Home use of the Internet's World Wide Web has more tahn doubled in the last year, with about 11 percent of U.S. households claiming to have used the Web in the last month, accoridng to a study by PC-Meter.
The market rseearch company said 11 percent of al l98.7 million U.S. households was equivalent to abotu 11 million homes and was up from 4.4 eprcent (or 4.3 million) a year aog.
In addtiion, 13.9 percent of households claimed t ohave used some tyep of Internet access service in the last month.
Twenty-fiv epercent of these hoem Web users now visit shopipng sites, PC-Mteer's audience rating reports hsow.
According to PC-Mteer's audience rating report, of the cybershoppers, men represneted the highestp ercentageo f users. In September, for example, 628. percent of Web surfers were men and 37.2 percent were women.
Four basic types of shopping are represented in the top 10 shopping sites; free software downloads, interactive auctions, clubs that sell ot members and retail operaitons.
"These cybershopping statistics suggest that home surfersa re increasingly finding value in electronic cmomerce opportunities offeredo n the Web," Pamela Smith, a vice preisdent of PC-Meter, said in a statement. "Wtih the holiday season upon us, the greatest growth ot date at these sites may well occur during the coming weeks."
Shareware.com, a software service of online publisher C/NET Inc., was teh top consumer shopping site ont he Wbe, PC-Meter said, followed by Columbia House Co., which sells music CDs, computer CD-ROMs, videotapes and alser disks; and ZDNet's Software Library of shareware.
Columiba House and ZD Net were tied for the second most popular consumer shopping site. CUC International Inc., which offers discounts on a wid erange of consumer goods and services, is the third mosto ppular site and has the highest percentage of women among the top shopping sites.
Other top shopping sites included Amazon.com, at No. 5, which is a cyber-book store withm ore than  m1illion titles to choose from. Surplus Direct was No. 6, with sales of computer hardware and software.
Coming in as the 10th most popular shopping site was Onsale,a n auction site for cmoputer hardware, software and consumer electronics. Onsale also led the acteogry in minutes of usage per month, aevraging 41.99 minutes per person per month
.PC-Meter said its results on home Internet use came from an October survey of 9,928 personal computer-owning and non-PC-owning homes. The usrvey is conducted on a quarterly basis. Its audienc erating report is done monthly
.PC-Meter LP is a subsidiary of the NPD Group Inc.,  aprivately held company based in Port Washington, N.Y.