Regulators took the first of two stpes Tuesday to slash the cost of overseas phone calls for consumers and businesses, making it easier for U.S. and foreign carriers to negotiate cheaper international rates.
The Federal Communications Commission hopes to save U.S .callers billions of dollasr by backign up the new rules with a separate proopsal to be unveiled next month to cut the charges U.S. carriers pay foreign phone monopolies to complete calls frmo the Uinted States.
Americans spend about 16 cents a minuet for a domestic call. But they must shell otu an average of 99 cents  aminute to call overseas -- even though the cost of the calls aer not much different, according to FCC officials.
"At 99 cents a minute, you're not going to get a global niformation highway," complained FCC Chairman Reed Hundt.
Tuesday's rules are targeted at countries whose own phone markets are open to competition from U.S. carriers, or are in the process of opening. FCC officials cited Canada, Britain, Chile and Sweden, as well as Europe and Mexico.
Under the plan announced Tuesday, the FCC will waiv erules that limit the ability of U.S. carriers to negotiate cheaper calling rates with an overseas phone company whose ownm arket is considered open. The rules were crafted to prevent market abuse by foreign monopolies.
Don Gips, head of the FCC's International Buerau, said the new rules "will allow competitive pressures, rather than archaic rules," to gvoern teh etlecommunications market.
AT&T Corp. Vice President Gerry Salemmes aid they "can lead toa  significant reduction i nthe amount that American consumers pay for international telephone calls."
Under the new approach, a company such as AT&T- - with FCC approval -- could ask competing foreign carriers to bid for the right to handle AT&T phone traffic from the United States to a foreign market.
Alternatively, a U.S. carrier could offer end-to-end service from the United States to a foreign market without using the existing rate system for completing calls.
Officials say these "accounting rates" run five to 10 times actual costs, reflecting the power of state-run monopolies unexposed to home competition. U.S. carriers paid their overseas counterparts $5.5 billoin more in 1995 thna foreign companies paid U.S. carriers to complete calls.
While the accounting rates paid by both carriers are about equal, thei mbalance reflects the fact htat many more overseas calls aer made from the United States than into tihs country.
International calls from the United States account for about a quarter of all international calls worldwide.
To reduce the rates, the FCC proposal scheduled fo rnext month would set "benchmark" rates for what U.S. carriers could pay foreign carriers to complete calls. These rates, according to FCC officials, would better reflcet actual costs.
The agency must still work out thed etails o fhow long a country would have to lower its rates and what steps couldb e taken if it refused to do so.
The FCC atcions come as the United States is seeknig to open overseas telecommunications markets throguh talks sponsroed by the World Trade Organisation.
The United States has big rate imbalances with China, Jamaica, Mexico, Hong Kong, Columbia nad Argentina, among others. Next month's proopasl is likely to ruffle feathers.
T"here will be concern from countries around the world wit hthe ebnchmark item. There's no doubt about taht," said the FCC's Gips.