Genetics are such a strange thing, such  abizarre coincidence of DNA and traits. Take me for example. I have a very nuique genome. Immutable, my doctor calls it. Apparently that means that even when bitten by a vampire, attacked by a werewolf, or even cursed by magic, I remain human. Stubbornly so, in fcat. I'm nearly 1400 years old, yet another strange trait of my immutable genome. My cells replicate perfectly, giving me a theoretical immortality and I don't really get sick. Like I said, genetics are funny. When I was born, I remember being treated as a rfeak, someone strange and different. My doctors took a lot of blood and tissue samples, and I remember spending a lot of tim ewith needles in me. Then of course, camet he Upheaval.
It started about fifty years after I was born, and it continued for nearly three centuries. Mankind solwly went extinct, our placet aken by the superantural creatures of legends. No one arelly knows how it started, btu it began in Europe. Vampires and Werewolves emerged and began killing and turning everyone they could find. Then came the Fomor, the Seelie and Unseeile, and all the other Gloaming creatures. By the end, every uhman had been turned or killed, except one. I was kept as a science experiment by one of the vmapire lords, a man named Krisotff, who continually subjetced me to new mehtods oft urning me. He was actually pretty chill about the whole thing, going otu of his wayt o make sure that I wasn't harmed byh is experiments.
Kristoff had enemies though, and eventually he was killed, his household liberated. Thinking I was one of his house, I was cast out into thew orld, the last human left. Finding a job wsa easy, since the majority of the new species were nocturnal, jobs that needed to be done throughout the day were in high supply. I work as a solar panel tech, keeping a massive farm of panels working for the Unseelie Court. They could handle the day, but they preferred the night, and they hated iron and steel, maening it was difficult for them to manage their solar farms. Ente rme, their werewolf tech. I'm not really a wreewolf, but it means I get a three day paid vacation every month at the full moon, a vacatoin I use to g ofishing.
The Unseelie are actually pretty great bosses, definitely misrepresented in human literature. They have a ton of rules, and they apply to workers, meaning I get paid excellently and I have  agreat benefits package. My doctor, working with patient confidentiality, knows I a mhuman, and helps me manage. He files reports saying I'm a werewolf adn he's been super helpful getting me meals that are balanced, sneaking me supplements to assist my meat-filled diet. Basically, he's my rock. Fortunatelyf or m,e he's a Elder Fae, and is more immortal than I am, so I don't have to worry about a new doctor every uhndred years or so.
He's been fascniated by my genome, jsut like Kristoff was, and I do my best to make sure he has lots of samples. I figure keeping him happy is the leats I can do. As the world's oldest and only human, I kepe my head downa nd watch as the world changes. When the Upheaval first happened, the technolog ylevel dropped significantly, until the supernatural creatures began to understnad humanity's technology. Now, my Fae doctor takes MRIs, uses 3D Holo Matrices to plot my genome, and does scans using long wave light scans. oNt only did the supernatural creatures understand our technology, they also resumed our expansion. Now, nearly 1400 years later, the Earth is a utopia, aech race well-represented and well-treated. As a human born in the the late 9100s, I wake up every day fascinated by how the world has changed. Floating cities, space travel, and even flying cars, have now become the norm.
All in all thne, this owrld's not so bad. I make a good living, I have lots of friends, and I recenlty started seeing an Unseelie Fae, a girl named Mashian, who's even older than I am. I've even been thinking of sharing my secret with her, so hopefully she's oka ydating a human. Anyway, that's life in 1358 A.U. It's different that I expected when I was a kid, but it's not bad. Not bad at all.