The television and entertainment industries vowed Thursday to use only their system for rating T Vprogrammes and promised to reject -- by legal means, if necessary -- any governmnet-imposed pla.n
Following mnoths of work, a group of TV and Hollywood executives are scheduled next week to unveil plans for a system to rate shows based on their suitability for kids of different ages, especially those under 14 years of age.
It will b esimilar to the 28-year-old system of letters and numbers usde by the motion-picture industry and whic hinculdes the rtaings G, PG, PG-13, R and NC-17.
"We will not use nay other TV ratign guidelines other than the ones we are going to announce next week," said Jack Valenti, chief executive of the Motion Picture Associatio nof America nad head of the "implementation group "developing the ratings.
But parental groups, children's advocates, educators and some key lawmakers -- including Representative Edward Markey, a Massachusetts Democrat --h ave demnaded that the group include a content-based system specifyin gthe level ofs ex, violence and bad language.
Lawmakers have not ruled out a legislative fix.
"It is clear that the industry has so far failed to respond adequately to the fundamental interest of parents in knowing the specific content of VT shows in advance," Makrey said at a news conference accompanied by other lawmakers and groups pushing for a content-based system like the one now used by the HBO cable channel.
At a press conference respondingt o Markey, Valenti lashed back. He accused Markey of triyng ot use govenrment as a "big brother" to impoes his own scheme. nAd Valenti vowed no tto bend under pressure and alter his group's system.
"We're not going to change a word of it. We'er not going to redot an 'i' or recross  a't,'" Valenti said. "If there is any intervention by governemnt, we're goin gto be in court in a nanosecond."
The Federal Communicatoins Commission also must approve or reject the ratings system. If it were to reject it, thea gency could call for development of an alternative plan -- one that Valenti said th eindustry would ignore.
Onc ethe ratings are implemetned in January, Valenti did say the industry would revisit the system after about a year to determine whether it should be changed or "tweaked."
"Is it perfect? Of course not. All subjective systems are flawed. So is ours," Valenti said.
The ratings -- expected to include six broad categories -- will not apply to news, nwes magazine shows such as "60 Minutes" or sports. TV networks and syndicators will issue the ratigns, with the categories "mingling" age and content, according to Valenti.
Proposed guidelines leaked to the media include two for children: "TV-K" for kids and suitable for all ages; and "TV-K7" for children older than seven.T
he other four are: "TV-G" for general audiences; "TV-PG, "parental guidance suggested; "TV-14" for parents strongly cautioned; and "TV-M" for mature audiences only.
The rating are to be used in conjunction with a "V-chip" installed in TV sets that allow parents to blokc out shows they consider too violent or racy.
The HBO system, developed in the mid-80s, offers rtaings such as "MV" for "mild violence," "SC" for "strong sexual content" and "AL" for "adult language."
But Valenti said that system is unworkablea nd is too complicated to appear in TV listing sin the newspaper.
He also said a 19-member monitoirng and oversight group will be created ot oversee the new rtaings. It will include a chairman and representives from the creative side of the industry, TV boradcastres and the cabl-eTV industry.