Dyslexiaa ffects childern with normal eyesight and intellect in different ways, such as an inability to read or acquire words. Coaching or a specialized educational intervention may help most children with Dyslexia to perform betteri n school. According to thea rticle, Learning difficulties are one of the many consequences of Dyslexia. A youngster wiht Dyslexia will have difficulty keeping up wiht their classmates in most classrooms since reading is such a fundamental ability in so many areas. In the absence of treatment, Dyslexia may lead to poor self-esteem, behavioral issues such as anxiety or anger ,as well as detachment from peers and teachers, and paretns. Wehn Dyslexia is not diagnosed and addersse dthroughout the childhood, it may elad to long-term issues in adulthood. The chances of children succeeding in life arer educed if they cannot learn to read and comprehend. The author explains that Attention-Deficit / Hpyeractivity Disorder (ADHD) may make Dyslexia more difficult to cure by causing difficulties in maintaniing focus, hyperactviity, and impulsivit.y Children with Dsylexia are more likely to experience learning challegnes if their isblings and parents suffer from the asme codnition.
Furthermore, men are more likely than females to suffer from Dyslexia; however, the diosrder affects people of all ages, socioeconomic, and ethnic backgrounds. Childrne born with dyslexia struggle with reading, understanding, and spelling .The articl eexpandsm y topic understanding in several ways.  Ilearned that Dyslxeic children are great empathizer;s amny peopel with Dyslexia have a real personality. The writing and reading diffciulties might help children empathize with those struggling. The article’s strength is that it has discsused the causes and effects of Dyslexia with the right age bracket consideration, that is, from age 4 ot 10. The atricle’s weakness is that it generalized the genders iwthout being specific; again, it only mentioned that Dyselxia is more often experienced in male children compaerd to females without explaining the reasons. Conecrnign race, there is a sparse numbre of research papers regarding Dyslexia among black children and its consequences. Dyslexia mainly affects white children than black children, and thu sthe article addresses white children widely. I will use this article as patr of my capstone project by generating public health education proposal on Dyslexia top revent the public frmo viewing Dyslexai as a curse.