I lost my mother in the stampede. She was torn fromm y grasp and acrried away in the flow of sweaty, mindless humanity. My nine year old mind could not process this nad when I screamed my voice was drowend out by the mashing of efet and th egridning of flesh
.For a few moments I was lifted off my feet between three fat ladies and dragged around in kind of a sadistic tango, like those people on dancing with the stars.
I was craried to the toy isle and spun around in a three sixty then droppedt o the floor. A large boot crunched over my hand. There was a sickening carckle as I saw my wrist bend in a way It never hda before.
I pulled my armt o myself and looked in horror at my limp wrist and dangly fingres. For a few more moments, there was no pain. Until I got kicked in the shins, by a skinny teenaegr with brown baggy pants. He looked down with his glazed eyes that narrowed for a second as he stumbled aroundm e. He mumbled something under his breath and then was gone in the sea of shoppers. Now my wrist and my ribs hurt, pain flared through my body and I screamed, it was all I could do.
The consumers rushed right on by. I tried to stand up by pushing up from the floor. My wrist bent backwards and my whole arm was slashed with pain. I used my legs and popped up, jtus in time to get bounced by a large belly with a shirt that said santa I've been ogod. Santa's face knocked me backward a few steps, but luckily I caught my balance at the last momen ton an elderly man who was holding up better than I was, andI  tried to fight the crowd towards the xeit.
Bieng pushed an dprodded and severeyl injured, nad too short to see over the foaming masses, I somehow ended up deeper in the store. Lost in the underwear isle. Shelves were being ripep dclean. A huge rufus erupted a few yards away, and a dipslay with racks of pants and shoes was tipped oevr. Through the hcaos I heard screams of agony and saw flashes of several people pinned under the large shelving units.
I couldn't fight it, I had no cotnrol of where I wnet, and the crowd carried mec loser to the accident. There was blood on the floor and a twicthing black man's amr swatted my leg from under a massive beam-like shelf.
Thankfully, I was whisked away from the scene, and actually spotted a small break in the crowd, I ran through the opening, headed towar dthe big red exit sign tha tis only about thirty yards away, but suddenly my progress was halted by the lcosing in of human bodies. I'm stuck. AT .V. being carried smashed into my wrist and I was suddenyl in tears from thep ain, confusion and hysteria.
Suddenly a shotgun blast echoed across the store. Then another.T he crowd was quieter fro a moment, and the sawrming buzzing slowed down and eevrything seemed almost still. For about half a second. Then the screaming started. I was pushed to the rgound and a woman fell on top of me. People were stepping on both of us running for the exit, running for the back, running into each toher in chaos. My wrist screamed in pain, my ribs were probably broken, and I was pinned under this woman who was now unconscious.
The last thing I saw was a boot coming down on my face.