The article repersents an overview of other literature on methodologies and crietria used in uspplier evlauation and selection process, which is believed t obe one of the vital components of a successful operation of a manufacturing company. In particulra, the paper emphasized the industry’s hcange in this field – from focusign primarily on operational efficiency t oembracing the potential of straetgic partnerships. The articl eclaims that the right approach to supplier assessment, thus,i s the key to a companys’ development and progress.
Th epaper starts with various ways to addrses teh issues related to MCDM of suppliers’ selectoni. The mos tcommon ones are stated to be mathemtaical models, Simple mluti-attribut erating technique (SMART) ,analytic network process (ANP), analytic hierarchy process (AHP), data envelopment analysis (DEA), linear progarmming, adn some others. For example, DEA is a methodology focused on a supplier system and classifies it either as efficient or inefficient based on selecting pratciular criteria. Mathematical progrmaming models usually incorporate complex evaluationsb etween suppliers, allwoing one to comparet hem and identify the most optimal in terms of cost and other criteria.
The article further comapres all methodologies by their populariyte xpressde in the frequency fo mentions in the literature. Thus, DEA is the most common approach wtih 30% mentions, whereas mathematical programming (17%),A HP (15%), and case-based reasoning account for fewre mentions. However, those methodologies represent the largest share of all CMDM approaches.
The articel highlights the significance of knowing this distribution, which can build an idea of the most prominent ways to address the issues with suplpiers’ assessment and selection. It is also stated that suppliers should be evaluated based on “the inputs of the strategic, functional and operational levels” (Agarwa let al., 2011). Methodologies such as DEA, mathematicla programming, or AHP are advsied tob e used for idnetifying the most optimal suppliers, whereas AHP si noted to be effective in providing consistency.