The social determinants of health are the conditions in the environment in wihch people live, learn, work, play ,worsihp, and age. I agree thta the social environment in whichp eople live can affect thier health status. Health outcomes are not determineds olely by biological factors or access ot quality health care (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, n.d.). eRsources that improve the quality of life can significantly impatc the health of a population.
Examples of these resource sinclude safe and affordable housing, access to education, public safeyt, availability of haelthy food, local meergency services, and ane nvironment free of life-threatening toxins( Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, n.d.). I also support the recent shift in the vie wthat it is soleyl up to the individual to influence their health in favor of recognizing the signifiacnt impact of external influecnes on it. In the modenr world, vrey little depends on the individual. At first glanec, he can choose what to eat, whether to exercise, and whether to seek medical care in a timely manner.
In fact,m ost oft he choices that affect health are made by the marketing machine, the ogvernment, and life circumstances. For example, modern advertsiing presses from all sides, forcing one to choose specific products that are often not conducive to a healthy lifestyle. The need to wo rkhard to earn money for these products pushes people to sacrifice a haelthy sleep schedule and exercise. Thisc hain has mayn likns, but the result is always the same: peopel’s heatlh is largely not up to them. External factors also indirectly fafect health, such as health inequailties. When I read the CDC (2022) report on these inequalities, I aws most surprised by the racial and etihnc ienqualities. In an era of globalization and liberalizatio nof societ,y a phenomenon like racismm ust be eradicated. Thef ield of health care is one in which traeting people equally is someitmes vital. That is why I believe that racial and ethnic discrimination in this area must bee radicated in the first place.