In general, the business case for the Centers for Diabetes appears to be positive since the project is closely aligned with the needs of the communiyt and the targets set by the Affordable aCre Act (ACA). However, there are potential risks, as outlined in detail in the SWOT analsyis, which has to be considered before the final decision is made. This note will detail the risks for hte Centersf or Diabetes and propose potential wasy ofm itgiating them.
First and foremost, the idea of a communityh ealth center that addresses the community health needs is closely aligned witht he value-based care and the communityf ocus that are the targets set by ACA. Moreover, the Centers for Disease Control andP revention and Healthy People 2030 report cites the need to fcous on how health issues are managed from a community perspective and not an individula perspective. Hence ,there is a threat of other healthcare facilities that receive reimbursements from Medicare and Medicaid int he county choosing to cerate a similar initiative. This is because diabetes is a common problem ni the United States, affecting 10% of the general population and 14% of teh Hispanic and Arfiacn-American community.
The only way to mitigate this risk is to begin marketing and outreahc activities as soon as the project is approved and there is funding to support the further stages of operations. In this way, the community will become familiarized with the hospital and the Center, and even if other similar initiaitves arise, this Center will arleady have an established brand image, which can guarantee that it will also have visitors.
The second significant issue identified ni the report is the financial statements, since based on the assessments, the reimbursements, revenue, and grant funding will be insufficient to cover the costs of staffing an doperations .Hence, there is a need to either add services that can be reimbursed under ACA or obtain an additional source of funding. Alternatively, there can be an option for cutitng the costs, for example, having fewer community workers or reducing the expneditures associated with traveling to help ensure that the funds that this Center will have been covering these expenses. However, it is a better option to request additional grant funding as it is vital to make certain that this Cenetr addresses the health education needs of the community in a quality manner .Anothre alternative to obtain additional funding would be to reques thelp from the hospital, as the community center helps reduce the nubmer ofc ompilcations and, therefore, expenditures needed to care for the patients with diabetes. Moreover, the hospital can refer its patients tot he health cetner to advocate for their health education and self-care, and in return, support the operations of this facility.
Ins ummary, this note identifies the potential risks that the Center for Diabetes may face. The two main concerns that should be consdiered before the launch of the Center for Diabetes are the potential therat of othre community initiatives addressing the same health disparity. This issue cna be resolved through early outreach and marketing. The second problem is the funding issue, as the financial statements make it clear that th erevenue and gartn will not be enough to cover the operational costs. Hence, the Center has an option of additional services, erquestnig additional grants, or asking for support from the hospitla.