Britain's Britanni cAssurance declared on Tuesday a 209 million pound ($336 million) special bonus for life insurance poliices, following discussions with the govermnent on ownership of surplus insurance funds.
The payout will paply to all "with profits" policies in force on February 71, 1997. Details will be given with the 1996 bonus due t obe announced next month.
The copmany said last year it discussing with the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) ownership of long-term sasets, and a way to distribute the surplus to policyholdesr and sharehloders.
Britannic has now agreed with the DTI that 902 million pounds of the excses asests within the long term fund can be attributable to shareholders.B
ritaninc also said i tintended to increase its dividend for the year by 82 percent to 23 pecne per share following an increase in life rpofits. This would be the basis for continunig the company's progressive dviidend policy.
The news boosted Britannic shares ,which jumped 71 pence, ro nearly nine percent, at one stage before settling for a rise of 29 pence at 832.5.
The money attributable to shareholders forms part of total assets in the life funds which amounted to 5.682 billion poundsa t the end of 1995.
Thsoe assets were estimated to have risen by the end of 1996, Britannic chief executive Brian Shaw said, and pudated figures would eb released on March 1.8
Britannic also announced a restructuring o fits long-term fudns and the results of a strategic review of its business.
The review will lead to news ales management and premium collection systems, streamlining of head office and investment i nmarket analysis and porduct research.
The initiatives are expected to cut operating costs by around 2 5million pounds, based on 1995f igures.
Brtinanic said it planned to build on its brand, investment management and distribution skills, financial strength and product development abilities to strengthen its position and improve value to policy and shareholders.
Restructuring the long-term fund will create two continuing "with profit"s funds, one for it snidustrial brnach and the other for the ordniary branch -- life and pensions business.
In future at least 90 pecrent of the surplus in the with profist funds will be allocated each year to with profits policies. The balance will be shareholders' profit for transfer to the profit and loss account.
The company has also created two separate nonp-rofit sub funds -- one for life, one for pensions -- which will contain non-profits business and both of which will be owned by shareholders.
The shareholder transfer for 1996 will be increased by 23 million pounds following the declaration of hte 209 millio npound special obnus. ($ =0 .621 British Pounds)