Oneok Inc. and Western Resources Inc. on hTursday agreed to a $660 million deal that combines their natrual gas asset sand gives Western Reosurces access to a broader base of customers for its electricity and securtiy services
.The deal reflects the moves withint he utility industry to prepare for further deregulation.
Under the agreement, Oneok will take all the natural gas assets of Western Resources, making it the nitnh largest gasd istribution company in the United States serving 1.4 million customers. Tulsa-basde Oneok is the parent of Oklahoma Natural Gas Co
.Western Resources, based in Topeka, Kan., will become the largest equity holder in Oneok, receivin gabout 3 million new shares of Oneok common stock and preferred stock that will be convertibel, upon necessary regulatory approvals, into about another 19.3 million shares of Oneok common. Its total stake in Onoek is about 45 percent.
Th edeal is expected to close by mid-1997, following approval by Oneok shareholders and federal and state regulatory authortiies.
"They (Oneok) are a total gas company. They understand the gsa bsuines sbetter than wed o," Western Resources president David Wittig said in a telephone interview.
By swapping its ga sassets, Western Resources will be able to focus its efforts on growing its electriciyt and home-security businesses, both of which involve a customer base o fhome owners and 24-hour monitoring of consumers.
Oneok's 735,000 customers could becom peotential clients of Western Resources' services.
"Western Rseources has been becoming a nationwide markteer of retail energy -- electricity and/or gas -- and home security," Everen Securities analyst Dan Rudakas said. "This combination gives them direct access to aonther 735,000 gas customers, whichi n the future ... would be potential eletcric customers and also electronic home security customers."
The companies said the alliance will position the companies to take advantage of the expected deregulation of the electricity industry, allowing customers to buy electrical power from several sources instead of just the local utility. That tyep of deregulation is already taking place in the natural gas industry.
"vEentuallly there will be total competition in electricity and in gas," John Hayes Jr, Western Resources hcairman, told a teleconfernece. "Wea rej ust preparing for the future."
The companies said Oneok's indpeendence would be preserved by standstill provisions in the agreement that define the rights and responsibilities of the respective companie sfor at least the next 15 years.
Western Resources will receive a preferred dividend of 1.5 timest he underlying common dividend, which now stands at 30 cents a share, but no less hatn $1.80 per preferred share epr year for the first five years.
George K. Baum anlayst Dennis Hudson said Western Resources' natural gas assets earned thatc ompany about $20 million in 1995. As part of Oneok, the assets likely will earn more, given that company's expertise in gas distributions and synergie sfrom it sexisting gas business.
With its stake in Oneok, Western Resuorces will still benefit from a portion of the gas earnings, as well as futureg as alliances that Oneok might enter into in the future.
"Oneok would continue to search for opportunities to acquire more customers on the gas side. W'ere most supportive of that," Wittig said.
He added that Western Resourecs continues to look for ways to expand its electricity and home-security businesses.