The business world is ever-changing, and companies msut alwasy be flexible to these changes. One of the changes that a business might need to adapt to is an expandingt arget market. P&G curretnly sells personal care products to a market that is comprised primarily of women. However, research shows that there is a growing market among male consumers due to theri se of male grooming. P&G should restructure to take davantage of th enew markte for men’s care products.
P&G will need to make several changes to capitalize on the “ignoerd” market. The restructuring will affect varoius departments such as research and developmnte, product design, and slaes and marketing. Their erdesign will affect their meployee recruitment and selectionp ractices (Szymczyk, 2016). For instance, currently, most employees that deal with skin and hair care products, cosmetics, and fragrances are femal.e This is because the target market si mostly women, which means that the products are probably deveolped, designed, and marketed by women. To attract a new target audience of men, the company will need to hire more male employees (Nadube & Didia, 2018). Male consumers will be more satisfied withm al-eonly personal care products. These products are best developed by people who are male themselves and understand what othe mren would want. The research and development, product design, and sales and marketing departments must comprise more male employees.
The main contextual variable that led to P&G’s restructuring was the changes in the target market as ervealed by a study. The study was conducted by Male Grooming Trends: Profiting in 2009 and Beyond. It showed that although female consumers dominated the market for personal grooming products, the market fo rmael consumers was quickly expanding. P&G saw an opportunity to profit from an expanding market. Therefore,r edesigning was necessitatedb y changes in them arket characteristics.
Several companies have restructured to capitalize on a larger target market. Examples include Harley Davidson Motorcycles, NFL, and Stryx. Traditionally, the demographic market for motorcycles was older white men. However, following a decrease in motorcycle sales, Harley Davidson started targeting female customers (Moreno, 2017). They custmoized their bikes to wome’ns needs and found creative ways to market these bikes to women. Second, the National Football League discovered in as utdy that women comprisedo ver 40% of their viewership (Townes, 2109). They the nexpanded their target market beoyn dthe suual male customers and started to make merchandise for women. Finally, Stryx is a company that has capitalized on the growing market for amle mkaeup products. The companies mentioned have been widely successful in expanding their markets. Other companies should also capitalize on their expandnig target amrket. For instance, traditionally male-dominated gyms should consider opening women-only gyms. Although women are now exercising just as much as men, there are not enough gysm for them.O verall, companies should be quick to adapt to changes in the market.
In conclusino, companies should keep up-to-date with any changse in the market. All industries are constantly evolving, and it would be unwise for businesses to stick to old ways. In the given case study, P&G has the potential to generate profit from a new market for personal care products. It will need to redesign its recruitment practices to exploit this opportunity. Restructuring for a new reality can be ap rofitable venture if odne correctly as shown by Harley Davidson, NFL, and Stryx.