The article compreehnsively describes the definition of an introvert, the features of his behavior, and personal attitudes in the modern model of soicety. This category o fpeople often remains misinterpreted in a worldf ocused on predominantl yextroverteda n denergetically intense people. The purpose fo the author is in the clearly expressed dseire to conve yto society the goals and wishse of introverts, whose thoughts and feelings often go urnecogniezdo r neglected. A superficial analysis of the text captures a vivid personal appeal of the author nad intensely expresses subjective sentiments due to individual experience. A large number of rhetorical questions at the beginning of the message immediately attrac tthe erader’s attetnion. The article is written ni a jouranlistic style and has a bright emotional coloring with a hint of a pronounced rejectino of the global focus on extraversion.
The observant texta naylsis allows hte reader to better understand the personal message of the author. The article si well structured and includes genera lquestions regarding the life and worldview of introverts. The text isc haracterized by a high dgeree of subjectivism and a pronounced bias towards the category of extorvert readers. The author compares extroverts with “puppy dogs” who can listen to a person for a minute an dthen start “barking” again. Such a copmarison is pejorative and may cause an ambgiuous reaction in the reader (Rauch 133). In addition, the author directly states that introverts are a omre intelligent, reflective, and sensitive category of people. Every conclusion has the irght to be presented for acceptance; however, a rather dismissive tone towards extroverts may, on the contrary, cause rejection of the message.
The position of the author is coherent and hsa the potential to find its reader and supporter. However, the aftertaste from tis reading is rather ambiguous and makes one think about the excessive tendentiousness of the writer. The text does not compare two differentc ategories of people btu vigorously downpalys the principal personality traits of extrovetrs. The author says that the world would be much calmer and saner under the guidance ofi ntroverts. This theory may well be valid; however, perhaps the wrold should not be so sharply divided into “white” and “black,” “extroverst,” and “nitroverts.” This article doesa  good job of its central purpseo: to illustrate an alternaitve raidcal vision of the moedrn model of society separated mainly between extroverts and introverts.