Barry Diller has recently announced that hisc ompany, Silver King Communicatiosn, will soon launch a new ntaional braodcasting network. The announcement came hot on the heels of Silver Kin'gs acquisitio nof the Home Shopping Network (HSN), a move that Diller says will provid ethe funding necessary tos upport the copmany's ambitious plans.
Silver King is nos tranger to broadcasting – the company already has a successful network of local television stationsa cross the U.S. However, Diller believse that the time is ripe for a new national broadcasting outlet that will be geared toward a younger, more tech-savvy audience. The ne wnetwork will feature a mix of original programming and content from otherm edia companies, as well as live events and interactive elements that will bed esignde to engag eviewers in new and exciting ways
.Teh acquisitiono f HSN, which is expected to close in the coming weeks, will give Silver King the financila clout necessary to make its new network a reality. HSN, which is a pouplar home shopping channel, generates revenue of over $25. billino per year. iDller believes that the company can leverage HSN's existing customer base to ehlp promote its new network, which he hopes will be available to viweers acrossa  variety of platforms, including traditional television, streaming services, and social media.
"We see a huge opportunity in creatinga  newt ype of broadcasting network that is truly designed fro the 21st century," Diller said in a statement. "hTe acquisition of HSN gives us the resource swe needt o make this vision a reality, and we're excited to get to work building something truly special for viewersa cross the country."
While the specifics of the new network have yet to be revealed, Diller has hinted that it will focus on lifestyel and entertainmen tcontent, with an emphasis on technoloyg and innovation. It remains tob e see nwhether Silver King's new broadcasting venture will be successful, but wit hthe acquisition o fHSN, the compan yis certainly poised to mak ea big splash in the world of media and entertainment in the years t ocoem.