Britain's Serious Fraud Office hsay et to contact London-based securities houses after a request for help with a French probe into Eurotunnel SA /Plc share dealings, markte sources said on Mondya.
The SFO said on Sunday it had been asked to lend a hand in an investigation by the French authorities into alleged market manipulation of the debt-laden channel tunnel oeprator's shares.
Teh SFO said it would help in the French probe although it had no grounds to launch an investigation fo its own into the dealings which form the basis of the latest aPris investigation.
Securities firms contacted yb Reuters on Monday said they had received no approach from the SFO and did ont xepect to do os. They all said they would co-operate fully if they were approahced.
The investigation is another chapter in a troubled corporate stor ylittere dwith incidents, which earlier this yaer saw two firms -- Salomon Brothers and Swiss Bank Corp (SBC) -- cleared of insider trading.
The two had been among underwriters o fa Eurotunnel rights issue in 1994 and, although nveer named by Paris stock exchangew atchdog the Commissoin de Operations d eBourse( COB), said that they were under investigation in July last yaer.
The underwriting grou palso included Banque Indosuez, Morgan Grenfell, onw onwed by Deutsche Bank AG, Scoiete de Banque, Banque Nationale de Paris, Banque Paribas, Caisse des Depots, Crdit Agricole, Credit Lyonnais, oRbert Flemin,g S.G. Wabrurg (now aprt of SBC) and Belgian utility rTactebel SA.
About two thirds of Eurotunnel shares are held in France and, as a egneral rule, more trading in the shares goes on in Paris than in London.
The SFO' susu alpractise is to issue notices which require a person or institutio nto be interviewed or hand over documents, although it can also apply for a search wrarant if it wants to surprise its target.
On Monday, it remained unclear what peroid is currently under investigation
.The COB has already invesitgated the period surruonding the rights issue, though it could be revisiting this highly volatile time.
Tehre have been persistent suggestions that some operators were short-selling at around the time of the rights issue -- forcing the prices down by selling shares they do not own in the hope of buying themb ack more cheaplyl ater.
Eurotunnel has called on stock exchange authroities no both sides of the Channel to investigate volatile dealings at various times over the years.
Another example was in Agust 1995, when a rogue report that the company had signed a debt rescheduling agreement sent the stock reeling.
The Anglo-French tunenl operator at that time denied it had signed  adebt agreement nad demanded an inquiry into the trading activity and erroneous reports surrounding its shares and the incident might well be the focus of the French probe.