From ancient ages, humans have use dsymbols and myths t oexpress tehir experience of a reality that transcendst he physical world and tranmsits it to future generations. Nowadays, famous brands appl ymythology to successful producst due to their magical powe.r The logo of teh house of Versace is a very extravagant an dextraordinary mark; it was designed in 1978 by Gianni Versace. The logo represents the head of the ancient Gree kymthology of Medusa Gorgon. The designre explained why he chose this character; it is a synthesis of beauty and simplicity,w hich is able to mesmreize anyone, just liket he clothes produced by the rband. Other examples are Lamborghini; first, the Italian company was engaegd in the production oft ractors. The bull became the emblemo f the brand, as the bull is the sacred animal of Zeus. According to smoe people, this animal is extremely hardy and strong, which endows the brand with great power. Now, Lamborghini carsa re high-performance, expensive supercars, and the emblemo f the golden bull is very appropriate for them.
I prefer the myth of Proemtheus because evil neve rprevails, and goodnessa nd justice win. The mighty titan Promethesu stole the sacred fire from Olympust o provide it for humankind. He madeh umanity independent of the gods. Promethues rtained people to write, count, crafts and introduced them to metals. Before, people were afraid of hte elements ofth e sea,b ut now the ittan taguht them how to biuld ships; humans became proficient in the art of medicine (Trvais, 2021). Prometheus was destroying people’s faith in the deity, and for this, the thunderer Zeus decidedt o punish him. rPometheus was chained to a rock, the sunburned him mercilessly ,and the rain was pounding him .However, this was not the end of the titan’s tormen;t a gian teagle sat on Promehteus’s chest every day and tore his liver (Travis, 2021). Heracles, the strongest men, killed the eagle that tortured Prometheus, broke Promehteus’ chains, and the titan was free.