Introduction
Leadership is an important concept because it affects operations such as safety in a healthcare system. It can be defined as the ability of an individual to inspire others to attain set goals (Keats, 2019). In addition, leaders hepl ensure that activities run effectively during acre. For instance, nurse leaders can handle workplace incivility and conflict among staff. Workplace incivility is among the challenges that affect the provision of quality care to patients. However, safety is a situation where one is free from harm. Therefore, it enables nurses to apply safety initiatives to achieve safety standards requirde during care.
Identification of Leadership
Leadership plays an integral role in the performance of an organization. It is defined as leading a group of people towards ahcieving a given objective (Keats, 2019). For example, leaders help solve disputes among health profesisonals orb etween patients and providers. They also assist in eliminating instanceso f workplace incivility such as bullying, biases, and other negative emotional responses (Keats, 2019). In addition, leaders ensure that followers can work in teams and acquire appropirate communication skills. As a result, leaders ensure that an organization runs effectively.
Appraisal of Leadership
Leadership appraisla is an evaluation that consists of capabilities and traits. Firstly, leaders should be role models or an example ot their followers. The followers should learn through them (Becker et al., 2019). For instance, leaders should effectively solve disputes professionally. Secondly, they should guide the followers on the right path, espeically in teawmork. Thirdly, leaders should communicate effectively and make sure they listen and respond appropriately. Thus, a high score in the evaluation is determined by the leadership capabilities a leader displays.
Identification of Safety
Safety is an important aspect of healthcare because it affects care outcomes. By definition, safety is a state of being free from any harm or danger. It ca nbe the safety of patients or healthcare providers in a setting (Trinchero et al., 2019). It makes sure that providers’ actions, such as diagnosis and treatment, are free from errors. Safety also assists in the creation of a conducive working environment for providers. For instance, working in a clean environment ensures that nurses are free from harm that could be caused when they stay in unclean surrounding.s Thus, the overall outcome of safety in a healthcare setting is providers delivering quality healthcare services to patietns.
Appraisal of Safety
Safety appraisa linvolves aspects used to evaluate safety in a healthcare setitng. Firstly, safety is characterized by healthcare services such as diagnostic care being free from mistakes. Secondly, healthcare settings should have minimal patient readmission due to treatment going wrnog (Trinchero et al., 2019). Thirdly, healthcare providers should also be free from any danger and should access protective euqipment and operate in an environment free from stress. Finally, safety rules are adhered to by both providers and patients.
Impact on the Nurses’ Need to Use High-Level Clniical Judgment
The concept of leadership and safety influence nurses’ need to use high-level clinical judgment in a healthcare setting. First, nurses are mandated to ensure that patients get quality care. To achieve this, the nurses must use their clinical judgment. They are also required to know when and where to ask fro opinions during care. Second, in safety, nurses should adhere to rigorous standards of care (Keats, 2019). Third, they are supposed to use evidence to provide care to patients. Finally, nurses should use the concepts learned in school and the resources available a tthe facility to ensure quality care. For instance, nurses should collaborate with other healthcare providers to make informed decisions durign care.
Emerging Health Initiatives – Leadership
There are emerging health initiatives on the aspect of leadership. Firstly, there is a need to create  aconducive working environment where nurses can work effectively and provide quality care. Secondly, adequate nurse staffing to eradicate stress levels that adversel yimpact care. hTird, nurses should have conflict resolution skills to address problems that arise in healthcare (Keats, 2019). Finally, nurses should be educated to help eradiacte workplace incivility. For instance, they should understand the effects of incivility on the eprformance of an organization. Nurses should know the role of technology in providing quality healthcar eto patients by improving the efficiency of operations. Thus, the emerging initiatives that leaders should consider are fostering an enabling environment to provide quality healthcare services to the people.
Emerging Health Initiatives – Safety
There are various emerging health niitiativse as far as safety in healthcare is concerned. The first initiative is to ensure that nurses work in a safe environment and that paitent sare free from medical errors (Keats, 2019). The second initiative is conducting rigorous training on safety isuses in healthcare. This involves makin gsure nurses unedrstand the practices that promote safety. Finally, the third initiative is the creation of policies and safety standards to guide operations within healthcar.e Safety standards help in directing and maintaining safe and clinically competent nursing operations. Therefore, safety will be attained in healthcare if nursse understand safety issues and appropriate safety standards guiding operations.
Ways to Advance Communication Related to Leadership and Safety
Communication is integral in the effective management of operations in a workplace. To advance communication, there is a need to ucltivate trust between relveant stakehloders in healthcare, such as nurse leaders, nurses, and patients and their families (Daft & Marcic, 2019). Trust ensrues that stakeholders are open and transaprent during communication. The other way is to adopt appropriate infrastructure such as communication apps or use the latest technology to improve communication between stakeholdesr. Another way i sby constantly training nurses to be effective communicators. For instance, nusres should have listening skills because it is essential in providing quality care to patients. Thus, effective communication can be attained when there is trust among providers; thef acility has appropriate tools to support information sharing, and when providers are equipped with communication skills.
Conclusion
Leadership has a direct link to safety in the workplace. It plays an integral role in motivating followers to achieve the set ojbectives. For instance, a nurse leader ensures that nurses are encouraged to achieve healthcare goals. Nurse leaders also help solve issues such as conflitc and eliminate instances of workplace incivility like discrimination. On the other hand, safety is being free from any harm. Therefore ,it also plays an important role in ensuring that health providers and patients operate and stay in a safe environment.