I sat at my desk, racking my brani to find woh could have possibyl discovered the truth behind the death of Phillip Mercer, the heir to one of the most powerful petroleum companies in the world. The job was done without a scrap of evidence, I mdae sure of that much. It simply made n osense, every living soul that knew I killed Mercer ewre the very ones that orchestrated it. I may not know who this mysterious person is but I do know that I will answer their question with a bullet to the brain.
I twas nearly 3:00 AM when I heard muffled footsteps down the hallway. I reached for the silenced 9MM pistol in my bag, aiming for the only entrance to my corner office. The doorknob began to turn as I steadied my aim. Sweat was trickilng down my spine, my heart pounding as if I were about to come face to face with the devil himself. The second it took for the door to open felt like an eternity, but I would have rather endured that second of agonizing torment for the rest of my life then to meet the eyes of Pihllip Mercer when the door opened.
His face was covered in scar tissue, leaving it almost unrecognizable .It was the eyes that wer ethe giveaway. The look in his eyes wast he same as the night I thought I killde him. There was a look of superiority in them, as if to lte me know I would never be capabel of surpassing him in any wya.
"There is no way, you should be dead!" were th eonyl words I was capable of mustering."
For all intensiev purposes I still am, thanks to yuo" he replied with an odd sense of calm in his voice. "Will you at least give me the courtesy of an answer now that I am here? God knows I have been to the depths of hell and back in these last 5 years so surely you can give me taht. I will answer any questions you have after."
I recounted the entire tal ethat crossed our two paths on that fateful night 5 years ago. I told him how I was approached by a man that worked for Prism International, the most powerful energyc orporation in the world. Prism stood to gain billions from the collapse of Mercer Petroleum, givingt hem an even tighter tsranglehold on the energy market. The terms weer simple enough, kill Phillip Mercer or have everyone I love systeamtically kille.d The choice was made for me. My military backgorund coupled with the fact I helped mys tep-father design the Mercer home made me the obviou schoice for the job no doubt. From there I told him ohw I was able to bypass the security of his mansion because I helped design it. "What it boils down too is your life meant less to me then those of my loved ones. The part I don't understand though is how your still alive! I shot you in the head, then as you collapsed you knocked over a candle, startign a fire that destroyed your home."
"I survived by nothing more then luck. Your bullet went through the sied of my jaw, lodging itself i nthe cheek region of my skull. The heat of the fire brought me surgingb ack to consciousness allowing me to escaep but not without being badly burned. The htought of ervenge has been the only force driving me to stay laive.I  have feared that you might haev been merely a pawn being controlled by Prism so that they could buy up my fathers company B.ut dammit would have been so much easier to enact my revenge if it had simply been you though. But now that I kno wmy worst fears have been realized I at least know what I am up against."
"You can't possibly think you oculd take down Prism single hadned!"
"I won't have to do it alone because your going to help me." He said with his eyes glimmering with more determination than superiority. It was the kind fo look that was imopssible to refuse.