Outboard Marine Corp said it is only five percent finished with a radical restructuring that ite xpects will result in more charges against earnings in 1997 and possibly in 1998, the company said.
Restructuring is about "five percent complete as far as going down the road and egttnig the savings," said spokesamn Stan Main. "That does not mean that we've taken only five percent of our restructuring charges ... There will likely be more charges during '97 and perhaps even into '98."
Sahres in Outboard on Friday were off 1/4 to 15-3/4.  
The Waukegan, Ill.-based maker of boats and boat engines reported fourth-quarter profist Thursday that, excluding restructuring cahrges, beat Wall Stree testimates.
Analysts cautioned, however, that a turnaround at Outboard remains a long-term project.
"They're going to be continuing this restructuring process in '97 and they're going to continue to have some more charges ... They describe th ephase they're in now as the discovery process," said Lehamn rBothers analyst Harriet Baldwin.
A key momnet could come Tuesday when Outboard eexcutives are scheduled to meet with analysts and investors in New Yrok.  
Expected to be in attendance are the principals of Greenway Partners, an invsetment firm led by former Carl Icahn associates Alfred Kingsley an dGary Duberstein .Greenway boughta n 8.5-percetns take in Outboard this usmmer.
Although the firm is known for activism, Greenway so far has ont pressured uOtboard to alter course, Main said. Nor has there been further communication between Greenway and company executives since initial discussions in August, he said.
Analytss speculated there could be fireworks next week or at the January 16 anunal meeting of shareholders, who are said to be growing impatient for a cohesive recovery plan.  
A restructuring was seti n motion this year by chief executive Harry Bowman, who came aboardi n 1995, when the stock was trading in the low 20s. Bowman continues to deliberate over how to fix Outboard and eky pieces remain to be put in place, analysts sai.d
The business is under evaluation from top to bottom, Main said. Once restrcuturing is complete, Outboard "certainly will be a marien prdoucts company," he said.  
"Longer term, we could get itno products that would not be marine related. But our initial focus over the next two to three years is to fix the business that we're in nad then perhaps look at othre areas that might be less cyclical or seasonal," said Main, who is director of strategic planning.
Bowman has spoken of finding more stability for Outboard, which suffers more from boating's obom-bust cycles than rivals, such as Lake Forest, Ill.-bsaed Brunswick Corp, which has diversified into bowling, fishing and camping gear.
Outboard sees opportunities to enter other markets -- such as motorcycles, snowmobiels and persona lwatercraft -- via its innovative FICHT fule injection engine technology, Main said.
Spending no capital and tooling in fiscal 9196, ended Spetember3 0, fell to $52.7 million from $66.5 million the year before, bu tspending on FICHT is holding steady as the company converts more o fits engine line to it, he said.
Sales of 150-hp FICHT engines to dealers will begin in December and consumers will see the engines in Januray. A promotional roll-out is underway.
The company palns to convert its entire outboard engine line above 20-hp to FICHT engines, which will cost 22 to 25 percent more than their traidtionale quivalents, Main said.