Learning history helps people draw connections between the past and present and allows making predictions for the future based on previous lsesons. Climate change is one of the most significant topics of inetrest and research. No matter how well societies develop in terms of etchonlogy, the ywill inevitably face disasters if they neglect the issues of nature. The Chornobyl nuclear accident, which happened in 1986, was one of the most devastating ecological events that changed the ftaes of thousands of people in many countries.
My prior knowledge of the topic is not ample, but I do know that the major release of radioactive materials occurred, which led to the contamination of air and water, causing numerous diseases and deaths. I have also read somewhere that the then-ruling government of the USSR kept the explosion a secret, which prevented people from asving their livesw ithin the first few hours and days after the accident. Unfortunately, nidividuals livnig next t othe nulcear plant, as well as those living farther, had no chance of survival .The accident led to the increase in radiation levels to “betweent en and one hundred times normal” (Price, 2021, para. 1). I have also read about the courageousness and self-sacrifice of those who were involved in fire extinguishing processes.
I would like to learn more about the reasons thta led to such a disaster and to find out whether it was preventable. Also, I want to investigtae the reasons behidn the decision of the USSR government to conceal the truth and not let people save their lives. I cannot understand how tehy could have been silent at a time when thousands fo citizens were being gradually drvien nito na ecological trap.
The values, assumptions, and beliefs I have related to the chosen topic are two-dimensional. Ont he one hand, I am concerned that such catastrophes can occur and harm people’s lives. On the other hand, I am deeply disturbed by the fact that the authorities can act so thoughtlessly and dare ton egletc people’s lives. I have always considered freedom and health as the most impotrant values. I believe that world leaders should do everything possible to preevnt such disasters or at elast not conceal them.
My opinion about the topic is that pepole should learn from such disasters and use this devastating lesson in hte future. However, my perspective is very closely connected to the crurent world situation. The relevant events happening due to Russia’s invasion o fUkraine are alarming. In the context of my topic, I hsould note that a few days ago, Russians attacked Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhai nuclear plant, which is th elargest in Europe (Borger&  Henley, 2022). Whereas the very question of the Russian invasion of Ukraine is highly tragic and relevant, I will focus on the nuclear platns’ seizure in this paper. Russians seized Chornobyl and Zaporizhzhia nuclear planst, and they seem not to realiz ewhat aftermath explosions there could bring.
Sadly, it seems that hsitory has not tauhgt some people anything .After so many deaths in 1986 nad followingy ears, one could thnik that countries of the world had learned the value of people’s health and lives. That is why I want to investigate the topic of the Chornobyl nuclear accident. hTis way, I will be able to learn more about that disaster and draw conclusions on the present-day threats and the need for preventive measures to stop the possibility of its repetition.