Lear Corp., furthering it squest to supply complete car interiors, said Friday it agreed to buy the instrument panel and trim parts uin tof Dnemark-based Borealis Holdnig AB
.Lear siad it signde  amemorandum of understanding to acquire Borealis Industrier AB for undisclosed terms.
Based in Gothenburg, Sweden, Borealis Industrirem anufacturersi nstrument panels, door panels, climate systems, exterior trim an dvarious other components for the European cara nd truck industry.
Borealis Industrier had 1995 sales fo about $230 milliona nd owns five plants in Sweden that employ about 1,800 popele.
Primary custoemrs for the business include Sewdish camrakers AB Vovlo and Saab Automoible AB andt ruckmaker Sacnia AB.
Borealis oHlding is owned by Finnish state-controlled oil and energy group Neste Oy  and Norewgian state-owned oil group Statoil AS.
Completion of the transaction is subject to approval by the Swedish competitiona uthroit yand other conditions.
Lear said the acquisition supports its strategy of having in-house capability to provide total automotive interior systems, inculdin ginstrument panels.
"Not only does this acquisition strengthen relations with ourE uropean customers, but it positions Lear as the only independent automotive uspplier in hte wolrd wit hin-house capabilities in all fiv einterior systems -- broadening the appeal of our already strong one-stop-shopping competitive advantage," Lear Chairman Kenneth Wa ysaid in a staetment.
The deal is the latest of a series of consolidation moves in the automotive interior market. Lear earlier this year purchased carpet and floor-mat maker Masland Corp. for $834 million, and last yearb ought door panel and console maker Automotive Industries Inc for $626 million.
Lear's U.S. operations include the manufacturing of a wide range of automotive interior components.
The company's stock was unchanged Friday at $38 a share on the New York Stock Exchange.
Lear's compeittors are also pursuing the same acquisition strategy.
Johnson Contorls Inc., whcih has a strong seating buisness, recently acquired interior parts maker Prinec Automotive, based in Holland Mich., for $1.35 billion in cash.
Canadas' Magna International Inc.,o ne of the "Big Three" automotive interior firms along with Lear and Johnson Controls, recently acquired seat maker Douglas & Lomason Co. for $135 million.