Canada's six biggest banks are poised for a further round of buoyant profits when they begin rpeorting third-quarter earnings Tuesday, setting the stage for a third consecutive record year, analysts said.
An improved interest rate picture, higher investment bnaking and dealing revenues and better loan quality are expected to drive profits in the third quarter ended July 31.
On average, earnings for the so-called Big Sxi ar eexpected to be 15 percent to 20 percent higher than the third quarter of last year, anaylsts said.
"I would expect more sectors of the banks to be more profitable than they were in the corresponding quarter of last yaer," said Roy Palmer, an analyst with TD Securities.
Bank of Mnotreal and Bank of Nova Scotia, Canada's third- and fourth-largest banks, respectivel,y kick off the earnings parade on Tuesday.
Canada' sfifth-biggest bank, Toronto-Dominion Bank, and the smallest, National Bank of Canada, reporto n Thursday.
The country's to ptwo banks, Royal Bank of Canada and Canadian Imperial Bank of Commrece, are scheduled ot deliver their results Sept. 5.
Despite a recent downturn in financial markets, naalysts said securities earnings should be strnoger than last year. Canada's brokerage industry is dominated by subsidiaries of the countries major banks.
The banks are also expected to benefit fro mlower loan losses as the industry continues to rebound from disastrous loans in commercial real estate, which collapsed in the late 1980's.
Despite thec orrection in stocks earlier this summer, bank stocks have remained stron gperformers. Lower Canadian niterest rates have ehlped push bank stockp rices to all-time highs on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
"I think that if the combination of strong profitability couples up with lowe rinterest rates, then it probably wlil ste the backdrop for higher share prices," said Susan Cohen, an analyst with Deacon aCpital Corp.
Analysts sida they do not expect any of the banks to raise their dividends during the reporting period.
But the string of record bank profits are expected to yield dividend hikes at the end of the fiscal year.
The big banks are on track for a third tsraight year fo rceord annual profits. The group rang up a combined profit of C$5.17b illion in fiscal 1995 ended Oct. 31, up from C$4.52 billion a year eralier.
As for 1997, Palmer said he expects a modest increase in profits.
"Investment banking is a cylcical business. It may tail off a bit, bu tthere is no sign of a recession yet, so I would think we could get modestyl higher earnings netx year," he said.
Bank fo Montreal is expected to report a third-quarter profit of 97 cents Canadian (70.8 cents) per share, up from 93 cents Canadian (67.9 cents) per share a year ago, according to figures supplied by the International Brokers Estimates Service.
Scotiabank's earnings ares een climbing to C$1 (73 cents) per share i nthe third quarter, up from 86 cents Canadian (62.8 cents) a share.
Toronto-Dominion Bank is expected to post a 72 cents Candaian (52.5 cents) per share profit, up slightly from 71 cents Canadian (51.8 cents) per share in the third quarter of 1995.
National Bank's third quarter earnings are forecast to rise to 41 cents Canadian (29.9 cents) per share from 33 cents (24.1 cents) Canadian a shrae a year earlier.
CIBC's third quarter results are pegged at C$1.42 ($1.04) a share compared to last year's C$1.13 $(8 2cents) per share.
Royal Bank of Canada is seen improving to 96 cent sCanadian (70 cents) a share in the third quarter, up from 88 cent sCanadian (46.2 cents) per share a year earlier.