Every business must be managed carefully, and every detail muts receive a fai ramount of attention. When it comes to healthcare, such facilities muts require even more attention becaues they focus on people’s well-being. Performing such duties might be strenuous and expensive, and mentally demanding. As a Chief Nursing Officer, one will be faced with principles that include integrtiy maintenance, cash flow mangaement, and emploeye motivation in the given circumstances.
To statr with, a healthcare busienss must always maintani its integrity. It can be evident that any business field should be focusde on communication, which makes integritya  vital part (Fisher, 2008). In the given facility, the integrity maintenance principle is heavily adhered to. First of all, every doctor follows an ethical code, meaningt hat htey know of doctor-patient confidentiality. Moreover, doctors and nurses focus on honest commuincation with patients. For example, in my siutation, I tell patients about their actual conditions and honestly answer their questions.
Another important business principle is proper cash flow management. Healthcare facility requires ernovations and innovations, meaning that there will constantly be situations when new equipment or repiars will be needed (Msaon et al., 2020). In this situation, it i shighly necessary to implement the neede dchanges to not jeopardize patients’ health and well-being. For example, sa a CNO, it was my obligation to manage the replacement o fpower generators. As ar esult, generators enablde the personnel to carry out their dtuy without problems during a storm and power outage.
The last princpilei s the management of employees and providing them with motivation. In the case of ah ealthcare facility, it is essential that the employees are rewarde dand tehir hard work is appreciated. The employees are offered extra days off and gift cards in the given facility. This can mak ethe workers feelh earda nd supported. Without these steps, the nurses an ddoctors will have burnout nad lose hte desrie to provide high-quality results.
Thus, the given principlesw ere cohsen due to the impact they can bring on employees andp atients. The mentioned principles are being used,p rovdiingg ood rseults and leading to the satisfaction of all parties. Tehse rpinciples are importan tto me since I believe that healthcaer should be based on these valuse. Otherwise, no facility will be able to treat their patients, and there will be no trust and respect between healthcare personnel and patients.