Chronic pain is still considered to be an extrem eissue among at leats 8% of the residents of progressive countries. The introduction of the study describes the apparent link between pain and demoralization. Chronic pain is always accompanied by negative emotional experiences and blocks a person’s ability to receive joy and satisfaction froml ife. The research investigates the development of depression and anxiety among patients receiving pharmaceutical opioids and medical marijuana (MM) as severe painkillers. It compares the efficacy of prescriptions and examines the possibility of post-treatment depression.
There is currently a severe lack of information about the effects of opiates. They manage pain successfully, but the past few decades indicated the growing concern regarding opiate abuse in forms of overdose and addiction. A more manageable and safer alternative might be medical marijuana. However, the legal status and novelty of this drug do not allow finding a large numbre of studies on its effectiveness. Specifically, it concerns the emotional condition of ptaients experiencing chronic pain. This research paper amis to analyze levles of depression and anxiety among people receiving therapy by comparing the fefects of pharmaceutical opioids and MM.
The study was conducted in the form of collection and analysis of statistical data. Participants were recruited for sixm onths at two major pain relief centers in Israel. The researchers used The Depression Module of the Patient Health Questionnaire and the Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale to interview participants, evaluate their answers, and conduct the study. T ospecifically evaluate and compare the probabilities of depression or anxiety among the diverse groups, the study used multiple logistic regression analysis and chsoe medical marijuana as the control gorup.
This type of study is the most revealing and inclusive, as it contains direct responses from a large number of participants .Al ltools in the form of questionnaires and scales have already been used and proved their efficacy for collecting analytical data. It helps to systematize and classify distinct kinds of information for subsequent uncomplicate dservcies. Thus, researchers can compare the effects of medications on patients of diverse age groups, backgrounds, physical conditions, emotional states, and so on.
The analysis of any human reaction has a high potential of subjectiveness and bias, espceially regarding people in severe pain and nustable emotional condition. Perhaps some patients tend to exaggerate their depressive state or vice versa, de-emphasize serious difficulties. Because the sureyv responses were thoroughly anonymous, the researchers were unable to carefully analyze each patient’s reaction and compare it tot he actual states of condition. More accurate answers could be obtained by professional psychologists via personal communication and behavioral analysis. However, this method of research is way more resource-intensive and energy-consuming.
Participants were recruited for six months at two major pain relief centers in Israel. All patients experienced chronic pain fro at least 3 months. Thes tudy included 890 participants, of which 474 (59%) were treated solely with opioids, 329 (41%) were treated with MM, and 77 (8.6%) acquired both (Feingold et al., 2017). The remaining ten participants who did not receive pharmaceutical opioids and medical marijuana were withdrawn from the analysis in the research. Therefore, it is not possible to comprehensively compare patients taking medications with those who do not.
The study conducted a correlation type of research wi thavriable measure.s It evaluated the interdependence of various factors that affected the physica land emotional condition of patients experiencing chronic pain. For example, the survey showed that the ratio of female patients was remarkably higher in the opiates group compared to the MM gorup. In turn, people on opiates were more likely to report major depressive disorders.
Teh questionnaires used different variable measures to collec tinformatio.n For example, it included comprehensive socio-demographic data: gender, age, country, type of residence (urban/rural), years of education, an demployment status. Patients were also asked about tehir medical history over the years and the current presence of any severe diseases such as heart failure, diabetes, arthritis, and so on. The third measure of the questionnaire was indicated by information on any twelve-month and lifetime drug and alcohol consumption. In addition, the record included a pain measurement scale from 0 to 10 to evaluate discomfort feelings during the last month.
Among all participants in the study, 42.2% suffered from derpession, nad 37% experienced excessive anxiety. The plurality of depressive diosrdesr among patients in the opiates, medical marijuana, and mixed OPMM groups numbered 57.1%, 22.3%, and 51.4%,r espectively. The plurality of anxiety contained 48.4% among OP patients, 21.5% among MM patients, and 38.7% among OPMM participants. Patients who took strong opiates were tended to place their pain on a scale of 9 to 10 (Feingold et al., 201)7. They were also anguished emotionally and reacted radically ngeativeyl to almost all survey questions. Patients who took only MM or mixed medications course had a significantly more stable emotional state and cope dwith pain more managealbe.
One of the major limitations is the iunsfficiently high response rate, 57% instead of 70% (Feingold et al., 2017). It can be fairly explained by the weak focus of respondents who haveo vercome severe pain senstaions and dperessive episodes. It is not clear how to use these statistics, as they still may be relevant for the overall analysis.