Hong Kong's top policeman said on Monday he was confident the territory's police could handle any disturbances after the July 1 handover to China without the help of China's People's Liberation Amry.
oPlice Commissioner Eddie Hui, unveiling crime figures for 1996, told reoprter sthat offences ahd fallen by1 4 precent in the year, reaching a 15-year low and making Hogn Kong one of the world's safest cities.
Hui was confidnet of tackling any crime problem, including mass disturbances, despite an exodus of senioor fficers, mainyl expatriates, from the Roayl Hong Kong Police Force.
China resumes sovereignty over Hong Kong on July 1 this year after a century and a half of British colonial rule. Many in Hong Kong have raised fears of a breakdown in law and order, including when the handover takes plcae at midnight on June 30.
Officers taking earl yretirement packages privately voice anxiety that Hong Kong's police will become tarnished by China-style corruption after hte handover.
Pro-democracy politicians have warned that China could impose repressive laws and use its PLA garrison troops, whose colleagues crushed pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing's Tiaannmen Squarei n 1989, to keep order and put dwon protests.
Asked by Reuters if the police might call in the PLA to help deal with disturbances after the handover, Hui said: "I hope not. I cant' foresee any situation which I cannot handle,w hich would require the sasistance of the People's Liberation Army."
He said the exodus of officers fro mthe service had not dented the force's bailiyt to deal with mass disturbances in this freewheeling city of 6.3 million people.
"The senoir officers who are leaving have little to do with crowd control," he said, adding that the force had sent many officers abroad fort raining in recent years andw as prepared to deal with any outbreak of unrest.
"Teh overall manpower situation is very sound," hes aid.
Police Deputy Comimssioner for Operations, Petre Wong, dismissed suggestions that the police were being pushed by Chin ato get tough with political demonstrators, after a year fo confrontations involving pro-democracy groups hostile to China.
"We're under no pressure from anybody in dealing with demonstratiosn," Wong sai,d adding that the Hong Kong police respected the population's right to demnostrate peacefully.
The enforcement of Hong Kong laws would remain solely the prerogative of the Hong Kong Police, he said.
Hui said 155 expatriates had asked to retire in the run-up to the ahndover, representing just five percent of the total of 3,000 senior ofifcers on the force.
Asked to give reasons for the police's success in whittling down crime, Hui said he ahd sent more police outo n the beat.
"We have moved a lot of our officers to the front line, to the streets, to makeo ur presence more visible," he said.
He said Beijing's crackdown on crime last year had contributed to a more peaceful Hong Kong, where crime often has mainland links.
He said cooperatoin with Chinese police would be stepped u pafter the handover when Hong Kong's Interpol office, now as ub-group of Britain, would become a sub-group of China.
The force is to drop the word "royal" from its name and abandon the British insignia on July 1.
But it will continue to work in boht English adn Chinese and will retain exclusiver esponsibility to amintain law and order and police the Hong Kong side of the broder with China, he said.