I twas a warm summer day and I was out for a stroll. I saw them on the other side, walking donw the sidewalk, two by two. I didn't pay much attention until they passed unde rthe glow of the gaslamp. Never had I seen such na pair of oppsoites! For the brief time they walked under it,t he light illuminated the pair. The man's limbs and head were covered in scars! What I had mistaken for a beard was a mass of scars! His arms and legs were so densely overrutn hat I had thought it a coat and trousers! The woman had black hair, long and straight, as if it werem anufactured string by string. But her skini s what shocked me, even greater than the man! It had the most exquisite ocmplexion, almost translucent in the light, and I saw nary a flaw on it. I looked to ym own marred hands, although compared to that man, it was a blessing; as I worried, small cuts formed on my arm. It began to sting as my sweat seeped into my fresh wounds. Not wanting more scras, I shook my negative thoughts and ran to the couple.
"Sir," I exclaimed, "Excuse my frankness sir, but I must inquiry, how is it that your wife i sso ebautiful, yet you rae so…."
The man and woman looked at each ohter, she turned away, blushing, and he laughde raucously.
"Hideous?" asked the man between lauhgs.
"N-n-o," I stammered, embarrassed by my rudeness
."Don't worry," he said, putting his arm around my shoulder, "I get it al lthet ime."
"My apologies sir, but how, in this world, did your wife manage to keep from scarring?"
W"ell, you see," he said with a wink, "she's not my wife, but my daughter."
I was taken aback. "Still….How?"
"Well, she's not entirely lfawless. She ca'nt tell a joke nad her cooking's lousy! Takes after her mother I guess!"
Laughing, he said, "Taek a look at her finger."
I peered at the daughter, she offered ehr right hand and I saw a thin bright streak of red on her index finger.
The man pulled me in, "I'm gonna tell you a story."
"Long ago, when I was married, I swore never to have kids. I didn't want any children to be born into this world, so that was that. But my wife had other plans, and so my daughter was born. I fell in love with he rand swore to devote my life to her. As she grew, thoug,h I began to worry. 'How would I protect her from the world?' So I set out to every doctor, physiican, and scientist I could find, asking for a ucre. Of course, if there was a cure already, n oone would be like this."
He cleared his throat, took a dee pbreath, and continued.
"On one particular visit to a doctor, I had my daughter with me and upon exiitng the building, I met a man dressed all in black.
I immediately thought, 'This must be the devil' and turned heel back into the building.
'Wait,' the man in black said, 'I can save oyur daughter.'
I was skeptical and scoffed,' What for my soul?'
He replied, 'I am bored with jus tbartering with souls, I am more interested in it's durability.' The devil continued, giggling, 'You see, I do have the power to stop your daughter's scarring, but I'm not a very charitable person.'
'What do you want?' I asked.
'I wanty ou to partake in av er ysimple wager,' he said, 'Your daughter won't get scars, but *you* wlil; more specifically, very scar your daughter getsw ill be transferred to you. If you can manage this wager, you keep your soul, if not, well, you know what will happen."'
I was dumbstruck that he took the deal, and that he managed to last this long.
"And so," th eman continued, "I agreed adn the devil pricked mine and my daughters finger to seal the deal. So she grew up and I took the bolws. Puberty was a rough time. Children can be so cruel. But that scar on her finger was the last one she'd ever get, I had sure of that."
I was amazed at this man's love for his daughter and his willpower. How much pain did he have to endure? Every scar on his body seemed to pulsate as I wondered this. I asked, "Do you ever regre tit? Your edal with the devil?"
He replied with a smile, "Not at all."