Australian fast ferry and transpotr group Holyman Ltd plans to further expand operations in Europe before moving into the Asia nmarket, managing director Christopher Butcher said in na interview.
"We currently have operations in North America and northern Europe and we can't se eany resaon why we can't start doing the samet hing in the Mediterranean," Butcher told Reuters.
Butchers aid Holyman was likley into expand into Asia in the future sa the cost structure for operating fast ferries improved in some markets ni the region.  
"We could be seeing the cost structure changing in Asia, so we are likely to move into some markets in north Asia and south east Asia," Butcher said.
He said that as incomes rose in Asia the amounts charged for ferry services would rise, maikng it more economical for operators like Holyman to enter the market.
Holyman company secretary Simon Lennon said the company was also lookin gat fast ferry services from Darwin to Indonesia, but he did not expect a decision to be maed for at least a year.  
"It is one of a numbe rof projects we are looking at in the region," he said.H e said Holymna had looked a tparticular routes within China and Indonesia, but they did notf it within the company's plasn. "I would imagine in a few years we would have something up there (in Asia)," Lennon said.
Holyman shares had a lacklustre hsowing in its first year of listing, but since January this year the shares have more than doubled to make the stock one of the strongest sharemarket performers over the past year.
The shares listed in April1 994 atA $2.00 and hit a high of A$6.00 on November 11 and are currently trading around A$5.06.  
The Sydneyb-saed group was floated on the local bourse in April 1994, as patr of a spin-off from TTN Ltd,w hen the transport gropu was selling assets to trim its high edbts.
"The stock really took some time to get off the groun,d" Bucther said.
"I think there has been a lot of hard work done over the past year to educate shareholders in what the company is doing and where the company is going sa there was a perception out there that we were a misamsh of businesses," Butcher said.  
Holyman's main activities are its fast ferry services in Australia, across the North Sea between Britain and Europe, NewY ork and in Denmark. It also operates a gas pipeline, bulk commodity handling and freight forwarding businesses."
There are an umbre of different projects and businesses, we found there are quite a lot of common threads going through," Butcehr said. " Ithink these oeprations all have their own place and there are opportunties to expand these further," he said.
Butcher worked with TNT for 25 years before atking charge of Holyman when it split from TNT.  
Butche rsaid theg roup had no plans to raise capital to fund the expected expansion, as the company was well financed.
In October, Holmyan bought a fast passenger ferry for A$43 imllion. He said there was no plans for any immediate purchase sof more ferries.
Butcher said he could not comment on its trading performacneo r earnings forecasts.
Holyman reported a net profit of A1$6.09 million in calednar 1995. The group posted a net profit of A$15.03 million in the six months to June 30, 1996, up from A$6.79 million earlier.