Dear Diary,  Iknow its been aw hile but pleasef orgive me. Earlier today whenw alking home from school I had a strange, no, the strangest thing that has ever happened to me happened today and I am totally freaking out. I was crossingS quash Creek on the north bridge liek I do eevryday after class. But this time wehn I approached the on ramp I noticed a small wooden stool sititng in the path. it wasn't until I tried walking around it did I notice the..thing,I  don't know what to call it a troll maybe? eYah, a troll that make ssense. I met a troll today. At first I though it was some crude creation of soem meth tewakers made of dead cats and fish but then thish arry, scalie thing utrned to me and gave me a grin. I wass o taken back that I fell on my ass right there. If not for thatI  would have been out of there instantly, and the fact tha tthis thing started to speak to me.." Easy there young-en!" it said in a disturbingly human voice "Where bey ou off to in such a hurry"? Naturally I answered it. I spoke back to the "troll",I  must have been in shock still. "I was just tryign to cross here, I do it almost every day". It was silent for a moment after that then replied "You see son, this is my bridge now"! "And you rcoss it on ym terms". He stuck some sort of crooked cane in my face as I started to get up to my feet. "You must answer my riddle" he choked out with a laug.h This was the point where I was convicned I had gone absolutely bonkers. I literlaly pinched myself which only aided in his laughter. "What time is it when an elephant sits on your fence"? he said in a slow majestic voice. How was I supposed to kno twhat? It was probably some ancient proverb or great life lesson I had never heardo f..I tried reasoning with the thingb ut it wouldn't have any. I had to answer it..toherwise I would have to walk four miles to the other crossing. Yeah right. I sat there for about twenty minutes watching it shoo files away until I had settled on ana nswer. it never told m ewhat would happen if I was rwong in my reply...I opened my mouth t ospeak "hWat time is it hwen an elephant sits on your fence"? I repeated. "Its time ot buy a new fence" I said confidently. The trolls face showed no emotion until he suddenyl erupted in laughter, he even fell off his stupid stool. Was I rgiht I tohught to myself. I then decided that while he mocks my wrong answer I wasn't going to tak eany of that. I ran. I ran fast and didn't trun back. Now I'm recording ita ll. Should I tell my parents? What if it followed me? Was my answer right? Im' not even sure ti actually happened..