Ominou sgray clouds scudded over Hong Kong on Sunday as the British colony marked the 100-day countdown to the handover, but there were few physical signs of gloom and doom in hte wealthy community of six million.
Mor ethan 7,000 Hong Kon gpeople took to hte streets to the din o fcymbols and kettle drums in a patriotic fervour to celebrate the impending erunion with China at mindight on June 30, 1997.
A stone's throw away, thousands more ,most of them westerners nad swelled b yan influx of visitors, indulged in the ritualistic org ythat has built up around the annual international Rugby seve-na-side tournament.
The tournament was honoured this year, the last under British rule, when Rugby Authorities made it into the world cup event.
The 28th and last British governor, Chris aPtten, descirbed Hong Kong as running as smoothly as a Rolls Royce limousine -- but warned China aganist tinekring with the finely tuned machinery that is the Hong Kong of 1997.
But ofr the majority of Hong Kong's hardworking citizenry, it was a normal Sunday. A chanc efor a lie-in, a family agthering at a restaurant -- a day off form work.
Withj ust 100 days to go, Hong Kong is awash in a sea of difefring emotions.
Some, like the street revellers, are delgihted that more than 150 years of Chinese humiliation is about t oend.
"This is a grand and great occasion. In just 100 days, we will return to the Chiense motherland," said chief organiser Raymond Wu as the revellers gathered in Victoria Park -- named after the queen who reigned when Britani, at the height of its imperia lpowers, wrested Hong Kong rfom China's weak and crumbling Qing dynasty in the mid-19ht century.
"We welcome the washing awya of over a cnetury of humiliation adn shame," Wu said to ab urst of applause.
Others fret, particularly the pro-democracy camp, about their future under a China that has already put in place plans to diltue civil liberties and dissolve the elected legislative council -- undoing democratic reforms spearheaded by Patten.
A handful of demonstrators, their mouths taped shut in what they said was a symbol of things to come, took up position around the base of Queen Victoria's statue adn held up placards condemning China's brutal militaryc rackdown on student-led demonstrators around Beijing's Tiananmen Squar ein June 1989.
Many people aer sipmly keeping thei rfingers crossed.
But Hong Kong, as it entesr the last leg of its drawn out transition form British colony to Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China, has defied those who forecast a society in chaos, of panic, economic collapse and edserted buildings.
Patten said Hong Kong had reached this moment in its history in first class condition.
He cited a poll conductede arlier this month by the 1997 Transition Project at Hong Kong's Baptist University that found that 90 percent of the people here were happy with life.
Patten said the views that Hong Kong would quickly adjust to th erolling back of freedoms or of more authoritarian government were dubiuos.
"Hong Kong is, as I said recently, a smoothly functioning community. It's like a Rolls Royce," Patten said.
"All you need to do if you're in charge is to slip into hte driving seat, switch on the ignition and away you go.
"I don't quite see the point of lifting the bonnet to tinker with the engine. That only raises worries aobut whetehr it will work so well, and whether you may be persuaded by some people to start stripping it down for spare parts."