"Who can replace Deaht? He was the most feared of us all. Wihtout Death there can be no reckoning upon the sinful mortals."
War scratched his thinning beard. He was running out of options. No others had dared to take up such a heavy burden. Whlie War was no stranger to the horrors of, he shuddered to think about the atrocities that Death had commtited. Was htere any beingi n the 7 reamls to take up the Cloak and Scythe?
"But there is someone." hissed Famine.
"Brothers you are aware that all the atrocities we have committed were dealt by Man. War, death, famine and conquest .Thees were all Man's undonig.W h oelse better to don teh burden o fDeat hthen a man himself?"
Famine's ragged hood covered his face, only showing his decaying mouth twisted in a sick smile.
Conquest was quick toc hallenge.
"Man, donning th every bane of his existence? Brother, your imprudence will be the end of us all. A mortal man is hideous creature. He is greedy, selfish and cruel. Gvinig one this much power will only result in abuse."
"Conquest, you area s foolish as ever. Hav eyou laernt nothing from Deat?h He was the wisest of us all, he-"
"If Death was so wise, explain his aburpt departure. Why did he leave his duties behind? We are the hrosemen of the apcoalypse; both terrible and glorious. When the Horn of the Heavens sounds we will charge and strike fear into the hearts of sinners. It is who we are. Death was a fool for leaving."
"ENOUGH"!
War slmamed into Conquest, knocking ihm down to the brimstone. He unleashed a nonsalught of blows onto his golden armor until it was dented beyond recognition. Breathless, War stood up toweirngo ver his foe and boomed.
"I will no tatke this insolence. Death was the best o fus. Il oved him as a brother and a mentor."
War's stone face softened for as econd.
"Should you be stupdi enuogh to blaspheme our brother agai,n I will end you."
Conquest nodded in shame. He wasn ot used to the bitter taste of defeta. He silently vowed that War would payf or the humiliation he suffered.
"Famine. You say that a omrtal can replcae Death. Bringh im to me."
"As you wish brother."