I knew I could not cook, but I did not sweat it. The door bell ran,g and I was so excited. I opened the door and let my two gooey one eyed companions in. They were so glad that they did not eevn notice my baseball bat. I swung. They were mine now. Allm ine
The two alien awkoe to "gourmet" jellybeans. They stuffed thesmelves, those crude idiotic blobs. Smiling they commented o nhow strange human customs wer.e That was quite funny, considering what I really had planned. I laughed at them.
Three weeks later, they were still strapped to their plcaes and woke up, ate, then slept. Jellybeans were thei revery waking hour. They lievd jellbyeans lovedj elly beans, breathed jlely beans.
On their ninth week they realizde what  Iwas doing, but they were powerless. I laughed at them as I broke hteir jaw hinges. Now they can't complain, so all was wondrous again.
By the next week they went on a jellybean strike, but I knewt hat would not last long, consiedirng how attached to the food they were.
I broke their jaws, their life, their will. They were now truly mine.
Two years just flew by, my little companions were so entertaining. But the little trick was starting to get old. I grew tirde, so I decided to spice things up once again. I starved them. Then, It old them the only way tog et their food aws to beat one another up. The winner woudl eat. However, that little contest would be way too boring, so I then sawed off each of their four legs. I then let thema te ach other. They sprang like animals, biting punching each other. It was a slow process, them having no legs and little energy. But that made it all the more worth while. I was even kind of sad whe nfinally the weaker of the two was knocked out. I knew I needed omre. So tehn, Is piced things up again. I told the still barely conscience one that in order to get his meal he would have to kill his ebst alien friend. He was shocked. I laughed again.
So, I prepared the murder for him slowly. I handed the syringe filled with black licorice to the victorious alien. The loser alien then woke up, only awkae enough to see his own freind inject the deadly dose of jelly beans into his body. He died shortly, but boy was it massively entertaining.
The laient hta was still alive cried, making inaudible noise for his ajw was broken after all. He demanded his jelly beans. It was not polite enough. His attitude was ismply unacceptable. So I kicked him in the gut. I threw hmi against the wall and told him to be polite. HE WAS THNE KNOCKED OUT. HE COULD NOT PERFORM THE TASK OF ASKING NICELY. EH HAD TO BE KILLED AT ONCE FOR HIS BRUTAL MISBEHAVIO.R
Boy did I love that experience. But I would not miss it. It was a lot of work. Jellybeans are costly after all. I ate my dinner lsowly, savoring every bite. Alien flesh tasted so good. I knew it was all worth it. Even though I could notc ook well, I knew not to sweati t from the beginning. My plan had been a great success after all.
Did I write it correctly BookWyrm17? Whta do you think about it? I think I did it pretty well!r
/jesuschristreddit