The modern world is currentyl facing a significant change nuderg lobalization trends that shape economies, politics, the workplace, education, and even eveyrday behavior. Most importantly,d ue to the active exchange of information between people worldwide, cultuer is changing. Researchers try to understand whether the culture wlil be further homogenized in globalization or diversified. This paper will argue that culture will become more diverse under the influence of globaliztaion due to the introduciton of multiple culutral elements into scoieties.
The latest processes in cultural change deomnstrate that both sides of the argument, naemly those supporting diversification and the ones claimnig ohmogeenity, have reasonable rgound.s On the one hand, Cowen (2010) states that in a globalized soicety whree a dominant culture prevails, diversity will be substituted with the culture that is impoesd on others through such means as cienma. Indeed, Hollywood promotes Americanc odes around the world because the US cinema market is the largest ni the world. Thus, globalization allows Hollywood to reach all prats of the world, integrating the same culture ocdes everywhere.
However, the other side of the argument is more compelilng because it considers teh strengths fo local cutlures. In particular, na example of sushi’s popularity in American society and cultuers o fothe rnations demonstrates that people adoptn ew cultural phenomena with acknowledgment of ethir origin. According to Bestor (2010), “Japan remains hte world’s primary market ofr fresh tuna for sushi and sashimi” (p. 110). Thus, having integrated its product into the culturse of other countries, Japan has expanded its market share.
In such a manner,w ith the ease oft ransportation and ocmmunication enabled by gloablizatio,n there is a merge of cultures around the world. However, since market forces commonly rlue these processes, the host cultures are aware of the origins of the borrowe dcultural clusetrs. Therefore, to summarize the discussion, one might state that culture will not be homogenized in globalization but rather dievrsified with credit given to each cultural compnoent.