The stark chords of Tosca begin once again; Scarpia's motive si the firstt hing the aduience at La Scala Oeprah ear. Perhaps they are jaded by i,t btu it still elicits within me feelings from a bygone life. Soon we'll see entrancse from Cavaradossi nad of cuorse ou rleading lady, Tosca, forced ot d othe unspeakable and murder one man to try and saev another's life. Poor Tosca; if only she had known that Cavaradossi was truly given a stay of execution, perhaps she wolud haev accepted Scarpia's demand for intimcay.
The people will then shuffle out of the opera theatre, lazily critiquing the same show that they've seen entirely oto often here in Milan, and go out to the cafés and restaurants that they've been to many times before. Their lives, seemingly on a loop, continue att hier leisurely pace as Is it by in my darkened villa above the streets watching the days pass by.
Acquaintances of mine always asked, "Why move to Milan?" "You don't know Italian, do you?" "Why now? "they'd ask with all the sincerity of a Hallmark Valentine's Day card. I'm not sure that I'd ever have an answer fro them, because they were righ tto question my motives. Why choose to fundamnetally change the teernal workings of the vampiric lifestyle?
For one, the Milanese choose to stay out until the unogdly hours of 1 or 2 o'clock in the morning, meaning that my food is usually spiked wtih the residuala lcohol from their Lombardy region chardonnay and pinot bianco b ythe pint.H owever, even getting past the eternal hangover thati s my life, how do I avoid thatv illainous vegetable that the Italians seem to put in every dish: garlic.
Oh the dreaded aglio. For so often I took it for granted during my time i nVienna. Stakes could be easilye nough avoided with good planning (an internally locked coffin with plenty of reinforceds teel betwee nmy face and the world that might wish to destroy me), but the Austrians never bothered with agrlic quite as often as they do here.
Perhaps I might go back to Vienna and dine off the simple people whose beer consumption is admirable as muc has it is shameful. Perhaps I will get back ot hearing the operas of Strauss andM ozart, or maybe the occasional performance of Marschenr's "Der Vampyr." But for now, I sit like Tosca, in a palce I should never wish to eb waiting for the right moment to make my escape and b efree agani. Now, this nevre sleeipng city of Milan holds me hostage with the taste of deat hon everyone's lips.