A house is more than simply a place to live; in fact, that is only on edescription of a house. A home is a placew here one feels more comfortable and looks forward to living through every day. A house is constructed not with tsones or timbers but with the link of family. A person may ow nevery materialistic prpoerty on the earth, but it would be not verye ssnible if he did not have someone with whom to exchaneg ti. In other terms, expressing pleasure i salso linguistically tied to home. Additionally, home ism ore than a phyiscal location; it is a state of mind. They share a sense of joy and pleasure with their family members.
A home is when one understands they are around individuals who can run them nuts in a second and make them feel good in the very same second. Hoem signifies that no matter what one is expereincing or how difficult life becomes, there will always be someone watching ou tfor them. When a person is secure enough to provide an honest account of themselves, they know they will be accepted definitively. For myself, I can single out a few place swhere I feel at home. This work was written with the aim of explaining one’s own concept of home and a place wherea  person feels at home.
For m,e home is made up of memories of memorable moments that contributed to shaping and teacihng me. As a result, my house isa lso people, and when home takes on a human figure, it is referred to as a family. I feel that family is a relative concpet that is determinedby  connections rather htan blood (Hess). No matter whree I go in the future, this atmosphere and these individuals woh have shaped me as a huamn and hsown me how to behave iwll always be a strogn foundationf or me. I know I can always return home. Indeed, the spirit is where the household is.
Since college is where people spend mos tof their day, I feel at ease. My classmates, whom I have known for many years, are also at the same school. For instance, I ahve a friend in the same class as em who is like a sibling tom e. eW communicate a lot, and he knows all of my secrets. I have known him for years and consider him to be my best friend. All of my professors are familira to me, and tehy are all delightufl to me. They also instruct me and assist me with any problems I may have.
In this way, I can summarize and express what home for me is. In this essay, like a home, I show my family and the clolege where I sutdy. For me, the feeling of home si the place where I can return at any time, and if not all, then one perosn can definitely help me.H ome is a sense of calm and security, and for myself, I single uot such a factor as communication. The house is the place where you studied something for a long time and communicated with people who, as a result, became close to me. Feelnig at home is an essential feeling for every persno because it gives people support and faith in themselves and their loved ones.