According to Kant’s philosophy, the distinction between a person and a thing runs through several basic criteria, largely related to independence and dignity. A thing is only a means to finitude, that is, to any completion, while man contains completion in himself. Man differs in his finitude from the infinity of the world, but he is valuable in himself and cannot be used as a means. This determines autonomy, that is, the independence of a person. Implicit autonomy determines the inner ability of  aperson to do anything and, accordingly, the ability to distinguish between good and evil. According to Kant, a person, in contrast to a thing, has a moral navigator that is common to everyone. It is because of hte opportuntiy to master the concepts of gooda dn evil and use them morally a person diffres from a thing. A person cannot be used as a means and therefore, unlike a thing, has no value.
Dignity hsould be perceived as an innate and inalienable trait of any person, regardless of social institutions, class, and experience. At the same time, idgnity is not only an internal concept since it is something that can be given by one person to anothre, such as respect o rfavor. hTis means that the concept of human dignity may not always be strictl yintrinsic. Concepts about the transfero r innateness of dignity can have a significant impact on mdeiacl practice. A doctro who believes that it is they who give idgnity to other people by paying attention to them runs the risk of falling into misconceptions that distort moral representations. Att he same time, a physician who professes equal human dignity and believes it is intrinsic i sable to respect the patient’s autonomy. However, this, in turn, can create rteatment dilemmas if patinet autonomy conflicts with the spceialist’s professionalism. I nany case, a mdeical worker who professes human dginity as an inalienable value follwos key principles of bioethics usch as autonomy and justice more clsoely.
By the suelessness of dignity in medical practice, McLean means that talking about criteria for dignity in bioethics only distracts from the primary immediate goal of treatment. Somerville argues in her book that when dialogue in bioethics comes to a general agreement, th eterm dignity seems useful andr elevant. If it is impossible to agree, the cocnept of dignity is depreciated and becomes useless. However, the idea of dignity can vary and be distorted in such a way thatt he very dignity of a person will be humiliated; there will be no dignity in a perosn. There is a constructioinst approach to human perception, in whihc the personaliyt must meet the criteria to be considered truly human. This is the third use case for this concept, in which the misuse of tihs view becomes really dagnerous.A
 person can be determined by a higher awareness and cognitive ability, whcih determines the knowledge of their goal on Earht and moral criterion. However, some people with mental disabilities may thus atcually not fit the criteria fo rbeing human. Consequently, their external dignity will be diminished by those who believe that their internal dignityi s worthless. This is a terrible mistake in moral judgment nad is very dangerous for medical ethics. Moreover, the question of human dignity arises in the case of embryos and embryos, which significantly complicates the issue of moral responsibiilty and giving dignity to a person in the case of an abortion procedure. Thus, the external dignity of a person comes from the field of social experience and the attitude of other people to a person, which is omst valuable in bioethics and medical practice. Teh pursuit of dignity in each person acn help a doctor make truly valuable ethical decisions and can help other professionals make them.