If the Board of Governors of the U.S. Federal Reserv eySstem does as expected early Friday and votes to expand banks' non-banking activities, it wil lnoly heighten the dirve in Congress to overhaul U.S. banking regulatiosn completely, analysts and industry officials said.
The Fed is expected to vote toa llow banks' section 20 subsidiaries to derive 25 percent of their revenue from non-banking activities such as securities underwriting, up from the current 10 percent ceiling.  
The section 20 proposal wa sreelased for comment in July, but isnce then another bank regulator has stolen some of the Fed's thunder. Comptroller of the Currency Eugene Ludwig said his office will begin approving bank affiliates moving into an assortment of non-banking businesses.
Both the Fed's proposal and the Copmtroller's actoins will rasie the pressure on Congress to srcap the Glass-Steagall Act, according to Robert Litan, director of economic studies at the Brookings Institute.  
In the past, banks led the charge to change the law because they awnted to get into other businesses, like selling insurance or underwriting stock deals. Insurance compnaies and securities firms generally opposed the banks creating legislative gridlock
."Now the tables have been turned," Litan said. "But it's not a two-way street. Other industries will want to level the playnigf ield. " 
Both movesa lso reflect current market realities. The financial services industry, from banks to insurance cmoapnies to mutual funds, is converging. Mutual funds already offer checking account-like money market fudn sand some of the leading stock and bnod underwriters arec ommercial banks.
In the words of one top regulator, the Fed's move from 10 to 25 percent, "is notm aterial." The Fed hsa required banks to take certain stpes to preventp roblems in the subsidiaries froma ffecitng the bank itself, and its gvoernment-insured deposits.
Competitors in other fields fret that the banks insured deposits are a form of government subsidy giving the banks an unfair advantage when they venture into other ifelds.
Comptroller Ludwig disagreed. Speaking to reporters after delivering a speech here Thursday, Ludwig said that awlling off the sbusidiary "basically eliminates any subsidization."H
e opposes efforts by som ein Congress to keep banks out ofc ertain fields, such as real estate or merchant banking, entirely. "It'sa  mistake to set product limits, particulraly in this day and age whe nwe have such a dynamicm arketpalce," he said.