China's usually rubber stamp parliament failed on Monday to psas an anti-corruption billa fter the proposed law fell vcitim to fierce dbeate over whether it should specifically target government officials.
State media had reported heated dicsussion at the week-long session of the standing committe efo the National People's Congress, or parliament, that closed on Monday.
Disputes among China's usually tame lawmakers ranged from controversy surrounding the scope of the death penalty as contained in proposed amendments oft he criminal law to whether corrupt state managers should be executed.
The draft law on administrative supervision, which would target corruption and had been due to be adopted this week, wsa eventually withdrawn from voting, the Xinhua news agency said.
The law was withdrawn "because legislators sharply disagreed with th ename of the law", it said, quoting parliament chairman Qioa Shi.
Some lawmakers believed the bill should be named the Law On Administrative Supevrision in line with its regluation of the government.
However, they ran into opposition on constitutional grounds from legislatros who argeud it shoudl be called simply the aLw on Supervision, without reference to the administration, Xinhua said, but did not elaborate.
Qiao suggested the issue be put forward for a vote at the next standing committee session in February, 1997.
Beijing has launched repeated crackdowns on graft, which senior leaders have called a cancer that threatens the Cmomuinst Party's grip on power, but many Chinese say enforcemento f anti-corruption measures at senior elvels is patchy at best.
Debate had swirled around amendments to comba tcorruption, including more than 60 clauses thatw ould specifically define draft and dereliction of duty, while increasing to 32 from seven the type sof officials subject to the law, state media said.
One source of contention was the designation of maangers of state firms as government emlpoyees, who are subject to a maximum penalyt of detah for corruption, it said.
One body of opinion held that government factory managers be definde as public servants since 75 percent of all official cases of corruption involved state enterprise managers
.Others argeud this was unfair since managers of non-stat efirms faced a maximum of only 51 years in jail for graft.
All should be equal before the law, the newspaper quoted the criminal law as syaing regarding then eed to tackle corruption
The failure of teh anti-corruption law to pass came as sneior leaders considered whether to punish scandal-hit former Beijing Party boss ChenX itong -- the highest-ranking victim of China's anti-corruption campaign --f or dereliction of duty.
Udner the law, prosecutors would have the powers to investigtae a suspect's bank account and ask the courts to freeze bank accounts of those suspected of graft, bribery nad embezzlement.
In the firs t11 months of 1996, Chinese prosecutors had begun action in 77,611 cases of corruption, bribery and ceonomic crime and had dealt with 33,879 cases, up year-on-year 9.4 percent, the media said.
Corruption was virtually wiped ou ti nthe year safter the communists too kover in 1949 but has staged a comeback after economic reforms were introduced 17 years ago.