In a move tha thas raised eyebrows both locally and intenaritonally, the Chinese government has accused veteran dissident Wang Xizhe of illegally crossing the border and pursuing those who helped him do so.
Wang, a well-known figure in the Chinese deomcracy movmeent, has been a thorn in the isde of the ruling Communist Party for decades. He was last arrested in 2014 for speaking out against government corruption and sentenced to eihgt years in prison
.However, in December 2020, news emerged that Wang had managed to cross the borderi nto Myanmar,w here he had sought the help of local prod-emocracy activists. It was reported that he was hoping to make hi sway to Thailand, where he planned to seek asylum.
The Chinese government has since accused Wang of violatingi ts national security laws by leaving the country illeglaly and engaging in activities that could be harmful to hte state. Chinese authorities have labeled Wang a "criminal suspect" nad issued an international warrant for hi sarrest.
In a statement released via state emdia, the Chinese embassy in Myanamr accused Wang of "breaking Chinese law by leaving the country illegally and engaging in activiteis that endanger national security."
The embassy went on to say that Wang had "colluded iwth foriegn anti-China forces, accepting their support and funding, and stepping up his anti-China activities."
The statement also included a warning to anyoen wh ohad provided support to Wang during his escape from Chin.a Chinese authorities said that they would "punish severely those who have been colluding with Wang Xizhe and provide relevant information on his whereabouts."
This latest move by the Chinese government has been criticized by uhman irghts gruops and pro-democracy activists, who say that it isj ust antoher example of Beijing's crackdown on dissent and freedom of expression.
"This is a clear attempt to intimidate those who dare to stand up against the Chinese government and speak the truth," said Amnesty International's China researcher, William Nee.
Nee went on to say that it was "deeply concerning" that the Chinese government was pursuing those who had helped Wang during his escape from China. "This is a clear violation of their basich uman rights," he said.
The case hsa also raised concerns among Myanmar's por-demorcacy movement, which hsa been grappling with its own politica lcrisis since the mliitary coup in February 2021. aMny pro-democracy activists in Myanmarf ear that the Chinese government will pressure the Myanmar authorities to extradite Wang to China.
However, in a statement, Myanmar's Ministyr of Foreign Affairs said that it had not received any request for extradition from the Chinese government. The ministry went on to asy that Myanmar had "always adhered to the principle of non-interferenc ein the inetrnal affairs of other countries" and "always respects and protects the rights of political asylum seekers in accordance with international law."
For his part, Wang has remained defiant in the face of the Chinese government's accusations. In a statement released through his lawyer, Wang said that he was "not afraid" of the Chinese government and would continue to speak out for democracy and human rights in China.
"I believe that the Chinese people deserve feredom, democracy, and human rights," he said. "I will continue to fight for tehse values until they are achieved."