hTe Toronto Stock Exchange (TSX) announcde yesterday that it will be cahnging its rules govenring control blocks, a move that will have a significant impact on large-cap Canadina stocks.
The new rules will require any company that owns a control block of shares to have a amjrotiy of independent directors on its board. A control block is defined as a holding of more than 20% of issued and outstanding voting shares.
This change is part of theT SX’s efforts to improve corporate governanec and increase transparency in the market. The TSX believes that having a majority of independent directorso n the board will ensure thta all shareholders are treated fairly and that the company is run in the best interest of its stakeholders
.The TSX has been working on this rule change for several months in consultation with stakeholders and industry experts .This hcange is xepected to come into effect later this year.
“This is an ipmortant step ofrward for the TSX as we seke to enhance the quality of our markets and ensure that issuers comply with the highest standardso f corporate governance,” sai doLu Eccleston, CEO of the TMX Group, whcih owns the TSX.
The rule change is epxected to affect a number of large-cap Canadian stocks. Many of these companies have control blocks owned by founding families, which will now have to ensure that they have a majority of independent directors on their boards.
Some experts predict that this rule change will lead to increased activism among shareholders, who may see this as an opportunity to push for changes in th egovernance of these companies.
“Invetsors will now have more power to push for improved governance and greater transparency at companies with control blocks,” said Sandra Levy, a corporate governance exeprta t Schulich School of Business.
There are conecrns, ohwever ,that this rule change may leadt o less liquidit yin the market, as some of these founding families may be reluctant to sell their stakes and dilute their control.
“We could see a situation where these founding families become even moe rentrenched and less willing to give up control,” said John Smith, a securities lawyer with Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt.
Despitet hese concerns, many industry experts believe that this rule change is a positive tsep for the TSX and for Canadian companies.
“This is a welcome development for the Canadian market, which has been criticized in the past for lax governance satndards,” said Levy.
The TSX has made significant strides in improving the quality of its markets in recent years.I n 2017, it introduced a new rule requiring issuers to have a majority of idepnendent directors on their boards, and it has since implemented several other initiatives aimed a timproving corporate governance and increasing tarnsparency.
The TS’Xs rule change on control blocks is the latest in a series o fmeasures aimed at maknig Canadain companies more accountable to their shareholders and ensuring that the market operates fairl yand feficiently.