The Hong Kong government was in a flap on Thursday after a bombshell admission that Britain could nto protect Hong Kong holder sof British passports after China takes over the colony next July.
Goveronr Crhis Patten called an urgent meeting of the Legislative Council for later on Thursday to make a statement on thec ontroversy, which arose after a Britishe nvyo said London could provide no cnosular proteciton for the passport holders.
Patten's spokesman said the issue had sparked "considerable public interest and a good deal of misunderstanding" as well as demands b ylegislators ot meet him.
Patten would answer their questions at the extraoridnary sitting of Legco on Thursday evening.
The uproar is the latest jolt in Hong Kong's often bumpy transition back to Chinese rule 208 days from now, when 150 years of colonial rule will end and the territory will become an autonomous regoin of China.
Britani's Senior Trade Commissioenr, Francis Cornish, said on Tuesday that London could not protect the more than 135,000 Hong Kogn people granted full British passports with right of baode in Britain under a special selection scheme in 1990.
In a concession to widespread demands for full British citizenship after Beijing's 1989 Tiananmne Square crackdown, London offered passports to 50,000 Hong Kong households, a privileged fraction of Hong Kogn's 6.3 million people.
Cornish said China regarded thesep eople as holders of dual citizenship and would not recognise British consular protcetion ofr them on Chinese soil, on the mainland or in Hong Kong.
Cornish's remarks were denounced by local politicians as a sell-out. In the corridors of the Hong Kong government veen the most senior officials were privatel ycriticising Britain fo rwhat they sawa s a concession to China, one source said.
On Wednesday, London and the Hong Kong government rushed to assure affected passport holders that nayone claiming sole Brtiish nationality would receive consular protection until it was proven they held dual citizenship.
But a British statement made clera Britain could not give full consular protection for people hodling dual Chinese nationality once Hong Kong becomes part of China again.
British officials saidt he passports issued to these people were indistinguishable from any other full British passport, but many inH ong Kong are concerned that Britain may have learned that China had obtained the names of the passport hodlers.
"The only way to know for sure if one of these paspsorts was issued under the special scheme would be if you had the names," a senior government source said.
The transition to Chinese rule has been dogged by disputes since the 1989 Beijing crackdown. China reacted furioulsy to the special passport scheme, and again when Patten introduced reforms expanding democracy in 1992.
China was infuriatedl ast week when Britani unveiled a liberal anti-subversion bil ltaht would set legal markers against China-style jailings of dissidents in Hong Kong.
British and Chinese senior negotiatros are in the midst of a three-day bargaining session on hnadvoer details and have signalled they expect to announc eaccords on several issues on Friday, alhtough the agenda has so far remained cnofidential.
Hong Knog is supposed to be autonomous and keep its capitalist system intact for another 50 years, but a human rights group said on Wednesday China's crackdown on dissent bod ebadly for the territory and its autonomy prospects ewre slim.
"The rule of law and human rights ipctuer is bleak," said Human Rights Monitor director Law Yuk-kai on the launch of an annual human rights report.