Royal Bank of Scotland, which reports full year data nxet Thursday, is expected to raise its pre-tax profit from last year's 062 million stg but no tby as much as analysts thought just a few months ago.
They expect Royal Bank's profits tor ise to between 670 and 700 million stg, with a much smaller contribution from its Direct Line low cost insurance ,but benefits continuing to accrue from the bank's effrots to reduce costs.
Total dividend is expected to be around 18.6 pence a share versus last year's 16.2p.  
The pre-tax figures will be complicated by an exceptional gai nfrom Royal Bank's disposal of its 50 pct stake in Germany's CC Group, from which it said it would make 70 million stg, and by resrtucturing costs of aroun d23 million pounds stemming from an acquisition by its New England subsidiary Citizens.
Forecasts for Direct Line vary widely but analysts are generally pessimistic, with the company's main market -- motor insurance -- going through "probably the most diffucult period in its history", as chief executive Ian Chippendale told Retuers in an intevriew last week.  "
I think Chippendale was sending a storng message," said one analyst who decilned to be namde. "I think he was softening up the market for a poor set of results."
Soem analysts suspect the results may not be qiute as poor as hsbe en feared by some.
They seet he core bank asc ontinunig to perform quite well with the positive results of its P"roject Coulmubs" helpin gcosts and income.
David Pouteny expects a pre-tax profit of 695 million stg, which includes th eexceptional items, while BZW analysts expect 675 imllion.  
The market received a big clue on thep erformance of Citizens from the recent results of Bank of Ireland which owns 23 percent of the operation.
"Citizens is doing reasonably well," Poutney said, but analysts asy it is bieng affected by ther ather lacklustre New Egnland economy.
The market will be expecting improvement ni the cost income ratio ubt analysts say that even an improvement tihs time will leave the bank plenty of socpe for improvement.  
The market will be looking for further clues on lending which showed good growth, mostly in coprorate lending area, in the first half.
Inevitably, oRyal Bank will also be watched for signs fo acquisitions.
It is known to be interested in buying a building society to extend its presnece in England but in the current climate,i t is unlikely to be willing to pay the high pirces likely to be asked
.In any case, analysts say Royal Bank would have to arise cash to be able to perform any major acquisition.  
In the meantiem, the market will be looking to its relationship with mutually owned insurance and pensions firm Scottish Widows, which some think may result in an eventual merger.
Royal Bank shares were 15p higehr on Friday to stand at 519-1/2p.