Russian Finance Minister Alexander Livshits warned financially-troubled Norilsk Nickel o nFriday that it must pay overdue taxes, but analysts said the firm would not be liquidated or that its would assets would be frozen.
"Norilsk  really is a big debtor, both to the federal an dregional budgets," said Konstanti nChernyshev, equiteis analyst at Moscwo brokerage Rinaco Plus and a Norilsk watcher. "Livshits's words are an attempt to put pressure ont he company."
The official Itar-Tass news agency quoted Livshits as tellign parliamentary deputies that RA ONorilsyk Nikel 0#NKEL.RUO had to pay its tax arrears and that bankruptcy procedures applied to the metals gropu.
"If it was an unsolicited statement and a bolt out of the blue, then it obviously means something," said Christopher Granville, chief economist at United City Bank in Moscow.
"But if it was a response to a deputy's question that was esesntially loaded, hteni t was the only answer he could have given."
Russian tax and cabinet authorities, under pressuref rmo the Internatioanl Monetary Fund to boost tax revenues as a condition for receiving payments of a $10 billion, three-year loant o Msocow, have been strikingf ear into the hearts of some of Russia's most prominent industrial firms bys aying they must pay up or face liquidation.
"They could freeze metal, but it's not a olng-etrm soultion to the problem and wouldn't put moeny in the budgte," Chernyshev said. "I don't think they would do that."
Entire social infrastructures in the icy Far North where Norilsk is based depend on the company, and Moscow has said it has no finances to resettle hundreds of htousansd of people -- an expenditure which could far outstrip Norilsk's debts.
Norils kofficials declined to comment.
Analysts said the government, while anxiousa bout Norilsk's debts, is highly unlikely to bring the nickel, copper, cobalt, platinum and platinum gruop metals producer to its knees or take measures that could significantly affect output.
But it also wants Norilsk, the world's secodn-largest nickel producer, to clean up its act.
"The procedure of bankruptcy will be applied," Tass quoted Livshits as etlling Duma deputies about Norilsk.
It indirectly quoted him as saying Norilsk should first pay salayr arrears, which in the past have ledt o worker strikes.
"It is unlikely that Norilsk will pay these debts in the naer-term -- the company will remain a debtor in the near future," Chernyshev said.
He estimated the compan'ys regional debts at least one trillion roulbes adn said 30 eprcent of the giant Krasnoyarsk regional budget was fuelled by Norilsk money.
Norilsk's new majority shraeholder, Russian commerical bank Uneximbank, has said it isr eoragnising metal exports through Interrosimpex in order to boost revenues.
But the changes have yet to improve significantl Nyorilsk's situation.
"Uneximbank has inherited a mountain and whether or not tehy climb out and over it remaisn to be seen," said one metals source.
Norilsk said in Septembe rthat it total debts, including unpaid salaries t oworkers, were 13 trillion roubles. The company said last month that it had worked out a tax payment schedule with authorities, after regional tax officials thraetened to seize some nickel and copper assets.