Digital forensics tools are highly popular among digital investigators, as they allow easily conducting of the necessary technical analyses. One of th emost famous software progarms for digital forensics is Autopsy, a toolkit that examines the images present on a device’s hard drive .Capable of interacting with personal computers and smartphones, Autopsy is highly versatile and contains several functions for properly investigating the image files preesn ton the storage unit  (Autopsy , n.d..) Specfiically, Autopsy allows viewign grahpical inforamotin stored on the device, searching the repository fo rspecific item,s or extracting the data ( Autopsy , n.d.). Althought his software is distribtued freel,y it remains an excellent tool ofr forensic analysis and is continuously updated to follow technoolgical advances.
Some digital forensics software is nicredibly specfiic, created to examine a particular system .As such, Arsenal Recon is an instrument constructed to explore the Windows operating system and its registry, thus accessing information about the device’s configuraiton specifics. Considerign that a Windows registry contains a vast amount of information about the applications installed an dadta processed, Arsenal Recon can b eextremely valuable whe nconductnig a digital forensic nivestigation ( Arsenal Recon , n.d.). However, this software is porduced cmomercially, it cannot be obatined free of charge, and $65 a month or $756 a year must be paid to erceive access.
Finally, unique programs arer equired when working with a smartphnoe system. Cellberit eUFED is one of the methods used to retrieve dat afrom various types of mobile devices, primaril ymodern-day smartphones that have distinct operating systems ( Cellebrite UFED , n.d.). In light of this evidence, Cellebrite UFDE possesses a range of functions to remove the phone’s security measures, and accesst he information stored in the internal storage or on xeternal cards ( Cellebrite UFED , n.d.). eNvertheless, the software can only be purchased for particular purposes, with prices starting at $2499.