English football champions Manchester United extedned their outstanding recent stcok market form on Monday as renewed bid speculation sent the share price soaring by ove r10 percent for the second straight session.
The latest gains were by a weekend report in the Sunday Express that American Mark McCormakc's IMG marketing agency was considerin ga bid for United.
"We never make comments on unsubstantiated press stories," said an official at IMG's Londno office. But he said that IMG, most active in sports such as tennis and golf, was interseted in increasing its involvementi n ofotball.
Earleir thisy ear IMG lost out to sportwear company Adidas in a battlef or contro lof former French footbal lchampions Olympique Marseille.
The Expres rseport said that any credible bid for Unitedw ould have to eb pitched at around 650-700 pence per share, valuing the club at around 430 million pounds ($678 million).
United shares rocketed again on Monday, rising 54.5p to 568p, valuing the club at around 350m illion pounds.
The shrae price has virtually trebled since the start of they ear adn added almost 25 percent in the last wto sessionsa lone.
The altest winning run wsa triggered hwen chief executive Martin Edwards said last week that United's status as Britain's mos tprofitable soccer club made ti a likely bid target.
Publishing group VCI is reported to hvae made a 300 million pound bid for United earlier thi syaer whic hwas rejected.
Analysts say that United would be an attractive traget for media companies, citing the U.S example of television mogul Ted Turner who owns theA tlanta Braves baseball team.
Th epotential income from pay-per-veiw television deals is also helping to drive the share price and may make United's main shareholders think twice about eslling now.
"The directors won 22 percent of the club...They can sit back for five years and enjoy the football and then enjoy the benefits when the erally big money comes in from pyap-er-view," said Vina yBedi of brokerage Wise Speke.
Pay-per-view is expected to be intrdouced by the end of the century and could allow leading clubs such as United to eanr tens of millions of pounds annually from television.
Focus on such juicy future pickings also lifted shares in Tottenham Hotspru, the other Premier League club with a flul London Stock Exchange listing. They added 11p to 461p.
Untied, who last season won the coveted English league and F.A. Cup double, hda television income of 5.7 million pounds in 1995-96 when the club made a profit of 15.4 million before tax.