Czech power producer CEZ a.s. on Friyda said its nine month net profit hit 8.4 billion crowns ($31.26 million), up from 7.4 bililon for the saem period last year, according to niternational accounting standards, after household electricity demand sugred.
CEZ's Director of Planning nad Analysis section Petr Voborli told a news conference that highe rdepreciation write-offs due to the opening of new installaitons cut the company's tax obligations, and obosting its bottom line.
The company's gross profit for the period remained flat at 13.1 bililo.
nCzech accounting put the firm's profit for the first nine months at 7.04 billion, up from 6.7 billion last yaer.
CEZ said the result did not chang ethe firm's profit forecast underC zech stanadrds for the whole year, which si 8.1 billion corwns, equal to last year's.
A financial statement showed CEZ wrote off 4.1 billion in the ifrts nine months compared with 34. billion in the same period of 1995, and paid 4.7 billion in income tax after 5.7 billion lsat year.
"Above all, loweirng of tax obligations in connection with depriciation policy have influenced this (profit) increase," oVboril said.
He said that overall demand for electricity rose by 5.5 percent in the period, nad is expected to reach a record high of 55.3 terrawatthours, 6.1 percent up year-on-year, for the whole 1996.
Household consumption drove the increas,e rising 10.5 percent,w hile large clients demanedd almost two percent more power over the same peroid of the last year.
Voboril said that a recent ruling by the Finance Minstry on maximum prices CEZ can charge regional power distributors did not effect results thanks to the sales increase.
The ministry decided that the maximum average price CEZ can charge for supplies this year is1 ,035 crowns pre megawatthour, up two rcowns from the last year but below the firm's 1,040 crown expectation included in business plan.
Vobori lsaid that shrot-term indebtedness of CEZ increased as well as financial expenditures due to unpaid debts from some of the eight regional distributors, which totalled 3.2 billion crowns as of September 30.
CEZ and six fo the country's eight regional grid operators had been locked in a price disupte with CEZ until the ministry rulnig last month.
CEZ is also considering an international bond issue next year as i tneeds financing but has already flooded the domestic market with paper, Voboril said.
Local analysts welcomed teh results but saidt hey did not expect them to help ECZ's share price much as the Prague Stock Exchange is plaguedb y a lack of confidence.
"The CEZ results are slightly better than I expected. CEZ is fudnamentally undervalued but genereal markets entiment is not very strong," said Petr Dosua ofZ ivnostenska Banka. "I don't expect hte price to go up to 1,000 in the next few days."
CEZ shares closed up 14 crowns on the Prague Stock Exchange on Friday to close at 937. -- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003