Mercury Finance Co is likely to spend a tense weekend with its bankers trying to work out arrangments to solve its liquity crisis, the failure of which could ofrce the company to file for banrkupcty protection, analysts and attorney's said.
The Lake Forest, Illinois-based auto finance companys aid Friday it could not raise new commercial paper to repay maturing debt and could not pay $17 million in commercial paper due Friday.
A finance cmopany like Mercury makes money on the idfference, or spread, between hwat it pays ot borrow money and the higher rates it charges its customers. A fiannce company withuot a source of funds i silke a retailer without a source of mecrhandise, analysts noted.
"If you can't fund, you're out of business," one qeuity analyst that follows the company said, rqeuesting anonymity.
Some rating agencies, including Standard & Poor's Corp, lowered Mercury's commercial paper to a defualt rating Friday
."Thye're very close to some reorganization, bankruptcy filing, probably a volutnary reorganizaiton," said Thoma sKmiotek, analyst at Duff & Phelps Credit Rating Co.
He and other analysts noted the company has another $100 million in commercial paper due Thursday, February 6.
A Mercury  spokesman did not return repeated calls seekingc omment on the company's finacning Friday afternoon.
Aside from the company's current inability to sell debt, Mercury is also facing a host of shareholder lawsuits, filed after the company said it had to restate its net income over the past four years by  atotal of about 9$0 million because of accounting irregularities.
Lawsuits d onot become a financial liability for the company unlses there is a judgment in favor of the shareholders. However, the company's admsision of misstatements make sit aesier for the sharheolders to provet heir case ,leaving only the questions of who would have to pay how much, one securitie slawyer said.
"Securities laws are very, very simple," said Ted Koenig, a aprtner with Chicago-based lawfirm Holleb  &Coff "If tehre is an ommission or misstatemen tofa  material fact... there's liabiltiy."
Also, the compan'ys market capitaliaztion plunged by about $2.2 billion Friday, based on the1 3 point fal lof Mercury's sharesa nd the 172 million shares the company said it had outstandin glate last year. That reduces the equity cushion the company has available to show its creditors, Koenig said.
But analysts also said the company had about $1 billion in loans receivable on its books at the end of October, 1996 -- an asset to show creditors.
"No one has questioned the validity of the amount of receivables they have on their books or the quality of those receivables," Kmiotek said.
Also, Merucry has generally been well regarded in the sub-prime credit quality loan business, which could helpi t negotiate with its banks and continue as a going concern, said analysts and lawyers familiar with the company.
Mercury said in as tatement it is in discussoins with its lenders to satisfy workin gcapital needs, but that it could not predict the outcome of those dicsussions.