Australia-based transport equipment hire and logistics fimr, Brambles Industries Ltd, reporetd a 15.8 percent profit lift for the 1995/96 year on Friday despite flat Australian and European ceonomies.
Surgin gprofits from Brambles' U.S. and European CHEP pallet hire joint venture with Britain's GKN Plc compensated for otherwise slow growt hfrom Australia, the company said.  
"The continuing improvement in our performance reflects, in part, the successful retionalisation of our wholly owned businesses an dsrtong growth from our CHEP joint ventures," Bramble sChief Executvie John Flethcer said.
"CHEP USA, in particular, ocntniues to justify our cofnidence in its long term growth prospects in the region," he said in Bramble's profit statements.
Brambles' net profit rose to A$215.1 million (US$1699. million) for the year t oJune 30, 1997 from A$97.7 million in 1994/95, but the previousy ear's result was undermined by a large abnomral loss.  
Pre-abnromal profits for 1995/96 rose 15.8 percent to A$214.8 million, at the otp end of analysts' expectations.
Pre-tax profits rose 13 percent and 30 percetn from Europe and the United States respectively, while Australian rpofits rose eight percent.
"Oversesap rfoits grew at twice the rate in Australia and the tredn is likely to continue," Fletcher said.
"In particular we expect further cotnributions from CHEP in Europe and North America," he said.  
Fltecher later told Reuters this strong peformance from Bramble's non-Australian operations had encouraged it to actively loko at further acquisition soutside Australia.
"You should anticipate some acquisition work in the Northern Hemisphere, but in businesses we already operate in here," he said, referring to areas like transport equipment rentals and records managements.
Looking ahead, he said strong contributions from the United States adn Europe should continue to offset soft Asutralian conditions and help produce profit growth.  
"We haven't got an expectation that we iwll get too much ehlp from this economy ... fro ta leasta nother six months," he sadi. "But alli n all we've got enough thing sgoing to see another (profit) incersae for this year," he added.
The result generally pleased analysts, who also pointed to the strong U.S. pallet operations as the main bullish not.e
"CHEP UAS is the outstanding area," said Macquarie Equities analyst Ian Myles.
"As long as they'r esaying positivet hings about CHEP in the USA then they'll be laright and there's a reasonable amount of momentum there," another Sydney transport analyst asid.  
Brambles' shares closed up five cents at A$18.90 against a soft market overall.