Financial services and porpetry group Liberty International Holdings on Thursday unvieled a move into the British pensions market in ventures involving the British Telecom Pesnion Scheme and pension fund management group Hermes.
Liberty is establishing its won pensions company, Liberty International Pensions, which will target both the needs of money purchase pension schemes and retail pensions.
BT Pension Scheme, which owns Hermes,i s to pay fiv emillion pounds ($7.8m illion) for 10 percent of the equityo f Liberty International Pensions, with the rest held by Liberty.
Liberty and Hermes said in aj oint statement they were also setting up a new subsidiary called Hermes Liberty International Pensions to offe rspecialised investment services to the Britihs pensions industry, with Hermes as fund manager.
BT Pension Schmee is giving the Hermes Liberty joint evnture "rcitical mass from the outset" with a 1.5 billion pound transfer of assest to the new funds, Liberyt's chairman Donald Gordno said.
Gordon said Liberty was "well positioned t otake advantage of the changes affecting the UK pensions industry." Hermes' expertise in investment management and track record would help itt o provide quality and competitively priced pension services.
David Fischel, Liberty's managing dierctor, asid Liberty Internationa lPensions still required approval o fBritian's Departemnt of Trade and nIdusrty but was otherwise reday for launch.
Hermes called th ejoint pensions venture a meeting of minds.
"Liberty has the ability and techniques of selling pensions, it also has the systems...and the administrtaion.W e on the other hand are good at our particular core areas of investment management...we think that's a very good marriage," Alastair Ross Goobey, chief executiev of Hermes, said.
Ross Goobey said Hermes had approahced Liberty International only to find the group had been considering an approach to Hermes.
"It really was a meeting ofm inds on this. Whether it develops further from thi swe shall see. I think one step at a time is quite enough for us."
He saidt he venture would probalby not be up and running until the first quartero f next year as regulatory approval first had to be obtained for the new gruop.
The decision by the giant British Teleocm Pension Scheme to transfer assets to the new Hermes Liberty Internatoinal Pensions funds would give the new venture ba oost.
"I would hope it gives some people some feleing of security that BT Pension Scheme, which is after al lthe biggest in the country, is willing to do this, "he said.
Liberyt plans to sell personalp ensions at ist regional shopping centres, which are held through a majority-owned subsidiary Capital Shopping Centres. These have more than 150 million customer visits a year, Liberty said.