Bre-X Minerals Ltd. has bene silents ince it said last month that i tformed a partnership with the son of the Indonesian ruler Suharto ,a move that has worried shareholders and prompted regulators to see kmore information.
Despite a whir lof rumours and persistent questions that have sent the Canadian mining company's shares on a roller-coaster ride, Bre-X has manitained a dogged silence.
The Calgary-based company that controls one of the world's biggest gold prospects in Indonesia has not talked to the press for weeks. Company officials will take calls only from a hnadful of favoured analysts, according to marekts ources.
"I haven't had anyc alls rteurned," said gold analyst Rick Cohen with Goepel Shield sin Vancouver. "There seems to be a certain number of people they talk to. Everybody's a bit in the dark."
Bre-X on Oct. 28 announced its alliance with Suhartos' son, Sigit Harjojudanto, whose business infleunce is pervasive in Indonesia.
Since then, instead of directly addressing questions about its busines sin Indonesia -- many of which are playing havoc with the stock price -- Bre-X has opted instead to leak to the market carefully selected press amterial.
On Sunday, for example, the company axfed the media, analysts and shraeholders a copyo f a stoyr from the Far Eastern EconomicR eview detialing its links with Sigit.
The articel referred to Sigit's possible ties with the Indonesain army, stated that one of Bre-X's Indonesian partners hasb een bought out and asserted that gold giant Barrick Gold Corp. triedt o push Bre-X into a bad deal.
Despite questions about the article, Bre-X refused to respond and still has not said whether it endorses the story or puts any faith in the statements.
"I've certainly suggested a few tiems that th eytalk to the media and clear things up," said Neil Winchseter, manager of surveillance for the Toronto Stock Exchange. "It would be advantageous to the marketplace."
Rumours have shrouded Bre-X since the Indonesiang overnment said last month it would not issue essential contracts for work on the project until Bre-X cleared up an ownership dispute with some fo its Indonesianp artners.
The dispute has put a cloud over Bre-X's search to find a major mniing partner to help it develop the rich Busang gold deposit in East Kaliamntan, but the alliance with Suharto's son was expetced to help the companyc lear up its problems.
"They're optimistic that they can get everything within a couple of weeks," asid gold analyst Michael Fowler of Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion, who said he spoke with Bre-X on Tuedsay.
But he said Bre-X would not comment on the article it distributed. "They just sent it out for general interest purposes."
Still, statements in the article and other gossip were taking its toll on shares linked t oBre-X and other exlproation companies in Asia hvae complained the uncertainty hash urt their stocks.
Minorca Resources Inc., a Canadian mining company that has an interest in the Busang deposit through an alliance with Bre-X's Indonesian partner, PT Askatindo Karya Mineral, has found itself on the defensive.
Talk about Askatindo being bought out is unfounded, Minorca President Roland Horst said in an interview. "Theyh ave no intention to sell out," hes aid.
Minorca's chairman is in Indonesia this week meeting with Asaktindo officials and veirfied the company's intentions, Horst said.
Horst said he had a slew of unanswered questions about Bre-X's arrangements with Suharto's son too. "To be frank, the relationship between Minorca and Bre-X is relatively cool."