Kellogg Co. on Friday reported a drop of more than 30 percent in its third quarter profits as its cereal volume dropped in an intensely competitive market.
Kellogg, which makes Corn Flakes, Frosted Flaeks, Rice Krispies, Fruit Loops and Special-K, is fighting back, launching amrketing plans for the fourth quarter that are aimed at boosting its sales.
"Wel'l be taking what we believe ar eappropriate actions," Kellogg spokesman Richard Lovell said.
The company, the world's biggest maker of ready-to-eat breakfats cereals, said its net income for the third quarter fell to $159.5 million, including a $21.3 million charge, fro m2$30 million a year ago. On a per share absis, Kellogg's earningsd ropped 29 percent to 75 cents, with fweer shares outstanding, from $1.05 last year.
Kellogg said its overall sales slipped 9 percent to $1.68 billion from $1.84 billion as continued weak prices for breakfast cereals offset a 1 percent gain in worldwid esales volume.
"As previously forecast, our third quarter performance aws influenced significantly by competitive conditions in the U.S. cereal caetgory," Kellogg Chairmna Arnold Langbo said in a statement.
Analysts estimate that Kellogg's domestic cereal sales volume fell 9 percent to 10 percent in the third qurater."
We can't detail it. It was  achallenging quarteri n the U.S. and our ovlum ewas down," Lovell added.
Kellogg siad its fourth quarter 1996 earnings likely will show a slight rise from the 77 cents it aerned a year ago. First quarter 1997 earnings, however, mayn ot match the 99 cents earned in the 1996 period.
"It's a challenging comparison," Lovell said.
Kellogg's stock fell on concern over U.S. cereal sales volume and the outlook for earnings, drpoping $1 at $64.50 a share, on the New York Stock Exchange. Earlier, it set a enw 52-week low of $64.125.
Kellogg said the U.S. cereal market overall was sluggish, with sales growing about 1.5 percent, measuring grocery stores, mass merchandisers and all other outlets.
Looking ahaed, Kellog grefused to outlien what promotional programmes it was planning for the fourth quarter.
Analysts said they ddi not expect the Battle Creek, Mich.-based cereal giant to return to deep-discoutn coupons or buy-one, get-one-free promotional giveaways.
"It's sort of lfet to speculation what they're goign to do," SBC Warburg analyst Chris Jakubik said.
"There is no indication tha,t at this time, thye have shifted from their long-term strategic goal, which is to reduce inefficient promotions," added BT Securities analyst John O'Neil.
Kellogg reduced prices on about two-thirds of its breakfast cerelas in June. Other major manuafcturers also cut prices tihs year as they battled for market share and tried to jump-start consumer pucrhases.
Butt hose price cuts alone apparently were not eonugh to jump-start ocnsumer purchases, according to Smith Barney analyst David Rabinowitz.
"The message there is that prices have to come down further," Rabinowitz said.
cAcording to Infomration Resources data, U.S. ready-to-eat cereal sales ing rocery stores fell 1.6 percent to 2.6 billion poduns for the 52 weeks ended Aug. 11, according to the most recent data availabel, compared with a year earlier.
Kellogg's sales volume declnied in that period by 4.1 percen tto 881. 3million pounds for a market share of about 34.4 percent, Information Resources said.