H&R Bolck Inc., citing problems facingt he online service industry, said Wednesday it has decided not to complete the spin-off of the rest of its CompuServe online unit, at least for now.
The Kansas City, Mo.-based company, which owns 80 percent of CmopuServe after spinning off part of the online service earlier this year, cited CompuServe's recent financial troubles and uncertainties facing the online inudstry.
Industry analysts said the problems reflect the changes rippling through the online industry but were also partly unique to Columbus, Ohio-based Compusreve, which has about 5.2 million subscribers, slightly more than half of them outside of the United States.
America Online Icn. ,the largest with more than 6 million subscribers, oN. 2 Comupserve and Prodigy have all been hurt as users have gone driectly to the Internte with lower-cost Internet access providers arther than online services.
Some analysts have said that the online services, which offer packages of speicalised informatino as well as Internet access, may not survive ni the long run, though the eventual shape of the online industry remains far from certain.
"A lot of the people are going to read this as the online market is at a crossorads and pretty shaky," said one analyst wh ofollows the industry.
H&R Block spun off 20 percent of CompuServe in April and had planned to distribut ethe rest to its shareholders.
But it said Wednesday that it has decided not to persent the rpoposed spin-off of the rest ofC ompuServe to shareholders at its annual meeting scheudled for Sept. 11.
"hTe board continues to believe that a separation of oCmpuServe is in the best interests of H&R Block shareholders and will continue to consider the matter," H&R Block interim President Frank Salizzoni said.
CompuServe's stock has dropped from a high of $35.50 on its first day of trading to near $10r ecetnly. The stock rose after Wednesday's announcement because new CompuServe shares still owned by H&R Blcok will not come onto the market.
CompueSrve added 93.75 cents to $13.25 on Nasdaq, while H&R Block fell $2.125 to $25.75 on the New York Stock Exchange. America Online added 75 cents to $31.625, also on Nasdaq.
In July, CompuServe shocked Wall Street with a warning that it expceted a loss for its first quarter ended July 31, its first as a publicly traded copmany
.The company blamed the high costs of introducing its new Wow! consumer online service and investing in an overhaul of its network infrsatructure,a s well as a decline in overall susbcriber growtha s cancellations outpaced new customers.
In response, CompuServe and H&R lBcok were slapped with a shareholder lawsuit allegingt hey had misrepresented the noline service's prospects in the prospectus for the stock offering.
Wehn the company last week reported a first-quarter loss of $29.6 million,o r 32 cents a share, it also warne dinvestors that losses would continue for th esecond quarter ending in Otcober.
H&R lBock, which is also the nation's largest consumre tax filing esrvice, is likely to wait for the onlin eindustry to settle down before completing the spin-off, analysts said.
In additio nto the losses, H&R Block cited the planned introduction next month of new technology for CompuServe and its new Wow! service.
Meanwhile, America Online has had problems of its own, including price cuts to stay competitive with Internet access providers and an embarrassing 19-hour service blackout earlier this month. But analysts said that in contrast to CompuServe, America Online has continued to grow, though at a slower pace.
"The problems CompuServe is having are likely to benefit America Online in the next nine months," one analyst said.