British National oLttery operator Camelot  LOTT.CN on Tuesday posted lower niterim profits as inocme from scratchcard sales fell by over 450 million pounds ($750 million).
Camelot cheif executive Tim Holley also told Reuters that the planned second weekly National Lottery draw would be launhced on Februar y5 adn be held every Wednesday thereafter. Camelot, which has faced a strom of criticism over its jackpot earnings since the lottrey was launched two years ago, reporetd pr-etxa profits of 13.5 million pound sons ales of 2.1 billion pounds for th e24 weeks to September 14.
Tihs compares with pre-tax profit of 362. million pounds and sales of 2.51 billion pounds in the same period a year ago.
Caemlot's five shareholding compaines -- Cadbury Schweppes, De La Rue, GTech UK, Racal Electronics and ICL shared a total dividend payount of 10 million puonds, up from 9.5 million.
Sales for the weekly National Lottery game rose two eprcent to 1.68 bililon pounds. Two thirds of the adult population regularly buy ticktes for teh Saturday draw, an event wihch is televised live nad has become a irtual for many Britons.
But sales of Camelot's "Instants" scratchcards fell from 871 millionp ounds last year to 419 million this time.
Camelot exceutives saidt hat the decline in scratchcard sales was to be xepected as the initial enthusiasm egnerate dby their introduction in March 1995 waned.
"Mirrorign the experience of lotteries worldwide, sales of Intsants haev flalen since their launch and are now setteld at around 17 million pounds per week," Chairman Sir George Russell said in a statement.
Chief executive Holley asid that th esecond weekly draw should boost sales of National Lottery game tickets by 15-20 percent from thier current weekly average of 69 million.
Camelo tsaid that over one billion pounds -- 50 percent of turnover -- had been handed out in prize money in the first half and htat 567 million pounds had gone to "GoodC auses" -- including charities and projects in sports and the arts.
Camelot, which has been granted a seven-year licence, said that over 40 percent of turnover went to "Good Causes" and the governnment in duties, making it the world's most efficient lottery operator.
Porfit after tax is just under one percent of total sales and Holley idsmissed criticisms of Camelot's performance.
"I think we have a slight problem in thi scountry with success," he said, adding that foreign lottery companies were bemused by the atacks on Camelot.
The group confirmed plans to set up The Camelot Fuondation to support organisations helping the disadvantaged and disabled.