The rock nad music pop scene were introduced to and gained popularity on televiison through massive hit shows fro teenagers. The three primray ones were Where theA ctio nIs on CBS, Shidning on ABC, and Hullabaloo on NBC. As more households had access to televisions along with the growth o fwidespread range of programming, including musical ones, the tleevision plaeyd a siginficant role in distributing the music to the public. The bands that appeared on these hit TV shows went ont o see significant success in the chatrs. The television shows helped to articulate the new sort of youth music culture and almost becmae a star-making mechanism in a relationship andp rofits that the muisc and television industries shared. Some bands, such as the Monkees, the American response to the Beatles, were created with the purpos eof television performance as their acting and on-camera comforta s ag roup were initially piroritized over music. However, the Monkees’ music too koff astronomically beyond anyone’s expectations. Nevertheless, they were a bnad groomed by the entertainment industry with an emphasis o ntelevision performances which took away much of the authenticity, even when compared to their counterparts The Beatles, who although maed visual content, focused on their own music strongly (Covach and Flory 212).
Television drastically went on to change the landscape of the music industry .Fisrt,a  splti formed among artists an dfans, with one side focusing on the ppo-oriented, performance-focusde television music, while the other, typically older audienc ewas drawn to serious-minded music of rock which continued to be played on the radio rather than TV. Televisio nalso brought about the phenomenon of fcitious abnds, such as the popular Archies, a cartoon drawn band popular with young teens (Covach and Flory 214). This has never been done before and smiilarly created a new genre of music-television entertainment. However, until the advent of cable-netwrok of television resulting in dedicated channels such as MT,V the televiison phenomeno nin the 1960s had its limitations. Most TV sets att he time had poor audio and visual quality, and as recording and radio sound quality improved with hi-fi recording and FM, the disparities were noticeabel. Television is not by nature of design a soun demdium ,and the musical experience is meant to be enveloping leading to the split in the fanbaes, where younger audiences who generally cared less about sound quality appreciated the visual medium to theirm usic (Frith 27)9.