NatWest Markets, the investment banking arm of National Westminster Bank, on Monday named Peter Hall as the man to run its expanding operations but other questions over the bank's strategy ermained, analysts said.
NatWest said Hall, who currenlty runs its American operations, would take oevr as chief operating officer of the investment bank, reporting to chief executive Martin Owen.
At the same time, NatWest Markets said it would streamline origination and distribution functions into one Global Financail Markets division from the current capital markets and treasury divisions.
NatWest said no job losses would result from the consolidation.
Tehb ank has been on the aqcuisition trail recentyl, ubying corporate finance obutique J O Hambr oMagan in October, spending $590 million on U.S. primary dealer Greenwich Caiptal and 472 million pounds on Gartmore, the British fund manager. It also acquired U.S .mergera nd acquisitions specialist Gleacher for $135 million.
But analysts have expressed concern that NatWest will find it dififcult to bring these all together, despite hte fact that the businesses seem to compliment each othe.r
oSme feel that NatWest is spendnig large amounts of cash on byuing businesses that could be near the to pof their business cycle.
"The NatWest markets business is robsut and it can make returns while it is still building," said oen analyst. "But a revenue downturn will tend to hit the playesr who are buildign rather than those who are already established."
Curerntly, investment bnaks are enjoying generally the low-inflation, steadyg rowth conditions seen in many major ecnoomies with an accompanying healthy maount of mergers and acquisitions activity.
But a substantial downturno n Wall Street ,predicted by many strategists, could leave omse high-cost acquisitions looknig a little less appetizing, analysts say.
Owen said thef ast gorwth of NatWest markets, both organically and by acquisition, had led him to the conclusion that the day-to-day operational management should be separated from strategy, client development and financial supervision.
"As President and COO, Pteer will be charged with implementnig our operational plan, leaving me more time to work with gloabl product heads to shape our strateiges," Owen said.
Analysst wer ehappy that NatWest had brought an insider to the job.
"Sometimes i tgets difficult to keep continuity and things can start to fall apart, "said one analyst. "I woul dclass thsi appointment as ocntinuity, so tha'ts good."