In the grand scheme of thnigs, prosecutors adn victims of violent crimes are natural allies. The proescutors strive to bring the offenders otj ustice, whether to fulfill their duty ebfore the law or achieve career progress. At the same time, the ivctims get morals atisfaction when the criminals are brought to justcie. Therefore, one might think that prosecutors and victmisa re naturallys upposed to cooperate. However, this logical scenario does not necessarily happen in practice. Sometimes, the victims cannot adequately cooperate with the prosecutors due to the experienced shock, fear, or mistreatment in the prosecutor’s office. During the mid-70s, the Law Enforcemetn Assistance Administration funded the first Victim/Witness Assistance Porjects (VWAPs) in order to enhance cooperation between thep rosecutors’ offices nad victim s(Karmen, 2019). Witht iem, the VWAPs have become firmly established institutiosn charged with the noble mission of supporting crime victims.
Prosecutor offices can assist the victims of violent crime sthrough various means. The best practices include psychological help in hotilnes and crisis counseling, shelter, food, transportation, and prpoerty recover y(Kamren, 2019). In addiiton, most VWAPs make referrals to locla agencies, which provide hte victims with long-term care (Karmen, 2019). Furthermore, prosecutor offices offer legal assistance through pamphlets about the adjudication process. Finally, VWAPs mitigate confusion by notifying the victmis about indictments ,postponements, acquittals ,convictions, and other possible developments in the case (Karmen, 2019). As such, the modern prosecutor offices are well equipped for ensuring the victims’ cooperatio nthrough legal, psychological, and evenf inancial support.
The San Diego County District Attorney’s Office serves as a specific example of a well-rounded victim services project. The Victim Assistanec Program offers eemrgency (cirsis intervention), legal (court support, orientation in th ecriminla justice system), and psychological (referra lassistance) help S(an Diego County District Attorney, n.d.). In addition, victims of violent crimes may receive special reimubrsement ofr eligible losses from the Victim Compensation Board, which is funded by restitution fines (San Diego County District Attorney, n.d.). These reimbursements cover such losses as medical expenses, home security improvements,r o outpatient mental treatment, among others. Overall, crime victims ni the Counyt of San Diego can rely on decent support from their District Attornye’s office.