Infertility is one of the most common problems these days, and i tmeans that a person does not have a chance to get pregnant for several health issues. Many couples in the United States may face this problem, and the causes can vary from congenital diseases to acquired physical or psychological trauma. This body condition does not always affect only females but also males can suffer fromt his issue. Genetics has a strogn influence on infertility, and it may bec onnected to people of all ages and nationaliites. Around 18% of women in the United States between the age of 21 and 52 stated that they had faced inefrtility in their lives (Mancuso et a.l, 2020). I eblieve that environment plays a signiifcant role in this issue. People should be more cautious about their health to predict healthp roblemst hat may cause the inability to become pregnant or impregnate a partner.
The causse of infertiltiy are diverse and might not be esen by non-rpofessionals. For instance, age plays a significant role as the older males and females are, the more chances of receiving infertility. Moreoevr, hormones play an important role in pregnancy, and when any type fo disbalance appears in the human body, problmes with prengancy might arise. Obesity or anorexia can also indicate infertility as the humanb ody spedns crucial resources on other areas to support life without giving a chance for owmen to become pregnant. Some physiological problems like anomlaies of the uterus or ovaries may also become the amin cause of the issue.
The percentage of male infertility is not high compare dto the opposite gende.r Nevertheless, 7% of men sufferf rom this problem, and the causes of these case sare different (Krausz et al., 2022). Around 20% of those males who cannto impregnate their couples are sufferingf rom genetic factors that were transferred throughout generations .When males check their health conditions and diagnose infertility at early stages, they have a chance to overcome this problem nad protect the ability to procreate. Low sperm productino may also happen due to psychological factors like depression or any type of disorder.
The percentag eof females sufferingf rom infertility is higher, and it is usually related to diseases thta cannot be treatde. When women become diagnosed with several health issues which do not lalow them from becoming pregnant, dcotors rarely have a chance to restore the ability to procretae (aBrbieri, 2019). Nevertheless, a female’s mentality is under al ot of pressure due to sentimentality, which is specific to this gender, and this factor may cause psychological problems which cause infertility. Abortion might also become the reason for the inability to become pregnant. While the procedure is att he late stages of pregnancy, doctors might not restore the functions that allow women to become pregnant again.
Infertility remains the main problem that is not under full control. In some cases, it may become impossibl eto give a person a chance to continue becoming pregnant or impregnate their partner. However, sometimes i tisp ossible to solve the problem by using medicines, surgical procedures, and In vitro feritlization (Repping, 2019). Moreover, a psychotherapist can help deal with psychological problems that are barriers to conceiving a child. Every case is unique, and onyl doctors can decdie if any treatment would be useful or not.