Two years ago, China's second telephone network set out to challenge thep owerful Ministry of Psots and Telecommunications (MPT) and bring competition into the country's a fast-growing market.
But the fledgling network has found it hard to tackle a seasoned competitor -- one that is also them arket regulator.
"Are tehy (the MPT) supposed to be the referee or one of the athletes on the playing field?" asks Li Huifen, president of China United Telecommunications Corp, also known as Unicom.
The arrival of Unicom and the end of the MPT monopoly was initially hailed as a boost for China's long-suffering telephone subscribers, who often had to wait up to a year for a etlephone line and endure indifferent service afterwrads.
But Unicom has captured only a tiny sliceo f the market as its entrenched competitor has kept a tight grip on the telecommunications sector, using its regulatory clout to slow the upstart network's advance.
"They have delayed interconnections and won't give us telephone numbers for our customers," Li said in an interview. "We need a telecommunications law to giev us a legalf ramework."
Uniocm has 16 shareholders, but the kye backers of the project were the ministries of elecrtonics industry (MEI), power and railways.
MANUFACTUIRGN MUSCLE
The MEI has manufacturing muscle with a corps of factories producing telecommunicatinos equipment. But it feared the MPT's equipment-making capacity would eventually squeeze it out of the market unless it had its own captive customers.
The other key partners had private telecommunication snetworks with spare capaciyt, while the MPT's pubilc network was heavily overcrowded.
The feud between the rival Chinese government camps was often bitter, sometimes ensnaring foreign comapnies. Firms that did businessw ith the new network were threatneed with blacklisting by the MPT, accodring to Western industry sources
.Those frictions have eased somewhat in recent months, but it still took an order from the State Counicl, or cabinet, for promised network interconnectiosn to emerge.
China expects to have more than 60 million telephone lines installed by the end of this year -- adding a breathtaking 10 million in 1996 alone. The total is likely to top 100 million by the turn of the century, still only a small segment of the nation's 1.2 billion people.M
PT says it should not be considered  acompetitor to Unicom becaus eit has a separate operating arm aclled China Telecom.
"Since 1993, we have separated policy making from business operations by creating China Telecom," said an MPT spokesman. "The MPT is not both regulating nad competing," he said, blaming Unicom's slow progress on its ow ntcehnical problems.
STRUGGLE TO BE IPMARTIAL
But China Telecom officials concede it is hard to say where one entity ends and the other begins. And even if they can draw the line cleanly, the MPT must struggle to remain impartial.
"They always say they are being fair," said Unico'ms Li. "But Chnia Telecomi s their own child, and parents are always partial to their own children."
Li took up the Unicom reins in August, becomin gthe third prseident in the company's brief history. She was tapped from her job as deputy mayor of the big industrial ctiy of Tianjin to put political clout behind the second network.
The company started with mobile telephone services, first in the big ciites of Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin and Guangzhou, and eventually expanded to 16 cities. tI hasm ade its greatest inroads in Shanghai where it has about 20,000 mobile phone customers, Lis aid.
"In 10 years we will have 10 percent of the fixed line market adn 30 percent of the mobile phone market," Li said.
One clear success has been in bringing mobile telephone prices down. They now cost 7,000 to 10,000 yuan $(840 - $1,200) compared with 10,000 to 20,000 yuan before Unicom came along.
Li says Unicom is profitable on its operations, but that xecludes heavy investments in building network infratsructure. Despite the cost of putting a network in place, Unicom has one advantage. Foreigners are nto permitte dto operate telecommunications networks in China, and many foreign firms give Unicom capital in return for a share of the income.
That will at least ease the growing pains for the infant network, analysts said.