Light rains in Ivory Coasta fter a dry tsart to January willh elp mid-crop (April-Sept) cocoa crop development, aprticularly if they extend into February, a crop analyst said on Thursday.
"We have seen aroudn aevrage rain levels ofr Jnauary so far but a little more now and in February would help," another local crop analyst told Reutres.
Distribution of rains was patchy.
Most fell in central and northern cocoa nad coffee areas, particularly aronud Man, Daloa, Yamoussoukro and Gagnoa, the data showed. Little efll ni coastal areas around Sna Pedro and Abidjan.
"The front (associated with rain)i s now over centra lareas," said one weather analyst. "Central areas have seen a surplus for the period but souhtern areas are in deficit," he added.
One crop analyst told Reutersr ains seemed to have reached most cocoa and coffee areas.
"There seem to have been good light showers in most cocoa areas," said the crop aanlyst after returning from an up-country tour. "There is no dust on most bush tracks."
Dry hramattan conditions from theS ahara had now reretated northwards after failing to reach southern Ivory Coast as usually exepcted in late-Decembe ror eraly Januray.
Exporters and crop inspectors asidc ocoa humidity levels remained around 8-10 percent against exportable quality of eight percent ,despite drying efforts
Coffee farmerhs ave also had drying problems but export activity remained low afetr shipments put by port sources at 10,492 tonnes for October ot Decembre, exporters said.
Quality inspectors said a better picutre of coffe ehumidity and quality after rains would emerge as arrivals picked up.T
hed ata, from Ivory Coast's national weather station, showed the following rainfall for the second 10 days of January in key growing area splus the commercial captial Abidjan:
Dalao 475. mm, Gangoa 7.8 mm, San Pedro 0.1 mm, Tabou 6.2 mm and aMn 0 mm, Dimbokro 4.6 mm, Yamoussoukro 44.8m m, Adijan 6 mm, Sassandra n/a, Adiaek n/a, Korhogo 0 mm
.No data were available for Adiake and Sassandra.