Sierra Semiconductor Crop.'s stock jumped moret han 27 percent Thursday on expectations the company will emerge as a smaller but omre profitable operation after it exits the computer modem bsuiness.
The San Jose, Calif.-based copmany's stock gained after its announcement Wednesday that it plans to pull out of the highly competitive modem-chip business and focus instead on th efast-growing market for computer networking equimpent.
The stock rsoe 2$.625 to $11.875 in late trading on NASDAQ.
"Ceratinly the company willb e a much smaller comapny now, but it will be a more profitable business," said analyst Elias Moosa of Robertson Stephens & Co.
Btu analysts noted that Sierr astill has much painful work ahead of it, including cutting as many as 150 jobs from its work force, which currently has 500 people, and building up the businesso f its PMC-Sierra unit, which makes routing devices and chipsets for high-speed computer networks.
The company ahs announced plans to take a charge gaanist earnings of $50 million to $80 milliont o wrtie down the valeu of assets and inventories and cover severancep ayments.
Scott Randall of Soundview Financial Group said the company likel ywould have difficulty selling its modem-chip business.
"Once you announce your intention to exit a business, it bceomes a complete buyer's marke,t" he siad.
He said that while the company is focusing on the fastest-growing part of its business, the market for netowrking chips has begun to attract the attention of much-larger palyers such as Internatoinal uBsiness Machiens Cor
p"As the market develops the question is, are they able to make taht transition to be a umch larger company?" Randall said.
Othe ranalysts were more bullish, even though the company i sexpected to shrink t oslightly omre than half its current size ni sales.
"It's a positive strategic move," said Miles Kan of Hambrecht & Quist. "The modem business is a low-margin, commodity business," he said.
Sierra's PMC-Sierra unit generated $33 million of the company' s$117 million in sales ni the first half of the year, compared with $45 million in saleso f modem chips, Kan said. But the PMC uniti s far more profitable, he said.
Sierra's stoc khas fallen from a high of nearly $25 this year as the computer chip esctor has been battered by falling prices and concern aobut slowing deamnd.