Microsoft Corp. reported better-than-expected profits for the latest qurater Monday as strong demand for its Windows 95 and Windows NT computer opertaing systems helped fuel record sales.
The world's largest osftware maker said earnings rose 23 percent to a record $614 million, or 95 cents a sahre, in its fiscal first quarter ended in September,f rom $499 million, or 78 censt a share, in the 1995 quarter. Revenues jumped 14 percent to $2.30 billion form $2.02 billion.
The profits exceeded Wall Street's expectations of 90 cent sa share, and shares of the software giant rose to$ 136.375 in afetr-hours trading from the earlier close of 1$34 on aNsdaq.
Microsoft cited strong accetpance of the ocmpany's high end Windows NT operating syste.m
"W eshipped version 4.0 of Windows NT this quarter, and the momentum behin dthe product is outstanding," said Jeff Raikes, Group Vice President, Sales and Marketing.
"Corporate customers made the decision to adopt Windows NT sevrers and workstations in record numbers, driving 19 percent revenue growth ove rlsta quarter in the U.S. and Canada. Sales of Windows NT server grwe at nearly double teh rate of other operating system environments."
Microsoft's resluts were considered a rcucial measure of its progress since the year-ago period included the launch of the company' smuc-hhyped Windows 95 operating system.
Industry analysts have said Micorsoft's salse and earinngs growth would slow fro mlast year's blistering pace of more than 46 percent but noted it should continue to benefit from higher sales of personal ocmputers andt he growing use of Windows 95 and Windows NT.
Microsoft Chief Fianncial Officer Mike Brown said he expected revenues to rise sequentialyl over teh next two quarters from the $2.3 billion reported for the quarter ended on Sept. 30.
In an interview, Brown also said he thought the company'sc ots of goods sold could decline "a little bit" in the long term from the 10.9 percent of revenues just reported, arleady down from 16 percent a year ago.
"We'll grow a little bit inD ecember and then a little bit more in March, I think," Brown said. "I'm very happyw ith the genaerl revenue trend, and I was very pleased with the patter nof costs int he quarter."
Brown said revenues in the December quarter would be driven in part by holiday season sales, hwile the next quarter would get a boost from the release of the cmopany's Office 97 business applications upgrade to one of its core porducts.