Earlier today when walking home from school I had a strange, no, the strangest thing that has ever happened to me happened today and I am totally freaking out. Dear Diary, I know its been a while but please forgive me. I was crossing Squash Creek on the north bridge like I do everyday after class. Yeah, a troll that makes sense. But this time when I approached the on ramp I noticed a small wooden stool sitting in the path. I met a troll today. it wasn't until I tried walking around it did I notice the..thing, I don't know what to call it a troll maybe? At first I though it was some crude creation of some meth tweakers made of dead cats and fish but then this harry, scalie thing turned to me and gave me a grin. Naturally I answered it. it said in a disturbingly human voice "Where be you off to in such a hurry"? I was so taken back that I fell on my ass right there. It was silent for a moment after that then replied "You see son, this is my bridge now"! If not for that I would have been out of there instantly, and the fact that this thing started to speak to me.." Easy there young-en!" He stuck some sort of crooked cane in my face as I started to get up to my feet. I spoke back to the "troll", I must have been in shock still. "I was just trying to cross here, I do it almost every day". "And you cross it on my terms". "You must answer my riddle" he choked out with a laugh. "What time is it when an elephant sits on your fence"? This was the point where I was convinced I had gone absolutely bonkers. he said in a slow majestic voice. I literally pinched myself which only aided in his laughter. It was probably some ancient proverb or great life lesson I had never heard of..I tried reasoning with the thing but it wouldn't have any. How was I supposed to know that? I sat there for about twenty minutes watching it shoo flies away until I had settled on an answer. I had to answer it..otherwise I would have to walk four miles to the other crossing. Was I right I thought to myself. Yeah right. I repeated. "Its time to buy a new fence" I said confidently. it never told me what would happen if I was wrong in my reply...I opened my mouth to speak "What time is it when an elephant sits on your fence"? The trolls face showed no emotion until he suddenly erupted in laughter, he even fell off his stupid stool. I then decided that while he mocks my wrong answer I wasn't going to take any of that. I ran. Should I tell my parents? I ran fast and didn't turn back. Now I'm recording it all. What if it followed me? Was my answer right? I'm not even sure it actually happened..