"Who can replace Death? He was the most feared of us all. Without Death there can be no reckoning upon the sinful mortals." He was running out of options. War scratched his thinning beard. No others had dared to take up such a heavy burden. While War was no stranger to the horrors of, he shuddered to think about the atrocities that Death had committed. Was there any being in the 7 realms to take up the Cloak and Scythe? War, death, famine and conquest. "But there is someone." hissed Famine. Famine's ragged hood covered his face, only showing his decaying mouth twisted in a sick smile. "Brothers you are aware that all the atrocities we have committed were dealt by Man. Conquest was quick to challenge. "Man, donning the very bane of his existence? Who else better to don the burden of Death then a man himself?" These were all Man's undoing. He is greedy, selfish and cruel. A mortal man is hideous creature. Brother, your imprudence will be the end of us all. Why did he leave his duties behind? "Conquest, you are as foolish as ever. Giving one this much power will only result in abuse." He was the wisest of us all, he-"
"If Death was so wise, explain his abrupt departure. We are the horsemen of the apocalypse; both terrible and glorious. Have you learnt nothing from Death? When the Horn of the Heavens sounds we will charge and strike fear into the hearts of sinners. Death was a fool for leaving." "ENOUGH!" War slammed into Conquest, knocking him down to the brimstone. It is who we are. Breathless, War stood up towering over his foe and boomed. "I will not take this insolence. He unleashed an onslaught of blows onto his golden armor until it was dented beyond recognition. War's stone face softened for a second. Death was the best of us. I loved him as a brother and a mentor." He was not used to the bitter taste of defeat. Conquest nodded in shame. "Should you be stupid enough to blaspheme our brother again, I will end you." "Famine. You say that a mortal can replace Death. He silently vowed that War would pay for the humiliation he suffered. Bring him to me." "As you wish brother."