It's when the sun goes down that things start to bother me. These days never get easier. Cute kid, good with his parents, and never causes any problems. Actually, the days I like, that's when I get to rest. You see that kid above me? I've seen him outgrow his crib and move into this racecar bed with flames down the side. I haven't seen the kid much outside of this room; the truth is I'm not allowed anywhere else. It's a good upgrade from the cramped space under the crib, let me tell ya. I don't mind though, the view is good and I can hear everything in this small house which makes me feel like I'm part of the family. Boss's rules, not his. I like to think he turned out alright since he gets such good rest at night, but I wouldn't want to take too much credit. To be honest, I've never actually met the kid. For what seemed like months the father would come in and listen to the boy talk about his fear of me, the Boogeyman. When he first moved into the new bed, his father was in here just before the lights went out. To which the boy would say "But dad I know he's in here". The lights go out, but everything is fine." He would come in and say:
"Taylor, buddy it's alright. I knew we shouldn't have let you watch the movies with mom and I last Halloween." "It's just your mind playing games with you. Taylor didn't want his dad to think he wasn't ready to be a big boy so he shouted
"No way dad, I can handle anything!" "Okay then bud, sleep well. Remember it's just like any other night." The dad said jokingly with a smile on his face. The dad said as he turned out the lights and shut the door behind him. Maybe another night for you Taylor, but I'll be busy. I mean, how this kid can be scared of me when we've never met! Not that I get much spare time to even come out, but one day would be nice. I've tried to come out and say hi a few times before, but every time this kid hears the slightest noise I can sense he gets worried. So I stick down here and haven't moved since. You see, where I'm from is a rough part of town. It's not your ordinary town with the kids playing out front of their homes with white picket fences. Sure, everyone around seems to get along, but at night the real creeps come out. As a matter of fact, no one in Taylor's world knows my world even exists. These guys like to cause problems and they can do that to each other. So when I hear Taylor tell his dad that he is scared of *me*, it hurts. I wish they would keep it amongst the other monsters, but they don't. It's when they start seeking the small ones for an extra rush that boils my blood and I step in. You see these guys night after night go out seeking kids like Taylor. You've got Aeran with his scaled skin and claws the length of a cable car. Yeah he's small, but lightening fast with a ferocious bite. They don't even call them kids; they call them "dessert" … real sickos.. Luckily, for the little ones they've each been assigned their own "Boogeyman" to make sure they stay safe and don't get snatched up. Don't want to leave out Leera. How about Zeila with spiked arms that burn like hell when they hit you, not to mention she's twice my size. If only Taylor knew what fighting these bastards was like. I'm fortunate enough I can heal fast. It's always the small ones that give you the most trouble. Yeah I get lots of bumps and bruises in this line of work. And with me dead that means the creeps win and they would have their feast. Sounds bad but really though, it's all in a nights work. If I wasn't trained for these guys then I would have problems and by problem I mean dead. Might sound weird after hearing that every night I'm busy beating up the bad guys, but hearing Taylor's laugh in the day is what keeps me going. I just wish the kid knew the truth. Making sure Taylor stays warm and asleep in his bed. I love my job, I really do. All those noises Taylor hears in the night are just me doing my job. And for that, I'm the one he worries about. Taylor isn't my first and won't be my last, but I still have hope. I would love to actually meet one of these kids I get to watch over, but it hasn't happened yet. Sleep tight Taylor… Gotta run, I can hear the chattering of claws on the pavement heading my way.