I knew I could not cook, but I did not sweat it. The door bell rang, and I was so excited. I opened the door and let my two gooey one eyed companions in. I swung. They were mine now. They stuffed themselves, those crude idiotic blobs. They were so glad that they did not even notice my baseball bat. All mine
The two alien awoke to "gourmet" jellybeans. That was quite funny, considering what I really had planned. Smiling they commented on how strange human customs were. Jellybeans were their every waking hour. Three weeks later, they were still strapped to their places and woke up, ate, then slept. I laughed at them. They lived jellybeans loved jelly beans, breathed jelly beans. On their ninth week they realized what I was doing, but they were powerless. I laughed at them as I broke their jaw hinges. Now they can't complain, so all was wondrous again. By the next week they went on a jellybean strike, but I knew that would not last long, considering how attached to the food they were. They were now truly mine. I broke their jaws, their life, their will. But the little trick was starting to get old. Two years just flew by, my little companions were so entertaining. I grew tired, so I decided to spice things up once again. Then, I told them the only way to get their food was to beat one another up. I starved them. However, that little contest would be way too boring, so I then sawed off each of their four legs. I then let them at each other. The winner would eat. They sprang like animals, biting punching each other. It was a slow process, them having no legs and little energy. But that made it all the more worth while. I was even kind of sad when finally the weaker of the two was knocked out. I knew I needed more. I told the still barely conscience one that in order to get his meal he would have to kill his best alien friend. So then, I spiced things up again. I laughed again. I handed the syringe filled with black licorice to the victorious alien. So, I prepared the murder for him slowly. He was shocked. The loser alien then woke up, only awake enough to see his own friend inject the deadly dose of jelly beans into his body. He died shortly, but boy was it massively entertaining. He demanded his jelly beans. The alien that was still alive cried, making inaudible noise for his jaw was broken after all. It was not polite enough. His attitude was simply unacceptable. I threw him against the wall and told him to be polite. So I kicked him in the gut. HE COULD NOT PERFORM THE TASK OF ASKING NICELY. HE WAS THEN KNOCKED OUT. HE HAD TO BE KILLED AT ONCE FOR HIS BRUTAL MISBEHAVIOR. It was a lot of work. But I would not miss it. Boy did I love that experience. I ate my dinner slowly, savoring every bite. Jellybeans are costly after all. Alien flesh tasted so good. I knew it was all worth it. Even though I could not cook well, I knew not to sweat it from the beginning. My plan had been a great success after all. I think I did it pretty well! What do you think about it? Did I write it correctly BookWyrm17? r/jesuschristreddit