Regulators took the first of two steps Tuesday to slash the cost of overseas phone calls for consumers and businesses, making it easier for U.S. and foreign carriers to negotiate cheaper international rates. The Federal Communications Commission hopes to save U.S. callers billions of dollars by backing up the new rules with a separate proposal to be unveiled next month to cut the charges U.S. carriers pay foreign phone monopolies to complete calls from the United States. Americans spend 16 cents for a domestic call. Even though the cost of the calls are not much different, they must pay an average of 99 cents a minute to call overseas. "At 99 cents a minute, you're not going to get a global information highway," complained FCC Chairman Reed Hundt. The rules are aimed at countries that are in the process of opening their phone markets to competition from the U.S. FCC officials cited Canada, Britain, Chile and Sweden, as well as Europe and Mexico. Under the plan announced Tuesday, the FCC will waive rules that limit the ability of U.S. carriers to negotiate cheaper calling rates with an overseas phone company whose own market is considered open. The rules were crafted to prevent market abuse by foreign monopolies. Don Gips, head of the FCC's International Bureau, said the new rules "will allow competitive pressures, rather than archaic rules," to govern the telecommunications market. AT&T Corp. Vice President Gerry Salemme said they "can lead to a significant reduction in the amount that American consumers pay for international telephone calls." Under the new approach, a company such as AT&T -- with FCC approval -- could ask competing foreign carriers to bid for the right to handle AT&T phone traffic from the United States to a foreign market. Alternatively, a U.S. carrier could offer end-to-end service from the United States to a foreign market without using the existing rate system for completing calls. The power of state-run monopolies is reflected in the "accounting rates" that run five to 10 times actual costs. Foreign companies paid U.S. carriers more to complete calls in 1995 than they did in 1994. While the accounting rates paid by both carriers are about equal, the imbalance reflects the fact that many more overseas calls are made from the United States than into this country. International calls from the United States account for about a quarter of all international calls worldwide. To reduce the rates, the FCC proposal scheduled for next month would set "benchmark" rates for what U.S. carriers could pay foreign carriers to complete calls. These rates, according to FCC officials, would better reflect actual costs. The agency must still work out the details of how long a country would have to lower its rates and what steps could be taken if it refused to do so. The FCC actions come as the United States is seeking to open overseas telecommunications markets through talks sponsored by the World Trade Organisation. China, Jamaica, Mexico, Hong Kong, Columbia and Argentina are some of the countries with big rate imbalances with the United States. Some people are likely to be upset by next month's proposal. There will be concern from countries around the world. There's no doubt about that," said the FCC's Gips.