Dyslexia affects children with normal eyesight and intellect in different ways, such as an inability to read or acquire words. Coaching or a specialized educational intervention may help most children with Dyslexia to perform better in school. According to the article, Learning difficulties are one of the many consequences of Dyslexia. Since reading is a fundamental ability in so many areas, a kid with a learning disability will have a hard time keeping up with their classmates. In the absence of treatment, Dyslexia may lead to poor self-esteem, behavioral issues such as anxiety or anger, as well as separation from peers and teachers. It may lead to long-term issues in adulthood if Dyslexia is not addressed throughout the childhood. Children who can't read and comprehend are less likely to succeed in life. The author explains that Attention-Deficit / Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) may make Dyslexia more difficult to cure by causing difficulties in maintaining focus, hyperactivity, and impulsivity. If siblings and parents suffer from the same condition, children with Dyslexia are more likely to experience learning challenges. Furthermore, men are more likely than females to suffer from Dyslexia; however, the disorder affects people of all ages, socioeconomic, and ethnic backgrounds. Children born with dyslexia struggle with reading, understanding, and spelling. The article expands my topic understanding in several ways. I learned that Dyslexic children are great empathizers; many people with Dyslexia have a real personality. The writing and reading difficulties might help children empathize with those struggling. The article’s strength is that it has discussed the causes and effects of Dyslexia with the right age bracket consideration, that is, from age 4 to 10. The article’s weakness is that it generalized the genders without being specific; again, it only mentioned that Dyslexia is more often experienced in male children compared to females without explaining the reasons. There isn't a lot of research on Dyslexia among black children. The article addresses white children more than black children due to the fact that Dyslexia affects white children more than black children. I will use this article as part of my capstone project by generating public health education proposal on Dyslexia to prevent the public from viewing Dyslexia as a curse.