Ominous gray clouds scudded over Hong Kong on Sunday as the British colony marked the 100-day countdown to the handover, but there were few physical signs of gloom and doom in the wealthy community of six million. More than 7,000 Hong Kong people took to the streets in a patriotic fervour to celebrate the impending reunion with China at midnight on June 30, 1997. A stone's throw away, thousands more, most of them westerners and swelled by an influx of visitors, indulged in the ritualistic orgy that has built up around the annual international Rugby seven-a-side tournament. The tournament was honoured this year, the last under British rule, when Rugby Authorities made it into the world cup event. The 28th and last British governor, Chris Patten, described Hong Kong as running as smoothly as a Rolls Royce limousine -- but warned China against tinkering with the finely tuned machinery that is the Hong Kong of 1997. But for the majority of Hong Kong's hardworking citizenry, it was a normal Sunday. A chance for a lie-in, a family gathering at a restaurant. Hong Kong is awash in different emotions with just 100 days to go. Some, like the street revellers, are delighted that more than 150 years of Chinese humiliation is about to end. "This is a grand and great occasion. "We will return to the Chinese motherland in 100 days, named after the queen who ruled when Britain, at the height of its imperial powers, wrested Hong Kong from China's weak and crumbling Qing dynasty. "We welcome the washing away of over a century of humiliation and shame," Wu said to a burst of applause. Others fret, particularly the pro-democracy camp, about their future under a China that has already put in place plans to dilute civil liberties and dissolve the elected legislative council -- undoing democratic reforms spearheaded by Patten. A handful of demonstrators, their mouths taped shut in what they said was a symbol of things to come, took up position around the base of Queen Victoria's statue and held up placards condemning China's brutal military crackdown on student-led demonstrators around Beijing's Tiananmen Square in June 1989. People are keeping their fingers crossed. But Hong Kong, as it enters the last leg of its drawn out transition from British colony to Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China, has defied those who forecast a society in chaos, of panic, economic collapse and deserted buildings. Patten said Hong Kong had reached this moment in its history in first class condition. A poll done by the 1997 Transition Project at Hong Kong's Baptist University found that 90 percent of the people were happy with their lives. Patten said the views that Hong Kong would quickly adjust to the rolling back of freedoms or of more authoritarian government were dubious. I said recently that Hong Kong is a smoothly functioning community. It's like a car. "All you need to do if you're in charge is to slip into the driving seat, switch on the ignition and away you go. I don't think it's a good idea to lift the bonnet to tinker with the engine. That only raises worries about whether it will work so well, and whether you may be persuaded by some people to start stripping it down for spare parts."