The whole field of astrophysics and astronomy, in general, is quite perplexing. The rich history and significant discoveries made by well-known scientists paved the way for the technological revolutions of the 20th and 21st centuries. However, these distinct discoveries would not have been made without equipment. The article The telescope in the seventeenth century written by Albert Van Helden, sheds light on the device and its significant importance in the history of astronomy. In this article, the author made several strong arguments. He says that the telescope was used against the enemies. The writer says that the telescope started to be used to amplify objects with the advancement and multiple improvements to the lense. The difference in science was made by the telescope. I agree that the telescope can be the conduit of information for astronomers, and with its help, they can gather new data and make new discoveries. Nevertheless, I disagree that it is the only source of achieving such significant results in the astronomy. Different methods of encouragement of telescope makers were used. Other sciences contribute to the development of engineering. For example, physics and chemistry focus on the appliance of knowledge about forces, pressure, and chemicals and their combination. The development of new technologies like phones and modern motor for vehicles are the most recent developments. Moreover, while the advancements have been so big, there are no fields of engineering which are prohibited. Specific developments might be prohibited if they jeopardize the health or lives of people. The activity of engineering is controlled by special laws. Hence, the development of telescopes and the improvement of the lenses gave an impetus to the advances in astronomy. While the telescope was first used as a terrestrial tool, it soon became astronomers’ tool. It was possible to make discoveries with the help of telescope-makers. However, other kinds of sciences, such as physics and chemistry, contribute to the technological advancements of our time. While there are no strong prohibitions of engineering, it is unlawful to jeopardize the health or lives of people.