In the Heat of the Night
The idea behind Supertom can be described as a trope used to make a black character heroic. The result is a strange image of a minor character who is trying to help the main character. To show the audience that ethnic minority characters are not bad people, Supertom takes a step forward to help others. They usually enter into the life of a much more privileged and white character and enrich the life of the main character. Christopher Nolan's The Dark Knight, Michael Clarke Duncan's The Green Mile, Bagger Vance's The Legend of Bagger Vance, and Uncle Remus' Song of the South are some examples of Supertom. Thus, a black character is endowed with high achievements and extraordinary positive characteristics, and Supertom is obtained. Mr. Tibbs is Supertom as he “is smarter than all the white people, the best homicide detective in Philadelphia, brave enough to face down a lynch mob,” and exhibits “a somewhat unexpected knowledge of varieties of plant life.” (Vera, 156) He is a kind of racial Sherlock Holmes. In other words, the relationship in the movie suggests the kind of friendship between blacks and whites that Americans like to think of as accurate, but that is not true in the context of the time frame in which In the Heat of the Night takes place. In the film, no one seems to reach the point of accepting Mr. Tibbs. At best, at the end of the film, there is a sense of indifference. Nothing in the film feels like a buddy moment, more like constant violence and almost kidnapping. The scene in Gillespie’s living room was the closest thing to friendliness. Thus, discussing this film in relation to buddy films proves to be a difficult task. Two white men killed Ahmaud Arbery in February 2020. In March, two police officers broke into the apartment of Breonna Taylor, who died from their gunshots, during an anti-drug raid. Then comes the culmination – Floyd’s death in May. Do the Right Thing is relevant despite the age of creation. The theme of US racism is somehow displayed in most of Spike Lee’s films, and the director’s attitude towards it is invariably critical. Lee portrays the characters in the film stereotypically through their language and aesthetic, which is ironic since the film shows how dangerous it is to react to others based on race. Spike Lee uses iconography to represent various racial groups in the film. He does this in various ways, such as having Italian-American characters wear crosses and t-shirts. In his portrayal of Radio Raheem, he wears an African locket necklace and plays loud rap music. Even tertiary characters, for example, a group of Puerto Rican friends, are shown listening to salsa, speaking Spanish, and drinking beer on the porch of their apartment building. During the film’s culmination and the verbal screaming fight between Sal and Buggin’ Out, the former uses racial epithets, telling Radio Raheem to turn off the jungle music and using profanity. Despite the explosive denouement, one of the film’s strengths is the complexity of its characters and the portrayal of blackness on screen. Lee went beyond the stereotypes of African Americans in movies and created characters that are reflected in everyday life. In Do the Right Thing, blacks are not depicted as inferior and smiling, aggressive and dangerous, but as full expression of themselves.