Most people during the Victorian era valued the virtues of society. Victorians believed that they were fixed and certain as guiding behavior to people all the time. The virtues included morals that one can be judged according to his behavior. Any betrayal of ethical standards was termed lousy behavior and could deserve punishment. These beliefs are no longer appropriate in modern America. They have shifted to values that no longer have classical ideas of wisdom, justice, courage, or cleanliness (p. 691). They have become sexual connotation where people practice prostitution and other immoral behaviors. In previous years, there were low rates of crimes that have continued to rise. Victorians practiced moral principles in their lives, which maintained good morals and behavior. Currently, morals have changed and translated to destructive behaviors that contribute to higher rates of crimes (Schlereth, 2018). Victorian speaks about morality and the best ways of devising it. In modern America, a character has been substituted, and most youths indulge in immoral behavior. In the Victorian era, women were illiterate, immigrants were not socializing with others, while now women are educated, and immigrants share ideas with natives. Men used to work for wages and get involved in politics while women engaged in domestic work and childrearing. In literature, each era had a different theme according to the way we understand life (p. 693). The Victorian era focused on industrialization, imperialism, domesticity, and cultural identity. Modern literature focused on the theme of loss, despair, and politics. Victorian era, most people were Christian and valued religion heavily compared to the current American. There are similarities between the Victorian era and modern American. In the two generations, people practiced moral behavior cherishing virtues in society. The two value the social, economic, and political life, and the individuals participate in them (Schlereth, 2018). The eras impacted the world of literature and changed people’s lives on how they see literature (p. 695). The cry of the children is a poem written by Elizabeth Barrett Browning that talks about industrialization on child labor. Child labor has become popular due to new machines. All people were able to socialize during the Victorian era to learn formal and informal skills. Most people get involved in literature where they write poems that could talk of their current situations and life experiences. The Victorian and modern American eras have impacted changes to human life. In England, the rate of indictable offenses was reduced by 50% and the population grew from 19 million to 33 million. The people learned moral values and the virtues that correspond to better social, economic, and political life. Men and women were able to interact and socialize in the two eras. People were successful in business. The Victorian era brought change, innovation, and invention that contributed to current technological advancements. The modern American misses a lot from the Victorian era regarding morality, beliefs, and virtues. People practiced good moral behavior and valued cultural opinions during the Victorian era. The modern American had derailed from all the norms and changed the way of life. There are practices of immoral behavior such as prostitution, many divorces, many crimes, and a lack of seriousness in religious belief. Most people have disrespect and ignorance of everything in the current world. Victorian-era people were religious and valued their religion, but a few currently do the same. All people were able to socialize during the Victorian era to learn their roles, get an education and interact with each other. Most people get involved in literature where they write poems about their current situations and life experiences. People could write poems sensitizing an issue affecting the society for the society to take necessary measures. In the two eras, people learned how to deal with different issues in society.