Learning history allows people to draw connections between the past and the present and make predictions for the future based on previous lessons. Climate change is one of the most significant topics of interest and research. If societies neglect nature, they will inevitably face disasters, even if they develop in terms of technology. The Chornobyl nuclear accident, which happened in 1986, was one of the most devastating ecological events that changed the fates of thousands of people in many countries. My prior knowledge of the topic is not ample, but I do know that the major release of radioactive materials occurred, which led to the contamination of air and water, causing numerous diseases and deaths. I have also read somewhere that the then-ruling government of the USSR kept the explosion a secret, which prevented people from saving their lives within the first few hours and days after the accident. There was no chance of survival for people living next to the nuclear plant. The accident led to the increase in radiation levels to “between ten and one hundred times normal” (Price, 2021, para. 1). I've read about the bravery and self-sacrifice of those who were involved in fire extinguishing processes. I would like to know if the disaster was preventable. Also, I want to investigate the reasons behind the decision of the USSR government to conceal the truth and not let people save their lives. I cannot understand how they could have been silent at a time when thousands of citizens were being gradually driven into an ecological trap. The values, assumptions, and beliefs I have related to the chosen topic are two-dimensional. I am concerned that catastrophes can hurt people's lives. On the other hand, I am deeply disturbed by the fact that the authorities can act so thoughtlessly and dare to neglect people’s lives. I have always considered freedom and health as the most important values. I believe that world leaders should do everything possible to prevent such disasters or at least not conceal them. People should learn from disasters like this and use them as a lesson in the future. However, my perspective is very closely connected to the current world situation. The relevant events happening due to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine are alarming. The largest nuclear plant in Europe was attacked by Russians a few days ago. Whereas the very question of the Russian invasion of Ukraine is highly tragic and relevant, I will focus on the nuclear plants’ seizure in this paper. Russians seized Chornobyl and Zaporizhzhia nuclear plants, and they seem not to realize what aftermath explosions there could bring. History has not taught some people anything. After so many deaths in 1986 and following years, one could think that countries of the world had learned the value of people’s health and lives. That is why I want to investigate the topic of the Chornobyl nuclear accident. This way, I will be able to learn more about that disaster and draw conclusions on the present-day threats and the need for preventive measures to stop the possibility of its repetition.