In the first half of the year, income from scratchcard sales fell by over 450 million pounds. The second weekly National Lottery draw will launch on February 5 and be held every Wednesday thereafter, according to the chief executive. Pre-tax profits were 31.5 million pounds for the 24 weeks to September 14 and sales were 2.1 billion pounds. This compares with pre-tax profit of 36.2 million pounds and sales of 2.51 billion pounds in the same period a year ago. Camelot's five shareholding companies -- Cadbury Schweppes, De La Rue, GTech UK, Racal Electronics and ICL shared a total dividend payount of 10 million pounds, up from 9.5 million. Sales for the weekly National Lottery game rose two percent to 1.68 billion pounds. Two thirds of the adult population regularly buy tickets for the Saturday draw, an event which is televised live and has become a ritual for many Britons. But sales of Camelot's "Instants" scratchcards fell from 871 million pounds last year to 419 million this time. Camelot executives said that the decline in scratchcard sales was to be expected as the initial enthusiasm generated by their introduction in March 1995 waned. The Chairman said that sales of Instants have fallen since their launch. The second weekly draw should boost sales of National Lottery game tickets by 15-20 percent from their current weekly average of 69 million. In the first half of the year, 50 percent of the turnover was handed out in prize money, with 567 million pounds going to "Good Causes", including charities and projects in sports and the arts. Camelot, which has been granted a seven-year licence, said that over 40 percent of turnover went to "Good Causes" and the governnment in duties, making it the world's most efficient lottery operator. The profit after tax is a small percentage of total sales. "I think we have a slight problem in this country with success," he said, adding that foreign lottery companies were bemused by the atacks on Camelot. The group confirmed plans to set up a foundation to help disadvantaged and disabled people.