Colombia has long been a hub for drug trafficking, but the country is taking steps to crack down on the issue by overturning its extradition ban. Drug traffickers are opposed to the move because they want to prevent their associates from being extradited. The ban was put in place to protect the country's sovereignty. However, it has since become a roadblock in the fight against drug trafficking. Drug traffickers who flee the country when under investigation can be difficult to prosecute. The current administration led by President Ivan Duque has been pushing for the ban to be overturned. The country's top court has now approved the move, allowing for the extradition of Colombian nationals who are wanted by foreign countries for drug trafficking. Drug trafficking organizations in the country have responded with force. Just this week, a car bomb exploded in the capital of Bogota, killing several people and injuring dozens more. The attack has been linked to a group known as the National Liberation Army, which is believed to have ties to drug trafficking. Drug traffickers have caused violence and corruption in the country. The government has made strides in recent years to combat the issue, but it is an ongoing battle. The move to lift the extradition ban is seen as a crucial step in the fight against drug trafficking. The government hopes it will encourage drug traffickers to think twice before engaging in illegal activities. However, the move is not without controversy. Critics say it could lead to a destabilization of the country. They say that drug traffickers will seek revenge on those who cooperate with authorities, and that it could lead to an escalation of violence. President Duque has made it clear that he is not backing down. He thinks the move will send a message to drug traffickers that their reign of terror is over. He said that drug traffickers will not be allowed to operate with impunity in the country. "This is a critical step in our fight against drug traffickers, and we will do everything we can to bring them to justice." The move has been lauded by many in the international community, who see it as a bold step in the fight against drug trafficking. The United States has provided funding and resources to help fight the issue. Colombia is making progress in its fight against drug trafficking, but it is clear that there is still a long way to go. The government's decision to lift the ban on extradited people is a positive step, but it comes with risks. The country will need to remain vigilant as it takes on this difficult task.