The rock and music pop scene gained popularity on television through hit shows for teenagers. Where the Action Is on CBS, Shinding on ABC, and Hullabaloo on NBC were the primary ones. As more households had access to televisions along with the growth of widespread range of programming, including musical ones, the television played a significant role in distributing the music to the public. The bands that appeared on these shows went on to have success in the charts. The television shows helped to articulate the new sort of youth music culture and almost became a star-making mechanism in a relationship and profits that the music and television industries shared. The American response to the Beatles was created with the purpose of television performance as their acting and on-camera comfort as a group were initially prioritized over music. The music of the Monkees was beyond expectations. They were a band groomed by the entertainment industry with an emphasis on television performances which took away much of the authenticity, even when compared to The Beatles, who focused on their own music strongly. Television drastically went on to change the landscape of the music industry. There was a split among artists and fans, with one side focusing on the pop-oriented, performance-focused television music, while the other side was drawn to serious-minded music of rock which continued to be played on the radio rather than TV. Television also brought about the phenomenon of fictious bands, such as the popular Archies, a cartoon drawn band popular with young teens (Covach and Flory 214). This has never been done before and similarly created a new genre of music-television entertainment. Until the advent of cable-network of television resulted in dedicated channels such as MTV, the television phenomenon in the 1960s had its limitations. Most TV sets at the time had poor audio and visual quality, and as recording and radio sound quality improved with hi-fi recording and FM, the disparity was noticeable. Television is not designed to be a sound medium, and the musical experience is meant to be more of a visual experience, leading to the split in the fanbase, where younger audiences who cared less about sound quality appreciated the visual medium to their music.