The instrument panel and trim parts unit of Borealis Holding AB will be purchased by Lear Corp., furthering its quest to supply complete car interiors. The deal was signed for undisclosed terms. Borealis Industrier makes components for the European car and truck industry. Borealis Industrier had sales of about $230 million in 1995 and has five plants in Sweden. Volvo and Scania are two of the primary customers for the business. Borealis Holding is owned by Finnish state-controlled oil and energy group Neste Oy  and Norwegian state-owned oil group Statoil AS. Completion of the transaction is subject to approval by the Swedish competition authority and other conditions. Lear said the acquisition supports its strategy of having in-house capability to provide total automotive interior systems, including instrument panels. "Not only does this acquisition strengthen relations with our European customers, but it positions Lear as the only independent automotive supplier in the world with in-house capabilities in all five interior systems -- broadening the appeal of our already strong one-stop-shopping competitive advantage," Lear Chairman Kenneth Way said in a statement. There have been a number of consolidation moves in the automotive interior market. Lear earlier this year purchased carpet and floor-mat maker Masland Corp. for $384 million, and last year bought door panel and console maker Automotive Industries Inc for $626 million. A wide range of automotive interior components are manufactured by Lear's U.S. operations. The company's stock was unchanged Friday at $38 a share on the New York Stock Exchange. The same acquisition strategy is being pursued by Lear's competitors. Johnson Controls Inc., which has a strong seating business, recently acquired interior parts maker Prince Automotive, based in Holland Mich., for $1.35 billion in cash. One of the "Big Three" automotive interior firms, along with Johnson Controls and Lear, recently acquired a seat maker for $135 million.