One of the most common problems these days is infertility, and it means that a person doesn't have a chance to get pregnant for a lot of health issues. Many couples in the United States may face this problem, and the causes can vary from congenital diseases to acquired physical or psychological trauma. This body condition can affect both males and females. Genetics has a strong influence on infertility, and it may be connected to people of all ages and nationalities. Around 18% of women in the United States between the age of 21 and 52 stated that they had faced infertility in their lives (Mancuso et al., 2020). I believe that environment plays a significant role in this issue. People should be more cautious about their health to predict health problems that may cause the inability to become pregnant or impregnate a partner. The causes of infertility might not be seen by non-professionals. The older males and females are, the more likely they are to get infertility. Problems with pregnancy can arise when the human body is unbalanced, and hormones play an important role in that. Obesity or anorexia can also indicate infertility as the human body spends crucial resources on other areas to support life without giving a chance for women to become pregnant. Some physiological problems like anomalies of the uterus or ovaries may also become the main cause of the issue. The percentage of male infertility is not high compared to the opposite gender. Nevertheless, 7% of men suffer from this problem, and the causes of these cases are different (Krausz et al., 2022). Around 20% of those males who cannot impregnate their couples are suffering from genetic factors that were transferred throughout generations. When males check their health conditions and diagnose infertility at early stages, they have a chance to overcome this problem and protect the ability to procreate. Low sperm production may also happen due to psychological factors like depression or any type of disorder. The percentage of females suffering from infertility is higher, and it is usually related to diseases that cannot be treated. When women become diagnosed with several health issues which do not allow them from becoming pregnant, doctors rarely have a chance to restore the ability to procreate (Barbieri, 2019). A female's mentality is under a lot of pressure due to sentimentality, which is specific to this gender, and this factor may cause psychological problems which cause infertility. Abortion might also become the reason for the inability to become pregnant. While the procedure is at the late stages of pregnancy, doctors might not restore the functions that allow women to become pregnant again. Infertility remains the main problem that is not under full control. It's possible that it's impossible to give a person a chance to continue being pregnant or having a baby. However, sometimes it is possible to solve the problem by using medicines, surgical procedures, and In vitro fertilization (Repping, 2019). It is possible to deal with psychological problems that are barriers to having a child. Every case is unique, and only doctors can decide if any treatment would be useful or not.