Many people suffer from mental disorders such as manias, phobias, and panic attacks. An obsessive-compulsive disorder, or OCD, is a long-term mental illness that can be difficult to control. Due to the four D diagnostic indicators, the analysis of this disorder can allow us to explore it more deeply. * Distress: OCD often makes individuals feel abnormal when they are forced to fight the terrible thoughts torturing their heads and repeat meaningless acts intended to decrease anxiety. People can't stop images or impulses that evoke anxiety or extreme distress if they don't realize the unreasonable nature of symptoms. The level of distress is high because they become nervous and depressed. * Dysfunction: This disorder significantly influences the daily life of a patient. Firstly, obsessive thoughts often interfere with the usual people’s acts and cause a surge of panic, disturbing to complete their work. Sometimes, “cognitive biases cause dysfunctional beliefs” (Van Leeuwen et al., 2020, p. 2). A patient is forced to do specific steps a certain number of times because of compulsive actions. Such activities can last even for an hour or more: therefore, the extent of dysfunction is also noticeable. Sometimes, people feel so depressed that they are ready to commit suicide. In addition, sometimes, they may try to defeat their obsessive thoughts, causing self-pain: for instance, they can strike themselves to get rid of the unwanted image. However, although one of the most widespread fears of people with OCD is to harm others, they rarely do it (O’Connor & Aude, 2019). The danger to self is higher than the danger to others. * Deviance: Since OCD causes abnormal thoughts and behavior, people with such a disorder can be characterized as deviant. It would be wrong to say that it is easy to determine the degree of deviation from the norm. OCD causes anxiety, stress, and panic; it makes people live in fear that if they do not do specific actions, they will not be able to avoid danger. An individual should visit a clinic and have specialists help them fight.