Sierra Semiconductor Corp.'s stock jumped more than 27 percent Thursday on expectations the company will emerge as a smaller but more profitable operation after it exits the computer modem business. The stock of the San Jose, Calif.-based company gained after it was announced that it would pull out of the modem-chip business and focus on the market for computer networking equipment. The stock rose $2.625 to $11.875 in late trading on NASDAQ. "Certainly the company will be a much smaller company now, but it will be a more profitable business," said analyst Elias Moosa of Robertson Stephens & Co. Sierra still has a lot of work to be done, including cutting as many as 150 jobs from its work force and building up the business of its PMC-Sierra unit, according to analysts. The company will take a charge against earnings of $50 million to $80 million to write down the value of assets and inventories. Soundview Financial Group's Scott Randall said the modem-chip business would be difficult to sell. He said that announcing your intention to exit a business becomes a complete buyer's market. He said that while the company is focusing on the fastest-growing part of its business, the market for networking chips has begun to attract the attention of much-larger players such as International Business Machines Corp
"As the market develops the question is, are they able to make that transition to be a much larger company?" Randall said something. Other analysts were more bullish, even though the company is expected to shrink to slightly more than half its current size in sales. Miles Kan said it was a positive strategic move. He said that the modem business is a commodity business. In the first half of the year, Sierra's PMC-Sierra unit generated $33 million of the company's $117 million in sales, compared with $45 million in sales of modem chips. But the PMC unit is far more profitable, he said. Sierra's stock has fallen from a high of nearly $25 this year as the computer chip sector has been battered by falling prices and concern about slowing demand.