Strong demand for its Windows 95 and Windows NT computer operating systems helped fuel record sales as Microsoft reported better-than- expected profits for the latest quarter. The world's largest software maker said earnings rose 23 percent to a record $614 million, or 95 cents a share, in its fiscal first quarter ended in September, from $499 million, or 78 cents a share, in the 1995 quarter. There was a 14 percent increase in revenues to $2.30 billion. The profits exceeded Wall Street's expectations of 90 cents a share, and shares of the software giant rose to $136.375 in after-hours trading from the earlier close of $134 on Nasdaq. Microsoft's high end Windows NT operating system has strong acceptance. "We shipped version 4.0 of Windows NT this quarter, and the momentum behind the product is outstanding," said Jeff Raikes, Group Vice President, Sales and Marketing. "Corporate customers made the decision to adopt Windows NT server and workstations in record numbers, driving 19 percent revenue growth over last quarter in the U.S. and Canada." The rate at which Windows NT server sales grew was nearly double that of other operating system environments. Microsoft's results were considered a crucial measure of its progress since the year-ago period included the launch of the company's much-hyped Windows 95 operating system. Microsoft's sales and earnings growth will slow from last year's pace of more than 46 percent but should still benefit from higher sales of personal computers and the growing use of Windows 95 and Windows NT. Microsoft Chief Financial Officer Mike Brown said he expected revenues to rise sequentially over the next two quarters from the $2.3 billion reported for the quarter ended on Sept. 30. In an interview, Brown also said he thought the company's cost of goods sold could decline "a little bit" in the long term from the 10.9 percent of revenues just reported, already down from 16 percent a year ago. "We'll grow a little bit in December and then a little bit more in March," Brown said. I was happy with the general revenue trend and the pattern of costs in the quarter. Brown said revenues in the December quarter would be driven in part by holiday season sales, while the next quarter would get a boost from the release of the company's Office 97 business applications upgrade to one of its core products.