Every business must be managed carefully, and every detail must receive a fair amount of attention. When it comes to healthcare, facilities that focus on people's well-being need more attention. Performing such duties might be strenuous and expensive, and mentally demanding. As a Chief Nursing Officer, one will be faced with principles that include integrity maintenance, cash flow management, and employee motivation in the given circumstances. To start with, a healthcare business must always maintain its integrity. It can be evident that any business field should be focused on communication, which makes integrity a vital part (Fisher, 2008). In the given facility, the integrity maintenance principle is heavily adhered to. First of all, every doctor follows an ethical code, meaning that they know of doctor-patient confidentiality. Doctors and nurses communicate honestly with patients. For example, in my situation, I tell patients about their actual conditions and honestly answer their questions. Another important business principle is proper cash flow management. Healthcare facility requires renovations and innovations, meaning that there will constantly be situations when new equipment or repairs will be needed (Mason et al., 2020). In this situation, it is highly necessary to implement the needed changes to not jeopardize patients’ health and well-being. My obligation as a CNO was to manage the replacement of power generators. As a result, generators enabled the personnel to carry out their duty without problems during a storm and power outage. The management of employees is the last principle. In the case of a healthcare facility, it is essential that the employees are rewarded and their hard work is appreciated. Extra days off and gift cards are offered to employees. This can make the workers feel heard and supported. The nurses and doctors will lose their desire to provide high-quality results if they don't have these steps. Thus, the given principles were chosen due to the impact they can bring on employees and patients. The mentioned principles are being used, providing good results and leading to the satisfaction of all parties. I believe that healthcare should be based on these principles. Otherwise, no facility will be able to treat their patients, and there will be no trust and respect between healthcare personnel and patients.