British National Lottery operator Camelot  LOTT.CN on Tuesday posted lower interim profits as income from scratchcard sales fell by over 450 million pounds ($750 million). Camelot chief executive Tim Holley also told Reuters that the planned second weekly National Lottery draw would be launched on February 5 and be held every Wednesday thereafter. Pre-tax profits were 31.5 million pounds for the 24 weeks to September 14 and sales were 2.1 billion pounds. This compares with pre-tax profit of 36.2 million pounds and sales of 2.51 billion pounds in the same period a year ago. The total dividend paid by the five companies was 10 million pounds, up from 9.5 million. Sales for the weekly National Lottery game rose two percent to 1.68 billion pounds. Two thirds of the adult population regularly buy tickets for the Saturday draw, an event which is televised live and has become a ritual for many Britons. But sales of Camelot's "Instants" scratchcards fell from 871 million pounds last year to 419 million this time. Camelot executives said that the decline in scratchcard sales was to be expected as the initial enthusiasm generated by their introduction in March 1995 waned. The Chairman said that sales of Instants have fallen since their launch and are now settled at 17 million pounds a week. The second weekly draw should boost sales of National Lottery game tickets by 15-20 percent from their current weekly average of 69 million. Camelot said that over one billion pounds -- 50 percent of turnover -- had been handed out in prize money in the first half and that 567 million pounds had gone to "Good Causes" -- including charities and projects in sports and the arts. Camelot, which has been granted a seven-year licence, said that over 40 percent of turnover went to "Good Causes" and the governnment in duties, making it the world's most efficient lottery operator. The profit after tax is a small percentage of total sales. He said that foreign lottery companies were confused by the atacks on Camelot. The group confirmed plans to set up The Camelot Foundation to support organisations helping the disadvantaged and disabled.