Lear Corp., furthering its quest to supply complete car interiors, said Friday it agreed to buy the instrument panel and trim parts unit of Denmark-based Borealis Holding AB. Lear said it signed a memorandum of understanding to acquire Borealis Industrier AB for undisclosed terms. Based in Gothenburg, Sweden, Borealis Industrier manufacturers instrument panels, door panels, climate systems, exterior trim and various other components for the European car and truck industry. Borealis Industrier had 1995 sales of about $230 million and owns five plants in Sweden that employ about 1,800 people. Two of the primary customers are Volvo and Scania. Statoil AS is a state-owned oil group in Norway. Completion of the transaction is subject to approval by the Swedish competition authority and other conditions. The acquisition supports the strategy of having in-house capability to provide total automotive interior systems, including instrument panels. "Not only does this acquisition strengthen relations with our European customers, but it positions Lear as the only independent automotive supplier in the world with in-house capabilities in all five interior systems -- broadening the appeal of our already strong one-stop-shopping competitive advantage," Lear Chairman Kenneth Way said in a statement. There have been a number of consolidation moves in the automotive interior market. Lear earlier this year purchased carpet and floor-mat maker Masland Corp. for $384 million, and last year bought door panel and console maker Automotive Industries Inc for $626 million. A wide range of automotive interior components are manufactured by Lear's U.S. operations. The company's stock was unchanged Friday at $38 a share on the New York Stock Exchange. Lear's competitors are also pursuing the same acquisition strategy. Johnson Controls Inc., which has a strong seating business, recently acquired interior parts maker Prince Automotive, based in Holland Mich., for $1.35 billion in cash. One of the "Big Three" automotive interior firms, along with Johnson Controls and Lear, recently acquired a seat maker for $135 million.