Rite Aid Corp said it plans to swiftly integrate Thrifty PayLess Inc into its already-powerful company by attacking weaknesses in the regional drugstore chain's distribution and technology. "To make this acquisition work, we have to reduce costs and we have to reduce costs rapidly," Rite Aid chief executive officer Martin Grass told more than 250 investors and analysts in a conference call. In the latest drugstore merger to sweep the industry, Rite Aid announced plans to buy Thrifty PayLess for $1.4 billion. Pricing pressures and costly computer upgrades that are essential in today's world of managed healthcare are behind the rapid consolidation of U.S. drugstores. Industry analysts said Thrifty PayLess has been plagued by a weak distribution system and inefficient technology. "It is our belief that our technology is a lot more sophisticated than what is being used at Thrifty PayLess and that there are significant benefits that we can bring -- not only to the store operations, but also to the customers," Grass said. Even though savings will not come from geographic overlap, analysts expect Rite Aid to make significant progress in reducing the Thrifty PayLess cost structure. Rite Aid does not have any stores in Thirfty PayLess' West Coast markets. "No one is as lean as Rite Aid," said Eric Bosshard of Midwest Research-Maxus Group. But the proposed acquisition may create some new difficulties for Rite Aid, which typically has smaller stores and less varied merchandise than Thrifty PayLess. Unlike Rite Aid, Thrifty PayLess sell plants, ice cream and shoes as well as traditional drugstore items. Concerns about Rite Aid's move into these new areas sent the company's stock down two to 33-7/8 in afternoon trade. "This is something that is entirely outside their realm of experience. That is a major question mark," said Joseph Ronning of Brown Brothers Harriman. "These are completely different businesses. These guys are general merchandisers," said Gary Vineberg of Merrill Lynch. Grass said in the conference call that Rite Aid may add more merchandise experts to assess the different products. "There are certain lines of merchandise that we will continue to carry out West that we don't carry back East," Grass said. Shares of Thrifty PayLess, which made its initial public offering in April at 14 per share, gained three to 21-3/8. The deal values the company at $23.32 per share. The proposed acquisition of Thrifty PayLess seems to eliminate Rite Aid as a potential bidder for southeast drugstore chain Big B Inc.  Rite Aid has been viewed as a possible bidder for Big B, which is fighting a hostile takeover from Revco D.S. Inc. But in announcing the Thrifty PayLess acquisition, Rite Aid also said that it is pulling out of Florida, Alabama and Georgia, which are Big B's key markets.