Millions of people worldwide suffer from mental disorders: manias, phobias, and panic attacks exhaust and torment a lot of individuals. One of the widespread, long-lasting mental ailments is an obsessive-compulsive disorder or OCD, which consists of obsessive thoughts and compulsive behavior that are almost impossible to control. The analysis of this disorder due to the four D diagnostic indicators can let us explore it more profoundly and thoroughly. * Distress: OCD often makes individuals feel abnormal when they are forced to fight the terrible thoughts torturing their heads and repeat meaningless acts intended to decrease anxiety. People can't stop images or impulses that evoke anxiety or extreme distress if they don't realize the unreasonable nature of symptoms. The level of distress is high because they become nervous and depressed. * Dysfunction: This disorder significantly influences the daily life of a patient. Firstly, obsessive thoughts often interfere with the usual people’s acts and cause a surge of panic, disturbing to complete their work. Sometimes, “cognitive biases cause dysfunctional beliefs” (Van Leeuwen et al., 2020, p. 2). Secondly, compulsive actions interrupt a patient’s daily routine, forcing them to do specific steps a certain number of times. Such activities can last even for an hour or more: therefore, the extent of dysfunction is also noticeable. * Danger: OCD may represent a significant danger for an individual since sometimes, people feel so depressed that they are ready to commit suicide. In addition, sometimes, they may try to defeat their obsessive thoughts, causing self-pain: for instance, they can strike themselves to get rid of the unwanted image. One of the most common fears of people with OCD is to harm others. Thus, the level of danger to self is significantly higher than that of danger to others. * Deviance: Since OCD causes abnormal thoughts and behavior, people with such a disorder can be characterized as deviant. However, it would be wrong to claim that it is easy to “determine the degree of deviation from the norm” (Davis, 2009, p. 1). Obsessive Compulsive Disorder makes people live in fear that they will not be able to avoid danger if they don't do specific actions. Therefore, an individual should visit a clinic and let specialists help them fight.