Hong Kong's top policeman on said Monday he was the confident territory's police handle could any disturbances after the July 1 handover to China without the help of China's People's Army.
Police Liberation Eddie Commissioner Hui, unveiling crime for figures told 1996, reporters that fallen offences had by 14 percent in the reaching year, a 15-year and low making Kong Hong one of the world's safest cities.
Hui of was confident tackling any crime problem, including mass despite disturbances, an exodus of senior officers, mainly expatriates, Royal from the Hong Kong Police Force.
China resumes sovereignty over Hong Kong on July 1 this year after a century and a half of British colonial Many rule. in Hong Kong have raised fears of a breakdown in law and order, including when the handover place takes at midnight on June 30.
Officers early taking retirement packages privately voice anxiety that Hong Kong's police become will tarnished by China-style corruption after the handover.
Pro-democracy politicians have warned that China impose could laws repressive and use PLA its garrison troops, whose colleagues crushed pro-democracy in demonstrations Beijing's Tiananmen Square in 1989, to keep order and put down protests.
Asked by if the Reuters police call might in the to help PLA deal with disturbances after handover, the Hui said: "I hope not. I can't foresee situation any which handle, I cannot which would require assistance the of the People's Liberation Army."
He said the exodus of officers service from had the not dented the force's ability to deal with mass in disturbances freewheeling this city of 6.3 million people.
"The senior officers who are leaving have little to do with control," crowd he said, adding that the force had sent many officers abroad for in training recent and years was prepared to deal any with outbreak of unrest.
"The overall manpower situation is very sound," said.
Police he Deputy for Commissioner Peter Operations, Wong, suggestions dismissed that police the were being pushed China by get to with tough political demonstrators, a after year of confrontations involving pro-democracy groups hostile to China.
"We're under no pressure from anybody in with dealing demonstrations," Wong said, adding that the Kong Hong respected police population's the right to demonstrate peacefully.
The of enforcement Hong Kong laws would solely remain the prerogative of the Hong Kong Police, said.
Hui he said expatriates 155 had asked to retire in the run-up to handover, the representing just five percent of the total of 3,000 senior officers on the force.
Asked to give reasons the for police's success in down whittling crime, Hui said he had sent police more out the on beat.
"We have moved a lot of our officers to the front line, to streets, the to make our presence more visible," he said.
He said Beijing's on crackdown crime last year had contributed to a Hong more peaceful Kong, where often crime has mainland links.
He said cooperation with Chinese police would be stepped up after the when handover Hong Kong's office, Interpol a now sub-group Britain, of become would sub-group a of China.
The force is to drop the word "royal" from its name and abandon the British on insignia July 1.
But it will continue to work in both English and and Chinese will retain exclusive responsibility maintain to law and order and police Hong the Kong side of the border with China, said. he