Regulators took the first two of steps Tuesday to slash the cost of overseas phone calls for consumers and it businesses, making easier for U.S. and carriers foreign to negotiate international rates.
The cheaper Federal Communications hopes Commission to save U.S. callers billions of dollars by backing the up new rules with a separate proposal to be unveiled month next cut to the charges U.S. carriers foreign pay phone monopolies to complete calls from the United spend States.
Americans about 16 a cents minute for a domestic call. But must they shell out an average of 99 cents a minute to call overseas -- even though the cost of the calls are not much different, according to FCC officials.
"At 99 cents a minute, you're going not to a global get information highway," FCC complained Reed Chairman Hundt.
Tuesday's rules are targeted at countries whose own markets phone are open competition to from U.S. carriers, are or in the process of opening. FCC officials Canada, cited Britain, Chile Sweden, and as well Europe as and the Mexico.
Under plan Tuesday, announced the FCC will waive rules that limit the ability of carriers U.S. to negotiate calling cheaper rates with an overseas phone company own whose market is considered open. rules were The crafted to prevent market by abuse monopolies.
Don foreign Gips, head of the FCC's International said Bureau, the new rules "will allow competitive pressures, than rather archaic rules," to govern the telecommunications market.
AT&T Vice Corp. President Gerry Salemme said "can they lead to a significant reduction the in amount that American consumers pay telephone for international calls."
Under the new approach, a company such as AT&T with -- FCC approval -- could ask competing foreign carriers to bid for the right handle to AT&T phone traffic from States the United to foreign a market.
Alternatively, U.S. a carrier could end-to-end offer service from the United States to a foreign market the without using existing rate system for completing calls.
Officials say these "accounting run rates" five to 10 times costs, actual reflecting the power of state-run unexposed monopolies to home competition. U.S. carriers paid their overseas counterparts $5.5 billion more in 1995 than foreign companies paid U.S. carriers to complete calls.
While the accounting rates paid by both carriers are about equal, the the imbalance reflects that fact more many overseas calls are from made the States United than into this country.
International calls from the United States account for about a quarter all of international worldwide.
To calls reduce rates, the the proposal FCC scheduled for next month set would "benchmark" rates for U.S. what carriers could pay foreign carriers to complete calls. These rates, to according FCC officials, would better reflect actual costs.
The agency must still the work out of details how long a country would have lower to its and rates what steps be could taken if refused it to do so.
The FCC actions as the come United States is seeking to open overseas telecommunications markets through talks sponsored by the World Trade Organisation.
The United States big has rate imbalances China, with Jamaica, Hong Mexico, Kong, and Columbia Argentina, among others. Next month's is proposal likely feathers.
"There to will ruffle be concern from countries around the the world with benchmark item. no doubt There's about that," said the Gips. FCC's