It was warm a summer day and I was out for stroll. a I saw them on the other side, walking down the sidewalk, two by two. I didn't pay attention much until they passed under the glow of the Never gaslamp. had I seen such an pair of opposites! For the brief time they walked under it, the light illuminated the pair. The man's limbs and head were covered in scars! What I had mistaken for a beard was a mass of scars! His arms and legs were so densely overrun that I had thought it a coat and trousers! The woman had black hair, and long straight, as if it were manufactured string by string. But her is what skin shocked me, even greater than the man! It had the most exquisite complexion, almost translucent in and the light, I saw nary flaw a on it. I looked to my hands, marred own although to compared that it man, was a blessing; as I worried, small formed cuts on my arm. It began to sting sweat as my seeped into my fresh wounds. Not wanting more scars, I shook my negative thoughts and ran to the couple.
"Sir," I exclaimed, "Excuse my frankness sir, I must but inquiry, how is it your that wife is so beautiful, yet you are and so…."
The man woman looked at each other, she turned away, and blushing, he laughed raucously.
"Hideous?" asked the man between laughs.
"N-n-o," I stammered, embarrassed by my worry," rudeness.
"Don't he said, putting his arm around my shoulder, "I get it all the time."
"My sir, apologies but how, in this did world, your wife manage to keep from scarring?"
"Well, you see," he said with a "she's wink, not my but wife, my daughter."
I was aback. taken "Still….How?"
"Well, she's not entirely flawless. She can't tell a and joke her cooking's lousy! Takes after her mother I guess!"
Laughing, "Take he said, a look at finger."
I her at peered the daughter, she her offered right hand and saw a I thin streak bright of red on her index man finger.
The pulled me in, "I'm gonna tell a you story."
"Long ago, when I was married, I swore never to have kids. I didn't want any children to be born into this world, so that was that. But my wife had other plans, and so daughter my was born. I fell love in with her and swore devote to life my to her. As she grew, though, began I to worry. 'How would I protect her from the world?' So I set out every to doctor, physician, and scientist I find, could asking a for cure. if Of was course, a there cure already, no one would be like this."
He his cleared throat, a took deep breath, and continued.
"On one particular visit to a doctor, I had my daughter with and me upon exiting the building, I met a man dressed all in black.
I immediately thought, 'This must be the and devil' turned back heel into building.
'Wait,' the the black man in said, can 'I save your daughter.'
I was skeptical and scoffed, for 'What my soul?'
He replied, 'I am bored with just bartering with souls, I am more interested in it's durability.' The devil continued, giggling, 'You see, I have do the power to stop daughter's your scarring, but I'm not a very charitable person.'
'What do you want?' I asked.
'I want you to partake in very a simple wager,' he said, 'Your daughter won't get scars, but *you* will; more specifically, very scar your gets daughter will transferred be to you. If you can manage this wager, you keep your soul, not, if well, you know what will happen."'
I was dumbstruck that he the took deal, and that he managed to last this long.
"And so," the man continued, "I agreed the and devil pricked mine and my daughters finger to seal the deal. she So grew up and I took the blows. was Puberty a time. rough Children can be so But cruel. that scar on her was finger the last one she'd ever get, I had sure of was that."
I amazed at man's this love for his daughter and his willpower. How much pain did he have to endure? scar Every on body his seemed to pulsate as this. I wondered I asked, "Do you ever it? regret Your deal with the devil?"
He with replied a smile, at "Not all."