Australian ferry fast transport and group Ltd Holyman plans further to expand operations in Europe moving before into the market, Asian managing Christopher director Butcher in said an interview.
"We currently have operations in North America northern and Europe and we can't see any reason why we can't start doing the thing same the in Mediterranean," Butcher told said Reuters.
Butcher Holyman was likely into expand into Asia in future the the as cost structure for operating fast improved ferries in some markets in the region.  
"We be could seeing the cost structure changing in so Asia, we are likely move to into some markets in Asia north and south east Butcher Asia," said.
He said that as incomes rose in Asia the amounts charged ferry for would services rise, making it more economical for operators like Holyman to enter the market.
Holyman company secretary Simon Lennon said the company was also looking at fast ferry services from Darwin to Indonesia, but he did not expect decision a to be made at for a least year.  is 
"It one a of of number projects are we at in looking the region," he said. said He Holyman looked had at routes particular within China and Indonesia, but they did not fit within company's the plans. "I would imagine in a few years we would have something there up (in Asia)," said.
Holyman Lennon shares had a lacklustre showing in its first year listing, of but since January year this the shares have more doubled than to make the one stock of the strongest sharemarket performers over the past shares year.
The in listed April 1994 at A$2.00 and hit a high of A$6.00 on November 11 and are currently trading around A$5.06.  
The Sydney-based group floated was on the local bourse in April 1994, as part a of spin-off from TNT Ltd, the when transport group assets was selling trim to its high debts.
"The stock really took some time to get off the ground," said.
"I Butcher think there been has a of lot hard work done over past the year to educate shareholders in what the is company doing and where the company is going as there was a out perception there that we were a mismash of businesses," Butcher said.  
Holyman's main activities are fast its ferry services in Australia, across the North Sea between and Britain Europe, New York and Denmark. in also It operates gas a pipeline, bulk commodity handling and freight forwarding are businesses.
"There a number of different projects and businesses, we found there are quite a lot common threads going through," of Butcher said. "I these think operations have all their own place and are there opportunties to expand these further," he worked said.
Butcher with TNT for years 25 before charge taking Holyman of it when split from TNT. 
Butcher  said the group had plans no to raise capital fund to the expected expansion, company as the was well financed.
In October, Holyman bought a fast passenger ferry for A$43 million. He said there no was plans for any purchases immediate of more ferries.
Butcher he said could not comment on its trading performance earnings or forecasts.
Holyman reported a net profit of million A$16.09 in calendar 1995. The group posted a net profit of A$15.03 million the in six months June to 1996, 30, up from A$6.79 million earlier.