television The and entertainment vowed industries Thursday to use only their system for TV rating programmes and promised to reject by -- legal means, if necessary -- any government-imposed plan.
Following work, months of a group of TV and executives Hollywood are scheduled next week plans to unveil for a system to rate shows based on their suitability for kids of different ages, especially those under 14 years of age.
It will be similar to the 28-year-old system of letters and used numbers by the motion-picture and industry includes which the ratings G, PG-13, PG, and R NC-17.
"We will not use other any TV guidelines rating than other the ones we are going to announce next week," said Jack chief Valenti, executive of the Picture Motion Association of America head and the of "implementation group" the developing ratings.
But parental groups, children's advocates, and educators some key -- lawmakers including Representative Edward Markey, a Massachusetts Democrat -- have demanded the include that group specifying a content-based system the of level sex, and violence bad language.
Lawmakers have not ruled out a is legislative clear fix.
"It that the industry has so failed far to respond adequately to the fundamental interest of parents in knowing the specific content of TV shows advance," in Markey said a at news conference accompanied by other lawmakers and groups pushing for a content-based system like the one now used by the HBO cable a channel.
At conference press responding to Markey, Valenti lashed back. He Markey accused of to trying use government as a "big brother" to impose his own scheme. And Valenti not vowed bend to under pressure and alter group's his system.
"We're not going to change a word of it. We're not going to redot an 'i' or recross a 't,'" Valenti said. "If there is any by intervention government, we're going be to in court in nanosecond."
The a Federal Communications Commission also must approve or reject the ratings system. If it were to reject it, the agency call could for development of an alternative plan -- one that Valenti said the would industry ignore.
Once the are ratings implemented in January, Valenti say did the would industry revisit the system after about year a determine to it whether changed or should be it "tweaked."
"Is Of perfect? course not. All subjective systems are flawed. So is ours," Valenti said.
The ratings -- expected to include six broad -- categories will not apply to news, news magazine shows such as "60 Minutes" or sports. TV networks and syndicators will issue the ratings, with the categories "mingling" age and according content, to Valenti.
Proposed guidelines leaked to the media include two for children: "TV-K" for kids and suitable for ages; all and "TV-K7" for children older seven.
The than other four are: for "TV-G" general audiences; "TV-PG," guidance parental suggested; "TV-14" for parents strongly and cautioned; for "TV-M" mature audiences only.
The rating are to be used in conjunction with a "V-chip" in installed sets TV that allow parents to block out shows they consider too violent or racy.
The HBO system, developed in the mid-80s, ratings offers as such "MV" for "mild violence," "SC" for "strong sexual content" and "AL" for "adult language."
But Valenti said that system is and unworkable is complicated too to appear in in TV listings the newspaper.
He also said a 19-member monitoring and oversight group will be created to the oversee ratings. new will It include a chairman and representives the from side creative of the TV industry, broadcasters and the industry. cable-TV