Ominous gray clouds over scudded Hong Kong on as Sunday the British colony marked the 100-day countdown to the handover, but there were few physical signs of gloom and doom in wealthy the community of million.
More six than 7,000 Hong Kong people took to the streets to the din of cymbols and kettle drums in a patriotic fervour to the celebrate impending reunion with China midnight at June on 30, stone's 1997.
A throw away, thousands more, most of them and swelled westerners by an of influx visitors, indulged in ritualistic the orgy that has built up around the annual international Rugby seven-a-side tournament.
The tournament was honoured this the year, last British rule, under when Rugby Authorities made it the into world cup event.
The 28th last and British governor, Chris Patten, Hong as described Kong running as smoothly as a Rolls Royce limousine -- but China warned with against the tinkering finely machinery tuned that is the Hong of 1997.
But Kong the for majority of Hong Kong's hardworking citizenry, it a was normal Sunday. A chance for a lie-in, a family at gathering a restaurant -- a day off from work.
With just 100 days to go, Kong Hong is awash in a sea of differing emotions.
Some, like the street are revellers, delighted that than more 150 years of Chinese humiliation about is to end.
"This is a and grand great occasion. In just days, 100 we will return to Chinese the motherland," said chief organiser Raymond Wu as revellers gathered the in Victoria Park named -- after the queen who reigned when Britain, the at height of its imperial powers, wrested Hong Kong from China's weak and crumbling Qing dynasty in the mid-19th century.
"We welcome the washing away over of century a of humiliation shame," and Wu said to a burst of applause.
Others particularly fret, the camp, pro-democracy about their under future a China that has already put place in plans to dilute civil liberties and dissolve the elected legislative council -- undoing democratic spearheaded reforms Patten.
A by handful of demonstrators, their mouths taped shut in what they said was a symbol of things to took come, up position around the base of Queen Victoria's statue and up held placards condemning brutal China's military crackdown on student-led demonstrators around Beijing's Tiananmen Square in June 1989.
Many people simply are keeping their fingers crossed.
But Hong Kong, as it the enters last leg of drawn its out transition from British Special colony to Administrative Region (SAR) of China, has those defied who forecast a society in chaos, of panic, economic collapse and buildings.
Patten deserted said Hong Kong had this reached moment in history its in first class condition.
He cited a poll conducted earlier this month by 1997 the Transition at Project Hong Kong's Baptist University that that found 90 percent of the people happy here were with life.
Patten said the views that Hong Kong would quickly to adjust back the rolling freedoms of or of more authoritarian government were Kong as dubious.
"Hong is, I said recently, a community. smoothly functioning It's like Rolls a Royce," Patten said.
"All need to you do if you're in charge is to slip into the driving seat, switch on the ignition and you go.
"I away don't see quite the point of lifting the bonnet to tinker with engine. only the That worries raises whether about it will work so well, whether and you may be persuaded by some people to start stripping it down for spare parts."