can "Who replace He Death? was the most feared of us all. Without there Death be can reckoning no upon sinful the scratched mortals."
War his thinning He beard. was running out of options. dared No others to had take up such heavy a burden. While War was no stranger to the horrors of, he shuddered to think about the atrocities Death that committed. Was had there being in any the 7 realms to up take the Cloak and Scythe?
"But is there someone." hissed Famine.
"Brothers you are that aware all the atrocities we have committed were dealt Man. by War, famine death, conquest. and all These were Man's undoing. Who else better to don burden the of Death then a himself?"
Famine's man hood ragged covered his face, only showing his decaying mouth twisted in a smile.
Conquest was sick quick to donning challenge.
"Man, the bane very of existence? Brother, his your imprudence will be the end of us all. A mortal man is creature. hideous He is greedy, selfish cruel. and Giving one this much power only result will in abuse."
"Conquest, you are foolish as as ever. Have you learnt nothing from Death? was He the wisest of all, us he-"
"If Death was so wise, his explain abrupt departure. Why did he leave his duties behind? We are horsemen the of the apocalypse; terrible both and glorious. When the Horn the of Heavens sounds we will charge strike and fear into the hearts It of sinners. who is we are. Death was a for fool leaving."
"ENOUGH!"
War slammed into Conquest, knocking him to the down brimstone. He unleashed an onslaught of blows onto armor his golden until it was dented beyond recognition. Breathless, War stood towering up over his foe and will boomed.
"I not take this insolence. Death was the best of us. I loved him as a brother a and mentor."
War's stone softened face for a second.
"Should you be stupid enough to blaspheme brother our again, I will end nodded you."
Conquest in He shame. was used to not the taste bitter of defeat. He silently vowed that War pay for would the he humiliation You suffered.
"Famine. say that a mortal replace can Bring Death. him to me."
"As you brother." wish