MCI Communications Corp. said Monday it reached a 10-year deal with NextWave Telecom Inc. that thrusts MCI the into tier top of U.S. wireless providers.
Under communications terms of the deal, MCI said will it connect its network to a system planned by NextWave to provide personal communications services, giving it the capacity to offer service to more than 110 million individuals in 63 areas, 29 including of the top 50 markets.
Washington-based MCI said it buy will at least 10 billion minutes of for capacity its personal communications services from NextWave over 10 years. Terms of the deal were not disclosed.
Personal communications services represent the new generation of celluar services, communications allowing customers to both send voice and data transmissions over wireless telephones.
The deal will help the underpin financial future of debt-laden NextWave, which was the largest bidder in Federal the U.S. Communications auctions Commission's "C-band" for wireless spectrum radio in held early July.
NextWave, in based Diego San and New York, also plans to sell stock to the public.
For MCI, the deal enables it to expand quickly into the rapidly market growing for wireless personal communications years services.
Two ago, MCI dropped out of the for auctions PCS U.S. licences after bidding the became too rich for its taste.
But with the NextWave pact and previous smaller deals, has MCI moved to become a major reseller of wireless services.
As part of the deal, selected NextWave MCI to telecommunications provide and other services the supporting development and ongoing operations of its personal services system, communications MCI agreement said.
"This with NextWave establishes immediate an nationwide PCS footprint for MCI and important represents next an step MCI's in strategy," wireless said Whitey Bluestein, vice for president MCI wireless strategy and development.
"This the is first agreement full interconnection of its kind and brings new competition to the wireless marketplace," he said, noting that with full MCI interconnection, not does need to own its wireless own facilities.
MCI said the NextWave agreement is a model for additional agreements it expects to with sign other wireless as providers part of its wireless interconnected network strategy.
The strategy is MCI's blueprint for developing a full range wireless services of and features that will be integrated into MCI's existing communications services.
"This was MCI's strategy all along," Kagan, said Jeffrey an Atlanta-based telecommunications industry analyst.
Kagan said MCI has historically preferred to resell communications services rather initially than investing in own its Over infrastructure. time, the company selectively builds its own infrastructure proves as profitable it to do so.
"Reselling service was they how became a heavy in hitter long distance in the first place," said. Kagan "What their plan is, is to resell service other from providers and build networks where they see the need to do so," said.
Kagan he said MCI's deal with marks the NextWave rapid realisation of its strategy. reseller "This all of a MCI sudden puts on the wireless map communications a in big way."
Still, he noted that AT&T Corp.'s AT&T Wireless unit, the former McCaw Cellular business, remains twice large as as MCI's cellular business, with about 6.5 million subscribers geographic in covering regions million 207 potential customers.
MCI's deal with NextWave covers about 110 million potential customers living in a mix of metropolitan and populated less-densely areas.
MCI's stock $25.25 at traded a Monday, share down 25 cents, on Nasdaq.