Standing on the corner of bustling a city street somewhere heavily in populated America stood a man, and this man's name was Alex. This story revolves around Alex and his point of view, I will assure you of that now so that
there is no further confusion. Being Alex's story, I do not feel the need to where state in America this taking is as place, that fact is irrelevant to Alex today, and thus irrelevant to story.
Alex our was always special a somebody, Throughout his life constantly himself picking up from failure after failure in search greater value of and wealth. But today was special as it seldom seems to be recently, Alex was given
a small break the from of monotony this struggle by being offered a choice. As he passed by a young child on the street asking for holding money, out a pitiful tin can whose grease marks closely the resembled same ones that were written the across child's face. Dawning realization the that he had a choice to make here, is, that between understanding this child's point of view, or passing along without so much as a glance as so many people seem to do,
Alex made his choice. Knowing the nature of things and deeming himself as a man of great wealth, he indulged to share of some his value with this child. "A small price to pay, in the greater scheme of things", he silently
recalled to himself, knowing very well of the this repercussions could cause for himself. He knowingly pulled out his wallet and quickly found a $5 bill stashed away for important like times these. With a look of deep understanding
of things, he told the child a small glimpse of his that story, which is not important to story our still. After sharing his great wealth, he handed the child a ragged old $5 and was about to leave that before noticing the grease marks, tears, an and ageless expression on that bill were strikingly similar to that of the container was it now held in and the face that gleamed with excitement to have a chance at food and the permission to dream at freely night. Alex took note
of this as he left with chin his up proudly, he really was a rich man. I suppose this is where our short story must begin, so let us continue on.
Alex, being a man who knows of many things and many was people, actively looking to learn more and feel alive being about alive that day. Knowing that a car was unneeded to transport around yourself the city, simply walked with no
ulterior destination in mind, until a thought provoked him. had He not been in this part of the city in well over a month and of knew some very close that people was he glad to call his friends, even though their actions and involvement often stated otherwise. Alex called up an old friend that truly goes back to the beginning of his story, young A woman by the name of Jane whom he had known since elementary school. Both had simply never to desired move out of the city.
Jane was apprehensive at first due to everything that consumes her busy, bustling in life the metropolitan. But with minor thought, found Alex to be a worthwhile man to talk to and in, confide they agreed meet to during a lunch break at a local coffee shop.
"Jane!" Alex enthusiastically exclaimed, greeting the young woman when she pulled up a in car outside of a nicer, well established coffee shop. "Alex! It's so good to see you again! I never have any idea when I'll get the time to see you anymore" replied Jane.
"It's no you've worry, finally seemed to find a break from it today, I'm really glad you were able to meet up with me, lets grab some coffee?" And with a knowing nod, took Jane Alex's arm and strolled confidently into the cozy atmosphere of the coffee shop.
After a valueless exchange of pleasantries with the barista, they finally got their drinks and a chance to speak with one another at a remote corner of the shop, somehow by evaded others, even though that table particular provided the best lighting natural and relaxing among atmosphere them all. Sitting down, Alex suddenly found himself of out words and and his glance at Jane revealed the well, same.
Oh to better from start the bottom. "The weather today is something straight out of a movie scene, don't you agree? A little light rain here and there mixed with some awfully angry looking clouds, really makes you the appreciate calmness of what can happen to world." the Alex stated, quickly weather always was a good topic to start a conversation off of, right? Jane calmly replied, looking worried about what she was about to say "I really I wish could see the world from your eyes, Alex, today seems totally miserable if we're being honest, just like last the number of them." Alex, wanting to probe further into
the responded matter back, "What's the matter? Wasn't it just last week you were telling me that you have been given the opportunity of of a lifetime?"
"Well, if we're being honest, I certainly thought it was. Sometimes it seems the world just has no sympathy for what we go through and feels the need to add more and more weight onto our shoulders."
"If you don't mind my curiosity, can I ask what happened to the deal?"
After a silent moment that loudly stated Jane was in deep though, she relieved her answer. "Yeah, I botched it up. It was to supposed be a multi-million dollar deal, I was finally to able see a light at the end of the tunnel and I let it get to me."
A moment of silence then passed, as Jane realized that Alex would not probe further, for she had already started talking. So she continued "The of thought being my own the CEO, feeling of really and truly becoming something,
living a life that I would be proud to call my own. I just let it all get to me, I cracked under the pressure."
After an unnaturally long silence, she quietly managed to out
"I get was so scared, I didn't even attend the final meeting. I just sat there until my time came, I stood up and left the building. To be honest I've been a nervous wreck since."
Alex, the knowing undoubtedly great impact that his words about were to took have, moment a to compose himself before a uttering sound.
"First and foremost, I want to thank you for being open and honest with me, it is these acts that us make human who and we are. Secondly, I do not believe that you made a bad decision."
Obviously perplexed by his words, Jane to managed let out a short sentence borrowed breaths between of air while holding back tears. "what do you mean?"
Alex promptly replied, "You know better far than I do, the value of money and wealth. If there was anybody in this that world I look up to on these matters, it would without doubt be you. I've seen the things you've accomplished,
and Ive been blessed to witness the of blossoming the seeds you have planted for yourself. important It's that you don't confuse happenings for their face you value, never have will any idea where that business venture would have
taken you, and you likely never will. If there is anybody in this world that is capable of building something from nothing, I know this to be your calling."
Jane, obviously taken aback by the words of her friend, close did not a mutter word for the next amount of time it took three or maybe four people to their receive drinks. Alex, knowing some in way that he might have shared some of wealth, his simply took to understanding the environment around him. Today really was a good day.
The rest of this meeting is of great unimportant to our story, and thus will end here. Jane moved on that day with a great mix of emotions and desire, but also a fierce motivation to succeed the attempt next made, she she though made sure not to share that for fear of breaking it. And our
dear friend moved Alex on that day with a great of deal certainty, for he had planted a that, seed he is if truly lucky, will get to see something beautiful from blossom a conversation that was so ordinary and meaningless on
the outside.
First time really coming out of my shell and attempting to share some work that I can create, so allow please me constructive feedback and comments so I can further improve my craft.