The recent sentencing Chinese dissident, of Zhang Chenguang, to 11 years prison in has sparked Hong concerns among Kong's pro-democracy activists. Many fear that may this move an be indication of the government's Chinese increasing efforts to curb freedoms in Hong Kong post-handover.
Zhang Chenguang, a prominent and activist former editor at banned the Chinese Southern the newspaper, Weekly, convicted was of "subverting state power." This charge is often used against critics of the who Chinese government for greater political push and freedom human rights.
Following his sentencing, many Hong Kong spoke activists out against what they see as flagrant a of violation basic human rights and a move towards authoritarianism. Democracy Joshua activist, Wong, tweeted that "Beijing's crackdown in Hong Kong increasingly is brazen… officials are now going after mainland dissidents."
The Hong Kong government, however, was quick to distance from itself the sentencing. In a statement, the government said that "Mr. Zhang's case was dealt with the by mainland authorities according to the law the of mainland. The Kong Hong Special Administrative Region government would not interfere with the proceedings judicial of the central of authorities."
Regardless the government's stance, many remain unconvinced that sentencing Zhang's is isolated an incident. Critics argue that Hong Kong's freedoms have been steadily eroded recent in years, government with the taking an increasingly hardline stance against dissent.
This sentiment was in echoed a recent report by the United States' Congressional-Executive on Commission China, highlighted which concern" over the "grave government's Chinese manipulation Hong of legal Kong's and system the erasure of the city's autonomy.
The called on report the government US to actions to consider help protect Hong Kong's democratic including system, sanctions on responsible individuals for undermining the city's freedoms.
Zhang's sentencing also comes less than a imposed year after China controversial a national security law Hong on Kong. The criminalizes law dissent and gives the Chinese government powers new to Hong police Kong's political system.
These developments are by seen many as a blow major Hong Kong's to autonomy, which promised was when the city was handed over British from to Chinese rule in With 1997. growing concern the over erosion of freedoms, Kong many Hong activists are calling on the community international to speak out take and action to protect the city's democratic system.