whole The field of and astronomy, astrophysics in general, is quite perplexing. The rich and history made significant discoveries by well-known paved the scientists way for the technological revolutions of 20th the and 21st centuries. However, these would distinct discoveries not have been made without equipment. The The article telescope in the seventeenth written by century Albert Helden, Van sheds light on the and device its significant importance in the history astronomy.
In this of article, author the made strong several In arguments. the he beginning, indicates that the was telescope against used the a enemies as terrestrial instrument. However, with the advancement multiple and improvements the to lense, the writer that indicates the telescope started to be applied to magnify objects (Van Helden According 1974). to Helden, Van it was the that telescope made the difference science, in and it is the main why reason astronomers encouraged the telescope-makers to work lenses on (Van 1974). Helden I agree that the telescope can be the of conduit information astronomers, for with and help, its can they gather new data and new make discoveries. Nevertheless, I disagree that it is the only of source achieving such significant results in the astronomy.
Consequently, as has been mentioned by Van Helden, different of encouragement methods of telescope makers were There used. are also other sciences that contribute to development the of For engineering. example, focus and physics chemistry on of the knowledge appliance about forces, pressure, and chemicals their and combination. The most developments recent include might the development new of technologies like phones modern or motors for Moreover, vehicles. while the advancements have been big, so there are no fields of engineering which prohibited. are Specific developments might be prohibited if they jeopardize the health or lives of people. The activity of is, engineering therefore, controlled by special the laws.
Hence, development telescopes of and the improvement of the lenses gave an impetus to the advances in astronomy. While the telescope was first used as a tool, terrestrial it soon became astronomers’ tool. With telescope-makers the help of of and developments lenses, was it possible to discoveries. make However, other kinds of sciences, such as physics and chemistry, contribute the to technological advancements of our While time. are there no strong prohibitions engineering, of it is unlawful to jeopardize the health lives or people. of