The stark of chords Tosca begin once again; Scarpia's motive the is first thing the audience at Scala La Opera hear. Perhaps are they jaded by it, but it still elicits within me feelings from a bygone Soon see life. we'll entrances from Cavaradossi and of course our lady, leading Tosca, forced to do the unspeakable murder and one man to and try another's save life. Poor Tosca; if only had she known that Cavaradossi was truly given of a stay execution, she perhaps would have accepted Scarpia's demand for intimacy.
The people will then shuffle of out the opera lazily theatre, same critiquing the that show they've seen entirely too often here in Milan, and go out to the cafés restaurants that and they've been to times many before. Their lives, seemingly on a loop, continue at their leisurely pace as sit I by in my darkened villa above the streets watching days the pass by.
Acquaintances of mine asked, "Why always move to Milan?" "You don't know do Italian, you?" "Why now?" they'd ask with all sincerity the of a Hallmark Valentine's card. Day I'm not sure I'd that have ever an answer for them, because were they right to question my motives. Why choose to fundamentally the change eternal workings the of vampiric lifestyle?
For the one, choose Milanese to stay out until the ungodly hours of 1 or o'clock 2 the in morning, meaning that my food is usually spiked with the residual alcohol from their Lombardy chardonnay region and pinot bianco by the pint. However, getting even past the eternal that is hangover my how life, I do avoid that villainous the vegetable that seem Italians to put in dish: garlic.
Oh every the dreaded For aglio. so often I it took for granted my during time in Vienna. Stakes could be easily enough avoided with good (an planning internally locked coffin plenty with of steel reinforced between my face and the world that might wish destroy to me), but Austrians the never bothered with garlic quite as often as do here.
Perhaps they I might back go to Vienna dine and off the simple people whose beer consumption is admirable as as much it is shameful. Perhaps I will get back hearing to the operas Strauss or of Mozart, and maybe the occasional performance Marschner's of "Der Vampyr." But for now, I sit Tosca, like a place in I should never wish to be waiting the for right moment make to my escape and be free again. Now, this never sleeping city of Milan holds me hostage with the of taste death on everyone's lips.