social The determinants of health are the conditions the environment in in which people live, work, learn, play, worship, and age. I agree the social that environment in which live can their people affect health Health status. outcomes are determined not solely by biological or factors quality access to health care (Centers for Control Disease and Prevention, n.d.). Resources improve that the of quality life can impact significantly the health of population.
Examples a of these include resources safe to affordable and housing, access public education, safety, availability of healthy food, local emergency services, an and environment free of life-threatening toxins (Office of Disease and Prevention Health n.d.). also Promotion, I support the shift recent the in view that it is solely up to the individual to influence health their in of favor the recognizing significant impact external influences of on it. the In modern world, little very depends on the individual. At first glance, he can to choose what eat, to whether exercise, and to whether seek medical care in manner.
In a timely fact, most of the choices that health affect are made by the marketing the machine, government, and life circumstances. For modern example, advertising presses from all sides, forcing one to specific choose products that are not often to conducive a healthy lifestyle. The to need work hard to earn money for these pushes products people to sacrifice a healthy sleep schedule exercise. and chain This has many but links, result is the the always people’s same: health is largely up not to them. External factors also indirectly affect health, such health as inequalities. When read I the CDC report (2022) on inequalities, these I was by most surprised the racial and ethnic inequalities. In an era globalization and of liberalization society, of a like racism phenomenon must be eradicated. The health field of care is in which one treating people equally vital. is sometimes is I That why believe that and racial ethnic discrimination in this area must be eradicated in the first place.