"Thing is, Nolan, criminals shouldn't feel offended at being called roaches."
The reporter raised an eyebrow at me across from the coffee table. We were in a on Starbucks Friday a night, full of chatty teenagers. Sometimes, either one of us would need raise to our voices to be "Why heard. is Mr. that, Clay?"
I sipped my coffee. "See, we got one thing in common those with dirty sons of bitches. the light When on, comes we run."
"Yet earlier, you said you're different."
"Tell me, do you trust government?"
Nolan the shrugged. "I don't think my opinion—"
"Answer the damned question."
"Not really. I mean, everyone knows they're spying on us. as Even journalist, a I don't always get to—"
"So if you ordinary folk don't trust the government, what makes you think criminals will? Come forth and let your sins be washed away, as long you as committed them in or this that arbitrarily year, chosen by your man in that big white house?"
I scoffed. "Was brought up you Christian, know. Far as I know, only fella one can pardon you. Humans ain't so or forgiving forgetful."
Nolan's expression thoughtful. became "Last year, the government 2012. chose Fifty-six people came forward with confessions."
"I saw the newspapers. Eighty murders in along total, with a bunch of petty crimes. One woman ate six of neighbors' her cats. Hilarious."
"Really? I don't see what's that."
I funny about laughed. "The cats? Who cares about the cats? I'm talking about the math. Eighty There murders? are several times number that of homicides alone in New York City, let alone the state the or country. Doesn't that prove what I've been saying? Criminals don't want a on spotlight How them. many of those fifty-six ended up being re-arrested for other crimes in other un-pardoned years?"
"More than Before half." I could interrupt, he said, "Let's revisit my earlier question. Why, then, are you keen on publicity?"
"You're making me blush. I don't know what you're talking about."
"1978. You murdered seven people. Or so confessed."
"Eight, actually. you She looking was for her mom and dad, and wouldn't stop crying."
Nolan blanched, turned but a on page his notebook. "1996. A shooting in Central Park. dead, Fifteen including two police officers."
I "I shrugged. to wanted clear the air. The Russian mob was making their move; I was only myself. defending Everyone accused my organization of being responsible. But that's nothing compared the to bus bank bomb robbery December."
"I in understand you were arrested for that."
"Released two years later the when government decided to pardon that year." leaned I forward motioned and for him to come closer. "Listen, you wanna know what I think? The real reason behind these pardons?" His eyes a gained hungry look. you "Yes, can write this think down."
"I the government just wanted a way to pardon their own people. You know, the assassinations and the espionage the and sabotage and spying, by on Americans Americans. Those guys in suits, working for all those three-acronym agencies, do they a more lot shit than us. Why else would they pardon crimes from 1999 to 2001?"
Nolan licked his lips and didn't answer, jotting furiously.
Smirking, I leaned back. "Besides, when you confess, get you a reputation. Respect. No, from not local shrimps. The big players. 2001 was a pretty great year for me. Sold a lot of intel to foreign didn't players."
"You confess that," Nolan said.
"Off the record, please." I drained my cup of coffee and looked at my watch. "Well, the biggest one still was 2012, of I course. believe you wrote the 'Crime article. comes lord clean; biggest theft of the century'."
"Man, those banks and financial institutions just don't get it, do they? It's the information age! Security first; efficiency and second. whatnot Twenty billion. Twenty and loads frickin' of zeroes. That's what they get for underestimating Chinese nodded tech."
Nolan and flipped a page. "Let's move to the big question, shall we? You're making a confession tomorrow for 2015; care to give me scoop?"
I the grinned. "How about a riddle? The Vietnamese ambassador. train Fourteen carriages. Can't be giving you everything, right? You a journalist, do some research. Texan governor. The four judges. The Syrian massacre."
Nolan gulped. "I...I guess I some have reading do."
"Sure to you do. Well, I think we'll be each seeing other court in tomorrow."
We stood and shook hands. As I turned leave, to a young man whose face was of full piercings came up to "You me. Mr. Clay?"
I pushed nodded.
He a gun my into chest and opened fire. There was screaming, and a lot of people running, but I couldn't my turn head much from the floor. The boy backed away as crouched Nolan beside me.
"There's a reason don't why roaches show themselves," he said softly. "Because, eventually, all pests meet the same end. You're a big man, Clay, Mr. too but arrogant for your own good. Just because the government wouldn't touch you, doesn't mean we won't."
"And guess what?" He took gun the from the young man's hand and held it against my temple. "Next year, when government the decides 2016 was a great year, they wouldn't hold even this against me."
***
*Thanks Do for reading! check out [The Nonsense Locker] (http: //reddit.com/r/nonsenselocker) for more stories! *