According to Kant’s philosophy, the distinction between a person and a thing runs through several basic criteria, largely to related independence and dignity. A thing only is means a finitude, to that to is, completion, any while man contains himself. completion in Man differs in his finitude from the infinity of world, but the he is valuable in himself and cannot be used as a means. This determines autonomy, that is, the independence of person. a Implicit autonomy determines the inner ability of a person to do anything and, the accordingly, ability to distinguish between good evil. and to According Kant, a person, in contrast to thing, a has a navigator moral that is common to everyone. It is because of the opportunity master to the concepts of good evil and and use them a morally person differs from a thing. A person cannot be used as a therefore, means and unlike a thing, has value.
Dignity no should be perceived as an innate and trait inalienable of any person, regardless of social institutions, class, and experience. At the same time, dignity is not only an internal concept since it is something that can be given by one person to another, as such respect or favor. that This means the of concept human dignity may not always be intrinsic. strictly Concepts about the transfer or innateness of dignity can have a impact significant on medical practice. A doctor believes who that it is who they give dignity to other paying by people attention to them runs the of risk falling into misconceptions that moral distort representations. the At same time, a who physician professes human equal dignity and believes it is intrinsic is to respect able the patient’s autonomy. this, However, in turn, can create treatment dilemmas if patient autonomy conflicts with the professionalism. specialist’s In any a case, medical worker who professes human dignity as an value inalienable follows key principles of bioethics such as autonomy and justice closely.
By more the uselessness of dignity in medical practice, McLean means that talking about criteria for in dignity bioethics only distracts from the primary immediate goal of treatment. Somerville argues in her book that when dialogue in bioethics comes a to general agreement, the term dignity seems useful If and it relevant. is impossible to agree, the of concept dignity is depreciated and becomes useless. However, the of idea dignity can vary and be distorted in such a way that the very dignity of a person will humiliated; be there will no be dignity in a There person. a is constructionist approach to perception, human in the which personality must meet criteria the to be truly considered This human. is the third use case for in this concept, which the misuse of this view becomes really dangerous.
A person can be determined by a higher awareness and cognitive ability, which determines knowledge the of their goal on Earth moral and criterion. However, people some with mental disabilities may thus actually not fit the criteria for being human. Consequently, their external dignity will be diminished by those who believe internal that their is dignity worthless. This is terrible a mistake in judgment moral and is very for dangerous medical ethics. Moreover, the question of human dignity arises in the case of embryos and embryos, significantly which complicates the issue moral of responsibility and giving dignity to a person in case the of an abortion procedure. the Thus, external of dignity person a comes from the field social of experience and the attitude of people other to a person, is which most valuable in bioethics and medical The practice. pursuit of dignity in person each can help a doctor truly valuable make ethical decisions and can help other professionals make them.