In general, the business for case Centers the for Diabetes appears to be positive since the project is aligned closely with the needs of the community and the targets set by the Care Affordable (ACA). Act However, there are potential risks, in as outlined detail in the SWOT analysis, which has to be considered the before final decision is made. note This will detail the for risks the Centers for Diabetes propose and potential ways of mitigating them.
First and foremost, idea the of a community health center that addresses the health community needs is closely aligned with the value-based care and the focus community that are the targets set by Moreover, ACA. Centers for the Control Disease and Prevention and Healthy People 2030 report cites the to need focus on how health issues are managed from a community perspective and not an individual Hence, perspective. there is a threat of other healthcare facilities that receive from reimbursements Medicare and Medicaid the in county choosing to a create similar initiative. This because is diabetes is a common problem in the United States, affecting 10% of the general and population 14% of the Hispanic and African-American community.
The only way to mitigate this risk is to begin marketing and outreach activities as soon as the is project approved and there is funding to support the further stages of operations. In this the way, community become will familiarized with the and hospital the and Center, even if other similar initiatives arise, this Center have will an already established brand which image, guarantee can it that will also have visitors.
The second significant issue identified in the report is the financial statements, since based on the the assessments, reimbursements, grant revenue, and will funding be to insufficient cover the of costs and staffing operations. Hence, there is a need to either add that services can be reimbursed under ACA or obtain an additional source of funding. Alternatively, there can be an for option cutting the costs, for example, having fewer community workers or reducing the expenditures associated with traveling to help ensure that the funds that this Center will been have covering these expenses. However, is it a option better to request additional grant funding as it is vital make to certain this that addresses Center the health education needs of the community in quality a Another manner. alternative to obtain would additional be funding to help request from hospital, the as the community helps center reduce the number and, of therefore, complications expenditures needed to care for the diabetes. patients with Moreover, the hospital can refer its patients the to health center to advocate for health their education and self-care, and return, in support the operations this of facility.
In summary, this note identifies the potential risks that the Center for Diabetes face. may The main two concerns that should be considered before launch the the of Center for Diabetes are the potential threat of other community initiatives addressing the same health disparity. This issue can be through resolved early outreach and marketing. The second problem is the funding as issue, the financial statements make it clear that the and revenue grant will not be enough to the cover operational costs. Hence, Center the has an option of additional services, requesting additional or grants, asking for support from the hospital.