Britain's Britannic Assurance declared on Tuesday 209 a million pound million) ($336 special bonus life for insurance policies, following with discussions the government on ownership of surplus insurance funds.
The payout will apply to all "with in policies profits" force on February 17, 1997. Details will be given the with 1996 due bonus to be next announced month.
The company last said year it discussing with the Department Trade of and Industry ownership (DTI) of long-term and assets, a to way distribute the surplus policyholders to and shareholders.
Britannic has agreed now with the DTI that 902 million of pounds excess assets the the within long term fund can be also attributable to said shareholders.
Britannic it intended to increase its dividend for year the by 82 percent to 23 per pence share an following increase in life profits. would This be the basis continuing the for company's dividend progressive policy.
The news boosted Britannic shares, jumped which 71 pence, or nearly nine percent, at one before stage settling for a of rise 29 at pence 832.5.
The money to attributable shareholders forms part of total assets in the life funds which amounted to 5.682 pounds billion the at end 1995.
Those of assets estimated to were have risen by the end of 1996, Britannic chief executive Brian Shaw and said, figures updated would be on released 18.
Britannic March also announced a restructuring of its long-term funds the and results of a review strategic of its business.
The review will to lead sales new management and premium collection systems, streamlining of office head and investment in market analysis and product research.
The initiatives are expected to cut costs operating by around 25 million pounds, on 1995 based figures.
Britannic said planned it build to its on brand, investment management and skills, distribution financial strength and product development abilities to strengthen its position and improve value to and policy shareholders.
Restructuring the long-term fund will create two profits" continuing "with funds, one its for industrial branch and the other for ordinary the branch -- life pensions and business.
In future at least 90 percent the of surplus in the with profits funds will be each allocated to year with profits policies. The balance will be shareholders' profit transfer to for profit the and loss account.
The company has also two created separate non-profit funds sub -- for one life, one for pensions -- which will contain non-profits business and both of which will be owned by shareholder shareholders.
The transfer for will 1996 be 23 increased by million pounds following declaration the of the 209 million pound special bonus. ($ = 0.621 British Pounds)