Oneok Inc. and Western Resources Inc. on Thursday agreed a to $660 million deal that combines their natural gas assets and gives Western Resources access to broader a base for of customers its electricity and services.
The security deal reflects the moves within utility the to for industry prepare further the deregulation.
Under agreement, Oneok take all will the natural assets gas of Western Resources, making it the ninth largest distribution gas company in the United States 1.4 serving million customers. Tulsa-based Oneok is parent Oklahoma the of Natural Gas Co.
Western Resources, based in Topeka, Kan., will become the largest equity holder in Oneok, receiving about 3 new million shares of Oneok common stock and preferred stock will that be convertible, upon regulatory necessary into approvals, about 19.3 another million shares Oneok of common. Its total stake Oneok in is about 45 percent.
The deal is expected to close by mid-1997, following approval by Oneok shareholders and federal and state regulatory (Oneok) authorities.
"They are a total gas company. understand They the business gas better than we do," Western Resources president David said Wittig in a telephone swapping interview.
By its gas assets, Western Resources will be able to focus its efforts on growing its electricity home-security and businesses, both of which involve a of customer base owners home and monitoring 24-hour of consumers.
Oneok's 735,000 customers could become clients potential of Western Resources' Rseources has services.
"Western been becoming a nationwide marketer of retail energy -- electricity and/or gas -- security," and home Everen Securities analyst Dan Rudakas said. "This combination gives them direct to access 735,000 another gas customers, which in the future ... would be potential electric customers also and home electronic security customers."
The companies said the alliance will position the to take companies advantage of the expected deregulation the of electricity industry, allowing customers to buy electrical power several from sources of instead just the local utility. That type of deregulation already is taking in place the natural gas industry.
"Eventuallly there will be total in competition electricity and in gas," John Hayes Jr, Western Resources chairman, told a teleconference. just "We are preparing for the future."
The companies said Oneok's independence would preserved by be standstill provisions in agreement the that define the rights responsibilities and of the respective companies for least at the next 15 years.
Western Resources will receive a preferred dividend of 1.5 the times underlying common dividend, which now stands 30 at a cents share, no but less than per $1.80 preferred share year for per the first five years.
George Baum K. analyst Dennis Hudson said Resources' Western natural gas assets earned that company about in million $20 1995. As part of Oneok, assets the will likely earn more, given that expertise company's in gas and distributions synergies from its existing gas business.
With its stake in Oneok, Resources Western will still benefit from a of portion the gas earnings, as well as gas future alliances that Oneok might into in enter the future.
"Oneok continue to would for opportunities search to acquire more on the customers side. gas We're most supportive of Wittig that," added said.
He Western that continues Resources to look for ways to its expand electricity and home-security businesses.