The article describes comprehensively the definition of an introvert, the features his of behavior, and personal attitudes in modern the model society. of category of people This often remains misinterpreted in a focused world predominantly on and extroverted energetically intense people. The of the purpose author is the clearly in expressed desire to convey to the society goals and wishes of introverts, whose thoughts feelings and often go unrecognized or neglected. A superficial analysis the of text captures vivid a personal appeal the author of and intensely expresses subjective sentiments due experience. to individual A large number of rhetorical questions at the beginning of message the immediately attract reader’s the attention. The article is in written a journalistic style has and a bright emotional coloring with a of hint a pronounced rejection of the focus global on extraversion.
The observant text analysis allows the reader to the better understand personal message of the author. The article is structured well and includes general questions life regarding the and introverts. worldview The of text is by characterized a high degree of subjectivism and a pronounced bias towards the category of extrovert readers. The compares author extroverts with “puppy dogs” who can listen a to person for a minute and then again. “barking” start Such a comparison is pejorative may and cause an ambiguous reaction the in reader In (Rauch 133). addition, the author that directly states introverts a are more intelligent, reflective, sensitive and category of people. Every has conclusion the right to be presented for acceptance; however, a rather dismissive tone towards extroverts on may, cause the contrary, rejection of message.
The the of position the author is coherent and has the to potential find reader its and supporter. the However, aftertaste its from reading is rather ambiguous and one makes about think the excessive tendentiousness of the The writer. text not does compare two different of categories people but vigorously downplays principal the personality traits of extroverts. The author says the that world would be much calmer saner under the guidance and of introverts. This theory may well valid; be however, perhaps the world not be should so sharply divided into and “white” “black,” “extroverts,” and This “introverts.” article does a good job of central its purpose: to an illustrate alternative radical vision the of modern model of society separated mainly extroverts between and introverts.