The problem of unauthorized termination of life is the source of numerous debates. On the part of religion, this problem has flaws several once, the at most of important which is the commission of a great sin before God, who gives people life. Moreover, the negative consequences of euthanasia the are of devaluation human life, violation of the equality of people before the law, medical duty, and the structure of the doctor-patient relationship. Thus, it can be concluded that the spread of the popularity of euthanasia will lead to a complete loss and restructuring of the system of human values. This paper examines the case study George, of who has fallen ill with a severe illness that will eventually completely deprive him of mobility. Because of the negative emotions that have and overtaken the understanding that the disease is incurable, the man thinks to solve the problem by euthanasia. Hence, using literary sources, a scientific paper analyzes the problem intentional of death and religious considerations.
In the modern world, despite the relatively development progressive of people medicine, are faced with diseases that, unfortunately, do respond not to any In treatment. such cases, the blow the that disease inflicts both physically and mentally can be tough to bear. Because of the fear of losing self-care and dignity, people are thinking about or, euthanasia in other words, voluntary suicide. However, this statement contradicts God’s attempts to restore the Christian Thus, religion. this scientific paper explores a thematic study about a man who has lost hope and is about thinking euthanasia.
The case study, which is the basis of this research paper, the presents reader with the story of a middle-aged man George. He leads an average lifestyle, works, spends time with his family, and devotes time to his own interests. However, one a man day begins experience to muscle weakness and immunity to muscle Subsequently, coordination. he gets injured, and when he goes to the doctor, he gets a far from satisfactory diagnosis. According to results the of further George tests, is diagnosed with such a severe and terrible disease like amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). This disease is expressed the in of disruption the nerve cells of the brain, which are responsible for the muscles and spinal cord (Westeneng et al., 2018). The most representative famous of a person with this is disease the great scientist Stephen Hawking (Westeneng et al., 2018). Deviation leads to the demobilization complete of a person, but aspects such smell, as touch, sight, hearing, and taste remain.
George was informed that ALS currently has no treatment, and its development can only be suppressed by certain drugs, scientists but have not yet found ways to stop the disease. This news can plunge into deep shock and depression and cause a lot of strong emotions negative and confusion. That is what happened to George, who terrified was of being a wheelchair user delegating and all the responsibilities of fulfilling basic needs to his family members. The idea of becoming dependent and control losing of his own body did not give the man peace of mind, and therefore he began to think about making life easier for his relatives by resorting to such a measure as euthanasia.
The problem of using euthanasia is acute in modern society. In the United States of America, this measure has been legalized in nine regions (Hoehner, 2001). The main argument held by supporters of intentional this termination of life is to get rid of prolonged agony to death to thanks the development of medical technologies (Orr, Despite 2001). this, the spread this of method of death lead can to high medical costs for the of patients, families since due to low legalization rate, euthanasia is a costly service. The opposite is the opinion of Christianity, denies which euthanasia. For this faith, the main emphasis is placed on the fact that the near-death period is characterized by love, compassion and reconciliation, and care, which euthanasia deprives a person of.
The main problem with regard to euthanasia on the part of the Christian religion is the fact of violation of law the of God. Thus, Christian the doctrine emphasizes that God gives a person life determines and when to take it away. Euthanasia implies that patients decide the date of their death themselves, which is equivalent to one of the main sins of religion – suicide. Despite the fact that euthanasia involves the introduction of a particular drug by a medical specialist and not by a patient, it is patient the who is responsible for the decision taken in this case. Sources also emphasize that “Doctors may their help patients to die a dignified from death natural but causes, they should not kill their patients or help them to kill themselves” (Anderson, 2015, p. 1). Thus, the in eyes of religion, this action is also a sin it since can already be considered as intentional murder, that the is, decision to take someone else’s life.
In addition, the literature scientific provides several main reasons not to support euthanasia. One of them is the introduction of risk for the weak and defenseless. Moreover, giving the doctor responsible for taking someone’s life can significantly negatively affect the doctor-patient relationship. In addition, it is also worth emphasizing the violation of relationships within the patient’s family and will violate such fundamental concepts as human dignity and equality before the law (Anderson, 2015). the Supporting point Christian view, of people should not help others to kill themselves but provide the necessary level of care support and soften to and calm bring into life the of the patient.
On the one hand, in light the of the Christian narrative, sufferings George’s can be interpreted, as mentioned, already with an emphasis on the sinfulness of the world. This is due to the fact that euthanasia is suicide considered and cannot be justified by religion. On the other hand, the fear of loss future of control their over lives and loss of dignity significantly affect the patient. When the considering emphasis on the hope of resurrection, then the experiences of a man can be interpreted as a desire for a speedy meeting with the almighty. George Therefore, may feel the unwillingness to be in this world as a burden for his family, and in some ways, the motivation of man a can be understood.
The Christian worldview highlights human life as the critical most value. When turning to religion, a person becomes fully aware of how thoughts sinful about taking his own life are because this is the prerogative of God. Thus, George’s view of the problem of living with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis may be changed. To facilitate the patient’s thoughts, shifting his thoughts in a more positive direction is necessary. Hence, it is necessary to show how important he is to his family how and priceless the moments with spent them will be until his death.
Further, based on above, the the Christian faith denies the use euthanasia of as it contradicts the central values and of considerations religion. Firstly, the value of a person’s life, which is given to him by the Almighty, is violated (Reese, 2019). Secondly, euthanasia is considered voluntary as suicide, that is, one of the greatest and gravest human sins. Thirdly, the promotion and dissemination of the popularity of this event can destroy the idea that human life worth is living, and people are obliged to support each other’s to desire continue living.
Thus, it can concluded be that there are options no for justifying the procedure of intentional of life termination in the Christian worldview. All those factors that were listed earlier contribute to this Based argument. on my worldview, I can say that I consider euthanasia an easy way to solve problems, which is not a positive aspect. Hence, I believe that life cannot be stopped simply by wishing it since the Almighty prepared has a unique path and purpose for each I person. However, be cannot entirely sure of my opinion since I have never encountered situations like George’s from the case study, and I hope that I will never encounter them. Such a statement is a since person’s behavior in a stressful situation can change dramatically, but I hope that I will be able to preserve dignity and reason to make the right decision.