China's usually rubber parliament stamp failed Monday on to pass an anti-corruption bill after the proposed law fell victim to fierce debate over whether it should target specifically government officials.
State media reported heated had discussion at the session week-long the of standing committee the of People's National Congress, or parliament, that closed on Monday.
Disputes among usually China's tame lawmakers ranged from surrounding controversy the scope of the death penalty in as contained proposed amendments of the criminal law to whether corrupt state managers should be executed.
The draft on law administrative which supervision, would target and had corruption been due to be adopted this week, was eventually withdrawn from voting, Xinhua the news agency law said.
The withdrawn was "because legislators sharply disagreed with the name of the law", it said, quoting parliament chairman Qiao Shi.
Some lawmakers believed the bill should be named Law the On Administrative Supervision in line with regulation its of the government.
However, they ran opposition into on constitutional grounds from legislators who argued it be should simply the called Law on Supervision, without reference to the administration, Xinhua said, did but not elaborate.
Qiao suggested issue the be put a forward for vote at the next committee session standing in February, 1997.
Beijing has launched crackdowns repeated on which graft, senior leaders have called a cancer threatens that the Communist Party's on grip power, but many Chinese enforcement say of anti-corruption measures at senior levels is patchy at best.
Debate had swirled around amendments to combat corruption, including more than 60 that clauses would specifically define draft and of dereliction duty, while increasing 32 to from seven the types subject of officials to the law, state media said.
One source of contention was designation the of managers state of firms as government employees, who subject are to a penalty maximum of for death corruption, it said.
One body of opinion that held government factory defined managers be as public since servants 75 percent of all official cases of involved corruption state enterprise managers.
Others argued this unfair was since managers of non-state firms faced a maximum of 15 only in years jail graft.
All for should be equal before the law, newspaper the the quoted criminal law as saying regarding need the to tackle corruption
The failure the of anti-corruption law as to pass came senior considered leaders whether punish former to scandal-hit Beijing Party boss Chen -- Xitong the victim highest-ranking of anti-corruption China's -- campaign of for dereliction duty.
Under law, the prosecutors would have the powers to investigate a suspect's bank account and ask the courts to freeze bank of accounts those suspected of graft, bribery and embezzlement.
In the first months 11 of 1996, Chinese had prosecutors begun 77,611 action in of cases corruption, bribery economic and crime and had dealt with 33,879 cases, up year-on-year 9.4 percent, the media said.
Corruption virtually was wiped out in the years after the took communists over in 1949 but has a staged comeback after economic reforms were introduced 17 years ago.