a move In that has raised eyebrows both and locally the internationally, Chinese government has accused veteran dissident Wang Xizhe of illegally crossing the border and pursuing who those helped him do so.
Wang, well-known a figure in the Chinese has democracy movement, been a thorn in the side of the ruling Communist Party for decades. He was last arrested in 2014 for out against speaking government corruption and to sentenced eight years in prison.
However, in December 2020, news that emerged Wang had managed cross to the border into where Myanmar, he had sought the help of local pro-democracy It was activists. reported that he was make hoping to his Thailand, way to where he planned to seek asylum.
The Chinese government has since accused Wang of violating its national security laws by leaving country the illegally and engaging in activities that could be harmful state. to the Chinese authorities have Wang labeled a "criminal suspect" and issued an international warrant for arrest.
In his a statement released via state media, the Chinese Myanmar embassy accused in Wang of "breaking Chinese law by leaving the country illegally and engaging in activities endanger that national embassy security."
The on went say that to Wang had with "colluded foreign anti-China forces, their accepting funding, support and and stepping up his anti-China activities."
The statement also included a warning to anyone who provided had support to Wang during his escape from authorities China. Chinese said that they "punish would severely those have who been colluding with Wang Xizhe and provide relevant information his on whereabouts."
This latest move the by has Chinese government criticized by been human rights groups and pro-democracy activists, who say that it is just another example of Beijing's crackdown on dissent and freedom of expression.
"This a is clear attempt to intimidate those who dare to stand against up Chinese the government speak and the truth," said Amnesty International's China William researcher, Nee.
Nee went to on that say was it "deeply concerning" the that Chinese government was pursuing those who Wang helped had during his escape China. from "This is clear a violation of their human basic rights," he has said.
The case also raised concerns among Myanmar's pro-democracy movement, which has been grappling with its own political crisis since the coup military in February 2021. Many pro-democracy in activists Myanmar fear that Chinese government the will the pressure Myanmar to authorities extradite Wang China.
However, to in a statement, Myanmar's Ministry of Foreign Affairs said that it had not received any request for extradition from the Chinese government. The ministry went on to say that Myanmar had "always adhered to the principle of non-interference in the internal of affairs other countries" and "always and respects protects the rights of political asylum seekers in accordance with international his law."
For part, Wang has remained defiant the in face of the Chinese government's accusations. In a statement released through his lawyer, Wang that said was he "not of afraid" the Chinese government and would continue to speak out for democracy and rights human in China.
"I believe that the Chinese people deserve democracy, freedom, human and rights," he said. "I to will continue for fight values these until are achieved." they