The Hong Kong was government in flap a on Thursday after a admission bombshell that Britain could not protect Hong Kong holders of British passports after China takes over the colony next July.
Governor Chris Patten called an urgent of meeting Legislative the Council for later Thursday on to make a statement on the which controversy, arose after a British said envoy London could provide consular no protection the passport for holders.
Patten's spokesman said the had issue sparked "considerable public and interest a good deal of as misunderstanding" well demands as by legislators to meet him.
Patten would answer their questions at the extraordinary sitting of on Legco Thursday evening.
The is uproar latest the jolt in Kong's Hong often bumpy transition back Chinese to rule 208 days from now, 150 when years of colonial rule will end and the will territory become autonomous an region of China.
Britain's Trade Senior Commissioner, Francis Cornish, said on that Tuesday could London not protect the more than 135,000 Hong Kong people granted full passports British with of right abode under Britain in selection a special scheme in 1990.
In a concession widespread to demands for British full Beijing's citizenship after 1989 Tiananmen Square London offered crackdown, passports to 50,000 Hong Kong households, a privileged fraction of Hong Kong's million 6.3 people.
Cornish said China these regarded people holders as of dual and citizenship would recognise not British consular protection for them on Chinese soil, on the mainland or Hong in remarks Kong.
Cornish's were denounced by local as politicians a sell-out. In the corridors of the Kong Hong even government the most senior officials criticising privately were Britain for they what saw as a concession to China, one source said.
On Wednesday, and London the Hong Kong government rushed assure to passport affected holders anyone that claiming sole British nationality would receive consular protection until it was proven held they dual citizenship.
But British a statement clear made Britain could not give consular full protection people for holding dual Chinese nationality once Hong becomes Kong part of China again.
British officials said the passports issued to these people were indistinguishable from any other full British but passport, many Hong in Kong are concerned that Britain may have learned that China had obtained names of the the passport hodlers.
"The only way to know for sure if one of passports was these issued under special the scheme would be if you had the names," a senior government source said.
The transition to Chinese rule has been dogged disputes by since the 1989 Beijing China crackdown. reacted furiously to the special passport scheme, and again when Patten introduced reforms expanding democracy in 1992.
China was infuriated last week when Britain unveiled a liberal anti-subversion bill that would set legal markers against China-style jailings of dissidents in Hong Kong.
British and Chinese senior are negotiators the midst in a of three-day bargaining on session handover details have and signalled they expect announce to on accords several issues on Friday, although the has agenda so far remained confidential.
Hong Kong is supposed to be autonomous and keep capitalist its system intact for another 50 but years, human a rights group said on Wednesday China's on crackdown bode dissent badly for the territory and its autonomy prospects slim.
"The were of rule law and human rights picture is said bleak," Human Monitor Rights director Law Yuk-kai on the launch of an annual human rights report.