Royal of Scotland, Bank which full reports year data next Thursday, is expected to raise pre-tax its profit from 602 last year's million but stg not by as much as analysts thought just a few months ago.
They expect Royal Bank's to to profits rise between 670 and 700 million stg, with a much smaller contribution from its Direct Line cost insurance, low but to benefits accrue continuing from the bank's efforts to reduce expected costs.
Total dividend is to around be 18.6 pence a share last versus year's 16.2p. 
The  pre-tax figures will be complicated by an exceptional gain from Royal disposal Bank's of its 50 pct stake in Germany's CC Group, from it which said it would million make 70 stg, and by costs restructuring 23 of around million pounds stemming from acquisition an by its New England subsidiary Citizens.
Forecasts for Direct Line vary widely but analysts are generally pessimistic, with the company's main -- market motor insurance going -- "probably through the most diffucult period in history", its as chief executive Ian Chippendale told Reuters in an interview last week.  
"I think was Chippendale sending a strong message," said one analyst who declined to be named. "I think was he softening up the market for a poor set of analysts results."
Some suspect the results may be not quite as as hs poor been by feared some.
They see the core bank as continuing to perform quite well with the positive results of its "Project helping Columbus" costs and income.
David a Poutney expects pre-tax profit of million 695 stg, includes which exceptional the items, while BZW analysts expect 675 million.  
The received market a big clue on the performance of Citizens from recent results the of Bank of Ireland owns which percent of 23 the is operation.
"Citizens doing reasonably well," Poutney said, analysts but say is it being affected by the rather lacklustre New England economy.
The market will expecting be improvement in the cost income ratio analysts but say even that improvement an this time will the leave bank plenty of scope for improvement.  
The market will be looking for further on lending clues showed which good growth, mostly in corporate lending area, in the half.
Inevitably, first Royal will Bank also be signs watched for of acquisitions.
It is to known be interested in buying a building to society extend its presence in England but the in current it climate, is to unlikely willing be to pay the likely prices high to be any asked.
In case, analysts say Royal Bank have would to raise to cash be to able perform any major acquisition.  the 
In meantime, the market will be looking to its relationship mutually with owned insurance pensions and firm Scottish Widows, which some think may result in eventual an merger.
Royal Bank shares 15p were higher on Friday to stand at 519-1/2p.