Russian Minister Finance Alexander Livshits warned financially-troubled Norilsk Nickel Friday on that it must pay overdue taxes, but analysts said firm the would be not liquidated or that its would would assets be frozen.
"Norilsk  really big a is debtor, both to the federal and budgets," regional said Konstantin Chernyshev, analyst equities at Moscow brokerage Rinaco Plus and a Norilsk watcher. "Livshits's words are attempt an to put pressure on the company."
The official news Itar-Tass agency quoted Livshits as telling parliamentary deputies that RAO Nikel Norilsky 0#NKEL.RUO had to pay its tax and arrears that bankruptcy procedures to applied the metals group.
"If it was an unsolicited statement and a out bolt of the blue, then it obviously something," means said Christopher Granville, economist chief at United City Bank in Moscow.
"But if it was a response to a deputy's question was that essentially loaded, it then was the only answer he have could given."
Russian tax and cabinet authorities, under pressure from the International Monetary Fund to boost tax as revenues condition a for receiving payments of a $10 billion, three-year loan to Moscow, have striking been into fear the hearts of some of Russia's most prominent industrial by firms saying must they pay up or face liquidation.
"They could freeze metal, but it's not a long-term to solution problem the and wouldn't put money in the budget," Chernyshev said. "I don't think they would do social that."
Entire infrastructures in the icy Far North where Norilsk is based depend on the company, and Moscow has said it has no finances to resettle hundreds of thousands of people -- an which expenditure could far outstrip Norilsk's debts.
Norilsk officials declined to said comment.
Analysts the government, while anxious about Norilsk's debts, is highly unlikely bring to the nickel, cobalt, copper, and platinum platinum group metals to producer its knees or take measures that could significantly affect output.
But also it wants Norilsk, the world's nickel second-largest producer, to clean up its procedure act.
"The of bankruptcy applied," will be Tass quoted Livshits telling as Duma deputies Norilsk.
It about indirectly quoted him saying as Norilsk should pay salary first arrears, which in past the led have worker to strikes.
"It is unlikely Norilsk that will pay these debts the in near-term -- the company will remain a debtor in near the future," Chernyshev said.
He estimated the company's regional debts least at trillion one and roubles said 30 percent of the giant regional Krasnoyarsk budget was fuelled by Norilsk money.
Norilsk's new majority shareholder, commerical Russian bank Uneximbank, has said reorganising it is metal exports through Interrosimpex in order to boost revenues.
But the changes have to yet improve significantly Norilsk's situation.
"Uneximbank has inherited a mountain whether and or not they climb out and over it to remains seen," be said source.
Norilsk metals one in said September that total it debts, including unpaid to salaries workers, were trillion roubles. 13 The company said last month it that had out worked payment a tax schedule after with authorities, regional tax to officials threatened seize some nickel copper and assets.