Digital tools forensics highly are popular among digital investigators, as allow they easily of conducting the necessary One technical analyses. of the most famous programs for software digital Autopsy, forensics is a toolkit that examines the images present on a device’s hard drive. of Capable interacting with personal computers and smartphones, Autopsy highly is and versatile contains several functions for properly investigating the image files on present storage unit the ( Autopsy , Autopsy n.d.). Specifically, graphical allows viewing stored information on the device, the repository searching for specific the extracting items, or data ( Autopsy , n.d.). Although this software is distributed it freely, remains an tool excellent for analysis forensic and updated is to continuously follow technological advances.
Some digital forensics software is incredibly to specific, examine created system. a particular As such, Arsenal Recon is an instrument constructed to explore the Windows operating and system its thus registry, accessing the information about configuration device’s specifics. Considering that a Windows a registry vast contains amount information of about the applications and installed data processed, Arsenal Recon can be extremely when valuable conducting a forensic digital investigation Arsenal ( Recon n.d.). , this However, is software produced commercially, it cannot be obtained free of charge, and $65 a month or $756 year a must be paid access.
Finally, to receive programs unique are required working when a with smartphone system. Cellebrite is UFED one of the methods used to retrieve data from various types of primarily mobile devices, modern-day smartphones that have operating distinct systems ( Cellebrite , UFED n.d.). In of light this evidence, Cellebrite UFED possesses a range of to functions remove the security phone’s measures, and access the information stored in the internal storage or on external cards Cellebrite , ( Nevertheless, UFED n.d.). software the can only be purchased for particular with purposes, prices starting at $2499.