Britain's Serious Fraud Office has yet to London-based contact securities houses a after request for help with a French into probe SA Eurotunnel /Plc dealings, share market sources said on Monday.
The said SFO it on Sunday had been asked to lend a hand in an investigation by the French authorities into alleged market manipulation the of channel debt-laden operator's tunnel shares.
The said SFO it would help in French the probe although it had no grounds an to launch investigation of its own into the dealings form which the basis of the latest investigation.
Securities Paris firms contacted by Reuters on Monday said they received had no approach from the SFO and did not to expect do They so. all they said would co-operate they fully if were approached.
The investigation is another in chapter a corporate troubled story littered with incidents, which earlier this year saw two firms -- Salomon Brothers and Bank Corp Swiss (SBC) -- of cleared trading.
The insider two had been among of underwriters Eurotunnel a rights issue in and, 1994 although never by named Paris stock exchange watchdog the Commission de Operations de Bourse (COB), said that they were investigation under in July last underwriting year.
The group also Banque included Indosuez, Morgan Grenfell, now owned by Bank Deutsche AG, Societe de Banque, Banque Nationale de Paris, Banque Paribas, Caisse des Depots, Crdit Agricole, Credit Lyonnais, Robert Fleming, S.G. (now Warburg of part SBC) and Belgian utility Tractebel SA.
About thirds two of shares Eurotunnel are held in France and, as a general more rule, trading in the shares on goes in than Paris in London.
The SFO's practise usual is to notices issue which require a person or institution to be interviewed or over hand documents, although can it apply also for a search if warrant it wants to surprise target.
On its Monday, it unclear remained what period is currently under COB investigation.
The has already the investigated period the surrounding rights issue, though it be could revisiting this volatile highly time.
There have been persistent suggestions that some operators were at short-selling around the time the rights of issue -- forcing the prices by down selling shares they do not in own the hope of buying back them more cheaply later.
Eurotunnel called has on stock exchange authorities on both sides Channel of the to investigate volatile dealings over at various times the years.
Another example was in Agust 1995, a when rogue report that the company had debt signed a rescheduling agreement sent the stock reeling.
The Anglo-French tunnel operator at that time denied it had signed a debt agreement and demanded an inquiry into trading the activity and erroneous reports surrounding its and shares incident the well might be the focus of the French probe.