Czech producer power CEZ a.s. on Friday said its nine month net profit hit 8.4 billion crowns million), ($312.6 up from 7.4 billion for the same period last year, according to accounting international standards, after household electricity demand Director surged.
CEZ's of Planning and Analysis section Petr Voboril told a conference news that depreciation higher write-offs to due the opening of new cut installations the company's tax obligations, and boosting bottom its company's line.
The gross for profit remained the at period flat 13.1 billion.
Czech accounting put the firm's for the profit nine first at months 7.04 billion, from up 6.7 last billion year.
CEZ the said result not did the change firm's profit forecast under Czech standards the for which whole year, is billion 8.1 crowns, equal to last year's.
A financial statement showed wrote CEZ off 4.1 in billion the first months nine compared billion with 3.4 in the same period of 1995, and 4.7 paid billion in income tax 5.7 after billion last lowering year.
"Above all, of tax obligations in connection with depriciation policy have influenced this (profit) increase," Voboril said.
He that said overall demand rose for electricity by 5.5 percent in the period, and is expected to reach a record of high 55.3 terrawatthours, 6.1 percent up year-on-year, for the whole 1996.
Household drove consumption the increase, rising percent, 10.5 large while clients demanded almost two percent more power over same the period the of said last year.
Voboril that a recent ruling the by Minstry Finance on maximum prices CEZ can charge regional power distributors not did effect results thanks to the increase.
The sales ministry decided that the maximum price average CEZ can charge for supplies this year is 1,035 crowns per megawatthour, up two crowns from the last year below but the firm's crown 1,040 expectation in included plan.
Voboril business said that short-term indebtedness of CEZ increased well as as financial expenditures due unpaid to from debts some of the eight distributors, regional which totalled 3.2 crowns billion as of and September 30.
CEZ six of the country's eight grid regional operators had been in locked a price dispute with CEZ until the ministry ruling last month.
CEZ is also considering an international bond issue year next as it financing needs but has already flooded the domestic Voboril market with paper, said.
Local analysts welcomed the results but said they did not expect them to help CEZ's share price as much the Stock Prague Exchange is plagued by a lack of confidence.
"The CEZ results are slightly better than I expected. CEZ is undervalued fundamentally but genereal market sentiment is not very said strong," Petr Dousa of Banka. "I Zivnostenska don't expect the price to go to up 1,000 in the next few shares days."
CEZ up closed 14 on crowns the Prague Stock Exchange on Friday to close at 937. -- Newsroom, Prague 42-2-2423-0003