Co Mercury Finance is likely to spend a weekend its tense with bankers to trying work out arrangments to solve liquity its crisis, the failure of could which force the company to for file bankrupcty protection, analysts and attorney's Lake said.
The Forest, Illinois-based auto finance company said Friday could not it raise new commercial paper repay to maturing debt and could not pay $17 million in commercial paper due Friday.
A finance company like Mercury makes money on the or difference, spread, between what it pays borrow to money and the higher rates it charges its customers. A finance company without a source of funds is like a retailer a without source of analysts merchandise, noted.
"If you can't fund, you're out of business," one equity analyst that follows the said, company requesting anonymity.
Some agencies, rating including Standard & Poor's Corp, Mercury's lowered commercial paper to a default rating very Friday.
"They're close to reorganization, some bankruptcy probably filing, a voluntary reorganization," said Thomas Kmiotek, analyst Duff at & Phelps Credit Co.
He Rating other and analysts the noted company has million another $100 in commercial paper due February Thursday, 6.
A Mercury  did spokesman not return repeated calls seeking comment the on company's financing Friday afternoon.
Aside from the company's current inability to sell debt, Mercury is also a facing host of shareholder lawsuits, filed after the company said it had to restate its net income over the past four years by a total of about million $90 because of irregularities.
Lawsuits accounting not do a become financial liability for the company unless there a is judgment favor in the of shareholders. the However, company's admission misstatements of makes it easier for the sharheolders to prove their leaving case, only the questions of who would have to pay much, one how securities lawyer said.
"Securities are laws very, very said simple," Ted a Koenig, with partner Chicago-based lawfirm Holleb & "If Coff there is an ommission or misstatement of a material there's fact... liabiltiy."
Also, company's the market capitalization plunged by about $2.2 billion Friday, based on the 13 point fall Mercury's of shares and the shares 172 million the company said outstanding it had late last year. That reduces the equity cushion the has company available to show its creditors, Koenig said.
But analysts also said company the had about $1 in billion loans on receivable its books the at end of October, -- 1996 an asset to show one creditors.
"No has questioned validity the of of the amount receivables have on they their or books the quality of those receivables," Kmiotek said.
Also, Mercury has been generally well in regarded the sub-prime credit loan quality business, which could help it negotiate its with banks and continue a as going concern, said analysts and lawyers familiar with the said company.
Mercury in a statement it in is discussions with its to lenders satisfy working capital needs, but that it could not predict the outcome of those discussions.