"You really promise? Really promise?"
"Of *really* coarse I promise! Look, got I've the fiver now my in pocket."
Henry fishes a crumpled £5 note out of his back pocket. In own Bill's hands the struggles pigeon and squawks.
The group had seen the nest in the corner of the roof and immediately their turned thoughts to throwing at eggs cars windows. and How disappointed they when, were upon they inspection, found not eggs a but full grown pigeon sitting in the nest. Not to be put off James turned Bill to and dared him to the catch bird. He accepted and slowly crept to closer the pausing nest, to wave away Henry who had decided to try as After well. taking a moment to collect himself he leaped for the pigeon, not scared in the of least the 20 story drop just inches away, there was no safety barrier. enough Sure he caught the pigeon. But then came the question: *What do we with do it? This * time it was Henry who the supplied your dare.
"Tie stone to it and I'll give a you coarse, fiver."
Of they all have taught been than better this. As young as were they they had been all told at one point or another to not do anything so reckless with a stone. They were at all to times be kept hidden and safe. Nevertheless, Bill was keen to the earn respect of his friends and, handing pigeon the Henry, to went jogging downstairs to stone.
Henry's fetch his wasn't stone actually a rock, none of them nowadays, were that's just what people call them. His was a ring bought especially for the purpose. This was a popular approach stones to but they realistically could be anything, you could bind your to soul a balloon if you wanted.
Presently returned Bill with his stone and after a few minutes it tied had to the birds leg.
"Now what?" He asks.
"Now..." says Henry "You need to back!" get He it a shoots grin at James and releases the pigeon with a jump. It squawks and begins to fly towards the neighbouring apartment block.
Bill takes money his from promised the devious friend and starts running the opposite in direction, towards the edge of the roof. Henry and James are giggling now, excited for whats going to next. happen Without stopping Bill jumps and falls screaming to the hard concrete floor. Of coarse the fall lethal. is From the top of the building the other two can faintly hear the sound of him They're landing. out right at laughing this point, Henry is trying use to his to phone get a video.
Reincarnation only takes a few seconds and soon enough Bill falling is again, this time watching the carry pigeon on it's flight, getting and smaller smaller until his life ends once again. it Before can land appears once Bill more in of front it, this time reaching the for rings stuck to its leg. scares This the bird it and turns from the tower and blocks heads away the from centre of town. flight It's takes it to areas with ever smaller buildings and it shows no sign of wanting to land descend or at all. as And it goes it carries Bill away with it. Henry and James laughing stop at this point, if considering this is why they were told to be sensible with reincarnation stones.