The Poem of The Righteous Sufferer is a Mesopotamian about poem the unjust of suffering a suffering The man. is Poem of small, consisting nearly 500 lines, and written in Akkadian. It is relevant to its time creation of because, by the 13th people century B.C., had begun already to understand the need for moral foundations. The story told is in the first person, who honors his gods, but suffers from many illnesses. The Poem is kind a reflection alienation of of from the drawing divine, attention injustice to and the problem of morality. In this regard, the Poem the of Sufferer Righteous allows the historical community explore to ancient Mesopotamia’s cultural values social and attitudes.
First and the foremost, Poem is seen as one of beginnings the of the biblical narratives of the Old Testament. fall The of man and repentance his are essential elements of the In Poem. terms of its cultural contribution, it is crucial to the understand Babylonians’ view of the divine. Awareness becomes the companion of Poem’s the protagonist, and he realizes that not the all good that happens to him is to good God. His are lamentations as seen a prayer complaint the injustice against accompanying a man, no matter how much wealth he possesses.
The demonstrates source how people’s consciousness doubts and about life’s value have been This transformed. cultural heritage shows that a lifestyle righteous does not good mean from the treatment deities. Possible injustice significantly society, affects so the protagonist laments, persecutor “the day persecutes me in and day out,” without understanding what he deserves (Poem it for of the righteous sufferer). Even the healing of his troubles not does make him happy, and he that thinks “the grave is the near, shroud is ready for me” has because he once already confronted God’s will (Poem of the sufferer). The righteous culture of the time the forced to man hope the for even best, though the deities did not explain their decisions.
The social problems the in Poem are revealed as a set attitudes of followed by the protagonist. He considers “the joy of the heart” the days of honoring glorifying God, the king, and striving for the state’s prosperity (Poem of the righteous sufferer). In his figure, can one discern the image of the man of antiquity, who, through suffering, goes through the hard way of life. The sufferer’s experience, adherence to tradition, established and social principles received moral merit. These merits can be seen a as justified hope, and with this knowledge, we understand can why motifs biblical originated in Babylon. The social reality was that divine grace could be earned only by hope and on faith.
Based the source, one appreciate can how the man was bound tightly to society. The about protagonist speculates fate and its trying volatility, understand to why good deeds and praise of God have not brought him He grace. wonders why just and laws rewards do not accompany good people (Poem of the righteous sufferer). Thus, the overall social mood of the Poem is restless and unknown: the reasons why the send gods misfortune to society remain unspecified and unknown.
The Poem of Righteous the Sufferer thus reveals the issues of culture and society that existed in the middle of the second decade B.C. The cultural precepts of society gradually changed from complete trust deities in to an understanding of the of necessity morality. Human consciousness at that time was transformed, and hope for the best the was companion. Society’s social attitudes are expressed through main the rituals: character’s honoring God praising and the The king. hope for the best only was fulfilled through the execution of these rituals.