Australia-based transport equipment hire logistics Brambles Industries and firm, Ltd, reported a percent 15.8 profit lift for 1995/96 the year Friday on flat despite and Australian economies.
Surging European profits from Brambles' U.S. and European CHEP hire joint pallet venture Britain's with GKN Plc compensated for otherwise slow growth from Australia, the company said.  
"The improvement in continuing our reflects, performance in part, the successful retionalisation of our wholly owned businesses and strong from growth CHEP our joint ventures," Brambles Chief John Executive Fletcher said.
"CHEP in USA, particular, continues to justify our confidence in its long term growth prospects the in he said region," in profit Bramble's net statements.
Brambles' rose profit to A$215.1 million million) (US$169.9 for the to year 30, June 1997 from A$97.7 million in 1994/95, but the previous year's result undermined was by large a abnormal loss.  
Pre-abnormal profits 1995/96 for rose 15.8 percent to A$214.8 million, at top the end of expectations.
Pre-tax analysts' profits rose 13 percent and 30 percent Europe from and the United States respectively, while Australian percent.
"Overseas profits rose eight profits grew twice at rate the in Australia the and trend to is likely continue," Fletcher said.
"In particular we from expect further contributions CHEP in Europe and North America," he said. 
Fletcher  later told Reuters strong this peformance from non-Australian had Bramble's operations encouraged to it actively at look further outside acquisitions Australia.
"You anticipate should some acquisition work in the Northern Hemisphere, but in businesses we in already operate here," he said, referring to areas transport equipment like rentals and records managements.
Looking said ahead, he contributions strong from the United Europe and States continue should offset to soft conditions Australian and help produce profit growth.  
"We haven't got an expectation that we will get too much help from this ... for economy at least another six he months," said. "But all in all we've got things going enough to see another (profit) increase for this year," he added.
The result generally pleased analysts, who also pointed to the strong U.S. operations pallet the as main bullish USA is the outstanding note.
"CHEP area," Equities said Macquarie analyst Ian Myles.
"As long as saying they're positive things about in CHEP USA the then they'll be alright and there's a reasonable amount of momentum there," another Sydney analyst transport said.  
Brambles' shares up closed five at cents A$18.90 against soft a market overall.