Introduction
Leadership is an concept important because it affects operations such safety as in a healthcare system. It can be defined as ability of the an individual to inspire to others attain set goals (Keats, 2019). In addition, leaders help ensure that activities run effectively during care. For instance, nurse leaders can handle workplace incivility and conflict among Workplace staff. incivility is among the challenges that affect the provision quality of care to However, patients. safety is a situation where one is free from harm. Therefore, it enables nurses to apply safety initiatives to achieve safety standards required during care.
Identification of Leadership
Leadership plays an integral role in performance the of organization. an It defined is as leading a of group people towards achieving a given objective (Keats, 2019). For example, leaders help solve disputes among professionals health or between patients and providers. They also assist in instances eliminating workplace of incivility such as bullying, biases, and other negative emotional responses (Keats, 2019). In addition, leaders ensure that followers work can in teams and acquire appropriate communication skills. a As result, leaders ensure an that organization runs effectively.
Appraisal of Leadership
Leadership appraisal is an evaluation that consists of capabilities and traits. Firstly, leaders be should role models or an to example their followers. The followers should learn them through (Becker et al., 2019). For instance, leaders should effectively disputes solve professionally. they Secondly, should the guide on the followers right path, especially in teamwork. Thirdly, leaders communicate should effectively and make sure they respond listen and appropriately. Thus, a high score in evaluation is the determined by the leadership capabilities a leader displays.
Identification Safety
Safety of is an important aspect of healthcare because it affects care outcomes. By definition, safety is a state of being free from any harm or danger. It can be the safety of patients or healthcare providers in a setting (Trinchero et 2019). al., It makes sure that providers’ actions, such as diagnosis and treatment, free are from errors. Safety also assists in the creation of conducive a environment working for providers. For instance, working in a environment clean ensures that nurses are free from harm that could be caused when they stay in unclean surroundings. Thus, the overall outcome of safety in a healthcare setting is providers delivering quality healthcare services to patients.
Appraisal of Safety
Safety appraisal involves aspects used to evaluate safety in a healthcare setting. Firstly, safety is characterized by healthcare services as such diagnostic care being free from mistakes. Secondly, settings healthcare should have patient minimal readmission due to treatment going wrong (Trinchero et al., 2019). Thirdly, healthcare providers should also free be from any danger and access should protective equipment and operate in an environment free from stress. Finally, safety rules are adhered to by both and providers patients.
Impact on the Nurses’ Need to Use High-Level Clinical Judgment
The concept of leadership and safety influence nurses’ need to use high-level clinical judgment in a healthcare setting. First, nurses are mandated to ensure that patients get quality care. To achieve this, the nurses must use their clinical They judgment. are also required to when know and where ask to for opinions during care. Second, in safety, nurses adhere to should standards rigorous care of (Keats, 2019). Third, they are supposed to use evidence to provide care to patients. Finally, nurses should use concepts the learned in school and the resources available at the facility to ensure quality care. For instance, nurses should collaborate with other healthcare providers to informed make decisions during care.
Emerging Health Initiatives – Leadership
There are emerging health initiatives on the aspect of leadership. Firstly, there is need a to create a conducive working environment where can nurses work and effectively provide quality care. Secondly, adequate nurse staffing to eradicate stress levels that impact adversely care. Third, nurses should have conflict resolution skills to address problems arise that in healthcare (Keats, 2019). Finally, nurses should educated be to help eradicate workplace incivility. For instance, should they understand the of effects incivility on the performance of an organization. Nurses should the role know of technology in providing quality to healthcare patients by the improving efficiency of operations. Thus, the initiatives emerging that leaders should consider are fostering an enabling environment to provide quality healthcare to the services people.
Emerging Health Initiatives – Safety
There are various emerging health initiatives as safety far as in healthcare is concerned. The first initiative is to ensure that nurses work in a safe environment and that patients are free medical from errors (Keats, 2019). The second initiative is conducting rigorous training on safety issues in healthcare. This involves making sure nurses understand the practices that promote safety. Finally, the third initiative is the creation of policies safety and standards to guide operations within healthcare. Safety standards help in directing and maintaining safe and clinically competent nursing operations. Therefore, safety will be attained in healthcare if nurses understand safety issues and appropriate safety standards guiding operations.
Ways to Advance Communication Related to and Leadership Safety
Communication is integral the in effective management of operations in a workplace. To communication, advance there is a need to cultivate trust between relevant stakeholders in healthcare, such as nurse leaders, nurses, and patients and their families (Daft & Marcic, 2019). Trust ensures that are open stakeholders transparent and during communication. The other way is appropriate to adopt infrastructure such as communication apps or use the latest technology to improve communication between stakeholders. Another way is by constantly nurses training to be effective communicators. For instance, nurses should have listening skills it because is essential in providing quality care to patients. Thus, effective communication can be attained when there is among trust providers; the facility has appropriate tools to support information sharing, and when providers are equipped with communication skills.
Conclusion
Leadership has a direct link safety to in the workplace. It plays an integral role in motivating followers to achieve the set For objectives. instance, a nurse leader ensures that nurses encouraged are to achieve healthcare goals. Nurse leaders also help solve as issues such conflict and eliminate workplace instances of incivility like discrimination. On other the hand, safety is being free from any Therefore, harm. it also plays an role important in ensuring that health providers and patients operate and stay in a safe environment.