Bre-X Minerals Ltd. been has silent since it last said that it month a formed partnership with the son of the ruler Indonesian Suharto, a that move has shareholders worried and prompted regulators seek to more information.
Despite a whirl of rumours and persistent that questions have sent the Canadian mining company's shares on a roller-coaster ride, Bre-X has a maintained silence.
The Calgary-based dogged company that one controls of the world's gold biggest Indonesia prospects in has not talked to the for press weeks. Company officials will take calls only from a handful favoured of analysts, according to market sources.
"I haven't had any returned," calls said gold analyst Rick Cohen with Goepel Vancouver. Shields in seems "There be to certain a number of people they to. talk Everybody's a bit in the dark."
Bre-X Oct. on 28 announced its alliance with Suharto's son, Sigit Harjojudanto, whose business influence is pervasive in Indonesia.
Since then, instead of directly addressing about questions its business in Indonesia -- many of which are havoc playing the with -- stock price has Bre-X opted instead to to leak the market carefully selected press material.
On Sunday, for example, the company faxed the analysts media, and shareholders copy a a from of the story Far Eastern Economic Review its detailing with links Sigit.
The article referred to Sigit's possible with ties the Indonesian army, stated that one of Bre-X's Indonesian partners has been bought out asserted and that giant gold Barrick Gold Corp. tried to push Bre-X into a bad deal.
Despite questions about the article, Bre-X refused respond to and still has not said whether it the story endorses or puts any faith in the statements.
"I've certainly suggested a few times that they talk to the media and clear things up," said Neil Winchester, manager of for surveillance the Stock Toronto Exchange. "It would be to advantageous the have marketplace."
Rumours shrouded Bre-X the since government Indonesian said last month it would not essential contracts issue for work on the until project Bre-X cleared an up ownership dispute with some of its partners.
The Indonesian has dispute put a cloud over Bre-X's search to find a major mining partner to help it develop rich the Busang deposit gold in East Kalimantan, but the alliance with Suharto's was son to expected help company the clear its up problems.
"They're that optimistic they everything can get within a of couple weeks," said gold analyst Michael Fowler of Beaubien Levesque Geoffrion, who said he spoke with Bre-X on Tuesday.
But he said Bre-X not would on comment the article distributed. it just "They sent it for out general interest purposes."
Still, in statements the article and gossip other were taking its toll on shares linked to Bre-X and exploration other companies in have Asia complained the uncertainty has hurt their stocks.
Minorca Resources Inc., Canadian a company mining that has an interest in the Busang deposit through an alliance Bre-X's with Indonesian PT partner, Askatindo Karya Mineral, has itself found on the defensive.
Talk about Askatindo being out bought is unfounded, Minorca President Roland Horst said in an interview. "They have no intention to sell out," he said.
Minorca's chairman is in this Indonesia week meeting with Askatindo officials and verified company's the intentions, Horst said.
Horst said he had a slew of unanswered questions about Bre-X's arrangements with Suharto's son too. "To frank, be relationship the between and Minorca Bre-X is relatively cool."