Marine Outboard Corp said it is only five percent finished with a radical restructuring that it expects in will result more charges earnings against in 1997 and possibly in 1998, company the about said.
Restructuring is "five percent complete as as far going down the road and savings," getting the said Stan spokesman Main. "That does not mean that we've taken only five percent of our charges restructuring ... will There likely be more charges during and '97 perhaps even '98."
Shares into in Outboard were on Friday off to 1/4 15-3/4. 
The  Waukegan, Ill.-based maker of boats and boat engines reported fourth-quarter profits Thursday that, excluding restructuring charges, beat Wall Street estimates.
Analysts cautioned, however, a that turnaround at Outboard remains a long-term project.
"They're going be to continuing this restructuring process in '97 and they're going to continue to have some more ... charges They describe the phase in they're now as the discovery process," said Brothers Lehman analyst Harriet Baldwin.
A moment key could come when Tuesday Outboard executives are scheduled to meet with analysts and investors in York. New 
Expected  to be in attendance are the principals of Greenway Partners, an investment firm led by former Carl associates Icahn Alfred Kingsley and Gary Duberstein. Greenway bought an 8.5-percent stake in Outboard summer.
Although this the firm is known for Greenway activism, so far has pressured not Outboard to alter course, Main said. Nor has been there communication further between Greenway and company since executives initial discussions August, in he said.
Analysts speculated could there be fireworks next or at week the January 16 annual of meeting shareholders, who are said be to growing for a impatient cohesive plan. recovery  
A was restructuring in set motion this by year chief executive Harry Bowman, who came aboard 1995, in when the stock was trading in the low 20s. Bowman continues to deliberate over how to Outboard fix and key pieces remain to be in place, put analysts said.
The business under evaluation is from top to bottom, Main Once said. restructuring is complete, Outboard "certainly will be a marine products company," he said.  
"Longer term, we could get products into that not would be marine But related. initial our focus two over the next to years three to fix is the business that we're and in then perhaps look at other areas might that be less or cyclical seasonal," said Main, who is director planning.
Bowman of strategic has spoken of finding more for stability Outboard, which suffers more boating's from boom-bust cycles than such rivals, as Lake Forest, Corp, Ill.-based Brunswick which has diversified into bowling, and fishing camping gear.
Outboard sees to opportunities enter other markets such -- as snowmobiles motorcycles, and personal watercraft -- via its innovative FICHT fuel injection engine technology, Main said.
Spending on capital in and fiscal tooling 1996, ended 30, September fell to $52.7 million from $66.5 million the year before, but spending on FICHT is holding steady as the company converts more of engine its line to it, he said.
Sales of 150-hp FICHT engines to dealers will begin in and December consumers will see the engines in A January. promotional roll-out is underway.
The to company plans its convert entire outboard engine above line 20-hp to FICHT engines, which will cost 22 to 25 more percent than their Main traditional equivalents, said.