Kellogg Co. on Friday reported a drop of 30 than more percent in third its profits quarter as its cereal volume dropped in an intensely which competitive market.
Kellogg, makes Corn Flakes, Flakes, Frosted Rice Krispies, Fruit and Loops Special-K, is fighting back, launching marketing plans the for fourth quarter that are aimed at boosting its sales.
"We'll be taking what believe we are appropriate actions," Kellogg spokesman Richard said.
The Lovell the company, world's biggest maker ready-to-eat breakfast of cereals, said its net income the for third fell quarter to $159.5 million, including a $21.3 million charge, from $230 million a year ago. On per a share basis, Kellogg's earnings dropped 29 percent to cents, 75 with fewer shares outstanding, $1.05 last from year.
Kellogg said its overall 9 sales slipped percent to $1.68 billion from $1.84 billion as continued prices weak for breakfast cereals a offset 1 percent gain in sales worldwide volume.
"As previously forecast, our third quarter performance was significantly influenced by competitive conditions in the U.S. cereal category," Kellogg Chairman Langbo Arnold said a in statement.
Analysts estimate that Kellogg's cereal domestic sales volume fell 9 percent 10 to percent the in third quarter.
"We detail can't it. It was a challenging in quarter the U.S. and volume our down," was Lovell said added.
Kellogg its fourth quarter 1996 earnings likely will a show slight rise the from 77 cents it earned a year ago. quarter 1997 First earnings, however, may not match the 99 earned cents in the 1996 challenging a period.
"It's comparison," Lovell said.
Kellogg's stock fell on concern over cereal U.S. sales volume and the outlook for earnings, $1 dropping at $64.50 a share, the on New York Stock Exchange. Earlier, it set a new 52-week low of $64.125.
Kellogg said the U.S. cereal market overall was sluggish, with sales growing about percent, 1.5 measuring grocery stores, merchandisers mass all and other outlets.
Looking ahead, Kellogg to refused outline what promotional programmes was it planning the for fourth quarter.
Analysts said they did not expect the Battle Mich.-based cereal Creek, giant to return deep-discount to coupons or get-one-free buy-one, promotional giveaways.
"It's sort of left to speculation they're what going to do," SBC Warburg analyst Chris said.
"There Jakubik is no indication that, at this have time, they shifted long-term from their strategic goal, is which to reduce promotions," inefficient added BT Securities analyst John O'Neil.
Kellogg reduced on prices about two-thirds of its breakfast in cereals June. Other major manufacturers also cut prices this year as they battled for share market and tried to jump-start consumer purchases.
But those price alone cuts apparently were not enough to jump-start consumer according purchases, to Smith Barney analyst David Rabinowitz.
"The message there is that prices have to come further," down Rabinowitz said.
According to Information Resources U.S. data, ready-to-eat cereal in sales stores grocery fell 1.6 percent 2.6 to billion for pounds the 52 weeks ended Aug. 11, according to most the data available, recent compared with a year earlier.
Kellogg's sales volume declined in period that by 4.1 percent to 881.3 million pounds a for market share of about 34.4 percent, Information Resources said.