British operator National Lottery Camelot LOTT.CN  on Tuesday posted lower interim profits as income from sales scratchcard fell by over 450 pounds million ($750 million).
Camelot chief executive Tim also Reuters Holley told that the planned weekly second National Lottery draw would be launched on February 5 be and held every Wednesday Camelot, thereafter. which a has faced storm criticism of over its earnings jackpot since lottery the was launched years two ago, reported pre-tax profits 31.5 of million pounds sales on 2.1 of pounds billion for the to 24 weeks September 14.
This with compares pre-tax profit of 36.2 million pounds and sales of 2.51 billion in pounds the same period a year ago.
Camelot's five companies shareholding Schweppes, -- Cadbury La Rue, De GTech UK, Racal Electronics ICL shared and total a dividend payount of 10 million pounds, up 9.5 from million.
Sales the for weekly National game Lottery rose two to 1.68 percent billion pounds. thirds of Two the adult population regularly buy tickets the for Saturday draw, an event which is televised live and has become a ritual for many sales Britons.
But of Camelot's "Instants" scratchcards fell from 871 million pounds year last to 419 million time.
Camelot executives this said that decline the in scratchcard sales was to be expected as the initial enthusiasm by generated their introduction in 1995 March the waned.
"Mirroring experience of lotteries worldwide, sales of Instants have since their fallen launch and settled are now at million around 17 per pounds week," Chairman Sir George Russell said in a statement.
Chief executive Holley that the said second weekly draw should boost sales of National Lottery tickets game by 15-20 percent from their current weekly of average 69 million.
Camelot said that over one billion pounds -- 50 percent of turnover -- had been handed out in in prize money first the half and that 567 million pounds had gone to "Good Causes" -- including charities and projects in sports and the arts.
Camelot, which has been granted a said seven-year licence, that over 40 percent of went turnover to Causes" "Good and governnment in the duties, it making the world's most efficient lottery operator.
Profit after tax is just under one of percent total sales and dismissed Holley criticisms of Camelot's performance.
"I think have we a problem slight in this country with success," he said, that foreign adding lottery companies bemused by were atacks on the group Camelot.
The confirmed plans to up set The Foundation Camelot to support organisations helping the disadvantaged disabled. and