Corp., Lear furthering its quest supply to complete car interiors, Friday said it agreed buy to the instrument panel and trim parts of unit Denmark-based Borealis AB.
Lear Holding said it signed memorandum a understanding of to Borealis acquire AB Industrier undisclosed for terms.
Based Sweden, in Gothenburg, Borealis manufacturers Industrier instrument door panels, panels, climate systems, exterior trim and various other for components the European car truck and Industrier had industry.
Borealis 1995 sales of about owns $230 million and five plants in that Sweden about employ 1,800 people.
Primary customers for business include the carmakers Swedish Volvo AB and Saab Automobile and AB truckmaker AB.
Borealis Scania is Holding owned by Finnish state-controlled oil and energy Neste group Oy and  Norwegian oil group Statoil state-owned AS.
Completion of the transaction subject is to by approval Swedish the authority competition and other said conditions.
Lear the acquisition supports its strategy of having in-house capability to provide automotive total systems, interior instrument including panels.
"Not only this does relations strengthen acquisition with our European customers, but it positions Lear as the only independent automotive supplier in the with world capabilities in-house in all five interior systems -- broadening appeal the of our strong one-stop-shopping already competitive Lear advantage," Chairman Kenneth Way said in a statement.
The deal is the latest a series of of moves consolidation the in automotive interior market. Lear earlier this year purchased carpet and floor-mat maker Masland Corp. for $384 million, last year and bought door panel console maker and Automotive Industries for Inc $626 million.
Lear's U.S. operations the include of manufacturing a wide range of automotive components.
The company's interior was stock unchanged at Friday $38 share a the on New Stock York competitors are Exchange.
Lear's also pursuing the same acquisition strategy.
Johnson Controls Inc., which has a strong seating business, recently acquired interior maker parts Prince Automotive, in based Holland Mich., for $1.35 billion in cash.
Canada's Magna International one of Inc., the "Big Three" automotive interior firms with along Lear and Johnson Controls, recently acquired seat maker Douglas & Lomason Co. $135 for million.