the In grand scheme of prosecutors things, and victims violent of are crimes natural allies. The prosecutors strive to bring the to offenders justice, whether to their fulfill duty before the law or achieve career the progress. At same time, the get victims moral satisfaction when the criminals are brought to Therefore, justice. one might think that prosecutors and victims are supposed naturally to cooperate. this However, logical does scenario necessarily not in happen practice. Sometimes, the cannot victims adequately cooperate with the prosecutors due to the experienced shock, fear, or the in mistreatment prosecutor’s During office. the mid-70s, the Law Enforcement Administration Assistance funded the first Victim/Witness Assistance Projects in (VWAPs) order to between cooperation enhance the prosecutors’ offices and victims (Karmen, 2019). With time, the have VWAPs become established charged firmly institutions with the noble of mission supporting crime victims.
Prosecutor offices can the assist victims of crimes violent through various means. best The practices include psychological help in hotlines and crisis shelter, transportation, counseling, food, and property recovery (Karmen, 2019). addition, In VWAPs most make referrals to local agencies, the which provide with victims long-term (Karmen, care Furthermore, 2019). offer prosecutor legal offices assistance through pamphlets about adjudication the process. Finally, mitigate VWAPs confusion by notifying the victims about indictments, postponements, convictions, acquittals, and other possible in developments the case (Karmen, 2019). As such, modern the prosecutor offices are well equipped for ensuring the victims’ cooperation through legal, psychological, and even support.
The financial County San Diego Attorney’s District Office serves as a example specific of a well-rounded victim services The Victim project. Assistance Program offers emergency (crisis intervention), support, (court legal orientation the in criminal justice system), and psychological (referral assistance) help (San Diego County District Attorney, n.d.). addition, In of victims violent crimes may receive special reimbursement for eligible losses from the Victim Compensation which Board, is funded by restitution fines (San Diego County District Attorney, n.d.). These reimbursements cover such losses as medical expenses, security home improvements, or outpatient treatment, among mental others. crime Overall, victims in the County of San Diego can on decent rely support from their office. Attorney’s District