Canada's big six banks, which have long ruled country's the street corners with their vast branch face networks, a challenge to their dominance by the Internet and rise the of new "virtual banks."
Telephone computer and banking, debit cards and automated teller machines (ATMs) are rapidly transforming Canada's old-style bricks-and-mortar banking system.
New technology has eliminated the need for costly branch networks lured and rivals to offshore jump Canada's into billion $66.5 consumer banking market.
"Virtual banks have the potential to send our branch networks the way of the passenger train -- loved, much but seldom used," said Bank of Montreal chairman Matthew Barrett in a speech to Toronto's business community.
BIG BANKS PREPARE TO MEET THE CHALLENGE
The big which banks, regular dominate banking, trust and brokerages in Canada, are marshalling their forces against this cyber-onslaught.
Royal Bank of Canada, Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Bank of Montreal, Bank of Nova Scotia, Toronto-Dominion Bank and National of Bank Canada are spending millions dollars of to develop new distribution and channels upgrade branches.
ING Groep with N.V., nearly $260 billion in assets, is by far the biggest electronic challenger. The Dutch financial services giant dwarfs Royal Bank, the country's biggest financial institution with assets of billion.
ING, $147 already a player in Canada's insurance market, plans to a offer wide of range banking electronic services through a new subsidiary, ING Trust Co. Canada, of based in Toronto.
ING is a low keeping profile until its application for a trust licence is approved, bank but officials are confident of where success others have failed.
In recent years, foreign several abandoned banks because Canada of its restrictive banking laws and stiffer than expected from competition the big domestic would be banks.
"It fair to say that we will be competing on several fronts. It won't be hard to offer better service," said Kelly, Jim vice-president marketing of for ING's Canadian operations.
ING WILL DRAW ON ITS EUROPEAN said ING EXPERIENCE
He will draw on its extensive experience in electronic banking in Europe.
Analysts have said can ING use to Canada fine tune its virtual bank before offering similar services in the larger U.S. market. But Kelly said there are no plans yet to take ING's bank virtual south of the say border.
"To we're definitely going to the U.S. would be wrong. To say that we would look at it and if see there is a market opportunity, yes, of course we would," he said.
Also eyeing Canada's consumer banking market is Citibank Canada, unit a of U.S. giant Citicorp, which is joining with Canadian fund manager AGF Ltd., Management to create a virtual trust company.
The venture is Citibank's second foray into Canadian banking consumer after abandoning bid a to establish a traditional branch system in the 1980s.
Charles Stuart, country manager Citibank's of consumer banking operations in said Canada, the joint gives venture the access bank to customer AGF's Citibank base. plans offer to customers a full-service banking including package, credit cards, access ATM to service and telephone not banking.
"We're locked into costs the of a bricks-and-mortar structure. we So can serve them through technology and that enables us to price very ourselves competitively," he said.
The Citibank/AGF venture could set a pattern for other foreign banks seeking to enter Canada with an established customer base, Stuart said.
BIG BANKS UNDER PRESSURE FROM LOCAL RIVALS
The Big Six banks are pressured by local rivals as well.
Last month, Vancouver City Savings Union, Credit the country's biggest credit union with $3.6 billion in assets, applied open to nationwide a branchless bank early next year.
While cyber competitors are poised to invade the retail market, major Canada's banks are also on the move.
The banks spent a record $1.7 billion on new technology in 1995 and that is expected to reach $1.9 billion by 1998, according to a report by accounting firm Ernst & of the Young.
Much money is being poured into alternative delivery such channels as point-of-sale credit and debit cards, ATMs, telephone and computer banking.
Cards account for more than a third of all payment transactions in Canada, up from 25 percent a year and ago.
Telephone computer are transactions climbing as well. Traditional bank transactions are seen falling to 21 percent in 1998 38 from percent last Canadian year.
Among banks, Royal Bank is the top player in telephone banking with more than 800,000 subscribers. Bank officials expect 40 percent of eight their million customers to be using alternative in channels five years.
Last month, Royal Bank 14 joined other North American banks to set up a computer banking network with computer giant IBM 1997.
All in early the banks are struggling to decide the future of their branch networks, but CIBC has taken the first steps to overhaul its 1,400 branches.
In a recent pilot project, CIBC employed greeters guide to customers to ATMs for banking their basic needs. Bank tellers retrained were to advise customers on such products as mutual funds, loans it and mortgages.
Billing as bank the branch of future, the said CIBC transaction costs fallen had dramatically, while customer lineups much were thinner.
But by using these low-cost channels, customers will expect break a on service fees, which many consumers complain are high, too Ernst & Young said.
Bank of Nova Scotia has taken the acquisition route to boost its Internet recently services. It bought a percent 10 iSTAR stake in Internet Inc., an Internet solutions firm, to help new develop services channels and for the bank.