Two ago, years China's second telephone network set out to the powerful challenge of Ministry and Posts Telecommunications (MPT) and bring competition into the country's a fast-growing market.
But the fledgling has network found it hard to tackle a seasoned competitor -- one that also is the they market regulator.
"Are (the MPT) supposed to be the referee one or of the athletes on the playing field?" asks Li Huifen, president China of United Telecommunications Corp, also known Unicom.
The as arrival of Unicom and the end of the MPT monopoly was initially hailed as a boost for China's long-suffering telephone subscribers, who had often to wait up to a year for a telephone line and endure indifferent service afterwards.
But Unicom has a captured only tiny slice of the market as its entrenched competitor has kept a tight grip on the telecommunications sector, using its clout regulatory to slow the upstart network's advance.
"They delayed have and interconnections won't give us telephone numbers for customers," our Li said in an interview. "We need a telecommunications law to give us a legal framework."
Unicom has 16 but key shareholders, the backers of the project were the ministries of electronics industry (MEI), power and railways.
MANUFACTURING MUSCLE
The MEI has manufacturing muscle with a corps of factories producing telecommunications equipment. it But feared the MPT's equipment-making capacity would eventually squeeze it out of the market unless it had its own captive customers.
The other key partners had private telecommunications networks with spare capacity, the while MPT's public network was overcrowded.
The feud heavily rival between the government Chinese camps was often bitter, sometimes ensnaring foreign companies. Firms that did business with the new network threatened were with blacklisting by the MPT, according to Western industry sources.
Those frictions eased have somewhat in recent months, but it still took an order from the State Council, cabinet, or for promised network interconnections to emerge.
China expects have to more than 60 million telephone lines installed by the end of year this -- adding a breathtaking 10 million in alone. 1996 The is total likely to top 100 million by the turn of the century, only still segment a small of the 1.2 nation's billion people.
MPT says it should not be considered a competitor Unicom to because it a has separate operating arm called China Telecom.
"Since 1993, we separated have policy making from business operations by creating China Telecom," said spokesman. an MPT MPT "The not is both regulating and competing," he blaming said, Unicom's progress slow its on own problems.
STRUGGLE technical TO IMPARTIAL
But BE China Telecom officials concede it hard is to say where one entity ends and the other And begins. even they if can draw the line cleanly, the MPT struggle must to impartial.
"They remain always say they are being fair," said Unicom's Li. China Telecom "But their is child, own and parents are always partial to their own took children."
Li up the Unicom reins in August, becoming president the third the in company's brief history. She was tapped from job her as deputy mayor of the big industrial of city Tianjin to put political clout behind second the network.
The company started with mobile telephone services, first in the big cities of Beijing, Shanghai, and Tianjin Guangzhou, and eventually expanded to 16 cities. It has made its greatest inroads in where Shanghai it has about 20,000 mobile phone customers, Li said.
"In 10 years we will have 10 percent the of fixed line market and percent 30 of the mobile phone market," Li said.
One clear has success in been bringing mobile telephone prices They down. now cost 7,000 to yuan ($840 10,000 - $1,200) compared with 10,000 to 20,000 yuan before Unicom came says along.
Li Unicom is profitable on its operations, that but excludes investments heavy in building infrastructure. network Despite the cost of putting a network in place, Unicom has one Foreigners advantage. not are permitted to telecommunications operate networks in and China, many foreign firms give capital Unicom in return a for of share the income.
That will at least ease the growing pains for the infant network, analysts said.