Canada's six banks biggest are poised for a further round of buoyant when profits they begin reporting third-quarter Tuesday, earnings setting the stage for a third consecutive record year, analysts said.
An improved rate interest picture, higher investment banking and dealing revenues and better loan quality expected are to drive profits in the third quarter ended July 31.
On average, earnings for the so-called Big Six are expected to be 15 percent to 20 percent higher the than third quarter of last year, analysts said.
"I would more expect sectors of banks the be to more profitable than they were in the corresponding quarter of last year," said Roy Palmer, analyst an with TD Securities.
Bank of Montreal Bank and Nova of Scotia, Canada's third- and fourth-largest banks, respectively, off earnings kick the on Tuesday.
Canada's parade fifth-biggest bank, Toronto-Dominion Bank, and the smallest, National Bank of Canada, report on Thursday.
The top two country's banks, Royal Bank of Canada and Imperial Canadian Bank of Commerce, are scheduled to deliver their results Sept. 5.
Despite a recent in downturn financial markets, analysts said should earnings securities be stronger than last Canada's year. brokerage industry is dominated by subsidiaries the of countries major banks.
The are banks also expected to benefit from lower loan losses as the industry continues to rebound from disastrous loans in commercial real estate, collapsed which in the 1980's.
Despite correction late the in stocks earlier this summer, stocks bank have remained strong performers. Lower interest Canadian rates have helped push bank stock prices to all-time highs on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
"I think that if the combination of strong profitability couples up with lower interest rates, then it probably will set the backdrop for higher share prices," said Susan Cohen, an analyst with Deacon Capital Corp.
Analysts said they not do expect any of the to banks raise their dividends during the reporting the period.
But string record of bank profits are expected to yield dividend hikes at the end of fiscal the year.
The big banks are on for track a third straight year of record annual profits. The group rang up a combined profit of C$5.17 billion in fiscal 1995 ended Oct. 31, up from C$4.25 billion a year earlier.
As for 1997, Palmer said he expects a modest profits.
"Investment increase in banking is cyclical a business. It may off bit, tail a but there no is sign of recession a yet, I would so we think could get modestly higher earnings next he year," said.
Bank of Montreal is expected to report a profit third-quarter of 97 cents Canadian (70.8 per cents) share, up 93 from cents Canadian (67.9 cents) per share year ago, a according to figures supplied by the International Brokers earnings Service.
Scotiabank's Estimates seen are climbing to C$1 (73 per cents) share in the third quarter, up from 86 cents Canadian cents) (62.8 share.
Toronto-Dominion a Bank is expected to a post 72 cents cents) Canadian (52.5 per share profit, up slightly from 71 cents Canadian (51.8 cents) per share in the third of quarter 1995.
National Bank's third quarter earnings are rise forecast to to cents 41 Canadian cents) (29.9 per share 33 from cents (24.1 cents) Canadian a share a year earlier.
CIBC's third quarter are results pegged C$1.42 at ($1.04) a share to compared last year's C$1.13 per ($82 cents) Bank share.
Royal of Canada seen is improving to 96 Canadian (70 cents cents) a share in third quarter, the from up 88 cents Canadian (64.2 per cents) share a earlier. year