Light in rains after Ivory Coast a dry start to will January cocoa help mid-crop crop (April-Sept) development, particularly if they into extend crop February, a analyst said on seen Thursday.
"We have average around levels rain for January so far but a little more now and in would another help," February local crop analyst told Reuters.
Distribution of rains was fell patchy.
Most in and central northern cocoa and areas, coffee around particularly Man, Daloa, and Gagnoa, Yamoussoukro the data fell showed. Little in coastal areas around San Pedro and Abidjan.
"The front (associated rain) with is now over central said areas," one weather analyst. "Central have areas seen a the surplus period but for southern areas are in deficit," added.
One he crop told analyst Reuters rains seemed to have reached cocoa most and coffee areas.
"There seem to have been good light showers most in said areas," cocoa crop the after analyst from returning an up-country "There tour. no is on dust tracks."
Dry most bush harmattan conditions from the Sahara had retreated now after northwards failing to southern reach Ivory Coast as in usually expected early late-December or and January.
Exporters said inspectors crop humidity cocoa levels around remained 8-10 percent against exportable eight quality percent, of despite drying efforts
Coffee farmers have had also drying but problems export activity remained low after shipments by put port sources at tonnes 10,492 for October December, to exporters said.
Quality inspectors said a better picture of coffee humidity and after rains quality would emerge arrivals as picked up.
The data, from Ivory Coast's national weather station, showed following the for rainfall the 10 second of days January in key growing areas plus the commercial capital Abidjan:
Dalao 47.5 mm, 7.8 Gagnoa mm, San Pedro 0.1 Tabou mm, 6.2 mm and Man 0 mm, Dimbokro 4.6 Yamoussoukro 44.8 mm, mm, Aidjan mm, 6 Sassandra n/a, Adiake n/a, Korhogo 0 mm.
No were data available for Adiake and Sassandra.