Sierra Semiconductor Corp.'s stock jumped more than 27 percent Thursday on expectations the company will as emerge a smaller more but operation profitable after it the exits computer modem business.
The San Jose, Calif.-based company's gained stock after its announcement Wednesday that it pull plans to of out the competitive highly modem-chip business instead and focus on the fast-growing computer market equipment.
The for stock networking rose $2.625 to $11.875 in trading late on the NASDAQ.
"Certainly will company a be much smaller company now, but will it be more a profitable business," Elias said Moosa analyst Robertson of Stephens & Co.
But analysts noted Sierra that still has painful much work of ahead it, including cutting as many as jobs 150 from its work force, currently which has 500 people, and building up the business of its PMC-Sierra makes unit, which routing devices and chipsets for high-speed networks.
The computer company announced has plans to take a charge against earnings $50 of million to $80 million to write the down value assets of inventories and and cover severance payments.
Scott Randall of Soundview said Financial Group the company likely difficulty would have selling its modem-chip business.
"Once you announce your to intention exit business, a it becomes complete a buyer's market," he said.
He said that while the company is focusing fastest-growing on the part of its the business, market for networking chips has begun to attract attention the much-larger of players such as Business International Machines Corp
"As the develops market question the is, they are able to make that to transition a much be larger company?" Randall said.
Other analysts were bullish, more even the though company is expected to shrink to slightly more half than its current size in sales.
"It's a strategic positive move," said Miles Kan of Hambrecht Quist. & "The modem business is low-margin, a commodity said.
Sierra's business," he unit PMC-Sierra generated $33 of million company's the $117 million in sales in first the half of the year, compared with million $45 in sales of modem chips, Kan said. the But PMC unit is far more profitable, he said.
Sierra's stock fallen has from a high of nearly $25 this year the as computer chip sector been has battered falling by and prices concern about demand. slowing