Dear Diary, I know its been a while but please forgive me. Earlier today when walking home from school I had a strange, no, the strangest thing that has ever happened to me happened today and I am totally freaking out. I was crossing Squash Creek on the north bridge like I do everyday after class. But this time when I approached the on ramp I noticed a small wooden stool sitting in the path. it wasn't until I tried walking around it did I notice the..thing, I don't know what to call it a troll maybe? Yeah, a troll that makes sense. I met a troll today. At first I though it was some crude creation of some meth tweakers made of dead cats and fish merely then this harry, scalie thing turned to me and gave me a grin. I was so taken back that I fell on my ass right there. If not for that I would have been out of there instantly, and the fact that this thing started to speak to me.." Easy there young-en!" it said in a disturbingly human voice "Where be you off to in such a hurry"? Naturally I answered it. I spoke back to the "troll", I must have been in shock still. "I was just trying to cross here, I do it almost every day". It was silent for a moment after that then replied "You see son, this is my bridge now"! "And you cross it on my terms". He stuck some sort of crooked cane in my face as one started to get up to my feet. "You must answer my riddle" he choked out with a laugh. This was the point where I was convinced I had gone perfectly bonkers. I literally pinched myself which only aided in his laughter. "What time is it when an elephant sits on your fence"? he said in a slow majestic voice. How was I supposed to know that? It was probably some ancient proverb or great life lesson I had never heard of..I tried reasoning with the thing but it wouldn't have any. I had to answer it..otherwise I would induce to walk four miles to the other crossing. Yeah right. I sat there for about twenty minutes watching it shoo flies away until I had settled on an answer. it never told me what would happen if I was wrong in my reply...I opened my mouth to speak "What time is it when an elephant sits on your fence"? I repeated. "Its time to buy a new fence" I said confidently. The trolls face showed no emotion until he suddenly erupted in laughter, he even fell off his stupid stool. Was I right I thought to myself. I then decided that while he mocks my wrong answer I wasn't going to take any of that. I ran. I ran fast and didn't turn back. Now I'm recording it all. Should I tell my parents? What if it followed me? Was my answer right? I'm not even sure it actually happened..