"Who can replace Death? He was the most feared of us all. Without Death there can be no reckoning upon the sinful mortals." War scratched his thinning beard. He was running out of options. No others had dared to take up such a heavy burden. While War was no stranger to the horrors of, he shuddered to think about the atrocities that Death had committed. Was there any being in the 7 realms to take up the Cloak and Scythe? "But there is someone." hissed Famine. War, death, famine and conquest. "Brothers you are aware that all the atrocities we have committed were dealt by Man. These were all Man's undoing. Famine's ragged hood covered his face, only showing his decaying mouth twisted in a sick smile. Conquest was quick to challenge. Who else better to don the burden of Death then a man himself?" "Man, donning the very bane of his existence? Brother, your imprudence will be the end of us all. He is greedy, selfish and cruel. A mortal man is hideous creature. Giving one this much power will only result in abuse." "Conquest, you are as foolish as ever. Have you learnt nothing from Death? He was the wisest of us all, he-"
"If Death was so wise, explain his abrupt departure. Why did he leave his duties behind? We are the horsemen of the apocalypse; both terrible and glorious. When the Horn of the Heavens sounds we will charge and strike fear into the hearts of sinners. It is who we are. Death was a fool for leaving." "ENOUGH!" He unleashed an onslaught of blows onto his golden armor until it was dented beyond recognition. War slammed into Conquest, knocking him down to the brimstone. "I will not take this insolence. Breathless, War stood up towering over his foe and boomed. I loved him as a brother and a mentor." War's stone face softened for a second. Death was the best of us. "Should you be stupid enough to blaspheme our brother again, I will end you." Conquest nodded in shame. He was not used to the bitter taste of defeat. He silently vowed that War would pay for the humiliation he suffered. "Famine. Bring him to me." "As you wish brother." You say that a mortal can replace Death.