It was a warm summer day and I was out for a stroll. Never had I seen such an pair of opposites! I saw them on the other side, walking down the sidewalk, two by two. I didn't pay much attention until they passed under the glow of the gaslamp. For the brief time they walked under it, the light illuminated the pair. His arms and legs were so densely overrun that I had thought it a coat and trousers! The man's limbs and head were covered in scars! What I had mistaken for a beard was a mass of scars! But her skin is what shocked me, even greater than the man! The woman had black hair, long and straight, as if it were manufactured string by string. I looked to my own marred hands, although compared to that man, it was a blessing; as I worried, small cuts formed on my arm. It began to sting as my sweat seeped into my fresh wounds. It had the most exquisite complexion, almost translucent in the light, and I saw nary a flaw on it. "Sir," I exclaimed, "Excuse my frankness sir, but I must inquiry, how is it that your wife is so beautiful, yet you are so…." The man and woman looked at each other, she turned away, blushing, and he laughed raucously. "Hideous?" Not wanting more scars, I shook my negative thoughts and ran to the couple. "Don't worry," he said, putting his arm around my shoulder, "I get it all the time." "N-n-o," I stammered, embarrassed by my rudeness. I was taken aback. asked the man between laughs. "Well, you see," he said with a wink, "she's not my wife, but my daughter." "My apologies sir, but how, in this world, did your wife manage to keep from scarring?" "Well, she's not entirely flawless. "Still….How?" Takes after her mother I guess!" She can't tell a joke and her cooking's lousy! The man pulled me in, "I'm gonna tell you a story." Laughing, he said, "Take a look at her finger." "Long ago, when I was married, I swore never to have kids. I didn't want any children to be born into this world, so that was that. I peered at the daughter, she offered her right hand and I saw a thin bright streak of red on her index finger. I fell in love with her and swore to devote my life to her. But my wife had other plans, and so my daughter was born. 'How would I protect her from the world?' As she grew, though, I began to worry. Of course, if there was a cure already, no one would be like this." "On one particular visit to a doctor, I had my daughter with me and upon exiting the building, I met a man dressed all in black. So I set out to every doctor, physician, and scientist I could find, asking for a cure. 'Wait,' the man in black said, 'I can save your daughter.' He cleared his throat, took a deep breath, and continued. I immediately thought, 'This must be the devil' and turned heel back into the building. I asked. He replied, 'I am bored with just bartering with souls, I am more interested in it's durability.' 'What do you want?' The devil continued, giggling, 'You see, I do have the power to stop your daughter's scarring, but I'm not a very charitable person.' "And so," the man continued, "I agreed and the devil pricked mine and my daughters finger to seal the deal. I was skeptical and scoffed, 'What for my soul?' I was dumbstruck that he took the deal, and that he managed to last this long. 'I want you to partake in a very simple wager,' he said, 'Your daughter won't get scars, but *you* will; more specifically, very scar your daughter gets will be transferred to you. If you can manage this wager, you keep your soul, if not, well, you know what will happen."' Children can be so cruel. Puberty was a rough time. So she grew up and I took the blows. But that scar on her finger was the last one she'd ever get, I had sure of that." Your deal with the devil?" I was amazed at this man's love for his daughter and his willpower. Every scar on his body seemed to pulsate as I wondered this. How much pain did he have to endure? I asked, "Do you ever regret it? He replied with a smile, "Not at all."