I was crossing Squash Creek on the north bridge like I do everyday after class. Dear Diary, I know its been a while but please forgive me. But this time when I approached the on ramp I noticed a small wooden stool sitting in the path. it wasn't until I tried walking around it did I notice the..thing, I don't know what to call it a troll maybe? I met a troll today. Earlier today when walking home from school I had a strange, no, the strangest thing that has ever happened to me happened today and I am totally freaking out. If not for that I would have been out of there instantly, and the fact that this thing started to speak to me.." Easy there young-en!" Yeah, a troll that makes sense. it said in a disturbingly human voice "Where be you off to in such a hurry"? I was so taken back that I fell on my ass right there. At first I though it was some crude creation of some meth tweakers made of dead cats and fish but then this harry, scalie thing turned to me and gave me a grin. "I was just trying to cross here, I do it almost every day". I spoke back to the "troll", I must have been in shock still. Naturally I answered it. It was silent for a moment after that then replied "You see son, this is my bridge now"! He stuck some sort of crooked cane in my face as I started to get up to my feet. I literally pinched myself which only aided in his laughter. "You must answer my riddle" he choked out with a laugh. "And you cross it on my terms". This was the point where I was convinced I had gone absolutely bonkers. "What time is it when an elephant sits on your fence"? How was I supposed to know that? Yeah right. he said in a slow majestic voice. I had to answer it..otherwise I would have to walk four miles to the other crossing. It was probably some ancient proverb or great life lesson I had never heard of..I tried reasoning with the thing but it wouldn't have any. it never told me what would happen if I was wrong in my reply...I opened my mouth to speak "What time is it when an elephant sits on your fence"? "Its time to buy a new fence" I said confidently. I sat there for about twenty minutes watching it shoo flies away until I had settled on an answer. The trolls face showed no emotion until he suddenly erupted in laughter, he even fell off his stupid stool. I repeated. I then decided that while he mocks my wrong answer I wasn't going to take any of that. I ran fast and didn't turn back. Was I right I thought to myself. I ran. What if it followed me? Should I tell my parents? Was my answer right? Now I'm recording it all. I'm not even sure it actually happened..