The librarian looked up and smiled when he entered. Its Saturday and he's in the library again. Lee walked in and looked around at his world. A beautiful world that people with a passion had built. Of course there's that weird guy that comes in to read the newspaper, he'd seen him over the weeks and thought the paper is less than a buck to have delivered, why drive here cheapskate. And he was all alone again. Anyway, what was on the menu today. Its nice to be able to understand what you're looking for. Roaming up and down the isles looking at the funny numbering system 101.001 -500 to the left, 101.501-1000 on the right. He liked this library, it still had an old fashioned card catologue. Science. It makes sense. Flipping cards over and over 'Newton?' 'What subject though'. A scrap of paper with some obscure numbers on it and off he goes. Can I understand this? Sure if they could figure this stuff out 300 years ago, i should be able to understand it now. An hour later the kid looks up and says "this is some dry stuff". 'I've got all day.' Puts it back, while walking back, he sees Darwin. Stop. 'I've heard that name before, is this they guy they're always talking about in church?' He takes a single book back to the table, sits down next to the vacant computer terminal and sits down to start thumbing thru it. Read the book a bit, do a couple searches on the computer. 'Jeez.. is there an end to this. It seems that answers lead to more questions. "No" says the voice behind him. Is there ever going to be a final answer?' "Uhm. Lee looks up and sees the newspaper guy sitting across from him. Sorry, man, i guess i was thinking out-loud'. Its cool. Origin of the species. As usual there's only you and i and staff here i really don't worry much about disturbing anyone anymore. That's some heavy stuff you're reading. Interesting, but dry. What else you been nosing around in? Darwin? I was trying to read some Newton earlier, but that was even dryer than this. Do you know anything about this stuff? I keep hearing these names mentioned when i go to church and they really seem to hate these guys. Saturday is my day when when i don't have to be at school, no church, no youth group. I told my parents i was going to friends, (looks around) i guess i really didn't lie. You got any opinions on this stuff? You're a weird kid. Yeah, i know. I'm Lee. I like to read. And now i take Saturdays off from my family and just kinda go exploring. I was reading a website I'm not supposed to read and it kinda started me looking for more information. I started reading what was written and thought, someone else actually sees it too. ...John, he holds out his hand. Those are some heavy books you're reading. Huh? I 'read' those books so very long ago. What do you mean 'see's it?' All those guys, they came to mean something to me. But as each one spoke, it killed a small piece of me as i understood the words they spoke more and more. (As Lee looks at him very oddly, thinking, this guy isn't that old.) You see, my whole life, I've lived in books. I see the things in the world and then I always find a book in it. Nowdays, nobody reads the books anymore. I love books, and they love me. They all watch TV and surf the internet. Sorry Lee, right?...You asked a question. They, people (looking at a wall) just don't care. Learning anything takes time. Lots of opinions, but very few answers. Everything. What was it, do i have an opinion on anything. What do you want to know. Lee smiled in response. Big goals man. John just chuckles. "Lets try to narrow it down" John says. You've got Darwins book there. I've heard the mention of Darwin in school. Yeah, gotta start somewhere. What do you think about what little you've read? I know my church is always talking smack about him. He sees John wince a little bit. The teachers try to tell us we came from monkeys or something like that. So i decided to read for myself. Yeah, John says. Hey, you ok man. I get these chest pains at times. I'm not doing to good nowadays. Anyway, if you want to know the truth, I'll tell you the truth. The messed up part is nobody will listen to you when you retell it. They talk for hours, one speaking of life and one asking questions. John starts talking, Lee asking questions in amazement of the stories he's hearing. What was that guys name you mentioned, Occam, i like that thought...the simplest path is usually the correct path. Keep it simple, no need to complicate things. Do you have a job. Yeah i agree, i tend to go with that path although my teachers keep wanting long ass answers to things. John, what do you do for a living. There was a hostile takeover, and they literally tried to kill me to make sure I wouldn't get into their business. I don't mean to be rude, but i wonder you look younger than my parents but you know a lot more than them. Are you rich? I was good at what i did, but these other guys didn't' like me in their territory. Well, i used to own my company. Wow, they tried to kill you over your business? Yep. OMG. Hired some guys to draw me out, got me coming out of dinner one night beat my ass stabbed me a time or two and then left me out to die. (blurts out Lee) oops sorry, picked that up my little sister. Fighting the mob? I've seen those movies, is that stuff real? What were you doing. I warehoused secrets and others didn't want me getting in their secrets. My business was secrets. Well Lee, I guess you could say that. It was kinda like the dot com stuff you read about in your history books, have you gotten to that stuff yet? People were inventing ideas, not making any products and selling information to one another that really had no value. Yep, during the 90's, the dot com boom. Lot of people got taken in. Yep, said John. Looked like a good time for a while. That's the idea. But you see, I wasn't doing anything with the information. I kinda just stored the information and allowed others to get on with what they were doing. The business was great, I was operating in 15 ish countries and then other companies got wind of what i was doing, how great the cash was and they started rewriting the rules. And in return they would pay me a weekly to monthly small fee to know their secrets were safe with me. And now i just kinda hang out in places that nobody goes waiting for what i know is going to happen. My company kinda fell apart. It happens to us all. John closes his eyes. I don't know where to go now. So, wow. You can see the pain in his face. Got anymore reading suggestions for me. Its addictive. John laughs, you really enjoy the learning don't you. I'm going to tell you this Lee. (I see his eye twich like he's really in pain now)
I'll tell you this, by the time you read those books and more like them. There are so many guys that offer you new visions of what the world you're going to inherit is. You wont need to seek out people for an answer, you'll become the answer. Sagan, Tyson, Dawkins...wow...so many books and so little time to understand all the words. You'll understand so much more about your world. A friend and teacher of mine told me one time, There are 3 things that do not remain hidden for long. (a wince) Remember, Knowledge is power. The Sun, The moon and The Truth. But true. Yeah, i know kinda corny. You want to come with us? Hey John, i gotta get going. I know the pastor always get happy when people bring new folks to church. I need to pick up my suit on the way home for church tomorrow. My parents have their own pew you can sit up on the front row with us. But I'm going to pass, they really don't sit too well with me anymore. Wow, its been a long time since i was invited to a church. We kinda have a different view on things nowadays. I tell you what Lee, you seem like a good hearted kid. I'll see you in a few weeks maybe. I've got some traveling to do. You knock out those names i've thrown out and when i get back. If you still feel the need to talk, we'll talk. Ok.
Cya John. Cya Lee. 6 weeks later, Lee is walking into the library. He drops the Dawkins book on the counter and the librarian looks at him kinda disapproving. He notices the shiny gold cross and the well worn bible on her desk. And just shrugs. Yes young man. Uhm...Miss? Hey you know that guy that used to hang out in here reading the papers on the weekend. The librarian kinda gasps and covers her mouth. Have you seen him lately? We called 911 but never heard much about him after that. I had forgotten about him until you mentioned it. We weren't supposed to talk about it, but he was here a couple weeks ago and kinda slumped over in a chair.