"Who can replace Death? Without Death there can be no reckoning upon the sinful mortals." He was the most feared of us all. War scratched his thinning beard. He was running out of options. "Brothers you are aware that all the atrocities we have committed were dealt by Man. hissed Famine. No others had dared to take up such a heavy burden. Who else better to don the burden of Death then a man himself?" Was there any being in the 7 realms to take up the Cloak and Scythe? While War was no stranger to the horrors of, he shuddered to think about the atrocities that Death had committed. "But there is someone." War, death, famine and conquest. "Man, donning the very bane of his existence? These were all Man's undoing. Famine's ragged hood covered his face, only showing his decaying mouth twisted in a sick smile. Brother, your imprudence will be the end of us all. He is greedy, selfish and cruel. He was the wisest of us all, he-"
"If Death was so wise, explain his abrupt departure. Conquest was quick to challenge. "Conquest, you are as foolish as ever. A mortal man is hideous creature. Giving one this much power will only result in abuse." Have you learnt nothing from Death? We are the horsemen of the apocalypse; both terrible and glorious. Why did he leave his duties behind? When the Horn of the Heavens sounds we will charge and strike fear into the hearts of sinners. "ENOUGH!" It is who we are. He unleashed an onslaught of blows onto his golden armor until it was dented beyond recognition. Breathless, War stood up towering over his foe and boomed. Death was a fool for leaving." War slammed into Conquest, knocking him down to the brimstone. War's stone face softened for a second. Death was the best of us. "I will not take this insolence. Conquest nodded in shame. He silently vowed that War would pay for the humiliation he suffered. "Should you be stupid enough to blaspheme our brother again, I will end you." "As you wish brother." I loved him as a brother and a mentor." "Famine. Bring him to me." He was not used to the bitter taste of defeat. You say that a mortal can replace Death.