These days never get easier. Cute kid, good with his parents, and never causes any problems. Actually, the days I like, that's when I get to rest. It's when the sun goes down that things start to bother me. You see that kid above me? It's a good upgrade from the cramped space under the crib, let me tell ya. Boss's rules, not his. I've seen him outgrow his crib and move into this racecar bed with flames down the side. I haven't seen the kid much outside of this room; the truth is I'm not allowed anywhere else. I like to think he turned out alright since he gets such good rest at night, but I wouldn't want to take too much credit. I don't mind though, the view is good and I can hear everything in this small house which makes me feel like I'm part of the family. When he first moved into the new bed, his father was in here just before the lights went out. To be honest, I've never actually met the kid. For what seemed like months the father would come in and listen to the boy talk about his fear of me, the Boogeyman. "It's just your mind playing games with you. The lights go out, but everything is fine." He would come in and say:
"Taylor, buddy it's alright. Taylor didn't want his dad to think he wasn't ready to be a big boy so he shouted
"No way dad, I can handle anything!" I knew we shouldn't have let you watch the movies with mom and I last Halloween." To which the boy would say "But dad I know he's in here". "Okay then bud, sleep well. Maybe another night for you Taylor, but I'll be busy. Remember it's just like any other night." The dad said jokingly with a smile on his face. The dad said as he turned out the lights and shut the door behind him. I mean, how this kid can be scared of me when we've never met! You see, where I'm from is a rough part of town. I've tried to come out and say hi a few times before, but every time this kid hears the slightest noise I can sense he gets worried. So I stick down here and haven't moved since. It's not your ordinary town with the kids playing out front of their homes with white picket fences. These guys like to cause problems and they can do that to each other. Not that I get much spare time to even come out, but one day would be nice. As a matter of fact, no one in Taylor's world knows my world even exists. Sure, everyone around seems to get along, but at night the real creeps come out. I wish they would keep it amongst the other monsters, but they don't. They don't even call them kids; they call them "dessert" … real sickos.. Luckily, for the little ones they've each been assigned their own "Boogeyman" to make sure they stay safe and don't get snatched up. It's when they start seeking the small ones for an extra rush that boils my blood and I step in. You see these guys night after night go out seeking kids like Taylor. You've got Aeran with his scaled skin and claws the length of a cable car. So when I hear Taylor tell his dad that he is scared of *me*, it hurts. If only Taylor knew what fighting these bastards was like. Yeah he's small, but lightening fast with a ferocious bite. How about Zeila with spiked arms that burn like hell when they hit you, not to mention she's twice my size. It's always the small ones that give you the most trouble. Yeah I get lots of bumps and bruises in this line of work. Don't want to leave out Leera. And with me dead that means the creeps win and they would have their feast. If I wasn't trained for these guys then I would have problems and by problem I mean dead. I'm fortunate enough I can heal fast. I just wish the kid knew the truth. Sounds bad but really though, it's all in a nights work. And for that, I'm the one he worries about. I love my job, I really do. Might sound weird after hearing that every night I'm busy beating up the bad guys, but hearing Taylor's laugh in the day is what keeps me going. All those noises Taylor hears in the night are just me doing my job. Making sure Taylor stays warm and asleep in his bed. Gotta run, I can hear the chattering of claws on the pavement heading my way. I would love to actually meet one of these kids I get to watch over, but it hasn't happened yet. Taylor isn't my first and won't be my last, but I still have hope. Sleep tight Taylor…