Really *really* promise?" "Of coarse I promise! "You really promise? Henry fishes a crumpled £5 note out of his back pocket. How disappointed they were when, upon inspection, they found not eggs but a full grown pigeon sitting in the nest. Look, I've got the fiver now in my pocket." He accepted and slowly crept closer to the nest, pausing to wave away Henry who had decided to try as well. The group had seen the nest in the corner of the roof and immediately their thoughts turned to throwing eggs at cars and windows. In Bill's own hands the pigeon struggles and squawks. Not to be put off James turned to Bill and dared him to catch the bird. But then came the question: *What do we do with it? After taking a moment to collect himself he leaped for the pigeon, not scared in the least of the 20 story drop just inches away, there was no safety barrier. Sure enough he caught the pigeon. They were at all times to be kept hidden and safe. Henry's stone wasn't actually a rock, none of them were nowadays, that's just what people call them. * This time it was Henry who supplied the dare. As young as they were they had all been told at one point or another not to do anything so reckless with a stone. "Tie your stone to it and I'll give you a fiver." Of coarse, they have all been taught better than this. This was a popular approach to stones but realistically they could be anything, you could bind your soul to a balloon if you wanted. Nevertheless, Bill was keen to earn the respect of his friends and, handing the pigeon to Henry, went jogging downstairs to fetch his stone. Presently Bill returned with his stone and after a few minutes had it tied to the birds leg. "Now..." says Henry "You need to get it back!" His was a ring bought especially for the purpose. "Now what?" He shoots a grin at James and releases the pigeon with a jump. He asks. It squawks and begins to fly towards the neighbouring apartment block. Bill takes his promised money from the devious friend and starts running in the opposite direction, towards the edge of the roof. Henry and James are giggling now, excited for whats going to happen next. Without stopping Bill jumps and falls screaming to the hard concrete floor. Before it can land Bill appears once more in front of it, this time reaching for the rings stuck to its leg. Of coarse the fall is lethal. They're out right laughing at this point, Henry is trying to use his phone to get a video. From the top of the building the other two can faintly hear the sound of him landing. This scares the bird and it turns from the tower blocks and heads away from the centre of town. Henry and James stop laughing at this point, considering if this is why they were told to be sensible with reincarnation stones. Reincarnation only takes a few seconds and soon enough Bill is falling again, this time watching the pigeon carry on it's flight, getting smaller and smaller until his life ends once again. And as it goes it carries Bill away with it. It's flight takes it to areas with ever smaller buildings and it shows no sign of wanting to land or descend at all.