The business world is ever-changing, and companies must always be flexible to these changes. One of the changes that a business might need to adapt to is an expanding target market. P&G currently sells personal care products to a market that is comprised primarily of women. However, research shows that there is a growing market among male consumers due to the rise of male grooming. P&G should restructure to take advantage of the new market for men’s care products.
P&G will need to make several changes to capitalize on the “ignored” market. The restructuring will affect various departments such as research and development, product design, and sales and marketing. Their redesign will affect their employee recruitment and selection practices (Szymczyk, 2016). For instance, currently, most employees that deal with skin and hair care products, cosmetics, and fragrances are female. This is because the target market is mostly women, which means that the products are probably developed, designed, and marketed by women. To attract a new target audience of men, the company will need to hire more male employees (Nadube & Didia, 2018). Male consumers will be more satisfied with male-only personal care products. These products are best developed by people who are male themselves and understand what other men would want. The research and development, product design, and sales and marketing departments must comprise more male employees.
The main contextual variable that led to P&G’s restructuring was the changes in the target market as revealed by a study. The study was conducted by Male Grooming Trends: Profiting in 2009 and Beyond. It showed that although female consumers dominated the market for personal grooming products, the market for male consumers was quickly expanding. P&G saw an opportunity to profit from an expanding market. Therefore, redesigning was necessitated by changes in the market characteristics.
The demographic market for motorcycles was older white men.
It would be foolish for businesses to stick to old ways when the market is constantly evolving.