Most people during the Victorian era valued the virtues of society. Victorians believed that they were fixed and certain as guiding behavior to people all the time. The virtues included morals that one can be judged according to his behavior. Any betrayal of ethical standards was termed lousy behavior and could deserve punishment. These beliefs have become misguided, undesirable, and inappropriate in modern America (Schlereth, 2018). They have shifted to values that no longer have classical ideas of wisdom, justice, courage, or cleanliness (p. 691). They have become sexual connotation where people practice prostitution and other immoral behaviors.
In previous years, there were low rates of crimes that have continued to rise. Victorians practiced moral principles in their lives, which maintained good morals and behavior. Currently, morals have changed and translated to destructive behaviors that contribute to higher rates of crimes (Schlereth, 2018). Victorian speaks about morality and the best ways of devising it. In modern America, a character has been substituted, and most youths indulge in immoral behavior.
In the Victorian era, women were uneducated, immigrants were not socializing with others, and men were involved in politics.
The Victorian era and modern American have similarities in how the people live in the two ages. In the two generations, people practiced moral behavior cherishing virtues in society. The two value the social, economic, and political life, and the individuals participate in them (Schlereth, 2018). The eras impacted the world of literature and changed people’s lives on how they see literature (p. 695). For example, Elizabeth Barrett Browning wrote a poem, ‘The cry of the children’, which has a message about industrialization on child labor. The poem narrates child labor which had become popular due to new machines and workplaces. All people were able to socialize during the Victorian era to learn formal and informal skills. Most people get involved in literature where they write poems that could talk of their current situations and life experiences.
In England, the rate of indictable offenses was reduced by 50% and the population grew from 19 million to 33 million.
The modern American misses a lot from the Victorian era regarding morality, beliefs, and virtues. During the Victorian era, people valued cultural opinions, cherished integrity in society, and practiced good moral behavior. The modern American had derailed from all the norms and changed the way of life. There are practices of immoral behavior such as prostitution, many divorces, many crimes, and a lack of seriousness in religious belief. Most people have disrespect and ignorance of everything in the current world. Victorian-era people were religious and valued their religion, but a few currently do the same.
All people were able to socialize during the Victorian era to learn their roles, get an education and interact with each other. Most people get involved in literature where they write poems about their current situations and life experiences. People could write poems sensitizing an issue affecting the society for the society to take necessary measures. In the two eras, people learned formal and informal skills, which helped them handle different issues in society.