Learning history helps people draw connections between the past and present and allows making predictions for the future based on previous lessons. Climate change is one of the most significant topics of interest and research. No matter how well societies develop in terms of technology, they will inevitably face disasters if they neglect the issues of nature. The Chornobyl nuclear accident, which happened in 1986, was one of the most devastating ecological events that changed the fates of thousands of people in many countries.
I don't know much about the topic, but I know that the release of radioactive materials caused a lot of diseases and deaths.
I would like to learn more about the reasons that led to such a disaster and to find out whether it was preventable. Also, I want to investigate the reasons behind the decision of the USSR government to conceal the truth and not let people save their lives. I cannot understand how they could have been silent at a time when thousands of citizens were being gradually driven into an ecological trap.
The values, assumptions, and beliefs I have related to the chosen topic are two-dimensional. On the one hand, I am concerned that such catastrophes can occur and harm people’s lives. On the other hand, I am deeply disturbed by the fact that the authorities can act so thoughtlessly and dare to neglect people’s lives. I have always considered freedom and health as the most important values. I believe that world leaders should do everything possible to prevent such disasters or at least not conceal them.
My opinion about the topic is that people should learn from such disasters and use this devastating lesson in the future. However, my perspective is very closely connected to the current world situation. The relevant events happening due to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine are alarming. In the context of my topic, I should note that a few days ago, Russians attacked Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant, which is the largest in Europe (Borger & Henley, 2022). Whereas the very question of the Russian invasion of Ukraine is highly tragic and relevant, I will focus on the nuclear plants’ seizure in this paper. Russians seized Chornobyl and Zaporizhzhia nuclear plants, and they seem not to realize what aftermath explosions there could bring.
I want to investigate the topic of the Chornobyl nuclear because it seems that history has not taught some people anything.