Lee walked in and looked around at his world. And he was all alone again. The librarian looked up and smiled when he entered. Its Saturday and he's in the library again. Of course there's that weird guy that comes in to read the newspaper, he'd seen him over the weeks and thought the paper is less than a buck to have delivered, why drive here cheapskate. A beautiful world that people with a passion had built. Anyway, what was on the menu today. Its nice to be able to understand what you're looking for. He liked this library, it still had an old fashioned card catologue. Science. Roaming up and down the isles looking at the funny numbering system 101.001 -500 to the left, 101.501-1000 on the right. It makes sense. Flipping cards over and over 'Newton?' 'What subject though'. Can I understand this? 'I've got all day.' Sure if they could figure this stuff out 300 years ago, i should be able to understand it now. A scrap of paper with some obscure numbers on it and off he goes. An hour later the kid looks up and says "this is some dry stuff". Puts it back, while walking back, he sees Darwin. He takes a single book back to the table, sits down next to the vacant computer terminal and sits down to start thumbing thru it. 'I've heard that name before, is this they guy they're always talking about in church?' Stop. It seems that answers lead to more questions. Read the book a bit, do a couple searches on the computer. Is there ever going to be a final answer?' 'Jeez.. is there an end to this. Lee looks up and sees the newspaper guy sitting across from him. "No" says the voice behind him. "Uhm. As usual there's only you and i and staff here i really don't worry much about disturbing anyone anymore. Sorry, man, i guess i was thinking out-loud'. Its cool. Darwin? Origin of the species. That's some heavy stuff you're reading. Interesting, but dry. What else you been nosing around in? Do you know anything about this stuff? I was trying to read some Newton earlier, but that was even dryer than this. I told my parents i was going to friends, (looks around) i guess i really didn't lie. Saturday is my day when when i don't have to be at school, no church, no youth group. I keep hearing these names mentioned when i go to church and they really seem to hate these guys. You got any opinions on this stuff? You're a weird kid. I'm Lee. Yeah, i know. I like to read. And now i take Saturdays off from my family and just kinda go exploring. I was reading a website I'm not supposed to read and it kinda started me looking for more information. ...John, he holds out his hand. Huh? Those are some heavy books you're reading. I 'read' those books so very long ago. I started reading what was written and thought, someone else actually sees it too. What do you mean 'see's it?' (As Lee looks at him very oddly, thinking, this guy isn't that old.) All those guys, they came to mean something to me. You see, my whole life, I've lived in books. I love books, and they love me. I see the things in the world and then I always find a book in it. But as each one spoke, it killed a small piece of me as i understood the words they spoke more and more. Nowdays, nobody reads the books anymore. Learning anything takes time. They all watch TV and surf the internet. They, people (looking at a wall) just don't care. What was it, do i have an opinion on anything. Everything. Lee smiled in response. Sorry Lee, right?...You asked a question. Lots of opinions, but very few answers. Big goals man. What do you want to know. "Lets try to narrow it down" John says. John just chuckles. Yeah, gotta start somewhere. What do you think about what little you've read? You've got Darwins book there. I've heard the mention of Darwin in school. I know my church is always talking smack about him. The teachers try to tell us we came from monkeys or something like that. So i decided to read for myself. Hey, you ok man. Yeah, John says. He sees John wince a little bit. I'm not doing to good nowadays. I get these chest pains at times. John starts talking, Lee asking questions in amazement of the stories he's hearing. What was that guys name you mentioned, Occam, i like that thought...the simplest path is usually the correct path. Anyway, if you want to know the truth, I'll tell you the truth. Yeah i agree, i tend to go with that path although my teachers keep wanting long ass answers to things. The messed up part is nobody will listen to you when you retell it. Do you have a job. They talk for hours, one speaking of life and one asking questions. Are you rich? Keep it simple, no need to complicate things. John, what do you do for a living. There was a hostile takeover, and they literally tried to kill me to make sure I wouldn't get into their business. I don't mean to be rude, but i wonder you look younger than my parents but you know a lot more than them. Well, i used to own my company. I was good at what i did, but these other guys didn't' like me in their territory. Wow, they tried to kill you over your business? Yep. Hired some guys to draw me out, got me coming out of dinner one night beat my ass stabbed me a time or two and then left me out to die. (blurts out Lee) oops sorry, picked that up my little sister. What were you doing. OMG. Fighting the mob? Well Lee, I guess you could say that. I've seen those movies, is that stuff real? My business was secrets. It was kinda like the dot com stuff you read about in your history books, have you gotten to that stuff yet? I warehoused secrets and others didn't want me getting in their secrets. Lot of people got taken in. People were inventing ideas, not making any products and selling information to one another that really had no value. Yep, during the 90's, the dot com boom. Yep, said John. Looked like a good time for a while. I kinda just stored the information and allowed others to get on with what they were doing. That's the idea. And in return they would pay me a weekly to monthly small fee to know their secrets were safe with me. The business was great, I was operating in 15 ish countries and then other companies got wind of what i was doing, how great the cash was and they started rewriting the rules. But you see, I wasn't doing anything with the information. And now i just kinda hang out in places that nobody goes waiting for what i know is going to happen. It happens to us all. You can see the pain in his face. My company kinda fell apart. So, wow. I don't know where to go now. John closes his eyes. I'm going to tell you this Lee. Got anymore reading suggestions for me. John laughs, you really enjoy the learning don't you. Its addictive. There are so many guys that offer you new visions of what the world you're going to inherit is. (I see his eye twich like he's really in pain now)
I'll tell you this, by the time you read those books and more like them. You wont need to seek out people for an answer, you'll become the answer. Sagan, Tyson, Dawkins...wow...so many books and so little time to understand all the words. You'll understand so much more about your world. (a wince) Remember, Knowledge is power. A friend and teacher of mine told me one time, There are 3 things that do not remain hidden for long. Yeah, i know kinda corny. The Sun, The moon and The Truth. But true. Hey John, i gotta get going. You want to come with us? I need to pick up my suit on the way home for church tomorrow. I know the pastor always get happy when people bring new folks to church. Wow, its been a long time since i was invited to a church. My parents have their own pew you can sit up on the front row with us. I'll see you in a few weeks maybe. But I'm going to pass, they really don't sit too well with me anymore. I tell you what Lee, you seem like a good hearted kid. I've got some traveling to do. If you still feel the need to talk, we'll talk. We kinda have a different view on things nowadays. 6 weeks later, Lee is walking into the library. You knock out those names i've thrown out and when i get back. Cya Lee. Ok.
Cya John. He drops the Dawkins book on the counter and the librarian looks at him kinda disapproving. And just shrugs. He notices the shiny gold cross and the well worn bible on her desk. Yes young man. Uhm...Miss? Hey you know that guy that used to hang out in here reading the papers on the weekend. Have you seen him lately? We called 911 but never heard much about him after that. The librarian kinda gasps and covers her mouth. We weren't supposed to talk about it, but he was here a couple weeks ago and kinda slumped over in a chair. I had forgotten about him until you mentioned it.