I knew I could not cook, but I did not sweat it. The door bell rang, and I was so excited. They were mine now. They were so glad that they did not even notice my baseball bat. I swung. I opened the door and let my two gooey one eyed companions in. All mine
The two alien awoke to "gourmet" jellybeans. Jellybeans were their every waking hour. They stuffed themselves, those crude idiotic blobs. I laughed at them. Smiling they commented on how strange human customs were. That was quite funny, considering what I really had planned. I laughed at them as I broke their jaw hinges. They lived jellybeans loved jelly beans, breathed jelly beans. Three weeks later, they were still strapped to their places and woke up, ate, then slept. But the little trick was starting to get old. By the next week they went on a jellybean strike, but I knew that would not last long, considering how attached to the food they were. I broke their jaws, their life, their will. On their ninth week they realized what I was doing, but they were powerless. Two years just flew by, my little companions were so entertaining. They were now truly mine. Now they can't complain, so all was wondrous again. Then, I told them the only way to get their food was to beat one another up. However, that little contest would be way too boring, so I then sawed off each of their four legs. I starved them. I grew tired, so I decided to spice things up once again. The winner would eat. I then let them at each other. But that made it all the more worth while. They sprang like animals, biting punching each other. I was even kind of sad when finally the weaker of the two was knocked out. It was a slow process, them having no legs and little energy. I told the still barely conscience one that in order to get his meal he would have to kill his best alien friend. I knew I needed more. So then, I spiced things up again. I laughed again. The alien that was still alive cried, making inaudible noise for his jaw was broken after all. I handed the syringe filled with black licorice to the victorious alien. He was shocked. He died shortly, but boy was it massively entertaining. So, I prepared the murder for him slowly. The loser alien then woke up, only awake enough to see his own friend inject the deadly dose of jelly beans into his body. I threw him against the wall and told him to be polite. He demanded his jelly beans. HE COULD NOT PERFORM THE TASK OF ASKING NICELY. It was not polite enough. So I kicked him in the gut. His attitude was simply unacceptable. HE WAS THEN KNOCKED OUT. But I would not miss it. HE HAD TO BE KILLED AT ONCE FOR HIS BRUTAL MISBEHAVIOR. It was a lot of work. Boy did I love that experience. I ate my dinner slowly, savoring every bite. Jellybeans are costly after all. Alien flesh tasted so good. I knew it was all worth it. Even though I could not cook well, I knew not to sweat it from the beginning. My plan had been a great success after all. What do you think about it? r/jesuschristreddit Did I write it correctly BookWyrm17? I think I did it pretty well!