It can be defined as the ability of an individual to inspire others to attain set goals (Keats, 2019). In addition, leaders help ensure that activities run effectively during care. For instance, nurse leaders can handle workplace incivility and conflict among staff. Workplace incivility is among the challenges that affect the provision of quality care to patients. Introduction
Leadership is an important concept because it affects operations such as safety in a healthcare system. Therefore, it enables nurses to apply safety initiatives to achieve safety standards required during care. Identification of Leadership
Leadership plays an integral role in the performance of an organization. For example, leaders help solve disputes among health professionals or between patients and providers. It is defined as leading a group of people towards achieving a given objective (Keats, 2019). In addition, leaders ensure that followers can work in teams and acquire appropriate communication skills. They also assist in eliminating instances of workplace incivility such as bullying, biases, and other negative emotional responses (Keats, 2019). However, safety is a situation where one is free from harm. As a result, leaders ensure that an organization runs effectively. The followers should learn through them (Becker et al., 2019). Appraisal of Leadership
Leadership appraisal is an evaluation that consists of capabilities and traits. Thus, a high score in the evaluation is determined by the leadership capabilities a leader displays. For instance, leaders should effectively solve disputes professionally. Firstly, leaders should be role models or an example to their followers. Thirdly, leaders should communicate effectively and make sure they listen and respond appropriately. Secondly, they should guide the followers on the right path, especially in teamwork. It makes sure that providers’ actions, such as diagnosis and treatment, are free from errors. By definition, safety is a state of being free from any harm or danger. Identification of Safety
Safety is an important aspect of healthcare because it affects care outcomes. It can be the safety of patients or healthcare providers in a setting (Trinchero et al., 2019). For instance, working in a clean environment ensures that nurses are free from harm that could be caused when they stay in unclean surroundings. Safety also assists in the creation of a conducive working environment for providers. Firstly, safety is characterized by healthcare services such as diagnostic care being free from mistakes. Thus, the overall outcome of safety in a healthcare setting is providers delivering quality healthcare services to patients. Thirdly, healthcare providers should also be free from any danger and should access protective equipment and operate in an environment free from stress. Finally, safety rules are adhered to by both providers and patients. Secondly, healthcare settings should have minimal patient readmission due to treatment going wrong (Trinchero et al., 2019). Appraisal of Safety
Safety appraisal involves aspects used to evaluate safety in a healthcare setting. Impact on the Nurses’ Need to Use High-Level Clinical Judgment
The concept of leadership and safety influence nurses’ need to use high-level clinical judgment in a healthcare setting. To achieve this, the nurses must use their clinical judgment. Second, in safety, nurses should adhere to rigorous standards of care (Keats, 2019). First, nurses are mandated to ensure that patients get quality care. Third, they are supposed to use evidence to provide care to patients. Finally, nurses should use the concepts learned in school and the resources available at the facility to ensure quality care. They are also required to know when and where to ask for opinions during care. Third, nurses should have conflict resolution skills to address problems that arise in healthcare (Keats, 2019). Emerging Health Initiatives – Leadership
There are emerging health initiatives on the aspect of leadership. For instance, nurses should collaborate with other healthcare providers to make informed decisions during care. Firstly, there is a need to create a conducive working environment where nurses can work effectively and provide quality care. Secondly, adequate nurse staffing to eradicate stress levels that adversely impact care. Nurses should know the role of technology in providing quality healthcare to patients by improving the efficiency of operations. For instance, they should understand the effects of incivility on the performance of an organization. The first initiative is to ensure that nurses work in a safe environment and that patients are free from medical errors (Keats, 2019). Finally, nurses should be educated to help eradicate workplace incivility. Thus, the emerging initiatives that leaders should consider are fostering an enabling environment to provide quality healthcare services to the people. Emerging Health Initiatives – Safety
There are various emerging health initiatives as far as safety in healthcare is concerned. The second initiative is conducting rigorous training on safety issues in healthcare. Finally, the third initiative is the creation of policies and safety standards to guide operations within healthcare. This involves making sure nurses understand the practices that promote safety. Therefore, safety will be attained in healthcare if nurses understand safety issues and appropriate safety standards guiding operations. The other way is to adopt appropriate infrastructure such as communication apps or use the latest technology to improve communication between stakeholders. Safety standards help in directing and maintaining safe and clinically competent nursing operations. Ways to Advance Communication Related to Leadership and Safety
Communication is integral in the effective management of operations in a workplace. To advance communication, there is a need to cultivate trust between relevant stakeholders in healthcare, such as nurse leaders, nurses, and patients and their families (Daft & Marcic, 2019). Another way is by constantly training nurses to be effective communicators. Trust ensures that stakeholders are open and transparent during communication. For instance, a nurse leader ensures that nurses are encouraged to achieve healthcare goals. For instance, nurses should have listening skills because it is essential in providing quality care to patients. Conclusion
Leadership has a direct link to safety in the workplace. It plays an integral role in motivating followers to achieve the set objectives. Nurse leaders also help solve issues such as conflict and eliminate instances of workplace incivility like discrimination. Thus, effective communication can be attained when there is trust among providers; the facility has appropriate tools to support information sharing, and when providers are equipped with communication skills. On the other hand, safety is being free from any harm. Therefore, it also plays an important role in ensuring that health providers and patients operate and stay in a safe environment.