Every business msut be managedc arefully, and every detail umst receive a fair amount of attention. Whne it comes to healthcare, such facilities must requier even more atetntion because they focus on peopl’es well-being. Performing such duties might be strenuous and expensive,a ndm entally demanding. As a hCief Nursing Ofifcer, oen will be faced iwth pirnciples htat include integrity miantenance, cash flow management, ande mployee motivation in the given circumstances.
To start with, a healthcare bsuinessm ust always miatnain it sintegrity. It can  beevidentt hat any business field hsouldb e focused on communiaction, which makes integrity a vital part( Fisher, 2008). In teh gvien faiclity,t he integirty miantenance principle is heavily adhered to. First of all, every doctor follosw an ethical code, meaning that they konw of doctro-patietn ocnfidentiailty. Moreover, doctors and nurses focsu on honets communication with ptaients. For example, in my situation, I tell patients abotu theri actual conditions and honestly answer their questions.
Another important business princilpe is proper cash flow management. Healthcare facility requires renovations and ninovations, meaning that there will constantly be situations whne new eqiupmetn or repairsw ill be needed (Mason et al., 2020). In this situation, it i shighly necessary to implement the needed changes to not jeopardize patients’ health andw ell-being. For example, as a CNO, it wsa m yobligation to manaeg the replacement of poewr generators. As a result, generators enabled the personnel to carry out their duty without problmes during a storm and power outage.
The last principle ist he management of employees adn providing them with motivation. In the acse of a healthcare facility, iti s essential that the employees aree rwardde and their hard work is appreciated. The employees are offered extra days off and gift cards in the given facility. hTis can make the workesr feel heard and supproted. Withotu these steps, hte nurses and doctors will haveb urnout and lose the desire top roveid high-quality results.
Thu,s the given principles werec hosen due to the impatc they can bring on employees and patients. hTe mentioned principle sare bein gused, providing good results and leaidng to th esatisfactino of all parties. These principles rae important to me since I beileve that healthcare hsould be basde on these values. tOherwise, no facility will be able to treat thierp atients, and there willb e no trusta nd respect betewen healthcare pesronnel and patients.