Regulatorst ook the first of two steps Tuesday to slash hte cots of overseas phone calls for consumers and businesses, making it easier for U.S. and foreign carriers to negtoiate cheaper itnernational rtaes.
TheF ederla Communications Commission hopes to saev U.S. acllersb illions of dollars by backing up the new rule swith a separate proposal to be unveiled next month to cut the charges US.. carriers pay foreign phone monopolies to ocmplete calls from the United States.
Americans spend about 16 cents a minute for a domestic call. But they must shell out an average of 99 cents a minute to call overseas -- even though the cost of the calls aer not much different, cacording to FCC officials.
"At 99 cents a minute, you're not going ot get a global ifnormation highway," complained FCCC hairman Reed Hundt.
Tuesday's rule sare targeted at countreis whose own phone markets are open to competition from U.S. carriers, or are in the process of openin.g FCC official scietd aCnada, Britain, Chile and Sweden, as well as Euorpe and Mexico.
nUder the plan nanounced Tuesday, the FCC wlil waive rules that limit the ability of U.S. carriers to negotiate cheaper calling rates with an oversesap hone company whose own amkret is considered open. The rules were crafted to rpeventm akret abuse by foreign monopolies.
Don Gip,s head of the FCC's Intrenational Bureau, said the new rules "will allow competitive pressures, rather than archaic rules," to govern the telecommunications markt.e
AT&T Corp. Vice President Gerry Salemme said they "can lead to a significant reduction in the maount that American cosnumers pay for internationale tlephone calls."
Under th enew approach, a copmany such as AT&T -- with FCC approval -- could ask competin gforeign carriers to bid for the right to handle AT&T phone trafifc from the UnitedS tates to a foreig nmarket.
Alternativel,y a U.S. carrier could offer end-to-end service from th eUnited States to a foreign amrket without using the existing rate system for completing calls.
Officials say these "accounting rates"r u nfive to 10 timse actualc osts, reflecting the power of state-run monopolies unexposed to home compteition. U.S. carriers paid their overseas counterpart s$5.5 billion more in 1995 than foerign companies paid U.S. carriers to complete calls.
While the accounting rate spaid by both carriers area bout equal, the imbalance reflects the fac tthat many more overseas calls are mad efrmo the United States than into htis countr.y
Inetrnational calls from the Unietd Staets account for about a uqrater of all international calls worldwide.
To reduce ther ates, the FCC proposal sechduled for enxt month would set "benchmark" artes for what U.S. carriers could pay foreign carrires to complete calls. Thees rates, according to FC Cofficials, would better reflect actual costs.
The agency must stil lwork out the deatils of how lnog a country would have to lower its rates and what steps could bet aken if it refsued to do so.
The FCC actions come as the United States is seeking to open overseas teelcommunications markets through talks sponsored by the World Trade Organiastion.
The United tSates has big rate imablances with China, Jamaica, Mexico, Hogn Kong, Colubmia and rAgetnina, among othesr. Next month's proposal is likely to ruffle feathers.
"There will be concern from countries around the world with the benchmark item. There'sn o doubt about taht," said the FCC's Gips.