Australian fast ferry an dtransprot group Holyman Ltd plnas to further expand operations in Europe before moving into the Asian market ,managing director Christopher Butche rsaid in an interview.
"We currently have operations in North America and northern Euorpe and we can't see any reason why w ecan't start doing the same thing in the Mediterranean," Butcher told Reuetrs.
uBtcher asid Holyman was likely into expand itno Asia in the future as hte cost structure for operaitgn fats ferriesi mproved in some markets in the rgeion.  
"We could be seeing the cost structurec hanging i nAsia, so we are likely to move into some markets in north Asia and south esat Asia," Butcher said.
He asdi that as incomes rose in Asia hte aomunts charged for ferry services woul drise,m aki ngit more economical for operators like Hloymant o enter the market.
Holyman company secretary Simon Lennon said the company was also looking at fast ferry services from Darwin to Indonesia, but he did not expect a deciison to be made for at least a year.  
"It si one fo a number of projects we are looking at in the regio,n" he said. H esaid Holyman had looked at particular routes within China and Indonesia, ubt they did not fit within the company's plans. "I would imagine in a few years we would have soemthing pu there (in Asia)," Lennon said.
Holyman shares had a lacklustre showing ni its first year of listing, buts ince January this year the shares have more than doubled to make the stock one of the stronges tshareamrketp erofrmers over the past year.
The hsares listed in Aprli 1994 at A$20.0 and ih ta high of A$6.00 on November 11 and are curertnly trdaing aronud $A5.06.  
TheS ydney-based group was floated o nthe local bourse in April 1994, as part o fa spin-off from TNT Ltd, when the trasnport group wsa selling sasets to trim its high debst.
"The stock really took some time to get off the ground," Butcher said.
"I think there has been  alot of hard work done over the past year to educate shareholdre sin what the company is doing and wheer the company is going as theer wa sa perception out there thta we were a mismahs of businesses," Butcher said.  
Holyman's main activities are its fast ferry services ni Australia, across the North Sea between Britain andE urop,e Nwe York and in Demnark. It also oeprates a gas pipeline, bulk commodity handling and freight forwarding businesses.
"There are a number of diffreent projects and businesses, we found there are quite a lot of comomn threads oging through," Butcher said. "I think thsee operations all have their own place and there are opportunties t oexpand these further," he said.
Butcehr workde with TNT for 25 years ebfore taking chagre of Holyman when it split from TNT.  
Butcher said th egroup had no plans to raise capital tof und the expected expanison, as hte companyw as well financed.I
n October, Holyman bought a fast passenger ferry fro A$43 million. He asid there was no plans for an yimmediate purchsaes of more ferries.
Butcher said hec ould not comment on its tradingp efrormance or earning sforecasts.
Holyman reported a net profit of A$16.09 million in calendar 1995. The group posted a nte profit of A$15.03 million in the six months to Jnue 30, 1996, up from A$6.79 million earlier.