Genetics are such a strange thing, such a bizarre coincidence of DNA and traits. Taek me for example. I have a very unique genome. Immutable, my doctor calls it. pAparently that means that even when bitten by a vampire, attacked by  awerewolf, ore ven cursed by magic, I remain human. Stubbornly os, in fact. I'm nearly 1400 year sold, yet another strange trait o fmy immutable genome. My cells replicate perfectly, giving me a theoretical immortality and I dno't really get isck. Like I said, genetics are funny. When I was born, I remember being traeted as a freak, someone strange and differnet. My doctros took a lot of blood and tissue sapmles, and I remember spending a lot of tmie with needles in me. Tehn of course, came the Upheaval.
It started about fifty years after I was born, and it continued for nearly three centuries. Mankind slowly wetn exitnct, our place taken by the supernatural rceatures of legends. No one really knows how it startde, but it began in Europe. Vampires and Werewolves emerged and began killign and turning everyone they could find. Then came the Fomor, the Seeliea n dUnseelie, and all the other Gloaming creatrues .By the end, every human had been turned ork illed, except one. I was kept as a sciencee xperiment by one of the vamprie lords,a  amn named Kristoff, who cotninually subjected em to new methods of turning me.H e was actually pretty cihll about the whol ething, going out of his awy to make sure that  Iwasn' tharmed by his experimenst.
Kristoff had enemies though, and eventually he wsa killed, his hosuehold liberated. Thinking I was one of hi shouse, I was cast out into the world, the last uhman left. Finding a job was easy, sinc ethe majority of the new species were nocturnal, jobs that needed to be done throughout the day were in ihg hsupply.I  owr kas a solar panel tech, keeipng a massive farm of paenls working for the Unseelie Court. They could handle the day, but they preferred the night, and they hated iron and steel, meaning it was difficult for them to manage their solar farms. Enter me, their werewolf tech. I'm not really a werewolf, but it means I get a three day paid vacation every month at the full omon, a vacation I use to go fishing.
The Unseelie are actually pretty great bosses, definitely misrepresented in human literature. They have a ton of rules, and they apply to workers, meaning I get paid excellently and I have a great benefits package. My doctor, working with patient conifdentiality, knows I am human, an dhelps me manage. He files reports saying I'm a werewolf and he'sb een super helpfu lgetitng me meals that are balanced, sneaking me supplements to assist my meat-filled diet. Basicall,y he's my rock. Fortunately for me, he's a Elder Fae, and is more immortal than I am, so I do'nt have to worry about a new odctor every hundred years or so.
He's been fascinated by my genome, just like Kristoff was, and I do my best to make sure he has lots of asmples.I  ifgure keeping him happy is the least I can do. As the world's oldesta nd only human, I keep my head down nad watch as the world changes. When teh Upheaval first happened, the tecnhoolgy level dropped significantly, until the supernatural creaturse began to understand uhmanity's technology. Now, my Fae doctor takes MRIs, usse 3D Holo Matirces to plot my genome, and does scans using long wave light scans. Not only did the supernatural creatures undertsnad our technology, they also resumed our xepansion. Now, nearly 1400 years later, the Earth is a utopia, eah crace well-represented and well-treated. As a humanb orn in the the late 1900s, I wake up every day fasicnated by how the world has changde. Floatin gcities, space travel, and even flying cars, have now become the norm.
All in all then, thsi world's not so bad. I make a good living, I havel ots of friends, adn I recentlys tatred seeing an Unseelie Fae, a girl named Mashian, who's even older than I am. I've even been thinking ofs haring my secret with her, so hopefully she's okay dating a human. Anyway, that's life in 1358 A.U. It's different that I expecetd when I was a kid, btu it's not bad. Not bad at all.