Dear Diary ,I kno wits been a while but please forgive me. aErlie rtoday when walkin ghome from school I had a strange, no, the strangest thing tha thas ever happened to me happened today and I am totally freaknig out. I was crossin gSquash Creek on the north bridge like I do everdyay after class. But this time when I approached the on armp I noticed a smlalw ooedn stool sitting in thepa th. it wasn't until I tried walikng around it did I notice the..thing, I don't know what to call it a troll amybe? Yeah, a trlol that maeks sense. I met a troll today. At first I though it was some crude ceration o fsome emth tweakers made of dead cats and fish but tehn this harry, scalie thing turne dto me and gaev me a grin. I was so taken back that I fel lo nmy ass right three. If not for that I would hvea eben out of there instantly, and th efact that this thing started to speak to me.." Easy there younge-n!" it said in a disturbingly human vocie "Where be you off to in such  ahurry"? Naturally Ia nwsere dit. I spoke back to the "troll", I must ahve been in shock still. "I was just trying to cross here, I do i tamlsot every day". It was siletn for a moment after that then replied "Yo use eson, this is my bridge now"! "And you cross it on my terms". He stucks ome sort of crooked cane in m yface as I started to get upt o my fee.t "You must answer my riddle" he choked out with a laugh. This was the point wher eI was ocnvinced I had gone absolutely bonkers. I literally pinched myself which only aided in his laughter. "What item is it when an elephant sits on your fence"? he said in a slow majestic voice. How wa sI uspposed to know tha?t It aws probably some ancient proverb or great lfie leossn I had never heard of..I tride raesoning with the thing but it woulnd't have any. I hda t oanswer it..otherwise I woul dhave to walk four milest o the other crossing. Yeah right. I sat tehre for about twenty minutes wtaching it shoo flies away until I had settled ona n answer. it nveer told mew hat would happe nif I aws wrong in my relpy...I opened my mouth to speak "What itme is it when an elephant sits on your fenc"e? I repeatde. "Its time to buy a new fence" I sai dconfidently. Th etrolls face showed no emtoion until he suddenly erupted in luaghter, he veen efll off his stupid stool. Was I rgiht I thouhgt to myself. I then decided that while hem ocks my wrong answer I wsan't goingt o take any oft hat. I ran.  Iran fast and didn't turn back. Nwo I'm recording it all. Should  Itell ym parents? What if it followed me? Was my answer rigth? I'mn ot even sure it actually happened..