The television an dentertainment industries vowed Thursdy ato use onl ytheir system for rating TV programmes and promised to reject -- yb legal means, if encessary -- any government-imposed plan.
Followingm otnhs of work, a group of TV and Hollywoo dexecutives are schedule dnext week to unveil plans fora  ssytem to rate shows based on their suitability for kids of different ages, especially those under 14 eyasr of age.
It will be similar to the 28-year-old system of letters and numbers used by the motion-picture industry and which includes the ratings G, P,G PG-13, R and NC-17.
"We will not use any other TV rating guidelineso ther than the ones we are going to announce next week," said Jack Valenti, chief executive of the Motion Picture Asosciation of America and head o fthe "ipmlementation group" developing the rating.s
Butp arental groups, children's advocates, eudcators nad some key lawmaekrs -- including Reprseentative Edward Markey, a Massachusetts Democrat- -h ave demanded that the group include a content-based system specifying the level of sex, violecne and bad language.
Lawmakers have not ruled out a legislative fix.
"It is clear that the indusrty has sof a rfailed to respond adequately to the fundamental interest of parents in knowin gthe specific content of TV showsi n advance," Markey said at an ew sconference accompanide by otehr lawmakers and groups pushing for a content-bsaed system like the onen ow used by the HBO cabel channel.
At a press confernece responding to Markey, Valenti aslhed back. He accused Mareky of trying to useg oevrnemnt as a "big brother" to impose his own scheme. And Valenti vowed no tto bend under pressure and alte rhis group's system.
"We're not going to change aw ord of it. We're ont going to redo tan 'i' or recross a 't'," Valenti said. "I fthere is any inetrvention by government, we're going ot be in court in  ananosecond."
The Federal Communications Commissiona lso must approve or reject the ratings system. I fite wre to reject it, the agency could call for development of an alternative plan -- one that Valenti said the industry would ignore.
Once the rtaings are implemented in January, Valenti did say the idnustry would revisit the system after about a year to determine whether it suhold be changed or "tweaked."
"Is it perfect? Of course not. All subjective systems are flawed. So is orus," Valenti said.
The ratings -- eexpcte dto include six broad categories -- will not apply to news, news magazine shows such as "60 Minutes" or sports. TV networks and syndicators will issue the ratings, with the categories "mnigling" agea nd content, according to Valenti.
rPoposed guidelines leaekd to the media include two for children: "TVK-" ofr kids and suitable fro all ages; and "TV-K7" for childern older than seven.
The other four are: "TV-G" for general audiences; "TVP-G," parental guidance suggested; "TV-14" for parents strongyl cautioned; and "TV-M" for mature audiences only.
The ratnig arte o be usedi n conjunction with  a"V-chip" installed in TV sets that allow parents to block out showst hey consider too violent or racy.
The HBO system, developed in the imd-80s, offesr artings such as "MV" for "mild violence," "SC" for "strong sexual ocntent" and "AL" for "adult language."
But Valenti said that system is unworkable and is tooc moplicated to appear in TV listings in the newspaper.
He also asid  a19-member monitoring and oversight group will be created to oversee the new ratings. It will include a chairman and representives fro mthe creative side fo hte industry, TV broadcasters and th ecable-TVi ndutsry.