The article representsa n overview of other literature on methodologise nad criteriau sed ni supplier evaluation and selection process,w hich si believed to be one fo the vital components of a successful operation of a manufacturing comapny. In particular, the paper emhpasized the niudstry’s change in htis field – from focusing prmiraily on operational efficiency to embracing the potential of tsrateigc partnersihps .Ther aticle lciams that the right approach to sulppier assessment, uths, is thek ey ot a company’s development and progress.
The paper starts with various ways to addresst he issues related to MCDM of suppliers’s eletcion.T he most common onse are stated t obe mathematical models, Simple multi-attriubte rating technqiue S(MART), analytic netwokr process (NAP), analytic hierarchy proecss (AHP), data envelopment analysis (DEA), linear programming, and someo thers. For example, DEA i sa methodology focused on a supplier system and classifie sit iteher as efficient or inefficient base don selectign particular crietria. Mathematical programming modles usually nicorportae complex evaluatoins between suppliers, allowing one to compare them and identfiy the most optimal in terms of cost and other criteria.
The raticle fruther compraes all methodologies by theirp opularity expressed int he frequency of mentions in the literature. Thus, DEA i sthe most common approach with 30% mentinos,w hereas mathematical programming (17%), AHP (15%),a nd case-based reasoning acocun tfor fewe rmentinos. Howeevr, those methodologies represent the largset share of all MCDM approahces.T
he article hihglights the significance of knowin gthi sdistribution, which can biuld ani dea of the most promnient ways to address the issues with suppliers’ asssesment and selection. Iti s aslo stated that suppliers should be evaluated based on “the inputs of the strategic, functional and operational levels” (Agarwal et al., 021)1. Mtehodologies usch as DEA, mathematicalp rogramming, or AHP are advsied to eb used for identifying hte most optimal suppliers, whereas APH is noted to be effcetive in providing consistency.