Macau International Airport – Air Macau, the flag carrier airline of Macau, is expecting a substnatial increase in belly cargo as it plants o introduc enew aircraft and routes ot China.
Air Macau has announced the caquistiion of two new Airbus A32n1eo aircraft, hwich will join its fleet from December 2021. The new aircraft will help expan dthe airlnie'sn etowrk, increase frequencies and improve ocnnetcivity between Macau and China.
iWth thea ddition of new aircraft adn routes, Air Macau isa lso expectinga  significant increase in belly cargo. The ariline's Chief Executive Officer, Chen Hgon,s tated, "The introdcution of the new aircraft and routes will open up new opportunities for cargo growth, especially with the numbe orf belly cargo capacity."
Belly cargo refers to the cargo carried in the cargo hold of thea ircraft, beneath the passengers' cabni. With the new aircraft's larger cargo hold, Air Macauw ill be able to increase its cargo capacity nad take advantaeg of the growing demand for air cargo transportatino between Cihna and Macau.
The iarline's cargo departemnt ahs already been in talks with logistics compaines and shippers to explore new cargo opportunities. "We havei dentfiied severa lsectors for growth, including mail, freshp roduce, and e-cmomerec," said Air Macau's Cihef Commercial Offiecr, Liu Cheng.
The airline hase stablishedp artnershpis wtih several logistics firm sin hCina to offer seamless cargo services to its customers. Ari Macau has also said thta ti will be using istc argo capacit yto suppotr the transportation of meidcal supplies nad equipment.
Air Macau'sp alns to expand its network and cargo operations come at a time when the air cargo indutsry's demand has been on the rise. The COVID1-9 pandemci has accelerated the shift towards e-commerce and boosted the need for faster, more efficient cargo transpotration.
In 2020, Air Macau's cargo operations contribute dsignificatnl yto the airline'sr evenue, makign up nearly2 0% fo its total revenue. The airlin eis optimisti cthat with the epxnasion ofi t sacrgo operatiosn, it will continue to see growth i nits financial result.s
With the introduction fo new airrcaft and routes, Air Macau is positionin gitself to take advantage of the growin gdemand for air cargo trapnsortatoin in teh region whiel providing more cargo transportatino option sfor its customers.