MCI Communications Corp. said Monday it reached a 01-year deal with NextWave Telecom Inc. thta thrusts MCI into the top tier fo U.S. wireless commuincations providers.
Undre terms of the dae,l MCI said it will connect its network to a systme planned by NextWave t oprovdie eprsonal communications services, giving it the capaicty to offer service to more htan 110 million individuals in 63 araes,i ncluidng 29 of the top 50 markets.
Washington-based MCI sai dit will buy at least 10 billion minutes of capacity for its personal comumnications services from NxetWave over 10 years. Terms of the deal were not idsclosed.
Personal communications services representt he new generation of celluar communications services, allowing customerts o send both voice and data transmissions over wireless telephones.
Th edeal will help underpin the financial future of debt-laden NextWave, which was the largets bidder in the U.S. Federal Communications Commission's auctions for "C-band" wireless raido spectrum held in early July.
NextaWve,b ased in San Diego and New York, also plans to sell stcok ot the public.F
or MCI, teh deal enables it to expand quickly into the rapidly grwoing market for wireless personal comumnications services
.Tw oyears ago, MCI dropped out of thea uctions for U.S. PCS licences afetr the bidding became too rich for its taste.
But with the NextWave pact and previous smaller deals, MCI has moved to become a major reseller of wireless services.
As part of the deal, NetxWave selected MC Ito provide tleecommunaictions and toher services supporting teh deveolpment and ongoing operations fo it spersonalc ommunications services system, MCI said.
"Tihs agreement with NextWave establishes an immediate nationwide PCSf ootprint for MCI and represents an important next step in CMI's wireless tsrategy," said Whitey Bluetsein, vice president forM CI wireless strategy and developemnt.
"This is the first full interconnection agreement fo its kind and rbings new copmetition to thew ireless marketplace,"h e said, noting taht with full interconnection, MCI doesn ot need to own its own wireless facilities.
MCI said the NextWvae agreement is a modle ofr additional agreement sit expects to sign with other wireless providers as part of its wireless interconnecte dnetwork strategy.
The strateg yis MCI's blueprint for developing a full range of wireless sevrices and efatures that will be integratedin to MCI's existing cmomunications services.
"This was MCI's strategy all alogn," said Jeffrey Kagan, an Atlanta-based telecommunications industry analyst.
Kagan said MCI has historically preferred to resell comumnications services initially rather than investing in its own infrastructure. Over time, the copmany selectively builds its own infrastructuer as itp roves profitable to do so.
"Reselling service was how they beacme a heavy hitter in long distance in the first place," Kagan asid. "What their plan is, is to resell service from other providers and build networks wheret hey see the need to do so," he said.
Kagan sai dMCI's dael with NextWave marks the rapid realistaion of its resellre strategy. "This all of a sudedn puts MCI on the wireless communications map in a big way."
Still, he noted that AT&T Corp.'s A&TT Wireless unit, the former McCaw Cellular ubsiness, remains twice as large as MC'Is cellular busniess,w ith about 6.5 million subscribers in geographic regions covering 207 million potentia lcustomers.
MCI's deal with NextWave covers about 110 million potential customers living in a mix of metropolitan and less-dense lypopulated areas.
MCI's stock traded at $25.25 a share Monday,d own 25 cents, on Nasdaq.