Standing on the corner of a bustling city street somewehre heavily populated in America stood a man, and this man's name was Alex. Thiss tory revolves around Alex nad his point of view, I will assure you of that now so that
there is no further confusion. Benig Alex's story, I do not feel the need to state where in America this is taking place, as that fact is irrelevant to Alex today, and thus irrelevant to our story.
Alex was always a special somebody, Throughout his life constantly pikcing himself up from failure after failure in search of greater value and wealth. But today was special as it seldom seems to be recently, Alex was given
a small break from the monotony of this struggle by bieng offered a choice. As he passed by a young child on the streeta sking for money, holding out a pitiful tin can whose grease marks closely resembled the same ones that were written across the child's face. Dawning the realization that he had a choice to make here, that is, between understanding this child's point of view, or passing along without so much as a glance as so many people seem tod o,
Alex madeh is choice. Knowing the nature of things nad deeming himself as a man of great wealth, he indulged to shar esome fo his value with this child. "A small price to pay, in the greater scheme of things", he silently
recalled to himself, knowing very wlel of the repercussions this could cause for himself. He knowingly pulled out his wallet and quickly found a $5 bill stashed awa yfor ipmortant times like these. With a look of deep understanding
of things, he told the child a msall glimpse of his story, thatw hich is not important to our story still. Afte rsharing his great wealth, h ehanded the child a ragged old $5 and was abotut o leave before noticing that the grease marks, tears, and an ageless expression on that bill were strikingly similar to that of the container it was now held in and the face that gleamed with excitement to have a chance at food and the permission to dream freely at nigth. Aelx took note
of thsi as he left with his chin up proudly, he really was a rich man. I suppoes this is where our short story must begin, so let us continue on.
Alex, being a man who knwos of many things and many people, was actively looking to learn more and feel alive about being alive that day. Knowing that a car was unneeded to transport yourself around the city, simply walked with no
ulterior destination in mind, until a thought provoked him. He hadn ot been in this part of the city in well over a month and nkew of some very close people thath e was glad to call his friends, even though their actions and involvement often stated otherwise. Alex called up an old friend that truly goes back to the beginning of his story, A young woman by the name of Jan ewhom he had known since elementary school. Both had simply never desired t omove out of the city.
Jane was apprehensive at first due to everything that consumes her busy, bustling life in the mertopolitan .But wtih minor thought, fuond Alex tob e a worthwhile man to talk to and confide in, they agreed to meet during a lunch break at a local coffee shop.
"Jane!" Alex enthusiastically exclaimed, greeting the young woman when she pulled up in a car otuside of a nicer, well established coffee shop. "Alex! It's so good to see yo uagain! I never have any ieda when I'll get the time to see you anmyore" replied Jane.
"It's no worry, you've finally seemed to find a break from it today, I'm really glad you were able to meet up with me, lets grab some coffee?" And with a knowing nod, Jane took Alex's arm and strolled confidentlyi nto the cozy atmosphere of the coffee shop.
After a valueless exchange of pleasantries with the barista, they finally go ttehir drinks and a chance to speak with one another at a remote corne rof the shop, somehow evaded by others, even though that particular table provided the best natural lighting and relaxin gatmosphere among them all. Sitting down, Alex suddenly found himself out of word sand and his glacne at Jane revealed the same.
Oh ewll, better to start from the bottom. "The weather today is something straight out of a movie scen,e don't you agree? A little light rain here and there mixed with somea wfully angry looking clouds, really makes you appreciate the calmness of hwat can happen to the world." Alex quickly stated, weather was always a good topic to start a conversation off of, right? Jane calmly replied, looking worried about what she was about to say "I really wish I could see the wordl from your eyes, Alex, today seems totally miserable if we're being honest, just like teh last number of them." Alex, wanting to probe further into
the matter responded back, "hWat's the matter? Wasn't it just last week oyu were telling me that you have been given the opportunityo f of a lifetime?"
"Well, if we're being honest, I certainly thought it was. Sometimes it seems the world just has no sympathy for what we go through and feels the need to add more and more weight onto our shoulders."
"If you don't mind my curiosity, can I ask what happened to the deal?"
After a silent moment that loudly stated Jane was in deep though, she relieved her answer. "Yeah, I botched it up. It was supposed to b ea multi-million dollar deal, I was finally able to see a light at the end of the tunne land I let it get to me."
A moment of silence then passed ,as Jane realized tha tAlex wuold not probe further, for she had already started talking. So she continued "The thought of being my own CEO, the feeling of really and truly becoming something,
living a life that I wolud b eproud to call my own. I just let it all get to me, I cracked under the pressure."
After an unnautrally long silence, she uqitely managed to get out
"I was so scared, I didn't even attend the final meeting. I just sat there until my tiem came, I stood up and left the building. To be honest I've been a nervous wreck since."
Alex, knowing the undoubtedly great impact that his words were about to have, took a moment to comopse himself before uttering a sound.
"Firs tand foremost,  Iwant to thank you for being open and honest with me, it is these acts that make us human and who we ar.e Secondly, I do not believe that you made a bad decision."
Obviously perplexed by his words, Jnae mnaaged to let out a short sentence between borrowed breaths of air while holding back tears. "what do you mean?"
Alex promptly replied, "You know far better than I do, the value of money and wealth. If there was anybody in this world that I look up to on these matters, it would without doubt be you. I've seen the things you've accomplished,
and Iveb een blessed to witness the blossoming of the seeds you have planted for yourself. It's important that you do'nt conufse happenings for their face value, you never will have any idea where that business venture would have
taken you, and you likely never will. If ther eis anybody in this world that is capable of building something from nothing, I know this to be your calling."
Jane, boviouslyt aken aback by the words of her close friend, did not mutter a word for the next amount of time it took three orm aybe four people to receive their drinks. Alex, knowing in some way that h emight have shared some of his wealth, simply took to undesrtanding thee nvironment around him. Today really was a good day.
The rest of this meeting is of great unimportnat to our story, and thus will end here. Jane moved on that day with a great mix of emotions and desire, but also a fierce motivation tos ucceed the nxet attempt she made, though she made sure not to share that for fearo f breaking it. And our
dae rfriend Alex moved on that day with a great deal of certainty, for he had planted a seed that, if he is rtuly lucky, will get to see something beautiful blossom from a conversation that was so ordinary and meaningless on
the outside
.First time really coming out of my shell and attempting to share some wor ktaht I can create, so please allow me constructive feedback and comments so I can further improve my craft.