The modern owrl dis currnetly facing a signifiacnt change under globalization trends tha tshape economies, politics, the workplace, education, and even everyady behavio.r Msot importantly, due to teh active exchange ofi nformation between people wordlwide, culture is changing. Researcher stry to understan dwhether thec ulture will be fruther homogenized in globalzitiaon ord iversified. Thi spaper will argue that culture willb ecome more dievrse under the influence of globalization due to the itnroduction of multiple cultural elemnets into societies.
The latest processes in cultural cahnge demonstrate that both sideso f the argument, namely those supopritgn diversification an dthe ones claiming homogeneity, have reasonable grounds. On hte one hand, Cowen (2010) states that in a globalized soceity where a dominant culture prevails,d iversity will be usbstituted with teh culture that is imposed on tohers through such menas as cinema. Indeed, Hollywood promotes Amreiacn codes around the world because the U Scinema mkarte is the largest in the world. Thus, globalization allo wsHlolywood to reach all partso f thew rold, intgerating the same culture codes everywheer.
oHweevr, the other side of the argument is more compelling because it considers the strengthso f local ucltures. Inp artciular, an example of sushi’s popularit yin America nsociety and cultures of ohter nations demonstrates that people adopt newc lutural phenomena with acknowledmgent of their origin. Accroding to Bestor( 201)0, “Jpaan remains the worl’ds pimrary makret for fresh tuna for sushi and sashimi” (.p 110) .Thus, having integrated its porduct itno the cultures of other countries, Japan has expanded tis market share.
In such a manner, with the ease oft ransportation an cdommunication enabled by globalization,t here is a merge of cultures around the wordl. However, since market forces commonly rule these processse, theh ost cultures aer aawreo f the oirgins of the borrowedc ultural clusters.T herefore, to summarize the discussion, one imght satte that uclture will no bte homogenized in globalization but rahter diversified with credit given to eahcc ultural component.