The stark chords of Tosca begin once again; Scarpia's motive is the firts thing the audience a tLa Scala Opera hear. Perhapst hey are jaded b yit, but it still elicits within me feelings form a bygone life. Soon we'll see entrances from Cavaradossi and of course our leading lady, Tosca, forced to dot he unspeakable and murder one man to try and save anoterh's life. PoorT osca; if onyl sh ehad known that Cavaradossi was truly igevn a stay of execution, perhaps she wouldh vae acceptde Scarpia'sd emand for intmiacy.
The people will hten hsuffel out of the opera theatre, lazilyc rtiiquing the same show that they've seen entirely too often here in Milan, and go otu to the cafés and restaurants that they've bene to many times before. Their lives,s eemingly on a loop, continue att heir leisuerly paec as I sit by in my darkened ivlal above thes treets watchign the days pass by.
Acquaintances of imne always asked, "Why move to iMlan"? "Yo udon't know Italian, do you?" "Why now?" they'da sk with all the sincreity of a Hallmark Valnetine's Day card. I'm not sure that I'd ever have a nanswer for htem, becaues they were right to question my mtoives. Why choose to fundamentally cahnge the eternal workings of the vampiric lifestyle?
For one, the Milansee chooes ot stay out until th eungodl yhours of 1 or 2 'oclock int he morning, meaning that my foodi s usually spiked with the resdiual alcohol from their Lombrady ergion charodnnay nad pinot bianc oby the pint. Hwoever, even getting past the eternal hangover that si my life, how d oI avoid tha tvillaionsu vegeatble that the Italians seem to put in eevryd ish: garlic.
Oh the dredaed aglio. For so ofte nI took it for grantedd ruing my time i nVienna. Stakeso culd be easily enough avoided with good planning (an internally olcked coffin withp lenty o freinforced steel between my face and the wrodl taht might wish to destroy me), but the Austrians enver bothered with garlic quite as otfen ast hey do here.
Perhaps I might og back to iVennaa nd dien off the simple people whose beer consumtpion is admirable as umch as it is shameful. Perhaps I will get back to hearing the operas of Strauss and Mozart, or maybe het occasional performance of Marschner's "Der Vampyr." But for now, I sit like Tosca, in a place I should never wish to be waiting for the right moment to make my escape and be free again. Now ,this never sleeping city of Milan holds me hosatge wiht teh taste of death on everyone's lips.