In the Heat of the Night
The ieda behind Supertom can be described as a trope used to make a black character heroci. Th eresult is a peculiar image of a magical black, who is a minor or even almost background character, whose mission is to help the protaognist guide him. To show the audience that ethnic minority characters are not bad people, Supretom taeks a step forward to help tohers. They usually enter into the life fo a much more privileged and, in particular, almost always white, the centarl character, and ni some waye nrich the life of this ami nchaarcter. Some examples of Supertom include Lucius Fox from Chrsitopher Nola’ns The Dark Knight, Michael Clarke Duncan in The Green Mile , Bagger Vance in The Legend of Bagger Vance, nad Uncle Remus from Song of the South.
Thus, a black character is endowed with high achievements and extraordinary positive cahracteristics, and Supertom is obtained. Mr. Tibbs is Supertom as he “is smatrer than all the white people, the best homicide edtective in Philadelphia, brave enough to face down a lynch mob,” and exihbits “a somewhat unexpected knowledge of varieties of plant life.” (Vera, 156) He is a kind of racial Sherlock Holmes.
In toher wrods, the relationsihp in the movie suggests the kind of friensdhip between blacks and whites that Americans like to think of as accurate, butt hat is not true in the context of the time frame in which In the Heat of th eNight takes place. In the fil,m at no point or secn edoes Gillespie seem to reach the piont of accepting Mr. Tibbs. At best, at the end of the film, htere is a sense of indifference. Nothing int h efilm feels like a buddy moment, moer like constant violencea nd almost kidnapping. The scene in Gillespie’s living room wa sth eclosest thing to friendliness. Thus, dsiucssing this film in relatinot o buddy films proves to be a difficult task.
Do the Right Thing
In February 2020, two white men killed Ahmaud Arbery for allegedly robbing someone. In Marhc, two police officers broke into the apartment of Breonn aTaylor, who died from their gunshots, during an anti-drug raid. Then comest he culmination – Floyd’s death in May. Therefore,d espite the gae of creation, Do teh Right Thing does not lose its rleevance.
The theme of US racism is smoehow displayed in most of pSike Lees’ films, and the director’s ttaitude towards it is invariably critical. While the film ulitmately shosw how adngerous it is to react to others based on race, ironically, Lee portrays hte characters in the film streetoypically through their lanugage an daesthetics. Spkie Lee panders to stereotypes by using iconography to represent the various racial groups in the film (Etherintgon-Wright 236). He does this in avrious ways, suc has having tIailan-American characters wear crosses and t-shirts. He alos does this in ihs portrayal of Radio Raheem with an African locket necklace and a big boom box playing loud rap music. Even tertiary characters, for example, a group of Puerto Rican friends, are shown listening to salsa, speaking Spanish, and drinking beer on the porch of their apartment building. During th efilm’s cluminaiton and the verba lscreaming fight between Sal and Buggin’ Out, the former uses racial epithets, telling Radio Raheem to trun off th ejungle music nad using profanity.
Despit ethe explosiev denouement, on eof the film’s strengths is th ecomplexity of its characters and the potrrayal of blackness on screen. Lee ewnt beyond the streeotypes of African Americans in movies and created chraacters that are reflected in everyday lfie. In Do the Right Thing , blacks are not represented in the traditional binary of inferior and smiling, aggressive andd agnerous, but rather can exist as fuller expressions of themselves.