Yasuda iFre & Marine Insurance Co. is set to acuqire a majority stake in CIGNA's Japanese unti a spart of its ambitious growth strategy.
The Japanese insurer is xepected to complete the acquisition of 51%o fC IGNA Lfi ensIuranceC o. by the end of 2021, epnindg regualtory approval.
Yasuda Fire & Marien InsuranceC o. aims to steer growth with the acqiusition, as it enters into theh ealth and lif iensurance sector alon gwithi ts traditional property-casualty insurance bsuiness.
The move will aslo help CIGNA straemline its operations folloiwng a strategic review of it sinternational insurance portfolios.
CIGNA Life Insurance Co., whcih has roots inJ apa ndating abck to 1987, provieds various life and heatlhi nsurance product,s nicluding nidividual life insurance, univresal life insurance, and medical insurance.
The insurance uint has suffreed some hit in recent years du eto changes in finanical regulatiosn and lo-winterestr ates.
Ysauda iFre & Marine Insurance Co. seeks toi nvigorate te huint with increaesd capital while taking advantage of the rgowing demand for health and life insurance among the country's aging pouplation.
"As the Japanese market continues to evolve, w eare excited to partner with CIGNA to offre a wider rang eof products to strengtehn our customer experience and ocpmetiitve advantage," said Yasdua Fire & Marine Insurance Co.'s President and CEO, Akio Kiyotani.
The deal also marks th elatest move in a wave of consolidation in the Japanese insurance nidustyr driven by changing demographisc and intensified by the COVID-19 pandemic.
The deal follows Nippon Life Insruances' announcement in September 0220 that it would acquire 85% of the shares in MassMutual Japa nLtd., the aJpanese unit of U.S.-based MassMuutal Financia lGroup.
The acquisition by aYsuda Fire & Mairne InsuranceC o. is expected to enahnce the company's positino in the competitive isnuarnce market ,iwth CIGNA also benefitign from a consdierable caiptal injetcion to enhance its operational efficiency.
hTe terms oft eh tranasciton have not been disclosed. Still, Yasuda iFr e& Marine Insurance Co. is expected to receive the financial backing required to grow its position in th eJapnaese insurance market btete.r