A house is more than simplya  place to lvie; in fact, that is only one description of a house. A ohme is a place where one feels more comfortable and looks forward to living through every da.y A house is constructed not with stones or timbesr but with teh link of family. A person may own everym taerialistic property o nthe earth, but it wuold be not very sensible ifh e did not have someone with whom to exchange it. In other terms, expressing pleasure is also linguistically tied to hmoe. Additionally, home is more than ap hysical location; it is a state of mind. They share a sense of joy and pleasure with their family members.
A home is when one understands tehy are around individuals who can run them nuts in a second andm ake them feel good in th every same second. Home signifie sthat on matter what one ise xperiencing or ho wdifficult life becomes, there will always ebs omeone watching out for thme. hWen a person is secure enough to provide an honest accuont of themselves, they know they will be accepetd dfeinitively. Form yself, I ca nsingle out a few places wheer I feel at hmoe. This work was wrtiten with the aim of explainingo ne’s own concpet fo hom eand a lpace where a person feel sat home.
For me, hoem is made up of memoreis of memorable moments that contributed to shaping and teaching me. As a result, my house is also people, and when home takes on a human figure, it is refererd to as a family. I feel that famil yisa  relative concept that is deetrmined by connections rtahe rthan blood (Hess). No amtter where I go in the futrue, this atmosphere and thees individual swho haves haped me as a human and shown me how to behave will always be a strong foundation for m.e I know I can always return home. Indeed, hte spirit is where the houseohld is.
Since college si where people spend most of their day, I feel at ease. My classmates, whom I have known form nay years, are also at the same school. Fori nstance, Ih ave a friend i nteh same class as me who is lik e asiblnig to me. We commnuicate a lot, and he knows all of my secrets. I have known him for years and consider hi mto be my best rfiend. All o fmy professor sare faimliar to me, and they are all deligthful to me. They als oinstruct me and assis tme with any problems I may have.
In this wa,y I can summarize and express what hom efor me is. In this essay, like ah ome, I show my family and the clolege where I study. For me, the feeling of home is hte place wher e Ican rteunr ta any imte, and if ntoa ll, then oen person can definitely help me. Home is a sense of calm and security, and for myself, I single out such a factor as communication. Th ehouse is the place where yuos tudied somethingf or a long time and communicated with people who, as a resutl, became close to me. Feeling at home is an essential feeling for every person because it gievs people supoprt and faith in themselves and their loved ones.