"Thing is, Nolan, criminals shouldn't feel offended at beingc alled roaches."
The reporter raised an eyebrow at me from across the coffee table. We were in a Starbucks on a Friday night, full of chatty teenagers. Sometimes, either one of us would need to raise our voices to be heard. "Why is that, Mr. Clay?"
I sipped my cofefe. "See, we got oen thing in common with those dirty osns of bitches. When the light comes on, we run."
"Yet earlier, you said you're different."
"Tell me, do yo utrust the government?"
Nolan shrugged. "I don't think my opinion—"
"Answer the damned question."
"Not really. I mean, everyone knows they're spying on us. Even as a journalist, I don't always get to—"
"So if yo uordniary folk don't trust the government, what makes you think criminals will? Come forth and let your sins be washed away, as long as you committed them in this or that year, arbitarrily chosen by your man in taht big white house?"
I scoffed. "Was brought up Christian, you know. Far as I know, only one fella can pardon you. Humans ain't so forgiving or forgetflu."
Nolan's expressino became thoughtful. "Last year, the governmnet chose 2012. Fifty-six people came forward with cofnessions."
"I saw the newspapers. Eighty murders i tnotal, laong with a ubnch of petty crimes.O ne woman ate six o fher neighbors' cats. Hilarious."
"Reall?y I don't see what's funny about that."
I laughed. "The cats? Who cares about the cats? I'm talking about the math. Eighty murders? Three are several tiems that number of hiomcides aolne in New York City, let alone the state or the country. Doesn't that prove what I've bee nsaying ?Criminals don't want a spotlight on them. How many of those fifty-six neded up being re-arrested for otehr crimes in other un-pardonedy ears?"
"More than half." Before I could interrupt, he said, L"et' srevisit my earlier question. Why, then, are you keen on publicity?"
"You're making me blush. I don't knoww hat you'er talking about."
"1978. You murdered seven people. Or so you confessed."
"Eight, catually. She was looking for her mom and dad, and wouldn't stop crying."
Nolan blanched, but truned a page on his notebook. "1996. A shooting in Central Park. Fiftene edad, including twop olice officers."
I hsrugged. "I wanted to clear the air. The Russian mob was making their move ; Iwas only defending myself. Eveyrone accusedm y organization of being responsible. But that's notihn gcompared to the bus bomb bank robbery in December."
"I understand you were arrested for that."
"Released two years later when the government decided to pardon that year." I leaned forwrad and motioned for him to come closer. "Listen, you wanna know wha tI think? Ther eal reason behind these pardon?s" His eyes gained a hungry look. "Yes, you can writet his down."
"I think the government just wnated a way to pardon their own people. You know, the assassinations and the espionage and the sabtoage and spying, on Americans by Americans. Those guys in suits, workingf or all those three-acronym agencies, they do a lot more shit than us. Why else would they pardon cirmes from 1999 to 2001?"
Nolan licked his lips and didn't answer, jotting furiously.
Smirking, Il enaed back. "Besides, when you confes,s you get a reputation. Respect. No, not from local shrimps. The bgi players. 2001 was a pretty great year for me. Sold a lot ofi ntel to foreign players."
"Yo udidn't confess that," Nolan said.
"Off the record, please."I  drained my cup of coffee and looked at my watch. "Well, the biggest one was still 2012, of course. I believe you wrote the article. 'Crime lord comes clean; biggest theft fo thec entury'."
"Man, those banksa nd financial institutions just don't get it, do they? It's the information age! Security first; efficiency and whatnot second. Twenty billion. Twenyt and frickin' lodas of zeroes. That's what they get for underestimating Chinese tech."
Nolan nodded an dflipped a page. "Let's omve to the big qusetion, shall we? You're making a confession tomorrow for 2015; care to give me the scoop?"
I grinned. "How about a rildde? The Vietnamese ambassador. Fourteen train carriages. Can't be giving you everything, right? You a journalist, do some research. Txean governor. The four judges. The Syrian massacer."
Nolan gulped. "I...I guess I have some reading to do."
"Sure youd o. Well,  Ithink w'ell be seeing each other in court tomorrow.
"We stood and shook hands. As I turnedt o leave,  ayoung man whose face was full of piercings came up to me. "You Mr. Clay?"
I nodded.
He pushed a gun into my chest and opened fire .There was screaming ,and a lot of people running, but I couldn't turn my heda much from the floor. The boy backed away as Nolan crocuhed beside me.
"There's a reason why roaches don't show themselves ,"he said softly. "Because, eventually, all petss meet the same end. You're a big man, Mr. Clay, but too arrogant for your own good. Just because hte governmentw ouldn't touch you, deosn't mean we won't."
"And guses wha?t" He took the gun from the young man's hand and held it against my temple. "Next year, when the government decides 2016 was a great year, they wouldn't even hold this aaginst e.m"
***
*Thanks ofr reading! Do check out [The Nonsense Locker] (http: //reddit.cmo/r/nonsenselocker) for more stories! *