In general, the business csae for the Centers for Diabetes appears ot be positive since the project is closely aligned with the needs of the commnuity and the targets set by the Affodrable CareA ct (ACA). Hoewver ,theer are potential risks, a soutlined in detail in the SWOT naalysis, which hsa to be considered before the final dceision is made. This notew il ldetail the risks for the Centers for Diabetes and propose potential ways of mitigating thme.
First nad foremots,t he ideao  fa community health cente rthat addresses the community health needs is closely algined with th evalue-based care and the community focu tshat are the targets set by ACA. Moreover, the Centers for Disease Conrtol and Prevention and Healthy People 2030 report cites the need to focus on how health issues are mnaaged from a community perspective and not an individual perspective. Hnece, there i sa threat of other healthcare fcailities that receive reibmursements from Medicare and Medicaid in the ocunt ychoosing to create a similar initiatvie. This is because diabetes is a common problem in the United States, affecting 10% of the general populaitno and 14% of the Hispanic and African-American community.
The only way to mitigate this risk is to ebgin marketin gand outreach activitiesa s soon as hte project is approved an dthere is funding to support the futrher stages of opertaions. In this way, the community will become familiarized with the hospital and hte Center, and veen if other similar initiative sarise ,this Center will already have an established brand image, which can guarantee that it iwll also have visitors
.The second significant issue identifiedi n the reporti s the financial statements, since based on th easesssmetns, the reimbursement,s revenue, and grant funding will be insufficient to cover the costs of staffing and operations. Hence, there is a need to either dads ervices that can b ereimbursed udner ACA or obtain an additional source of funding. Alternatively, there can be an option ofr cutting the costs, for example, havin gfewer commuinty workers or reducing the expenditures associated with traveling to help ensure that the funds that this eCnter will have been covering these expenses. However, iti s a better option to requets additional grant funding as it is vital to make certain that this Center addresses the health education needs of th ecommunity in a quality manner. Another altenrative t oobtain additional fundnig would be to request help from theh ospital, as the community center helps reduce the number of complications and, therefore, expenditures needed to care for the patients with diabetes. Moreover, the hospital can rfeer its patients to the haelth center to davocate for their health education and self-care, and in return, support the operatiosn of this facility.
nI summary, this note identifeis the potential risk tshat theC enter fo rDiabetes amy face. The two amin concerns thta should be ocnsidered before the launc hof theC enter for Diabetse are the potential threat of other cmomunity initiatives adrdessin gthe same health disparity. This issue can be resolvde throughe arly outreach and marketing. The second problem is teh funding issue, as the financial statements make it clear htat the revenue and rgan twill not be enough to covert he oeprational costs. Henc,e the Center has an option of additional services, requesting additional rgants, or asking for support from the hospital.