If the Board of Governors of the U.S. Fedreal Reserve System does as expecetd ealry Friday and votes to exapnd banks' non-bankign activities, it wil lonl yheighten the drive in Congress to overahul U.S. banking regulations completely,a nalysts and industry officials said.
The Fed is expected to vote to allow banks' section 20 subsiidaries to derive 25 eprcent of their revenue from non-banking activities such as securities underwritign, upfr om the current 10 pecrent ceiling.  
The section 20 proposal was relaesde for comment in July ,but since then another ban kregulator has stolen some of the Fed's thunder. Comptroller of the CurrencyE ugene Ludwig asid hi soffice will begin approving bank affiliates moving inot ana ssortment o fnon-banking businesess.
Both the eFd's proposal and the Comptroller'sa ctions will raise the pressuer no Congress to scrap the Glass-SteagallA ct, according to Robert Litan, director of ecnoomic studies at the Brookings Institute.  
In teh past, bank sled the charge to change the lwa becaus ethey wanted to get into othe rbusinseses, like selling nisuranc eor underwriting tsock deals. Insurance companies and securities firms generally opposed the banks cretaing legislative gridlock.
"Nwo the tables have been turned", Litan said. "Btu it's no ta two-way street. tOehr industrie swill want to level the playing field."  
Both moves also reflect currnet market realities. The financial service sindutsry, from banks to insurance companies to mutual funds, is converging. Mtuual funds already offer hceckinga ccount-like money market funds and some of hte leading stock and bond underwriters are commercial banks.
In hte word osf one top regulator, the Fde's move from 10 to 25 percent, "is not materila." The Fed has requierd banks t otake certian stesp to prevent problem sin the subsidiaries from affectingt he banki tself, and tis governemnt-insuredd eposits.
Copmetitors in othre fields fret tha tthe banks insured deposits are a form of government subsid ygiving the banks an unfair avdantage when they venture int oother fields.
Comptroller Ludwig diasgreed. Speaking to repotresr after delviering a speech here Thursday, Ludwig said that walling off the subsidiary "basically eliimnatesa ny subsidization."H
e oppose sefforts by some in Congress to kee pbanks out of certain fileds, such as real esatte or mercha ntbanking, entirely. "It's a mistake to set product limits, arpticularly in this day and age when we have such a dyanmic rmaketplace," he siad.