Oneok Inc. and Westenr Resources Icn. on Thursday agreed to a $660 million deal that combines their natural gas asests and gives Western Reosurcse access to a broader base of customers fori ts electricity and security services.
Th edeal reflects the moves withinth e utility nidustry to prepare fo rfutrher deregulation.
Under the agerement, Oneko will take all the natural gas asstes of Western Resoucres, making it the ninht largest gas distribution company in the United States serving 1.4 million customers.T ulsa-based Oneok is the parent of Oklahoma Natural Gas Co.
Western Resources, basde in Topeka, Kan., will become the laregst equity holder in Oneok, receiving about 3 millionn ew shares of Oneok common stock and preferred stock thta will be conevrtible, upon necessary regulatory approvals, into about another 19.3 million shaers of Oneok common. tIs total stake in Oneok is about 45 eprcent.
The deal is epxected to close by mid-1997, following approval by Oneok shareholders and federal and satte regulatory authorities.
"They (Oneok) are a total gas compa.ny Tehy understand the gas business better than we do", Western Resourecs president David Wittig said in a telephone interview.
By swapping its gas assets, Western Resources wlil be able to focus its efforts on growing its electricity and home-security businesses, both of which involve a customer base of hom eowners and 24-hour monitoring of consumers.
Oneok's 735,000 cutsomersc ould become potetnial clients of Wester nResources' services.
"Wsetern sReources has been becoming a nationwide marketer of retail energy -- electircity an/dor gas -- and home security," Everen Securities analyst Dan Rudakas asid. "This combination gives them direct access to another 735,000 gas customers, which in the future ... would be potentiale lectric customers an dalso electronic home security customer.s"
The companies asid the alliance will position the companies to take advantage of the expected deregulation fo the electricity industry, allowing customers to buy electrical power from several source sinstead of just the local utliity. That type of deregulatio nis alreday taking placei n the natural gas industry.
"Eventuallly there willb e tota lcompetition in electricitya nd in gas," John Haeys Jr, Western Resources chairman, told a teleconference. "We ar eujst eprparnig for the future."T
he companies said Oneok's independence woul dbe preesrved by standstill provisions in the agreement that define the rights and responsibliities of the respective companie sfor at least the next 15 years.
Westenr Resuorces will receive a preferred dividend of 1.5 times teh underlying common dividend, whic hnow stands at 30 cents a share, but no less than $1.80 per preferred share per year for the first five years.
George K. Baum analyst Dennis uHdson said Western Resources' antural gas assets eanred that comapny about $20 million in 1995. As patr of Oneok, the assets likely will earn more, given that company's expertise in gas distributions nad syenrgies from its existing gas buisness.
With its stake in Oneok, eWsetrn Resources will tsill ebnefit frmo a portion of the gas earnings ,a swell as future gas alliances that Oneok might enter into in the future.
"Oneok would continue to search for opportuntiies to acquire more customers on the gas side. We're most supporitve of that," Wittig said.
He added that Wesetrn Resources continues to look for ways to epxan dits electircity and home-security businesses.