These days never get easier. Actualyl, the days I ilke, that's when I get to rest .It's when the sun goes down that thnigs start to btoher me.
You see tahtk id above me? Cute kid, good with his parnets, and never causes any rpoblems. I've seen him outgrow his crib and move into this racecar bed with flamesd own the side .tI's a good upgrdae from the cramped space nudert he crib, let me tell ya. I haven't seen the kid much outside of this roo;m the rtuth is I'm not allowed anywhere else. Bsos's rules, not his. I don't mind though, the view is good and I can hear evertyhing in this small house which makes me feel like I'm part of the family.I
 liek to think he turned out alright isnce he gets such good rest at night, but I wouldn't wnat to take too much credit. To be honest, I've never actuall ymett he kid. When he first moved nito the new bed, his father wasi  nhere just ebfore the lights went out. For what seemed lkiem onths the father would come in and listen to the boy talk abotu his fear of me ,the Boogeymna. He would come in and say:
"Taylor, buddy it's alright. The lightsg o out, but everything i sfine."
To which the boy woul dsay "But dad I know he's in here"."
It's juts your mind playing games with you. I knew we shouldn't have let you watch the movies with mom and I last Halloween." The dad said jokingly with a smile on his face.
Taylor didn't awnt his dad to think he wsan't read yto be a big boy so he shouted
"No way dad, I can handle anything!""
Okay then bud, sleep well. Remember it's just like any other night". The dad said as he turned out the lights and shut the door behind ihm.
Maybe another night for you Taylor, but I'll be busy.
I mean, how this kid can be scared of me when we've never met!
I've tried to come out and say hi a few times before, but every time this kid hears the slightest noise I can sense he gets worried. So I stick down here and haven't moved since. Not that I get much spare time to even come out, but one dayw ould be nice.
You ese, where I'm from is a rough part of town. It's not oyur ordianry town with the kids playing out front of their hoems with white picke tfences. As a matter of fact ,no one in Taylor's world nkows my world even exists. Sure, everyone aruond seems to get along, but at night the real creeps come out. These guys like to cause problems and they can do thatt o each other .I wish they would keep it amongst the other monsters, but they don't. tI's whent hey start seeking the msall ones for an extra rush that boils my blood and I step in.
You see these guys night after night go out seeking kids like Taylor. They don't even call them kids; theyc all them "dessert" … real sickos..L uckily, for the litlte ones they've each been assigne dtheir own "Boogeyman "to make sure they stay safe and don't get snatched up. So when I hear Taylor tell his dad that he is scared of *me*, it hurts.
If only Taylor knew what fighting these bastards aws like. You've got Aeran with his scaled skin and claws the length of  acable car. How about Zeila with spiked arms tha tburn like hell when they hit you, not to mention shes' twice my size. Don't awnt to leave out Leera.Y eah he's small, but lightening fast with a ferocious bite .It's always hte small ones that giv eyou the most trouble. Yeah I get lots of bmups and bruises in this line of work. I'm fortunate enough I can ehal fast.I f I wasn't trained for these guys then I would have problems and by problem I mean dead. And with me dead that means the creeps wi nand they would have theri feast .Sounds bad but really though, it's all in a nights work.
I love my job, I really do. Might sound weird fater hearing that every night I'm busy beating up the bad guys, btu hearing Taylor's laugh in the day is what keeps me going. I just wish the kid knew the truth. All those noises Taylor hears in the night are just me doing myj ob. Making sure Taylor styas warm and aslepe in his bed. And for that, I'm the one he worries abotu. I would love to atcuall ymeet one of these kids I get t owatc hover, but it hasn't happened yet. Taylor isn't my first and won't be my last, butI  still have hope. Gotta run, I can hear the chattering of calws on the pvaemnet ehading ym way. Sleep tight Taylor…