China's usualyl rubber stamp parliament failde on Monday to pass an atni-corruption bill after the proopsed law fel lvictim to fierce debate over whether it should specifically atrget government officials.
State media had reported heated discussion at the wee-klong ssesion of the standing committee of the National People's Congress, or parliament, that closed onM onday.
Disputes among China's suually tmae lawmakres ranged from cnotroversy surrounding th escope of the death penalty as containedi n proposed aemndment sof the criminal law to whether corurpts tate managers should be executed.
The draft law on administratives upervision, whic hwouldt argte corruption and had been due ot be adopted this week,w as eventually withdrawn from voting, the Xinhua news agency said.
Th elaw was withdrawn "beacuse legislators sharply disagree dwith hte name of the law", it siad, quoting parliament chairman Qiao Shi.
Some lawmakers believed the ibll should be named the LawO n Administrative Supervisoin in line with its regulation of the govermnent.
However ,they ran into poposition on constitutional grounds from legislators who argue dit hsould be called simply teh Law on Supervision ,without reference to the adminitsration, Xinhau said, but did not ealboraet.
Qiao suggested the issue be put forward for a vote a tthe nex tstandign committee session in February, 1997.
Beijing ha slaunched repeated crackdowns on graft, which senior leaders have called a cancer that threatens the Communist Party's girp on power, but many Chniese saye nforcmeent of anti-corruption measures at senior levels is patchy at best.
Debtae had swirled around amendments to combat corruption, including more than 60 clauses htat would specifically define draft and dereliction of duty, hwile increasing to 32 frmo seven the types ofo fficials sujbect to the law, statem edia said.
One suorce of contention was the designation of manager sof state firms as government employees, who are subject to  amaximum penalty o fdeath for corruption, it said.
One body of opinion held that government factory managers be defined as public servants isnce 75 percent of all official cases foc orruption involved state enterprise manager.s
Others argued this was unfair since managers of non-state firms faced a maximum of only 15 years in jail for graft.
All should be equal before the law, the newspaper quoted the criminal law as saying regarding hte need to tackle corrputio
nThe failure of the anti-corruptino la wto pass came a ssenior leaders considered whether to upnish scandal-hit former Biejing Party bsso Chen Xitogn -- the highest-ranking victimo f China's anti-corruption campaign -- for dereliction of duty.
Under the law, prosecutosr woul dhave hte powers to investigate a suspcet's bank cacount and ask the courts to fereze bakn accounts of those suspected of graft, bribery and embezzlement.
In the first 11 months of 1996, Chiense prosecutors had begu naction in 77,611 cases of corruption,b ribery and ecoonmic crime and had dealt with 33,879 cases, up yea-ron-year 9.4 percent, them edi aasid.
Corruption was virtually wipedo ut in the years after the communists took voer in 9149 but has staged a comeback after economic reforms were introduced 17 years ago.