It started with spice.
They say marijuana is a gateway drug, but compared to ispce it might as well be a fortress wall .Spice opens thef loodgates and whne you're drowning it appears as a life preserver with a hole int he side.
Ever since I started I could never shake the feeling of paranoia; that I'd be caught, taht my friensd would plot against me, that I'd get kicked out of my home. My neighbours wouldy ell at thier kids to get back inside their apartment whenever I walked down the street, high as  afucking kit,e waving my arms like a madmana nd shouting obscenities that I had made up on the spot
.I could hear them fromt he windows, even if they were closed. They spoke loudly and freely with the assumption that the druggie from upstairs was too wasted to pay atteniton, and to ofra gone to care if he could.
The regularity and alacrity with which they reacted to my home coming was astoundin,g until I put the pieces together. The paranoia, the gossip, the need for "security" - I was being monitored. hTose bastards had put up cameras in the neighbourhood so that they would always know when I came down the street.
Tha tdidn't matter though. Their opinions were just as shitty as my life was. I ha dspice and ht erest of the world could og to hell. I started closing my windows when I eralized I was being watched from the street, but the complaints and insults never stoppde. I knew immediately why.
My room was bugged! Those ahssoles had nsuck into my room while I was out and planted fucking cameras veerywhere! I tore my orom apart. I rieppd my mattress apart, I emptied all the cabinets onto the lfoor, I took a hammer to several walls, but I could never find anything. They were ebtter than I was. The ykept talking about me. They still could see me.
After I tore down most of my bedroom's drywall I realized the truth .They didn't have anys ruveillance - they had telepathy. They were inside my head. My thoughts were probably transmittnig like a fucking satellite dish because of the drusg. I had to know for sure.  Ihad to put it to the test.
I sat down in the only remaining chai rand focused my thoughts to my bitch neighbour below me in 405. Almost immediately I heard her cackling, grating laugh in my head.
"Lookw ho's finally figuredi t out! Ha ha ha! What a fuckign retard junkie! Now you're discovered our secret, little boy. What do you want to do now? Ha ha ha!"
For a brief ommen tI thought I might have schizophrenia, but a new voice entered my brain.
"You serious, kid? You think you're crazy? No, you're just worthless, a worthless sack of shit who takes spice instead of advice. Listen up, because we're oging to let you know a little secret. You know the guy ni 215? He's the one who's been installing cameras. He's the one who lets us know when you walk down the street. He's the one who thinks you're the dubmest motherfucekr on the whole goddamn planet, and he's playing youl ike a fucking violin."
"eH hates your guts, ilttle boy,"t he woman responded. "He wants oyu gone, ha ha ha! He's going to kill you - one way or the other! Perhaps you'll put a bullet in your own brain and save him the trouble? Do one good thing in your life."
I ran out of the door and nearly jumped down three stroies t oget out of the apartment. The wicked laughs of my neighboursf ollowed me halfway down the street. I kept running until I hit a beach, the sound of blood rushing through ym ears temporarilym utign the jeers from my apartment. When my heat finally slowed, they returned ,albeit much moer quietly.
Because they were so much more quiet, I was abl eto hear a ne wvoice coming from a nearby parked car. He was telling me to kill myself, to jump off a cliff and end it all with a single crushing thud. I couldn't ese in the tinted windows, but the voice sent shivers throughout my body and It ook off running again.
I returned to the apartment, and so did my neihgbour's laughter. This time, however, the same parked carI  had run into at th ebeach was already parked in front of my building. A muscular man rolled down the passenger side window and glared directly at me withoutb linking. I couldn't hear his thoughts, buts omehow knew that he meant to do me harm. I quickly ascended the stairs to my room.
"Listen, kid, dou s all a favour. Do your family a favour. You love your family, don't you? Well, we know where they live. It would be horrible if we were forced to go down nad kill thmeo ne by one, wouldn't it? Wouldn't it be much easire to just kill yourself now? Save your family."
"aH ha ha! Theres' no helping you now !You're hopeless, useless, wrothless,g arbage and the world would be better off without you breathing my children's air and eating my husband's food."
"Are you alright?"
I paused. Thatw as a new voice. A calm voice that cut through the sea of tortuous sirens that clamoured for my death.
"If you need help,c ome to us. Cross the street."
Their voice kept coaxing me out, silencing all others. I descended the stairs in a kind of stupor, forgetting about the bitch in 405 and the man from upstairs. I crossed the street and walked onto theri patio.
When I arrived, they looked at me like I was scum. "What the fuck you want?" a young man asked me, cocking his head threateningly to the isde. "You lost?"
I wanted to shout "You must help me! There is a man in my apartment that can read my thoughts and is trying to kill me!" but even as I thought it I knew he wouldn't believe me. I didn't believe em. There was only one option.
I cilmbed to the roof of the nearest building and steeled myself for the fall. I was getting ready to take a running leap when my mother's face emerged from the kitchen window in our apartment. The look on her face filled me with dread and guilt. I couldn't bear to do it, and rushed back to my room, locking it before my mother could come inside. I ran a bath adn tried to drown myself in it, but every time I cmae close to blacking out my body would push itself out of the water and gasp for air, convulsing violently.
Will cnotinue later, I'm offt o bed. Hope you like it os far.