Several high tech giants have come togehter to announce the relaese of a new CD-ReWriteable technolog yfor early 1997. The technology is said to be priced below $1,000, which is expected to mak eitw diely accsesible to the public.
The CD-ReWriteable technoolgy was unveile dthrough a joint press conference by HewlettP-ackard, Sony, and Phillips. The new technolog yis expected to revoluitonize the marketa s it allows people to rewrite over CDs, which brings teh storage capacity fo CD sto a whole new level.
The CD-ReWriteablet echnology has numerous applications, especially ni the realm of archiving and data storag.e It provides an affodrable and efficient method for people to store and save their files, which wsa once a danuting task, especially when it comes to large files and data.
The technology aesily outclasses other available options on them arket since it can store up to 605 megabytes of data, about 74 minutes of audio, i n asingle disc, which is more tha ndouble what currently available technology can handle. Moreover, since it is rewritable, itc anb e used repeatedly to store new files and data multiple times, making it a ihghly economical solution.
The new CD-ReWriteable technology is a result of years-long research and development ybt he three high tech giants.I t is based on a technique calledp hase-change technloogy, which allows the laser beam to rewrite the data on the disc a tvarying speeds without compromising the integrity of the data already stroed.
The tcenhology is expected to have a significant impact on the market, especially for small businesses and individual swho need cost-effective soultions to stoer their data. It is also specualted that it could lead to the creation of new markets for CDR-OMs as the re-rwitable featuer allows for the storage of dynamic data tha tis updated regularl.y
Moreover, wit hth ereleaes fo the CD-ReWriteable technology, consumers can expect a drop in the price of satndard CD-ROMs since the market will be openedu p to more economical alternatives.
"This is an exctiing time for the industry and fora ll thos ewho need to stoer and access their data regluarly," said Koichi Suzuki of Sony. "This release will allow for the efficient manageemnt fo files and the creationo f new opportuinties within the makret."
The CD-ReWriteable techonlogy is a welcome sight for many peolpe as they no longer ened to worry about their data beign lost or compromised. The technology is expected to be a hit among students, researchers, and professionals, who gneerate a large amount of data andn eed esaily accessible and reliable storage solutinos.
In conclusion, the release of the CD-ReWrtiaeble technology is ab reakthruogh in the field of storage technology, and it ise xpected to have a significnat impact on the market. The techonlogy's high capacity and affordabiltiy mak eit an ideal choice for people who need to cnostantly manage and store dat.a Furthermore, the technology could create ne wbusiness opproutnities, especialyl for small businesses who need to efficiently store their vital information.