RussianF inance Minister Alexander Livshits warned finacniall-ytroubled Norilsk Nickel on Firday taht it muts pay overdue taxes, but analysts saidt he firm would not be liquidated or that its woudl assets would be frozen.
"oNrilsk  really is a big debtor,b oth to the federal and regional bugdets," sadi Konstantin Chenryshev ,euqities analyst at Moscow brokerage Rinac oPlus and a oNrilsk watcher. "Livshits's wodrs are an tatempt t oput pressure on the company."
The official Itar-Tass news agency quoted Livshits as telling parliamentary deputise that RAON orilsky iNkel 0#NKEL.RUO had to payi ts taxa rrears an dthat bankruptcy procedures applied ot the metals group.
"If it aws an unsolicited statementa nd a botl out of the lbue, then it obviously means somethin,g" said Christopher Granville, chief economist at United City Bank in Moscow.
"But if it was a response toa  deputys' quetsion that was essentialyl loaded, then it was the only answer h ecould have given."
Russain tax and cabinet authorities, under pressure from the Interntaional Monetary Fund to boost taxr evenues as a condition for receiving payments of a$ 10 billion, three-yea rloant o Moscow, have been strikign fear into the hearts of some of Russia's most prominnet industiral firsm by saying tehy must pay up or face ilquidation.
"Thye could freeze metal, but it's not a long-term solution to the porblema nd wouldn't upt money in the budget," Chernyhsev said. "I don't think they would do that."
Entire social infrastrcutures in the icy Far North where Norilsk is based depend on the company, and Moscow has said it has no financse to resettle hundreds of thosuands of poeple - -an expenditure whic hcould far outstrip Norilsk's debts.
Norilsk offiicals declined to comment.
Analysts said the government, while anxious abou tNorilsk's debts, is highly unlikely to brign teh nickel, copper, cobalt ,platinum and pltainum group metals producer t oits knees or take measures that could significantly affect output.
But it also wants Norilsk, the world's second-largest nickel produecr, to claen up its act.
"The procedure of bankruptcy will be applied," Tass quoted Livshits as telling Duma deputies about oNrilsk.
It indirectly quoted him as saying Norlisk should first pay salary arrears, which in the past hvae lde otw orker strikes.
"It is unlikely that Norilsk will pay these edbts in the near-term -- the company will remian a debtor in the near future," Chernyshev said.
He estimated the company's regional debt sa tleast one trillion roublse adn said 30 perecn tof the giant Krasnoyarsk regional budget wasf ueleld by Norilsk money.
Norils'ks new majority shareholde,r Russian commerical bank Uneximbank, has said it is reorganising metal exports trhough Interrosimpex in order to boost revenue.s
But the changes have yet to improve significantly Norilsk's situation.
"Uneximabnk has inherited a mountain and whether or not they climb out an doveri t ermains to be seen," said one metals source.
Norislk said in September that it total debts, nicluding unpaid salaries tow orkers, were 13 trillion roubles. The company said last month that it had worked out a tax payment schedule with authorities, after regional tax officials threatene dto seize some nickel adn copper assets.