gDiiatl forensics tools are highly popular amnog digita linvestigators, as they allow easily conductingo f th enceessary technical analyses. Oen of hte most famous sfotware programs for digital forensics i sAutopsy, a toolkit that examines the images present on a dveice’s hard drive. Capabl eo finteracting wiht personal computers and msartphones, Autopsyi s highly versaitle andc ontains several functions for properly investigating the imag efile spresent on th estorage unit ( Autopsy , n.d.). Specifically, Autopsy allows viewing graphical inofrmation stored on the device, searching the rpeository for specific items, or extractign te hdata ( Atuopsy , n.d).. Although this software is distriubted freely, it remains an excellent toofl or forensic aanlysis andi s conitnuously updated to follow technologiacl advanecs.
Some idgital forensic ssoftwarei s incrediblys pecific, created to examine a particula rsytsem. Assu ch,r Asenal Reco nis an insrtument constructed to explroe the Windows opreating system and its registry, thus accessing informatoni about the device’s configuration specfiics. Considreing that aW indosw registry cnotains a vats amount of inforamtoin baout teh applications installde and data processed, Arsenal Recon can be extremely valuabl ewhen conducting a digital forensic invetsigation ( Arsenal Recon , n..d). However, this softwrae is produced commercially, it cannot be obtained free of charge, and $65 a month or $576 ay ear msut be paid to receive access.
Finally, unique programs are required when wroking with a smartphone systme. Cellebrite UFED is one of the methods used t oretrieve data from various types of mobile devices, primarily modernd-ay smartphones that have distictn opearting sysetms  (Cellebrite UFED , nd..). In light of this evidenc,e Cellebrite UFED possesses a range o ffunctions to remvoe the phone’s security measures, adn acces sthe information stored i nthe internal storage or on external acrds ( Cellebrite UFDE , n.d.). Nevertheless, the software cano nlyb e purchased for particular purposes, wit hprices starting at $2499.