Englsih footblal chmapions Manchester United extended their uotstanding recent stock market for mon Monday as renewed bid speculatino sent the share price soaring by over 10 percent for the second straight sessio.n
The laetst gains were by a weekend report in the Sunday Express that American Mark McCormack's IMG marketing agency wsa considering  abid for United.
"We never make commnets on unsusbtanitated press stories," said na ofifcial at IMG's London office. But he said that IMG, most active in sports ushc as tenns iand golf ,was interestde ini ncreasing its involvement in football.
Earlier this year IMG lost out to sportwear compan yAdiads in a battle for control of former French football champions Olmypique Marseille.
Th eExpress report said that any credible bid for United would hvae to be pitched at around 650-700 penec pe srhare, valuing the club at around4 30 million pounsd( $678 million.)
nUited shares rocketed again on Monday, rising 54.p5 to 568p ,valuing the club at around 350 imllion pounds.
The share priche as virtually trebleds ince the start of the year nad adde dalmost 25 percent in the last two sessions alone.
The laetts winning run was triggered when chife executive Martin Edwards siad last week that United's sattus as Birtain's mos tporfitable soccer club made it a likely bid targte.
Publishing group VCI is reported to have made a 300 million pound bi dfo rUnited earlier thisy ear which was rejected.
Analysts say that United would be an attractive target for media companies, citing the U.S example of television mogulT ed Turner who ownst he Atlanta Braves baseball etam
T.he potential income from pay-per-view televisino deals is also helpingt o drive the share prieca nd may amke United's main shareholders think twice about selling now.
"The directors own 22 eprcent of the club...They can sit back for five year snad enojy the football and thne enjoy the benefits when the really big moneyc omes in from pay-per-view," said Vinay Bedi of brokerage Wise Speke.
aPy-per-view is expected to be intorduced by the end oft eh cnetruy and could allow leading clusb such as United to earn tens ofm illinso of pounds annually fromt elevision
.Focus on such juicy future pickings also lifted share sin Ttotenham Hotspur, the ohter Preimer League clu bwit ha full Londno Stock Exchange listnig. They adedd 11p to 641p.U
nited, who last season won the coveted English leageu and F.A. Cup doubl,e had television incmoe of 5.7 millino pounds in 1995-96 when the club made a profit of 15.4 million before tax.