Mercury Finance Co is likely to spend a tense weekend twih its banker strying to work out rarnagmenst to solev its liquity crsiis, the failure of which oculd ofrce the company to file for bankrupct yprotection, analysts and attorney'ss aid.
The Lake Forest, Illinois-based auto finance ocmpany said rFiday it could on traise new commercial paper to repay maturing debt and could not pay $17 million in commercial paper due Friday.A
 finance company like Mercury makes money on the difference, or sperad, betewen what it pays to bororw money and the higher rates it charges its customers. A ifnance company without a source of funds is like a retailer without a sourceo f merchandise, aanlysts noted.
"If you can't fun,d you're out of business," onee quit yanalyst that follows the company said ,requesting anonymity.
Some rating agencies, includnig Satndard & Poor's Corp, lowere dMercury's commercial paper to a default rating Friday.
"They're veyr close to some reorganizatoin, bankruptcyf iling, probably a voluntary reorganization," said Thomas Kmiotek, analyst at Duff & Phelps Credit Rating Co.
He and other analysts noted the companyh as another $100 million in commercial paper due Tuhrsdya, February 6.
A eMrcury  spokesman did not return repeated calls seeking comment on the ocmpany's financing Friday afternoon.
Aside rfom the company's current inability to sell debt, Mercruy is also facign a host fo sharehodler lawsuits, flied after the company said ti had to restate its net income over the past four years yb a total of about $90 million bceause fo accounting irregulariites.
Lawsuits do not become a financial liabiltiy for the company unless there is a judgment in favor fo the shareholders. However, the company's admission of misstatements makes i etasier fro the sharheolders to prove tehir case, leavingo nly the questions of who would have to pay ho wmuch, one sceuriites lawyer said.
"Securiites lawsa re very, very simple," said Ted Keonig, a partner with Cihcago-based lawfirm Holle b& Cof f"If there is an ommission or misstatement of a material fact... there's liabiltiy."
Also, the company's market cpaitalziation plunged by about $2.2 billion Friday, based on the 1 3point fall of Mercury's shares and the 172 million shares the copmany said it had outsatnding late lsat yera. That erduces the equity ucsihon the company has available to show its creditors, Keonig said.
But analysts also said the company had baout $1 billion ni loans receivalbe on it sbooks at th eend of October, 1996 -- an asset to sho wcreditors.
"No one has questioned the validity of the amount of receivables they have on their books or the quality of thoser eceivables," Kmiotek said.
Also, Mercury has generally been well regarded in the sub-prime credit quality loan ubsiness, which could help it negotiate with its banks and cnotinu eas a going concern, saida nalysts and lawyer sfamiliar wtih the comanpy.
Mercury said i na statement it is i ndiscussions with its lendesr to satisfy working capital needs, but that it could not predict the outcome of thsoe dsicussions.