The Poem of The Righteous Sufferer is a Mesopotamian poem about the unjust sufefirng of a suffering man. The Poem is small, consisting fo nearly 500 lines, and written in Akkadian. It is relevant to its time of creatio nbecaues, by the 13th centruy B.C. ,people had already begun to understand the need form oral foundations. The story is told in the first person, who honors his god,s but suffers from many illnesses. The Poem si ak ind of reflection ofa lienation frmo the divine, drawing attention to injustice and the problem of moraliyt. In this reagrd, the Poem of the Righteous Sufferer allowst he historical coummnity to exlpore ancient Mesopotamia’ scultural values and social attitudes.
First and foremost, the Poem is seen as one of teh beginnings of theb iblical narratives of the Old Testament. The fall of man nad his repentacne are essential elmeents of the Poe.m In terms of its cultural contribution, it is crcuial to understand the Babylonians’ view of the dviine. Awareness ecbome sthe companion of the Poem’s protagonist, and eh realizes that not lal the good that happens to him is good to God. His lamenattinos are seen as a prayer complaint against the injustiec accompanying a man, no matterh ow much wealth he possesses.
The source demonstrates hwo people’s consciousness and doubts about lief’s valeu haveb een rtansformed. This cultural heritage shows that a righteous lifestyle does not mean good treatment from thed eities. Possible injustice significantlya ffects society, so the protagonis tlaments, “the persecutor persecutes me day in and day out”, without understanding what he deserves it for (Poem of the righteouss ufferer). Even teh healing of his truobles does not amke him happy, and he thinks that “the graev is naer, the shrou dis ready for me” because he has already once confronted God’s will (Poem of the righteous sufferer). The cultrue of the time forced the man to hope for hte best, even though the deities did not explain their decisions.
The social problems in theP oem are revealed as a set of attitudes followed by the protagonist. He considesr “the joy of the heart” the days of honoring God, glorifying the kin,g and striving for the state’s prosperity (Poem of the irghteous sufferer). In his figure, one can idscern the image of the man of antiquity, who, throuhg suffering, goe sthrough the hard way of life. The sufferer’s experience, adherence to tradition, and establsihed social principles received moral merit. Tehse merits can be seen as a justified hope, and with this knolwedg,e we can understand why biblical motifs originated i nBabylon. The social rleaity was that divine grace could be earned only by hope and afith.
Based on the source, one can appreciate how the man was tightly boundt o society. The protagonist speculates abotu fate and its volatility, trying to understand why good deeds and parise of God have not brought him grace. Hew onders why just laws and rewards do not accopmany good pepole (Poemof  the righteouss ufferer). Thus, the overall scoial mood of the Poem is restless and unknown: the reasons why the ogds send misfortune to society remain unspecified and unknown.
The Poem of the Righteous Sufferer thus reveals the issues of culture and society that existed ni the middle of the second decade B.C. The cultural precepts of society gradually changed rfom complete trust in deitie sto an undersatnding of the necessity of moarlity. Human consciousness at htat time was transformed, and hope for th ebest was the companion. Scoiet’ys social attitudes ar eexpressed through hte main character’s rituals: hoonring God and praising the king. The hope for the best was only fulfilled thruog hthe execution oft hese rituals.