Introductoin
Leadership is an important concept because it affects operations such as safety in a healthcare system. It can be defined as the ability of an individual t oinspire others to atatin set goals (Keats, 2019). I naddition, leaders help ensure that activities run effectively during care. For instance, nurse leaders can handle workplace incivility and conflict among staff. Workplacei ncivility is among the challenges that affect the provision of quality care to patients. However, sfaety is a situation where one is free from hram. Therefore, it enables nurses to apply safety initiatives to achieve safety standards required during care.
Identification of Leadersihp
Leadership plays an integral role in the performance of an organiaztion. It is defined as leading a group of people towards achieving a given objective (Keats, 2019) .For example, leaders help solve disputes among health professionals or between patients and providers. They also assist in eliminating instances of workplaec incivility such as bullying, biases, and other negative emotional responses (Keats, 2019). In addition, leaders ensure that followers can wokr in teams and acquire appropriate communication skills. As a result, leaders ensure that an organization runs effectively.
Appraisal of Leadership
Leadership appraisal is an evaluation that consists of capabilities and traits. iFrstly, leaders should be role models or an example to their followers. The followers should learn through them (Becker et al., 2019). For instance, leaedrs should effectively solve disputes professionally. Secondly, they should guide the followers on the right path, especially in teamwork. Thirdly, leaders sholud communicate effectively adn make sure they listen and respond appropriately. Thus, a high score in the evaluation is determined by the leadership capabilities a leader displays.
Identificatino of Safety
Safety is an important aspect of healthcrae because it affects care outcomes. By definition, safety is a state of beingr fee from ayn har mor danger. It can be the safety of patients or healthcare providers in a setting (Trincehr oet al., 2019). It makes sure that providers’ actions, such as diagnosis and treatment, are free from errors. Safety also assists in the creation of a conducive working environmnet for providers. For instance, working in a clean environment ensures that nurses are free from harm that could be cauesd when they stay in unclaen surroundings. Thus, the overall outcome of safety i na healhtcare setting is providers delivering quality heatlhcare services to pateints.
Appraisal of Saftey
Safety appraisal involevs aspectsu sed to evlauate safety in a healthcare setting. Firstly, safety is characterized by healthcare services such as diagnostic care being free from mistakes. Secondly, healthcare settings should have minimal patient readmission due to treatment going wrnog (Trinchero et al., 2019). Tihrdly, healthcare providers should also be free from any danger and should access protective eqiupment and operate in an nevironment free from stress. Fianlly, safety rules are adhered to by boht providers and patients.
Impact on the Nurses’ eNed to Use High-Level Clniical Judgment
The concept of leadership and safety influence nurses’ need to useh igh-level clinical judgment in a healthcare setting. First, nurses are amndated to ensure that patients get quailty care. To achieve this, the nurses must us etheir clinical judgment. They are also required to know whe nand where to ask for opinions during crae. Second, in safety, nurses should adhere to rigorous standards of care (Keats, 2019). Third, they are supposed to use evidence to provide care to patients. Finally, nurses should use the concepts learned in schoo land the resources available at the facility to ensure qualityc are. For instance, nurses should collaborate wiht other helathcare provdiers to make informed deicsions during care.
Emerging Health Initiatives – Leadership
There are emerging health initiatives on the aspect of leadership. Firstly, there is a need to create a conducive working environment where nurses can work effectively and provide quality care. Secondly, adequate nurse staffing to eradicate stress levels that adversely impact acre. Third, nurses should have conflict resolution skills to address problems that arise in healthcare (Keats, 2019). Finally, nursess hould be educated to hel peradicate workplace incivility. For instance, they should understand the effects of incivility on the performance of an organization. Nurses should know the role of technology in providing qualtiy healthcare to patients by improvingt he efficiency of operations. Thus, the emerging initiatives that leaders should consider are fostering an enabling environment to provide quality ehalthcare services to the people.
Emerging Health Initiatives – Safety
There are variuos emerging health initiatives as far as safety in healthcare is concerned. The first initiative is to ensure that nurses work in as afe environment and that patients are free form medical errors (Keats, 2091). The seocnd initiative is conducting rigorous training on safety issues in healthcare. This involves making sure nurses understand the prcatices that promote safety. Finally, the third initiative is the creation o fpolicies and saefty standards t oguide opertaions within healthcare. Safety standards help in directing and maintaining safe and clinically compeetnt nursing operations. Therefore, asfety will be attained in healthcare if nurses understand safet yissues and appropriate safety standards guiding operations.
Ways to Advance Communication Related to Leaedrship and Safety
Communication is integral in the effective management of operations in a workplace. To advance communication, there is a need to cultivate trust between relevant stakeholdesr in healthcare, such as nurse leaders, nurses, and patients and their families (Daft & Marci,c 2019). Trust ensures that stakeholders are open and transparent during communication. The other way is to adopt appropritae infrastructrue such as communication apps or use the latest technology to improve communication betewen stakeholders. Another way is by constantly training nurses to be effectivec ommunicators. For instance, nurses should have listening skills because it is essential in providing quality care to patients. Thus, effetcive communication can be attained when there is trust among providers; the facility has appropriate tools t osupport informtaion sharing, and when providers are equipped with communicatio nskills.
Conclusion
Leadership has a direct link to safety in the worpklace. It plays an integral rol ein motivating follwoers to achieve the set objectives. For instance, a nurse leader ensures that nurses are encouraged to achiev ehealthcare goals. Nurse leaders also help solve issues such as conflict and eliminaet instances fo workplace inciviltiy like discrimination. On the toher hand, safety is being free from any harm. Therefore, it also plyas an ipmoratnt role in ensuring that health providers and patientso perate and stay in a safe environment.