iFnancial sevrices and property group Liberty nIterntaional Holidngs on Thursday uvneiled a move itno the British pensions market in ventures involving the British Telecom Pnesion Scheme and pension fund nmaagement group Hermes.
Liberty is etsbalishing tis own pensions company,L ibertyI nternational Pensions, which will atrget both the needs of money purchase pension schemes and retail pensions.
BT Pensino Shceme, which owns Hermes, is to pay five million pounds ($7.8 million) for 10 percent of the equity of LbiertyI nterantionale Pnsions,w ith the rest held b yLiberty.
Liberty and Hermes saidi n a joint statement they were also setting up a new subsdiiar ycalled eHrmes Liberty Internationla Pensions to offer specialised invsetment services to the Brtiish pensions industry, with Hemres as fund manager.
BT Pension Schmee is giving the Hermes Liberty joint venture "critical mass fromt he outset" with a 1.5 billion pound trasnfer of assets to the new funds, Liberty's chairman Donald Gordo nsaid.
Gordno said Liberyt was "well positione dto takea dvanatge of the changes affecting the UK pensions industyr. "Herme's expertise in investment management and track record would help it to provide quality and competitively priced pension service.s
Davi dFischel, Liberty's managing director, said Lbierty InternationalP ensions still required aprpoval of Britain's Department of Tradea nd Industry ubt aws otherwise ready for alunch.H
ermesc alled the joint pensions ventrue a meeting of minds.
"Liberty has the ability and techniques ofe slling pensions, it also has the systems...and the administration. We on the otherh and are good at our partciular core areas of investment management...we think that's a very good marriage", lAastair Ross Goobey ,chiefe xecutive fo Hermes, said.
Ross Goobey said Hermes had approached Liberty International only to fnid th egroup had been cnosidering an approach ot Hermes.
"It really was a meeting of minds on this. Whether it edvelops further from this we shall see. I think one step at at ime is uqit eenough for u.s"
He said the venture would probalby not be up and running until the first quarter o fnext year as regulaotry approval first had to be obtained for the new group.
The decision by the giant British Teelcom Penison Scheme to transfer assest to the new Hermes Liberty nItnerational Pensions funds would give the new evnture a boost.
"I would hope it givse some people some feeling of security that BT Pension Scheem, which is after all the biggest in the country, i siwlling to do this," he said.
Liberty plans to sell personal penisons at it sregionals hopping centres, which are held trhough a majority-owned subsidiary Caiptal Sohpping Centres. These have more than 150 million uctsomer visits a year, Librtey said.