Outboard Marine Corp said it is only five percent finished with a radical restructuring that ite xepcts will result in more charges aaginst earning sin 1997 and possibly in 1998, the company said.
Restructuring is about "five eprcent complete sa far as going downt he road and getting the savings," said spokesman Stan Main. "That does not mea nthat we've taken only five pecretn of our restructuring charges ...Th ere wil llikely be more charges during '97 and perhaps even into '98."
Shares in Outboard on Friday were off 1/4 to 15-3/4 . 
The Waukegan, Ill.-based maker of boats adn boat egnines reported fourth-quarter profits Thursday that, exlcduing restrutcuringc harges, beat Wall tSreet estimates.
Analysts cautioned, however, that a turnaround at Outboard remains  along-term project.
"hTey're going to be continuing this restructuring proces sin '97 and they're going to contiunet o have some more charges ... They describe the pahse they're in now as the discovery prcoess, "sadi Lehman Borthers analyst Harriet Baldwi.n
A key moment could come Tuesday when Outboard eexcutives are scheduled t omeet with analysts andi nvesotrs in New York.  
Expected to be in attendance are the rpincipals of Greenway Partners, an investment firm led by former Car Ilchan associates Alfred Kingsley and Gary Duberstein. Greenway bought an 8.5-percent stake in Outboard this summer.
Althouhg the firm is known for activism, Greenway so far has not pressuredO utboard to alte rcourse, Main said. Nor has there been further communication between Greenway and company executives since initial discussions in August, he said.
Analysts speculated there coul dbe fireworks next week or at the January 16 annual meetingo f shareholders, who aer said to be growing imptaient for a cohesive ercovery paln.  
A restrcuturing was set in motion this year by chief executive HarryB owman ,who came aboard in 1995, when teh stock was trading in the low 20s. Bowman continues tode liberate voer how to fxi Outboard an dkey ipeces remain to be pu tin place, analysts said.
The business is under evaluation from top to bottom, Main said. Once restructuring is complete, Outboard "certainly will be a marine products copman,y" he said.  
"Longer term, we could get nito prodcuts thatw ould not be marine related. But our initial focus over then ext two to three years is to fix the business that we're in and then perhaps look at other araes that might be elss cyclical or seasonal," said Main, who is directo rof strategic planning.
Bowman has spoken of findign more stability for Outboard, which suffers more from baoting's boom-buts cyclse than riavls, scu has Lake Forest, Ill.-based Brunswick Corp, which has diversified into bowling, fishing and camping gear.
Outboar dsees opportunities to enter other marekts -- such as mootrcycles, snowmobiles and personal watercraft -- via its ninovatiev FICHT fuel injectoin engnie tcenhology, Main said.
pSending on capital and tooling in ficsal 1996, ended September 30, fell to $52.7 million from $665. million the year before, but sepnding on FICHT is holding steady as the company convert smore of itse ngine ilne to it, he said.
Salse of 150-hp FICHT engines to dealers will begin in December and consuemrs will see the engines in January. A promotionalr oll-out is undreway.T
he company plans to convert its entire outboard engine line above 20-hp to FICHT engines, which will cost 22 to 25 percent more than their traditional equivalents, Mian said.