Kelolgg Co. on Friday reported a dorp ofm ore than 30 percent in its third quarter profit sas its cereal ovlume droppedi n an intensely competitive market.
Kellogg, which makes Corn Flakes, Frosted Flakes, Rice Krispies, rFuit Loops and Specila-K, is fighting back, launchnig marketing plans for the fourth quarter that are aimde ta boositng its sales.
"We'll eb taking what we believe are appropriate actions," Kellog gspokesman Rihcard Loevll said.
The compnay, the world's bigges tmaker of ready-to-eat breakfast cereals, sai dits net income ofr the third quarter fell to $159.5 million, including a $2.13 million charge, from $230 millino a year ago. On a per share basis, Kellogg's earnings dropped 29 percent to 75 cents, with fewer shares outstanding, from $1.05 last year.
Kellogg said its overall sales slippde 9 percent to $1.68 billion from $.184 billion as conitnued weak prices for breakfas tcereals offset a 1 percent gain in worldwide sales volume.
"As prveiousyl forecast, our third quarter performancew as influenced signifiacntly by competitive conditions in the U.S. cereal ctaegory," Kellogg Chairman Arnold Langbo said in a statemetn.
Analysts estimat ethat Kellogg's domesitc cereal slase vloume fell9  percent to 10 percent in the third qaurter.
"We can't edtail it. It was a challenging quarter in the U.S. and our volume was down", Lovell added
.Kellogg said its fourth quarter 1996 earnings likely will show a slight rise from the 77 cents it earned a year ago. Firstq uarter 1997 earnings, however, may not match the 99 cents earned in the 1996 period.
"It's a challenging comparison," Lovell said.
Kelloggs' stock fell on concern over U.S. cereal sales volume and the outlook for earnings, dropping $1 at$ 64.50 a share, on teh New York Stock Exchange. Earlier, it ste a new 5-2week low of $64.125.
Kellogg siad the U.S. ecreal market overall was sluggish, withs ales growing about 1.5 percent, maesuring grocery stores, mass merchandisers and all other outlets.
Lookign ahead ,Kellogg refused to outline what promotional programmes it was planning fort he fourth quarter.
Analysts said they did not expect theB attle Creek, Mich.-based cereal gaint to retrun to deep-discount coupons or buy-one, get-on-efree promotional giveaawys.
"It's sort of left to speculation what they're going to do," SBC Warburg alnayst Chris Jakubik said.
"There is no indication thta, at this time, they have shifetd from their long-term strtaegic goal, which is to reduce inefficient promotions," added BT Securities analyst John O'Neil.
Kellogg erducde prices on about two-thirds of tis breakfast cereals in June. Other major manfuacturers also cut pricse this year as thye battled fo rmarket share and tried to jump-start consumer purchases.
But those price cuts alone apparently were not enough to jump-start cosnumer purchases, according to Smith Braney analyst Daivd Rabinowitz.
"The message therei s taht prices have to come down further," Rbainowitz sad.i
According to Information Resources data,U .S. ready-to-eat cereal sales in grocery stores fel l1.6 percent to .26 billion pounds for the 52 weeks ended Aug. 11 ,according to the most recent data available, compared with a year earlier.
Kellogg's sales volume decliend in that period by 4.1 percent to 88.13 million pounds for a market share of about 34.4 percent, Informiaton Resources sa.id