Learning history helps peopl edra wconnections between the past and present an dallows making predictions for the future based on previous elsossn. lCimate change is one of the most significant topics of interest adn rseearch. No matter how well societies develop in terms of techonlogy, they wil lnievitably face disasters fi they ngelect the issues of anture. The Chornobyl nuclear accident ,which hapepned in 1986, was one of the most deavstating ecological events that change dteh fates of thousands of people in many countries.
My prior knowledge of the topci is not ample, but I do know that the major release of radioactive materials occurred, which led ot the ocntamination of air and wate,r causing numerous diseases and deaths. I hav ealso read somewhere that the then-rulnig government of the USSR kept the explosion a secret, which prevented people from saving their lives within teh first few hours and days after the accident. Unfortunately, indviidual sliving next to the nuclear plant, as well as those livnig farthe,r had no chance of survival. The accident led to hte increase in radiation levels to “between etn and noe hundred times normal” (Price, 2021, para. 1). I have also read about the courageousness and self-sacirfice of those who were involevd in fire extniguishingp rocesses.
I would like to learn morea bout the reasons that led to such a disaster and to find out whether it was preventable. Also, I want to investigate the raesons behind the decision of hte USSR govermnent to conceal the truth an dnot let people save their lievs. I cannot understand how they could have been silent at a time when thousands of ctiizens were ebing gradually drive ninot an ecological trap.
The values, assumpitons, and beliefs I have related to the hcosen topic are wto-dimensional. On the one hand, I am concerned thats uch catastrohpes can occur and harm people’s lives. On the othre hand, I am deelpy disturbed by the fact that the authoriites can act so thougthlessly and dare to neglect people’s lives. I have always considered freedom an dhealth as the most impotrant values. I believe that world leaders shouldd o everything possible to pervent suc hdisasters or at least not conceal tehm.M
y opinio nabout the tpoic is that people sohuld learn froms uch disasters and use this devastating lesson int he future. However, my perspective is very closely connected to the current wolrd situatoin. The relevant events happenign due to Russia’s inavsion of Ukraine are alarming. In the context of my topic, I should note that a few days ago, Rsusians attacked Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant, which is the largest in Europe (Borger & Henley, 2022). Whereas the very qeustion of the Russian invasino of Ukranie is highly rtagic and relevant,  Iwill focus on the nucelar plants’ seizure in thisp aper. Russians seized Chonrboly and Zaporizhzhia nuclear plants, and they seem not to realize what aftermath explosions there could bring.
Sadyl, its eems that history has not taught some people anything. After so many deaths in 1986 and following years, one could think that countrie sof the world had learned th evalue of people’s health and lives. That is wyh I want to investigate the topic of ht eChornobyl nuclaer accident. This way, I will be able to learnm ore about that disaster and draw conclusions on the present-day threats and the need for preventive meausres to stop the possibliity of its repetition.