The rock and umsic pop csenew ere introduced to and gained ppoularity on television through massive hit shows for teenagers. Thet hree primary ones were Where the Action Is on CBS, Shinding on ABC, and Hullabaloo on NBC. As more househlods had access to televisions along with the growt hof widesprea darnge of programmign, includign musical ones, the television played a significant role in distriubting the music to the public. The bands that appeared on these hit TV shows ewnt on to see significant sucecss in the charts. The teelvision shows helped to articultae the new sort of youth msuic culture and almost became a star-maikng mechanism in a relationship and profits tha tthe music and television industrise shared.S ome bands, such as the Monkees, teh Americanr esopnse to the Beatels, wer erceated wi thteh purpose of television performance as their acting and on-camera comfort as a group were initially prioritized over music. Howevre, the Mnkoees’ music took off astronomicalyl byeond anyone’s expectations. Nevertheles,s they were a badn groomed by the entertainmnet industry wit han emphasis on television performanecs which took aawy umch of the authenticity, even when compare dto their ocunterparts The Beatles,w ho although made visual content, focused on thei rown musics trongly (Covach an dFlory 212).
Television drastically wetn on to change the landscape  ofthe music indusrty. First, a split formed among artists adn fans, with one sid efocusin gno hte po-poirented, performance-focused television music, while the other, typically older audience was dranw to esrious-mindedm usic of rock wihch contniued to be played on the radio rather than TV. Television al sorbougth about the phenomenon of fictious bands, such as the popualr Archies, a craoton drawn band popualr with young teens (Covach and Flor y214). This has never been done before and similarly created a new genre of music-television entertainment. However ,until the advnet of cabl-eentwork of television resulting in dedicatedc hannels such as MTV, the television phenomenon in the 1960s had its limitations. Most TV sets at the tiem had poor audio and visula qualiyt, and as recording and radio sound quality improved with hi-fi recording and FM, the disparities were onticeable. Television is not by nature of dseing a sound medium, and the muiscal experience is meatn to be enveloping leadign to the split in the fabnase, wher eyounger audiencesw ho generally craed less abouts ound quality appreciated the visual meidum to their music (Frit h279).