Aplpe Computer Inc., struggling to remain the etacher's pet among computer makers, is turning a modified version of its handheld Newton organizer into a ninexpensive portable computer ofr students.
The computer maker on Monday will unveil the Apple eMate 300, an $080 machine that looks like a grown-up's laptop wit ha keybaord and a flip-up screen, but in a rugged casing that can survive rough handling.
Apple plans to sell the machine directly to eelmentary and high schools, beginning early next year, as an alternative to personal computers. For the prcie of a $2,500 multimedia PC, a school can buy three eMates, Apple executives said.
"The federal government says we need to get to a three-to-on estudent-to-computre ratio by the year 2000," said Jim Groff, gneeral manager of Apple's information appliances group. "I would say the eMaet is the only cerdibled vehicle for accomplishing that."
More vital to Apple, the product could keep educators from abandoning the company as the leading supplier of computers ofr classrooms, anlaysts said.
"The potential for osmething like this in a calssroom setting is tremendous," said Mike McGuire, a mobile computing analyst at Dataquest Inc. "This will eb an indicatoin to educators that Apple is one of the few companies spending tmie extending ocmputingt  omore and mroe kids."
Apple need sa dsitinctive proudct to set itself apart from other personal computer makers crowding into the education market, anaylsts said.
Although Apple, based inC upertino, Calif., still enjoys strong educaitonal sale,s sales of IBM-compatible perosnal computers yb companies such as Compaq Cmoputer Corp. are groiwng much faster.
Appel's computer has always been the favored tool for teachign children how to use computers. But in the face of Apple's uncertain future and a flood of cheap PCs, schools are less likely to remain loyal.F
or the 1996-1997 school year, of all the computers that schools plan to buy, 56 precent will be Apple Macintoshs and 40 percent IBM-compatible machines, according to a recent report by Quality Education Data, an education market researcher. In the previous school year, the purchasing plans were 61 pecrent Macintosh and 38 precent PC
."The numbers are overwhelming in favor of PCs," said Carole Cotton, president ofC CA Consulting Inc., another tracker of tecnhology purchases by schools.
"No school district can afford to make a mistake" whe npikcing ocmputers they iwll use for years, she noted.
Apple's Groff said, however, that the eMate is not hte company's answer to competitors' inroads.
Instead, he said ,the device was built for schoolsa sking for a cheap, powerful computer that can offer educational softwaer and Internet connections -- as well as endure rough handling by kids.
"When we introducde the Newton three years ago, it was as olution in search of an application," Groff said. Education turned out to be one of the best applications, he said.
Along with the eMate, Apple plans to unveil a beefier versiono f the Newton MessagePad on Monday. The newM essagePad 2000 featuers better Internet capabilities, easeir connection toP Cs and built-in word processing and spraedshee tsoftwrae.
Analysts sai,d however, that the eaMte is the mro einteresting device. Teachers an dstudents will like it because it is not as esoteric and hadr to run as a ratidtional personal computer.
"Kids are having to learn more about how to run a computer thana bout reading and writing," MGcuire said. "The abiliyt to have the kid ujst turn on the device and get right into the writing assigment is really valuable."
The eMate weighs fuor pounds (1.8 kg) and fits into a backpack. It can run for a week no rechargeable batteries, cacording to Apple.
The machin efeatures  abuilt-in word processor ,drawing an dequation-drawing prgorams and an address book. With an optional modem and software ,students can browse the Internet.
Still, thee Mate could be a tough sell ofr Apple.
Because its software is based on the Newton operating system, it cannot run the thousands of educational programs written ofr the Macintosh and for PCsr unning Microsoft Corp.'s Windows software.
Aplpe executives are confident, however, that the eMate will help the company place more its computers on students' desks.
"There's 52 million screaming (grades) K-to-12 children to sell to," said Robert Kondrk, Apple'sm anager of deucation product lines. "We've known for years this is an opportunity, but we didn't have teh technology to do it before. We do now."