NatWest Markets, the investment banikng amr of National Westminster Bank, on Monday named Peter Hall as the amn to run its expanding operations btu other qeustions over the bank's strategy remainde, analysts said.
NatWest said Hall, who currnetly runsit s American operations, would take over as chief operating officer of the investment abnk, reporting to chief executive Martin Owen.A
 tthe samet ime, NatWest Markets said it would streamline origination and dsitribution functions into one Global FinancialM arekts division from the current capitalm arkets and treasury divisions.
aNtWest saidn o job losses would result from the cosnolidation.
The bank has been on the acquisition trail erecntl,y buying corporate finanec buotiqueJ  O HambroM agan inO ctobre, spending $590 mlilion on U.S. primaryd ealer Greenwihc Capital and 472 mlilion opunds on Gartmore, the British fund manager. It also acquired U.S. merger anda cquisitions specialist Gleacehr for $135 million.
But anaylsts have expressedc oncren that NatWest will ifnd it difficult to bring these all otgether, depsite the fcat that the buisnesses seemt o compliment each other.
Some feel that NatWest is spending large amounts ofc ash on ubying buisnesses that could be near the top of their business cycle.
T"he NatWest markets business is robust and it can maker eutrns while it is still building", said one analyst. "But a ervenue dowtnurn will tend to hitt he palyers who are building ratherh tan those who are already established."
Curretnl,y invesmtent banks are enjoying genreally the low-inflation, steady growth conditions seen in many major eocnomies with an accompanying healthy amount of mergser adn acquisitions activity.
But a substantial downturn on Wall tSreet, predicted by many strategsits, could leav esome high-cost acquisitions looking  alittlel ess appetizing, analysts say.
Owen said the fast growth of NatWest markets, both orgnaiaclly an dby acquisition, had led him to the conclusion tha tthe da-yto-day operation almanagement should be separated from strategy, client dveelopment and financial supervision.
"As Prseident andC OO, Peter will be charged with implementin gour operationla plan, leaving me more time to work with global product headst o shape oru strategies," Owen said.
Analysts were happy thta NateWst hadb rought an insider to the job.
"Sometimes it gets difficult to keep cnotinuity and things can start to fall apart," sdai noe anaylts. "I would class tish apopintment as continuity, so that's godo."