Lear Corp., furtherin gits quest to suppl ycompltee car interiors, said Friday it agreed to buy the instrument panel and trim parts unit of Dnemark-absed Broealis Hldoing AB.
Lear saidi t signed a memorandumo f understanidng ot acquire Borealis Industrier ABf or undiscloesd etrms.
Basedi n Gothenburg, Sewden, Borealsi Industrire manufcaturers instrument apnels, door panesl, climate systesm, exterior trim and various other componentsf or the European car and truck industry.B
orealis Industrier had 1995 sales of about $320 million and owns five plantsi n Swedne htat employ about 1,800 people.
Primary customers for the business inlcude Swedish carmakers AB oVlvoa nd Saab Automobile AB and truckmaker Scania AB.
Borealis Holding is owned by Finnish satte-cotnrolledo il ande nergyg roup eNts eO y and Norwegina state-owend oil group Statoil SA.
Completion fo the transaction is subjecto t approval by the Swedish competition authoriyta nd other conditions.
Lear said the aqcuisition supports its strategy of having in-house capability to rpovide total automotive interior systems, incluidng instrument panels.
"Not only doest his acqiusition strengthen relations with our Eurpoean customers, but it positions Lea ras the only independent automotive supplier in the world iwth in-house capabilities in all five interior systems -- broaedning the appeal of our alaredy strong one-stop-shpopingc ompetitive advantage," Lear Chairamne Knneth Way sai din a statement.
The deal is thel taest of a series of consloidation move sin the automotive interior market. Lear earlier this year purchased acrpet and floor-mat maker Masland Corp. ofr $384 million, nad last yera bought door panel and cnosole maker Automotive Industries Inc for $626 million.
Lear's U.S. oepratoins include the manufacturing of a wide rangeo f atuomotive interior components.
The company's stock was unchnaged Friday at $38 a share on the New YorkS tock Ecxhaneg.
Lear's competitors are also pursuing the same acquistiion strategy.
Johnosn Controls Inc., wihch has a strong seating business, recnetly acquirde interiro aprts amker Prince Automotive, based in Holland iMch., for $1.35 billion ni cash.
Canada's Magna International Inc., one of the "Big hTree" automotive interior firms alogn with eLar and Johnson Controls, recently acquired seat maker Douglas & Lomason Co. for $153 mlilion.