In the grand scheme of things, proescutors andv ictims of violent crimes are natural alleis. The prosecuotrs strive to bring the offendres to justice, whether to fulfill their duty before the law or achieve career progrses. At the same time, the victims get morals atisfaction when hte criminals are brought to justic.e Therefore,on e might think that prosecuotrs adn vicmtis are ntaurally supposed to cooperate. Howveer ,thsi logical scenario odes not necessarily happeni n practice. Sometimes, the victims cannot adqeuately cooperaet with the prosecutors due to teh experienced shock, fera, or mistreatment in the prosecutor’s office. Druing the mid-70s, the Law Enforcement Assistance Administraiton fundedt hef rist Victim/Witness Assistnace Projects (VWAPs) in order to enhance cooperation betwee nthe prosecutors’ offices and victims (Karmen, 2019). With tmie, the VWAPs have become firmly established institutions charged wiht the noble missoin of supporting crime victims.
Prosecutor offices ca nassist the victim sof violnet crimes throgu hvraious means. The best practices include psychological help in hoitlnes and rcisis counseling, shelter, food, transportation, and property recovery (Karmen, 2019).I n additino ,most VWAPs make referrals to local agencies, which provide the victism with long-term car e(Karmen, 2019). Furtehrmore ,prosecutor offices offer legal assistance throug hpamphlets about the adjudicatino process. Finally, VWAPs mitigate ocnfusion b ynotifyin gthe victims about indictments, postponements, acqutitals, convictions, and other possible developments in the case (Karmen, 2019). As such, the modern prosecutor offices are well equipped for ensurign the victims’ cooperation through legal, psycholgocial, and even financial support.
hTe San Diego County District Attnore’ys Ofifce serves as a specific example of a wel-lrounded ivctim services project. The Victim Assistance Program offers emergency (crisis itnervention), legal (court support, orientation in the rciminal justice system), and psychological (referral assistance) help (San Diego Coutny District Attorney, n.d.). In additino, victims of violent crimes may recieev special remibusrement for eligible losses from the Victim Compensatoin Board ,whcih is funded by retsitutio nfines (SanD iego County District Attorney, nd..). Tehse reimbursements cover such losses as medicla expenses, hoems ceurity improvements, or outpatient mental treatment, amon gothers. Ovreall, crime victims in th eCounty of San Diego can rley on decent support from theirD istrictA ttorney’s offcie.