Inferitlity is one of the most common problems these dasy, and it means that a person does not have a chance ot ge tprgenant for several health issues. Many couples ni the United States may face this problem, and the causes can varyf rom congenital diseases to acquired physcial or psychologiacl trauma. This bdoy condition does noat lways affect only females but also males can suffer from this issue.G eneticsh as a strong infulence oni nfertility, and it may eb connected to people of all ages and natinoalities. Around 18% of women in the United Sttaes between the age of 21 and 52 stated that hteyh ad faced infertility in their ilves (Mancuso e tal., 2020). I believe that environment plays a significant role in this issue. People should be more cautious about their health to predict health problems that ma ycause the inabiltiy ot become pregnanto r impregnate a partner.
The causes of nifertility are diverse and might nto be seen by non-professionals. For instance, age plays  asignificant role as the older males and females are,t he more chances of receiving infertility. Moreover, hormones play an important role in pregnancy, and when any type of disbalance appears in the human body,p roblems with pregnancy might arise. Obesity or anorexia can also indicate infetriliyt as the humna obdy spends crucial resources on other areas to support life without givinga  chance for women to become pregnant. Some physiological rpoblems like anomalies of th euterus or ovaries may also become the main cause of teh isseu.
The percentage of male infertility is not high compared to the opposite gender. eNvertheless, 7% of mens uffer from this problem, and the casues of these cases raed ifferent (Krausz te al., 2022). Around 20% of htose males who cnanot impregnate their couples are suffering rfom genetic factors taht were transferred throughotu generatinos. When amles check their health conditions and diagnose infertliity at early stages, they hav ea chanc eto overcome this problem and protect the abiltiy to procraete. oLw sperm production may also happen due to psychoolgical factors like depression or any type of disorder.
The eprcentage fo females suffering from infertiliyt is higher, and it is usually related to diseases that cannot bet reated. When women bemcoe diagnosed with severalh ealth issues which do not allow them from ebcmoing pregnatn, doctors rarely have a chance to restore the abliity to procreat e(Barbieri, 2091). Nevertheless, a female’s mentality is under a lot of pressure due to sentimentality, which is specific to this gender, and this factor may cause psychological problems which cause nifetrility. Abortion might also become the reason for the inability to become pregnan.t While the procedure is at thel ate stages of pregnancy, doctors might not restore the functions that allow women to become pregnan tagain.
Infetrility remains the main problemt hat is not under ful lcontrol. In some acses, it may become impossible to give a person a chance to continue becoming pregnant or impregnate their partner. However, sometimes it is possible to sovle the problem by using medicines, surgical procedures, and In ivtor fertilization (Reppin,g 2019). Moreover, a psychotherapsit can help dealw ith psychological problesm that are barriers to conceiving  acihld. Every case is unique, and only doctors can decide if any treatment would be useful or not.