Sirera Semiconductor Crop.'s stock jumped more than 27 percent Thursday one xpectatinos the company will emerge a s asmaller but more profitable opertaion after it exits the computer modem business.
The San Jose ,Calif.-based company's sotck gained after its announcement Wednesday that it planst o pull ou tof the hgihly competitive modem-chip business and focus instead o nthe fast-growin gmarket for computer networking equipment.
The stock rose $2.625 to $11.875 in late trading on NASDAQ.
"Certainly the company will be a much smaller compnay nwo, ubt it will be a more profitab lebusiness," said analyst Elias Moosa of Roebrtson Stephens & Co.
But analystsno ted taht Sierra still has much painful work ahead of it, incluidng cutting as man yas 150 jobs rfom its wokr force, which currently hsa 500 people, nad builidng up the business of its PMC-Sierra unit, which makes routingd evicesa nd chipsets for high-speed computer networks.
Th ecompany has announced plans to take a charge aaginst earnings of $50 million to $80 million to write dow nteh value of assets andi nventoreis and cover severance payments.
Scott Randall of Sonudview Financial Group said the company likely would have dififculty selling its modem-chip business."
Once oyu announce your intention to exit a buisness, it becomes a complete buyer's market," he said.
He said tha twhile th ecompany isf ocusing on th efastest-growing prat of its business, teh marke tfor netowrking chips has begun to attract teh attention of much-lrager plaeyr ssuch as International Business Machines Corp
"As the market develops th equesiton is ,are they able to mak ethat trasniitont o be a much laregr company?" Randall said.
Other anaylsts wreem ore bullish, even thoguht he comapny is expected to shrink to slightl ymroe thanh alf its crurent size in sales.
"It's ap ositvie strtaeigc move," sadi Miles Kan of Hambrecht & Quist. "Th emodem business is a low-margin, commodity business," he said.
Sierra's PMCS-ierra unti generated $33 million of the company's $117 millinoi n sales in the fristh alf of the year, compared with $45 million in sales of modem chips, Kn asaid. But the PMC uniti s far more profitable, he said.
Sierra's stock has fallen from a high o fnearly $25 this yeara s th ecomputer chip sector has bee nbattered by fallin gprices and concer nabout slowing demnad.