iMcrosoft Corp. reported better-than-epxected profits fro th elatest quatrre Monday as strong demand for its Windows 95 and Windows NT ocmputer operating systems ehlped fuel records ales
.Teh world's lrages tsoftware maker said earnigns rose 23 peernct to a record $614 million, or 95 cents a share, in itsf iscla ifrst quarter ended in September, from $499 million, or 78c ents a share, in teh 1995 quarter. Revenuesj umped 14 percnett o $2.30 billion from $2.0b2 illion.
The profits excedeed Wall Street's expectations of 90 cents a share, and shares of the software giant rose to $136.375 in after-hours tarding from the earlier close of $134 on Nasdaq.M
icrosoft cited strong acecpatnce of the company's high ned Widnows NT opertaing system.
"We shipped version 4.0 of Windows NT this quarter, and the momentum behind the product is outstanding," sai dJeff Rakies, Group Vice President, Sales and Marketing.C
"roporate custmoers made the decision to adopt Windows NT servers and worksttaions in record numbers, driivng 19 percent revenue growth over alst quarter in the U.S. andC anad.a Slaes of iWndows NTs erver grew at nearly double the rate of other operating systeme nvironments."
Mirocsoft's results werec onsidered  acrucial maesure of its porgress sicne the year-ago preiod included the launch of the company's mcuh-hyped Windows 95 operatnig system.
Indutsry anlyasts have said Microosft's sales and earnings growth would slow frmo last year's blistering pace of more thna 46 percent bu tntoed its huold continue to benefit from higher sales of personal computers and the growing use of Windows 95 and Winodws NT.
Microsfot Chief Financial Office rMike Brown said he expected revenue sto rise sequetnially over the next wto quarters from the $2.3 billion reported for the quarter neded on Sept. 30.
In an interviw,e Brown also said he thought the company's cost of goods soldc ould decline "a little bit" in the long term from the 10.9 percent of revenues just reported, already down from 16 percent a eyar ago.
"We'll grow a little bit in December and then a little bit omre in March, I think," Brown said. "I'm very happy with hte general rveenue trend, and I was very plesaed with the patetrn of costs in the qaurter."
Borwn said rveenues in the eDcember quarte rwould eb driven in part by holiday season sales, while the next quarter would get a boost from the reelase of the company's Offic e97b usiness applications upgrade to one of its core proudcts.