Every business must be managed carefully, and every   detail mustreceive a fair amount o f attention. When it comes to healthcare, such facilities must require even more attention because they focus on people’s well-being. Performing such duties might bestrenuous and expensive, and mentally demanding. As a Chief Nursing Officer, one will be faced with principles that include integ rity maintenance, cash flow management, and employee motivation in the given cir cumstances.
To start with, a healthcare business must always maintain its integrity.It can be evident that any  businessfield should be focused on communication,which makes integrity a vital part (Fisher, 2008). In the given facility, the integrity maintenance principle is heavily adhered to.First of all, every doctor followsan ethicalcode, meaning that they know of doctor-patient confidentiality. Moreover, doctors and nursesfocus on honest communicationwith  patients. For example, in my situation, I tell patients about their actu al conditions and honestly answer their questions.
Anotherimportant business principle is proper cash flow manageme nt. Healthcare facil ity req uires renovations and innovations, meaning that there will constantly b e situations when new equipment or repairs will be needed (Mason et al., 2020). In this situation, it ishighly necessary to implement the needed changes to not je opardize patients’  health and well-being. For example, as a  CNO, it wasmy obligation to manage the replacement ofpower generators. As a result, generators enabled the personnel to carry out their duty withoutproblems during a storm andp ower outage.
The last principle is the management of empl oyeesand providing them with motivation. In the case of a healthcare facility, it is essential that the emp loyees are rewarded and their hard workis appreciated. Theemployees ar e offered extra days off and gift cards in the given facility. This can make the workers feel heard andsupported. Without these steps, the nursesand doctors will  have burnout and lose  the desire to pro vide high-quality results.
Thus, the given principles were chosen  due to the impact they can bring on employees and patients. The mentioned principles are being used, providing good results and leading to the satisfaction of all parties.Theseprinciplesare important to me since I believe that healthcare should be based on these values. Otherwise, no facility will  be able to treat their patients, and there will be no trust and respect between healthcare personnel and patients.