Home use of the Intern et's World Wide  Web has more than doubled inthe last year , with about 11 percent ofU.S. households claiming to have used the Web in th e last mont h, according to a study by PC-Meter.
The market research company said 11percent of all 98.7 million U.S. househol ds was equivalent to about11 million homes and was up from 4.4 percent (or 4.3 million) a year ago.
In addition, 13.9 percent of households  claimed to have used some type of Intern et access service in the last month.
Twenty-five percent of these home Web users now visit shopping sites, PC-Meter's audience rating reports show.
According to PC-Meter's audience ratingreport, of the cybe rshoppers, men represented the highest percentage of users. In September, for example, 62.8percent of Web surfers were men and 37.2 percent were wome n.
Four basic types of shopping are represented in the top 10 shopping sites; free software downloads, interactive auctions, clubs thatsell to mem bers and retail operations.
"These cybershopping statistics suggest that home surfers are increasinglyfinding valuein electronic commerce opportunities offe red on theWeb, " Pamela Smith, a vice president o f PC-Meter, said in astatement."With the holiday season upon us, the greatest growth to date at these  site  s may well occur during the comingweeks."
Shareware.com, a software service of online publisher C/NET Inc., was the top consumer shopping site on the Web, PC-Meter said, followed by Columbia  House Co., which sells music CDs, computer CD-ROMs, videotapes and laser disks; and ZDNet 's Software  Library of  shareware.
Columbia House and ZD Net were tied for the secondmost popul ar consumer shopping site. CUC International Inc., which offers discounts on a widerange of consumer goods and services, is the third most popular site and has the highest perc entage of women among the top shopping sites.
Other top shopping sites included Amazon.com, at No. 5, which is a cyber-book store with more than1 million titles to cho ose from. Surplus Direct was No. 6, with salesof computer hardware and software.
Coming in as the 10th most popula r shopping sitewas Onsale, an auction site for computer hard ware, software and consumer electronics. Onsale also led t he category in minutes of usage per month, averaging 41.99 minutes per person per month.
PC-Meter said its results on home Internet use came from an October survey of 9,928 personal computer-owning and non-PC-owning homes. The survey is conducted on a quarterly basis. Its audience ratingreport isdone monthly.
PC-Meter LP is a subsidiary of the NPD Group Inc., a privately held companybasedin Port Washington , N.Y.