Regulators t ook the first  oftwo stepsTuesday to  slash the cost of overseas phone calls for consumers and businesses, making it eas ier for U.S. and foreign carriers to negotiate cheaper international rates.
The Federal Communications Commission hopes to save U.S. callers billions of dollars by backing up the newrules with a separate proposalto beunveiled next month to cut the charges U.S. carriers pay foreign p hone monopolies to complete calls from the United States.
Americans spend about 16 cents a minute for a domestic call. But they mustshell out an average  of 9 9 cents aminute to call overseas -- even though the cost of the calls are not much different, according to FCC officials.
"At 99 cents a minute, you're not going to get a globalinformation highway," complained FCC Chairman Reed Hundt.
Tuesday's rules are targeted at countries whose own phone markets are open to competition from U.S. carriers, or are in the process of opening. FCCofficials cited Canada, Britain, Chile and Sweden, as well as Europe and Mexico.
Under the plan announced Tuesday, the FCC will waive rules that limit the ability of U.S. carriers to negotiate cheaper calling rates withan overseasphone company whose own market is considered open. The rules were crafted to prevent market abuse by foreign monopolies.
DonGips,  head of the FCC's International Bureau, said the new rules "will allow competitive pressures, rather than archaic rule s," to govern the telecommunications market.
AT&T Corp. Vice President Gerry Salemme said they "can lead to a significant reduction in the amount that American consumers payfor international telephone calls."
Underthe new approach, a company suchas AT&T -- with FCC approval -- could ask competing foreign carriers to bid for the right to handle AT&T phone traffic from the United States to a foreign market.
Alternatively, a U.S. carrier could offer end-to-end service from the United States to a foreign market without using the existing rate system for completing calls.
Off icials say these "accounting rates"run five to 10 times actual costs, reflecting the power of state-run monopolies unexposed to home competition. U.S. carriers paid their overseas counterparts $5.5 billion more in 1995 than foreign companies paid U.S. carriers to  complete calls.
While the accounting rates paid by bo th carriers are about equal, the imbalance reflects the factthat many m ore overseas callsare made from the United States than intothis country.
International calls from the United States account for abouta quarter of a ll international calls worldwide.
Toreduce the rates, the FCC proposal scheduled for next  month would set"benchmark" rates for what U.S. carriers  could pay foreign carriers to complete calls. These rates, according to FCC officials, would better reflect actual costs.
The agency must still work out the details of how long a country wo uld haveto lower its rates andw hat steps coul d be taken if it refused todo so.
The FCC actions come as the United States is seeking to open overseas telecommunicat ions marketsthrough talks sponso red by the World Trade Organisation.
The United States has big rate imbalances with China, Jamaica, Mexico, Hong Kong, Columbia and Argentina, among others. Next month's proposal is likely to ruffle feathers.
"There will be concern fr om countries  around the world with the benchmark item. There's nodoubt about that," said the FCC's Gips.