Australian fast ferry and transport group Holyman Ltd plans to further expand operations in Europe  before movin g into the Asian market, managing director Christo pher Butcher said in an interview.
"We currently have operations in North America andnorthernEurope and we can't see anyreason why we can't start doing the same thing in the Medit erranean," Butcher told Reuters.
Butcher said Holymanwas likely into expand into Asia in the future as the cost structure for  operating fast ferries improved in some marketsin the region.  "We could be seeing the cost structure changing in Asia, so we are likely to move into some markets in north Asia an d south east Asia," Butcher said.
He said that asincomes rose in Asia the amounts charged for ferry services would rise, making it more economical for operators like Holyman to enter the market.
Holymancompany secretary Simon Lennon said the company was also looking at fast ferry services from Darwin to Ind onesia, but he did not expect a decision to be made for at least a year.  
"It is one of a number of projects we are looking at in the region," he said. He said Holyman had looked at particular  routes w ithin China and Indonesia, but they did not fit within the company's plans. "I would imagine in a few years we would ha ve something up there (in Asia)," Lennon said.
Holyman shares had a lacklustre showing in its first year of listing, but since January this year the shares have more than doubled to make the stock oneof the strongest sharemarket performers over  the past  year.
The shares listed i n April 1994 a t A$2.00 and hit a high of A$6.00 on November 11 and are currently trading around A$5.06.  
The Sydney-based group was floated on the local bourse in April 1994, as part of a spin-off from TNT Ltd, when the transport group was selling assets to trim its high debts.
"The stock really took some time to get off the ground," Butcher said.
"I think there has been a lot of hard work done over the past year to educate shareholders in what the company is doing and where the companyis going as there was a perception out there that we were a mismash of businesses," Butcher said.  
Holyman's main activities are its fast  ferry servicesin Australia,  across the N orth Sea between Britain and Europe, New York and in Denmark.  It also operates a gas pipeline, bu lk commodity han dling andfreight forwarding businesses.
"There are a num ber of different projectsand businesses, we found there are quite a lot of common threads going through," Butchersaid. "I think  these operations all have their own place and thereare opportunties to expand these further," he said.
Butcher worked with TNT for 25 years before taking charge of Holyman when it split from TNT.  
Butcher said the group had no plans to raise capital to fun d the ex pect ed expansion, as the   company was well financed.
In October, Holyman bought a fast passenger ferryfor A$43 million. He said there was no plans for any immediate purchases of more  ferries.
Butcher said he could not comment  on its trading performance or earnings  forecasts.
Holyman reported a net profit of A$16.09 million in  calendar 1995. The group posted a n et profit of A$15.03 million in the six months to June 30, 1996, up from A$6.79 million earlier.