Dear Diary, I know its been a while  but  pleaseforgive me. Earlier today when walking home from school I had a strange, no, the strangest thing that has ever happened to me  happened today and I  am totally freaking out. I was crossing Squ ash Creek on the n orth bridge like I do everyday after class. But this time when I approached the on ramp I noticed a small woode n stool  sitting in the path. it wasn't until I tried walki ng around itdidI notice the..thing, I don't know what tocall it a  troll maybe? Yeah, a troll that makes sense. I met a troll today. At first I though it was some crude creation of som e meth tweakers made of deadcats and fish but then this harry, scalie thing turned to me and gave me a grin. I was so taken back that I fell on my ass right there. Ifnot for that I wouldhave been out of there instantly, and the fact that this thing started to speak to me.." Easy there young-en!" it said in ad isturbingly human voice "Where be you offto in such a hurry"? Natur ally I answered it . I spoke back to the "troll", I musthave been in shock  still. "I was just trying to cross here, I do it almost every day". It was silent for a moment after that then replied "You see s on, th is is my bridge now"! "And you cross it on my terms". He stuck somesort of crooked cane in my face as I started to ge t up to myfeet. "You mustanswer my riddle" he choked out witha laugh. This was the point where Iwas convinced I had gone absolutely bonkers. I literally pinched myself which only aided in his laughter. "What time is it when an elephant sits on your fence"? hesaid in a slow majestic voice. How was I supposed to knowthat? It was probably some ancient proverb or great life lesson I had never heard of..I tried reasoning with thething but it wouldn't have any. I had to answer it..otherwiseI would have to walk four miles to the other crossing. Yeah rig ht. I s at there for about twenty minutes watching it shoo flies away until I had sett led on an answer. it never told me what would happen if I was wrong in my re ply...I opened my mouthto speak "What time is it when an elephant sits on your fence"? I repeated. "Its time to  buy anew fence" I said confidently. The trolls face showed no emotion until hesuddenly erupted in laughter, he even fell  off his stupid stool. Was I right I thought to myself. I then decided that while he mocks mywrong an swer I wasn't going to take any of that. I ran. Iranfast and didn't turn back. Now I'm recording it all. Should I tell my parents? What if it followed me? Was my answer right? I'm not even sure it actually happened..