The tele vision and entertainment industries vowed Thurs day to use only their system for rating TV programmes and promised to reject -- by legal means, if necessary -- any government-imposed plan.
Following months of work, a group ofTV and Holl ywoodexecutives are scheduled next week to unveil plans for a system to rate shows based on their suitability for kids of di fferent ages, especially those under 14 yea rs of age.
It will be similarto the 28-year-old system of letters  and numbers used by the motion-picture industry and which includes the ratings G, PG,PG-13, R and NC-17.
"We will not use any other TV rating guidelines other than the ones we are going to announce next week," said Jack Valenti, chief e xecutive of the M otion Picture Associationof America and he ad of the "implementation group" developing the ratings.
But parental groups, chil dren's adv ocates,  educators andsome keylawmakers -- including Representative Edward Markey, a Massachusetts Democrat -- have demanded that the group in clude a content-based system specifying thelev el of sex, violen ce and bad language.
Lawmakers have not ruled out a legislative fix.
"It is clear that the industryhas so far failed to respond adequately to the fundamental interest of parents in knowing the specific content of TV shows in advance," Markey said at a newsconference accompa nied by other lawmakers and groups pushing for a content-based system like the one now used by the HBO cable channel.
At a press conference responding to Markey, Valenti lashed back. He accused Markey of trying to use government as a "big brother" to impose his own scheme. And Valenti vowed not to bend under pressure and alter his group's system.
"We're not going to change a word of it. We're not going to redot an 'i' or recross a 't,'" Valenti said. "If there is any intervention by government, we're going to be in court in a nanoseco nd."
The Fe deral Communications Commission also must approve or reject the ratings system. If it were to reject it, the agency could call for development of an alternative plan -- one that Va lenti said the industry would ignore.
Once the ratings  are implemented in January, Valenti did say theindustry would revisit the system after about a year todetermine whe t her it should be changed or "tweaked.""Is it perfect? Of course not. All subjective systems are flawed. So is  ours," Valenti said.
The ratings -- expected to include six broad categories -- will not apply to news, news magazine shows such as "60 Minutes" or sports. TV networks and syndicators will issue the ratings, wi th the categories "mingling" age and content, according to Valenti.
Proposed guidelines leaked to themedia include two for children: "TV-K" for kids and suitable for all ages; and "TV-K7" for children older than seven.
The other four are:"TV-G" for general audiences; "TV-PG," parental guidance suggested; "TV-14" for parents strongly cautioned; a nd "TV-M" for mature audiences only.
The rating are to be used in conjunction with a "V-chip" installed in TV sets that allow parents to bl ock out shows they consider too violent or racy.
The HBO system, developed in the mid-80s, offers ratings such as "MV" for "mild violence," "SC" for "strong  sexual content" and "AL" for "adult language."
But Valenti said that system is unworkable and is too comp licated toappear in TV listings in the newspaper.
He also saida 19-member monitoringand oversight group will be created to oversee the new ratings. It will include a chairman and representives from the creative side of the industry, TV broadcasters and the cable-TV industry.