Dyslexia affects children with normal eyesight and intellect in different ways, such as an inability to read or acquire words. Coaching or a specialized educa tional intervent ion may helpmost children with Dyslexia to perform better insc hool. Ac cording to the article, Learning difficultiesare one of themany consequences of Dyslexia. A youngster with Dyslexia will havedifficulty keeping up withtheir classmates in most classrooms sincereading is such a fundamental ability in so many areas. In the absence  of treatment, Dyslexi a may lead to poor self-esteem, behavioral issues such as anxietyor anger, as well as detachment from peers and teachers, and parents. When Dyslexia is not diagnosed and addressed throughout the childhood, itmay  lead to long-term issues in adulthood.T he chances of chil dren succeeding in life ar e reduced if they cannot learn to read and comprehend. The authorexplains that Attention-Deficit / HyperactivityDisorder (ADHD) maymakeDyslexia more difficult to cure by causing difficulties in maintaining focus, hyperactivity, and impulsivi ty.Children with Dyslexiaare  more likelyto experience learning challenges if their siblings and parents suffer from the same condit ion.
Furthermore, men are more likely than femalesto sufferfrom Dyslexia; however, the disorder  af fects people of all ages, socioeconomic, and ethnic backgrounds. Childrenborn with dyslexia struggle with reading, understanding, and spelling. The article expands my topic understanding inseveral ways. I learnedthat Dyslexic children are great empathizers; many people with Dyslexia have a real personality. The writing and reading difficulties might help children empathize with th ose struggling. The article’s strength is that it  has discussed the causes and effectsof Dyslexia with the right age bracket consideration, that is,  from age 4 to 10. The article’s weakness is that it generalized the genders without being specific; again, it only mentioned that Dyslexiais more often experienced in male children compared to females without explaining the reasons. Concerning race, there is asparse number of research papers regarding Dyslexia among black children and its consequences. Dyslexia mainly affects white children thanblack children, and thus the article addresses white childrenwidely. I will use thi s article as part of mycapstone project by g enerating public healtheducation proposal on Dyslexia to preventthe public from viewing Dyslexia as a curse.