I lost my mother in the stampede. She was torn from my grasp and carried away in theflow of sweaty, mindless humanity. My nine year ol d mind could not process this and when I sc reamed my voice was drowned out by the mashing of fee t and t he grinding of flesh.
Fora few  moments I was lifted off my feet between three fat ladies and dragged around in kind of a sadistic tango,like those peopleon dancing with the stars.
I was carried to t he toy isle and spun around in a three sixty then dropped to the floor. A large boot crunched over my hand. There was asickening crackle as I saw my wrist bend in a way It never had before.
I pulled my arm to myself and looked in horror at my limp wrist and dangly fingers. For a few more moments, there was no pain. Until I got kicked  in the shins, by a skinny teenage r with brown baggy pa nts. He looked down with his glazed eyesthat narrowed for a second as he stumbled around me. He mumbled something under his breath and then was gone in the sea of shoppers. Now my wrist and my ribs hurt, painflared through my body and I screamed, it wasall I could do.
The consumers rushed right on by. I tried to stand up by pushing upfrom the floor. My wrist bent backwards and my wholearm was slashedwith pain. I used my legs and popped up, just in time to get bounced by a largebelly with a shirt that said santa I've been go od. Santa's face knocked me  backward a few s teps, but luckily I caught my balance at the last moment on an elderly man who was holding up better than I was, and I tried to fight the crowd towards the exit.
Being pushed and prodded and severely injur ed, and too short to see over the foaming masses, I somehow ended up deeper in the store. Lost in the underwear isle. Shelves were being ripped clean. A huge rufus erupted a few yards away, and  a display with racks of pant s and shoes was tipped over.  Through the chaos I heard screams ofagony and saw flashes of several people pinnedunder the large shelving units.I couldn't fight it, Ihad no control of where I went, and the crowd carried me closer to the accident. Therewas blood on the floor and a twitching black man's arm swatted my leg from under a massive beam-like shel f.
Thankfully, I was whisked away from the scene, and actually spotted a small break in the crowd , I ran through the  opening, headed toward the big red e xit sign that is only about thirty yards away, but suddenly my progress was hal ted by th eclosing in of human bodies.I'm stuck. A T.V. being carried smashed into my wrist and I was suddenly in tears from the pain, confusion and hysteria.
Suddenly a shotgun blastechoedacross the store. Then another. The crowd was quieter for a moment, and the swarming buzzing slowed downand everything seemed almost still. F or about halfa second. Then the screaming started. I was pushedto the ground and a woman fell on top of me. People were stepping on both of us running for the exit, running forthe back, running into each other in chaos. My wrist screamed in pain, my ribs were probably broken, and I was pinned under this woman who was now unconscious.
The last thing I saw was a boot coming down on my face.