The article represents an overview of other literature on methodologies and criteria used in supplier evaluation and selection process, which is believed to be one of the vital components of a s uccessful operation of a manufacturing company . In particular, the paper emphasized the industry’s changein this field – from focusing primarily on operational efficiency to embracing th e potential of strategic partnerships. Thearticle claims  that the rightapproachto supplier assessment, thus,is the  key to a company’s development andprogress.
The paper  starts with various ways to address the issues related to MCDMof suppliers’ select ion. The most common ones are stated to be mathematicalmodels, Simple multi-attributeratingtechnique (SMART), a nalyti c network process (ANP), analytic hierarchy  process (AHP), data envelopment analysis (DEA), lin ea r programming, andsome others. For e xample, DEA is a methodology focused ona supplier system and classifies it either as efficient or inefficient based onselecting particular criteria. Mathematical programming models usually incorporate complexevaluations between suppliers, allowing one to compare them and identify the most optimalin terms of costand other criteria.
The  article further compares all metho dologies by their popularity expressed in the frequency of mentio ns inthe literature. Thus, DEA is the most common approach with30% mentions, whereas  mathematical programming (17%),  AHP (15%), and case-based reasoning account for fewer mentions. However, those methodolo gies represent the largest share of all MCDM approa ches.
The article highlights th e significance of knowing this distribution, which can build an idea of the most prominent ways to address theissues withsuppliers’assessment and selection. It is also stated that suppliers should be evalua ted based on “the inputs of the strategic, functional and operational levels” (Agarwal etal., 2011). Methodologies such as DE A, mathematical programming, or AHP are advised to be used for ide ntifying the most optimal suppliers, whereasAHP is noted to be effective inproviding consistency.