Ominous  gray clouds scudded over Hong Kong on Sunday as the British colony marked the 100 -day countdown to the handover, but there were few physical signs of gloom and doom in the wealthy community of six million.
More than 7,000 Hong Kong people took to  the streets to  the din of cymbols and kettle drums in a patriotic fervour to celebratethe impending reunion with China at midnight on June 30, 1997.
A stone's throw away, thousands more, most of them westerners and swelled by an influx of visitors, indulged in the ritualistic orgy that has built up around the annual international Rugby seven-a-side tournament.
The tourn ament was honoured this year, the last under British rule , when Rugby Authorities made it into the world cup event.
The 28th and last British governor, Chris Patten, described Hong Kong  as running as smoothly as a Rolls Royce limousine -- but warned China against tinkering with the finely  tuned machinery that isthe Hong Kong of 1997.
But for the majority of Hong Kong's hardworking citizenry, it was a normal Sunday. A chance for a lie-in, a family gathering at a restaurant -- a day off from work.
With just 100 days to go, Hong Kong is awash ina sea of  differing emotions.
Some, like the street revellers, are delighted that more than 150 years of Chinese humiliation is about toend.
"This is a grand and great occasion. In just 100 days, we will return to the Chinese motherland," said chief organiser Raymond Wu as the revellers gathered in Vic toria Park -- named after the queen who reigned when Britain, at the height of itsimperial powers,wrested Hong Kong from China's weak and crumbling Qing dynasty in the mid-19 th century.
"We welcome the washing away of over a century of humiliation andshame," Wu said to a burst of appla use.
Others fret, particularly the pro-democ racy camp, about their future under a China that has already put in place plans  to dilute civil liberties and dissolve the elected legislative council -- undoing democratic reforms spearheaded by Patten.
A handful of demonstrators, theirmouths taped shut in  whatthey said was a symbol of things  to come, took up position around the base of Queen Victoria 's statue and held up placards condemning China's brutalmilitary crackdown on student-led demonstrators around Beijing's Tiananmen Square in June 1989.
Many people are simply keeping thei r fingers cro ssed.
But Hong Kong, as it enters the last leg of its drawn out transition from British colony to Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China, has defied those who forecast asociety in chaos, ofpanic, economic collapse and deserted buildings.
Patten said Hong Kong had reached this moment in its history in first class condition.
He cited apoll conducted earlier this month bythe 1997 Transition Projectat Hong Kong'sBaptist University that found that 90 percent ofthe people here wereha ppy  with life.
Patten said the views that HongKong would quickly adjust to therolling back of freedoms  or of more authoritarian government were dubious.
"Hong Kong is, as I said recently,  a smoothly functioning community. It's like a Rolls Royce," Patten said.
"All you  need to do if you're in charge is to slip into the driving seat, switch on the ignition and away you go.
"I don't quite see the pointof lifting  the bonnet to tinker with the engine. That only raises worries about whether it will work so well,  and whether you may be persuaded by some people to start strippingit down for spare parts."