"Who can replace Death? He was the most feared of us all. Without Deaththere can be no reckoningupon the sinful mortals."
War scratched his thinning beard. He was running out ofoptions. No others had dared totake upsuch a heavy burden. While War was no stranger to the horrorsof, he shuddered to think about the  atrocities that Death had committed. Was there a ny beingin the 7 realms to take up the Cloak and Scythe?
"But t here is someone." hi ssed Famine.
"Brothers you are aware that all the atrocit ies we have committed were dealt by Man.War, death,famine and conquest. These were all Man'sundoing. Who else better to don the burden of Death then a man himself?"
Famine's ragged hood covered his face, only showing  his decaying mouth twisted in a sick smile.
Conquest was quick to challenge.
"Man, donning the very bane of his existence? Brother, your i mprudence will be the end of us all. A mortalman is  hideous creature. He is greedy, selfish and cruel. Giving one this much power will only result in abuse."
"Conqu est, you are asfoolish as ever. Have you learnt nothing from Death? He was the wisest ofusall, he-"
"If Death was so wise, expl ain his abrupt departure. Why did he leave hisduties behind? We are the horsemen of the apocalypse; both ter rible andglorious.  When the Horn of theHeavens sounds we will charge and strikefear into the heartsof sinners. It is who we are. D eath wa s a fool for leaving."
"ENOUGH!"
War slammed into Conquest, knockinghim down to the brimstone. He unleashed an onslaught of blows onto hisgolden armor until it was dented beyond recognition. Breathless, War stood up towering overhis foe and boomed.
"I will not take  this insolence. Death was the bestof us. I lovedhim as a brother and a mentor."
War'sstoneface softened for a second.
"Should you be stupid  enough to blaspheme our  brother again, I  will end you."
Conquest nodded in shame. He was not used to the bitter taste of defeat. He silently vowed that Wa rwould pay for the humiliat  ion he suffered .
"Famine. You say that a mortal ca n replace Death. Bring him to me."
"As you wish brother."