MCI Communications Corp. said Mon day it reached a 10-year deal with NextWave Telecom Inc. that thrusts MCI into the top tier of U.S. wireless communicationsproviders.
Under ter ms of the deal, MCI said it will connect its network to a system planned by NextWave to provide personal communications services, giving itthe capacity t o offer service to more than 110 million i ndividuals in 63 areas, including 29 of the top 50 markets.
Washington-based MCIsaid it will buy at least10 billion minutes of capacity  for its personal communications services from NextWave over 10 years.Terms of the deal were not disclosed.
Personal communications services represent the new generation of celluar communications services, allowing customers to send both voice and data transmissions over wireless telephones.
Thede al will help underpin the financial future of debt-laden NextWave, which was the largest bidder in the U.S. Federal CommunicationsCommission' s auctions for "C-band" wireless radio spectrum held in early July.
NextWave, based in San Diego and New York, also plans to sell stock to the public.
For MCI, the deal enables it to expand quickly into the rapidly growing market for wireless personal communications services.
Two years ago, MCI dropped out ofthe auctionsfor U.S. PCS licences after the bidding became too rich for its taste.
But with the NextWave pact and previous smaller deals, MCI has moved to become a major resell er of wireless services .
As part of the deal, NextWave selected MCI to provide telecommunications and other services supporting the development and ongoing operations of its personal communications services system, MCIsaid.
"This agreement with NextWave establishes an immediate nationw ide PCS footprint for MCI and represents an important next stepin MCI's wireless strategy," said Whi tey Bluestein, vice president for MCI wireless strategyanddevelopment.
"This is the first full interc onnection agreement of its  kind andbrings new competition to the wireless marketplace," he said, noting that with full interconnection, MCI does  not need to own its own wirele ss facilities.
MCI said the NextWave agreement is amodel for additional agr eementsit expects to sign with other wireless  providers as part of its wireless interconnected network strategy.
The strategyis MCI's blueprint for developing a full range of wireless services and features that will be integrated into MCI's existing communications services.
"This w as MCI's strategy all along," said Jeffrey Kagan, an Atlanta-based telecommunications industry analyst.
Kagan said MCI has historically preferred to resell communications services in itially rather than investing in its owninfrastructure. Over time, the company selectively b uildsits own infrastructure a s it proves profitable to do so.
"Reselling service was howthey bec ame a heavy hitter in long distance in the first place," Kagan said. "What their plan is, is to resell service from o ther providers and build networks where they see the needto do so," he said.
Kagan said MCI's deal with NextWave marks the rapid realisation of its reseller strategy. "This all of a suddenputs MCI on the wireless communications map in a big way."
Still, he noted that AT&T Corp.'s AT&T Wireless unit, the former McCaw Cellular business, remains twice as large as MCI's cellular business,with about 6.5 million subscribers in geographic regions covering 207 m illion potential customers.
MCI's deal withNextWave co vers about 110 million potential customers living in a mix of metropolitan and less-densely populated areas.
MCI's stock traded at $25.25 a share Monday, down25 cents, on Nasdaq.