I knew I could not cook, but I did not sweatit. The door bell rang, and I was so excited. I opened the doorandlet m y twogooey one eyed companions in. They wereso glad that they did not even notice my baseball bat. Iswung. Theywere mine now. All mine
The two alien awoke to "gourmet" jellybeans. They stuffedthemselves, those crude idiotic blobs. Smiling they commented on how strange human customs were. That was q uite funny, considering what I really had planned. I laughed at them.
Three weeks later, they were still strapped to their places and woke up, ate,then slept.Jellybeans were their every waking hour. They lived jellybeans loved jelly  beans, breathed jelly beans.
On their ninth week they realized what I was doing,but they were powerless. I laughed at them as I broke their jaw hinges. Now they can't complain, so all was wondrous again.
By the next week they went on a jellybean strike, but I kne w that would not last long, considering howattached to the food they were.
I broke their jaws, their life, their will. They were now trulymine.
Two years just flew by, my little companions were so entertaining.But the little trick was starting to get old. I grewti red, so I decided to spice things up once again. I starved them. Then, I told them the only way to get their food was to beat one anotherup. The winner would eat.  However, that little contest would be way too boring, so I then sawed off each of their four legs. I then let them at each other. They sprang like animals, biting punching each other. It was a slow  process, them having no legs and little energy. But that made it all the more worth while. I was even kind of sad when finally the  weaker of thetwo was knocked out. I knew I neededmore. So then, I spiced things up again. I told the still barely conscience one that in order to get his meal he would haveto kill his bes t alien friend. He wasshocked. I laughed aga in.
So, I prepared the murder for him slowly. I handed the syri nge filled withblack licorice to the victorious alien. The loser alien then woke up, only awakeenough to seehis own friend inject the deadly dos e of jelly beans into his body. He died shortly, but boy was it massively entertaining.
The alien that was stillalive cried, making inaudible noise for hisjaw was broken after all. He demanded his jelly beans. It was not polite  enough. His attitude was simply  unacceptable. So I kicked him in the gut. I threw him against the wall and told him to be polite. HE WAS THE NKNOCKED OUT. HE COULD NOT PERFORM THE TASK O F ASKING NICELY. HE HAD TO BE KILLED AT ONCE FORHIS B RUTAL MISBEHAVIOR.
Boy did I love that experience. But I would not miss it. It  was a lot of work. Jellybeans are costly after all. I ate my dinner slowly, savoring every bite. Alien flesh tasted so good. I knew it was all worth it. Even though I couldnot cook well, I knew not to sweat it from the beginning. My plan had been a great success after all.
Did I write it correctly BookWyrm17? What do youthink about it? I think I did it pretty well!
r/jesus christreddit