Themodern w orld is currently facing a significant change under globalization trends that shape economies,politics, the workplace, education, and even everyday behavior. Most importantly, due to theactiveexchange of information between  people worldwide, culture is changing. Researche rs try to understand whether the culture will be further homogenized in globalization or diversified. This paper  will argue that culture will become morediverse under the influence of globalization due to the introduction of multiple cultural elements into societies.
The latest processes in cultural change demonstrate thatboth sides of the argument, namely those supporting diversi fication and the ones claiming homogeneity, havereasonable grounds. On the onehand, Cowen (2010) states that in a globalized society where a do minant cultur e prevails, diversity will be substituted with the culture that is  imposed on oth ers through such mean sascinema. Indeed, Hollywood promotes American codes around the world because the US cinema market is the largest in theworld. Thus, globalization allows Hollywoodto reach all parts of the world,integrating the same culture codes everywhere.
However, the ot her side of t he argument is more com pelling becauseit considers the strengths oflocal cultures. In particul ar, an e xample of sushi’s popularityin American society  andcultures of other nations demonstrates that people adopt ne w cultural phenomena with acknowledgment of their origin. According to Bestor (2010), “Japan remains the world’s primary market for fresh tuna for sushi and sashimi” (p.110). Thus, having integrated  its product into the cultures of other countries, Japanhas expanded itsmarket share.
In such a manner, with the ease oftranspor tation  and communication enabled by globalization, there is amerge of cultures around the world. However, sincemarket forces commonly rule theseprocesses, the host cultures are aware of the  ori gins of the borrowed cultural clusters.Therefore, to summarize the discussion, one might state that culture will not be homogenized in globalization but rather diversified with credit givento e a ch cultural component.