The w hole field of astrophysics  and astronomy, in general, is quite perplexing.  The rich history and significant discoveries made by well-known scientists paved the way for the technological  revolutions of the 20th and 21st centuries. However, these distinct dis coveries would not have been made without equipment. The article The telesco pe in the seventeenth century written by Albert Van Helden,sheds light on the device and its sig nificant importanceinthe history of astronomy .
In this article, the author made several strong arguments. In the beginning, he indicates that the telescope was used against the enemies as a terrestrial instrument. Ho wever, with the  advancement and multiple improvements to the lense, the writer indicates thatthe telescope started to be applied to magnify objects (Van Helden 1974). According to VanHelden, it was the telescope that made the differenceinscience, and itis themain reason why astronomers encouraged the telesc ope-makers to workon lenses (Van Helden 1974). I agree that the telescope can be the conduit of information for astronomers, and with its help, they can gather new data and make new discoveries. Nevertheless, I disagree that it is the only source of achieving s uch significant results in the astronomy.
Consequently, as h as been m entio ned by Van Helden, different methods of encouragement of telescope  makers were used. There are al so other sciences that contribute to the development of engineering. For example, physics and chemistry focus onthe  appliance of  knowledge abo ut force s, pressure, and chemicals and their combination. The most recent developments might include the development of new technologies like phones or modern motors forvehicles. Moreover, whil e the advancements have bee n so big, there are no fields of engineering which are prohibited. Specific developments might be prohibited if they jeopar  dize the health or lives of people. Theactivity of engineering is, therefore, controlled by special laws.
Hence, th e  development  of telescopes and the improvem ent of t he lenses gave an impetus to th e advances in astronomy. While the telescope was first used as a terrestrial tool, it soon became astronomers’ tool. With the help of telescope-makers and  developments of lenses, it was possible tomake discoveries. However, other kindsof sciences, such as physics and chemistry, contribute to the technological advancements of our time. While there are no strong proh ibitions of engineering, it is unlawful to jeopardize the health or lives of people.