The stark chords of Toscabegin once again; Scarpia's motive is the first thing the audi ence at La ScalaOpera hear. Perhaps they are  jaded by it, but it still elicits within me feelings from a bygone life. Soon  we'll see entrances from Cavaradossiand of course our leading lady, Tosca, forc ed to do the unspeakable and murder oneman to try and save another's life. Poor Tosca; if only she had known that Cavaradossi was truly given a stay of execution , perhaps she would ha ve accepted Scarpia's demand for intimacy.
The people will then shuffle out of the opera theatre, lazily critiquing the same show that they've seen entirely too oftenhere  in Milan, and g o out to the cafésand restaurants that they've been to many times before. Their lives, seemingly on a loop, continue at t heir leisurely pace as I sit by in  my darke ned villa abov e the streets w atching the days pass by.
Acquaintances of mine always asked, "Why m ove toMi lan?" "You don't know Italian, do you?" "Why now?"  they'd ask with all the sincerityof a Hallmark Valentine's Day card. I'm not sure that I'd ever have an answer for them, because they were right to question  my motives . Why choose to fundamentally change the eternal workings of the vampiric lifestyle?
For one, the Milanese choose tostay out until the ungodly hours of 1 or 2 o'clock in the morning, meaning that my food is usually spiked with the residual alc oholfrom their Lombardy regionchardonnay and pinot bianco by the pint. However , eve n getting past theeternal hangover that is my life, how do I avoid that villainous vegetable that the Italians seem to put in every dish:garlic.
Oh the dreaded aglio. For so often I took it for granted during my time in Vienna. Stakes could be e as ily enough avoided with good planning (an internally locked coffin with plenty of reinforced steel between my face and the world that might wish to destroy me), but the Austrians never bothered with g arlic quite as often as they do here.
Perhaps I might go back to Vienna and dine offthe simple people whose beer consumption is admirable as much as it is sha meful. Perhaps I will getback to hearing the operas of Strauss and Mozart,  or maybe the occasional performance of Ma rschner's "Der Vampyr." But f or now, I sit like Tosca, in aplace I should never wish to be waiting for the right moment tomake my escap e and be free again. Now, this never sleeping city of Milan holds me hostage with the taste of death on e v eryone's lips.