The social determinantsof health are th e conditions in the environment in which people live, learn, work, play, worship, and age. I agree that the soci al environmentin which people live can affect t heir health status. Heal thoutcomes are  not determined solely by biological factors or accessto  quality health care (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, n.d.).Resources that improve thequality oflife cansignificantly impact the health of a population.
Examples of these resourcesinclude safe and affordable housing, access to education, publicsafety, availability of healthy food, local emergency services, and anenvironment free of life-threatening toxins (Office of Disease PreventionandHealth  Promotion, n.d .). I also support the recentshift in the view that it is solely up to the  individual to influence their health in favor of recognizing the significant impact of external influences on it. In the modernworld, very little depends on theindividual. At first  glance,  he can choose what to eat,whether to exercise, and whether to seek medical care in a timely manner.
In fact, most of the choices that  affect health are made by themarketing machine, the government, and life circumstances. For example,modernadvertising pressesfrom all sides, forcingone to choose specific products that areoften not conducive to a healthy lifestyle. The need to work hard to earn  money forthese products pushes people to sacrifice a healthy sl eep schedule and exercise. This chain has many links, but the result is always the same: people’s health is largely not up to them. External factors also indirectlyaffect health,  such as health inequalities. When I read the CDC (2022) report on these inequalities, I was most surprisedby the racial and ethnic inequalities. In anera of globalization and liberalizationof society,a phenomenonlike racism must be eradicated. The field of  health care is one in which treating peopleequally is sometimes vital. That is why I believe that racialand ethnic discrimination in this area must be eradicated in the first place.