A house is morethan simply a place to live; in fact, that is only onedescription of a house. Ahome is a place where one feels more comfortable andlooks forward to living through every day. A house is constructed not with stones or timbe rs but with the link of family. A person may own every materialistic property on the earth, but it would be not very sensible if he did not have someone with whom to exchange it. In other terms, expressing pleasure isalso linguistically tied to home. Additional ly, home is mor e than a physical location; it is a state of mind. They share a  sense  of joy and pleasure with their fami ly members.
A home is when one understands they are around individuals w ho can run them nuts in a second and make them fee l good in the very same second. Home signifies that no matter what one is experiencing or how difficult life becomes, there will always be someone watching out for them. When a person is secure enough to provide an honest account of themselves, they know they will be accepted definitively.  For myself, I can single out a few places where I feel at home. This work was writtenwith the aim of explaining one’sown concept of home and a placewhere a person feels at home.
For me, home is made up of  memories of memorable momentsthat contributed to shaping and teachingme. As a result, my house isalsopeople, and when home takes on a human figure, it is referred to as a family.I feel that family isa relative concept that is determined by connections rather than blood (Hess). No matterwhere Igo in the future, this atmosphere and theseindividuals who have shaped me as a human and shown me how to behave will always be a strong foundation f or me. I knowI can always  return home. Indeed, the spirit is where the household is.
Since college iswhere people spend most of their day,I feel at ease. My classmates, whom I have known for many years, are also at the same school. For instance, I have afriend in the same class as me who is like a sibling to me. We communicate a lot, and he knows all ofmy secrets. I haveknown him for years and consider him to be my best friend. All of my professors are familiar to me, and they are all delightful to me. They also instruct me and assist me with any problems I may have.
 In this way, I can summarize and express whathome for me is. In this essay, like a home, I show my family and the collegewhere I study. For me,the feeling of homeis the place where  I canreturn at any time, and if not all, then one person can definitely help  me. Home is a sense of calman d security, and for myself, I single out such a factor as communication. The house is the place where you studied something for a long time and communicated with people who, as a result, became close to me. Feeling at home is an essential feeling for everyperson because it gives people support and faith in themselves and their loved ones.