According to Kant’s philosophy, the distinction between a person and a thing runs through several basic criteria, largely related to independence and dignity. A thingisonly a means to finitude, that is, to any completion,while man contains completion in himself. Man differs in hisfinitude from the infinity of the world, but he is valuable in himselfand cannot be used as a means. This determines autonomy, that is, the independence of a person.Implicit autonomy determines the inner ability of a person to do anything and, accordingly, the ability to distinguish between good and evil. According to Kant, a person, in contrast to a thing, has a moral navigator  that is common to everyone. Itis because of the opportunity to master the concepts of good and evil and use them morally a person differs from a thing. A person cannot be used  as a means and therefore, unlike a th ing, has no value.
Dignity should be perceive d as an innate and inali enable trait of any person, regardless of social institutions, class, and experienc e .At thesame time, dignity is not only an internal concept since it is something that can  be given by one person to another, such as respect  or favor. This means that the concept of hum an dignity may not always be strictly intrinsic. Concepts about the transfer or innateness of dignity can have a significant impact on medical practice. A doctor who believesthat it is they who give dignity to other people by paying attention to them runs the risk of falling into misconceptions that distort moral representations. At the same time, a physi cian who professes equal hu mandignity and believes it is intrinsic is able to respect the patient’s autonomy. However, this, in turn, can create treatment dilemmas if patient autonomy conflicts with the specialist’s professionalism. In any case,a medical worker who professes human dignity as an inalienable value follows key principles of bioethics such as autonomy and justice more closely.
By the uselessness of dignity in me dical practice, McLean means that talking about criteriafordignity in bioethics only di stracts from the primary immediate goal  of treatment. Somerville argues in her bookthat  when dialogue in bioethics comes to a ge neral agreement, the t erm dignity seems useful and relevant. If it is impossible to agree, the concept of dignity isdepreciated and becomes useless. However,  the idea of dignity can vary and be distorted in such a way that the very dignity of a person willbe humiliated; there will be no dignity in a person. There is a constructionist approach to human perception, in which the personality must meet the criteria to beconsideredtruly human. This is the third use case forthis concept, in which the misuse of this view  becomes really dangerous.
A personcan be determined by a higherawareness and cognitive ability, which determinesthe knowledge of their goal on Earth and moral criterion. However, some people with mental disabiliti es may thus actually not fit the criteria for being human. Consequently, their external dignity will be diminished by those who believe that their internal dig nity is worthless. This is aterrible mistake in moral judgment and is very dangerous for medical ethics. Moreover, the question of human dignity arises in the c ase of embryos and embryos, which significantly complicates the issue of moral responsibility and giving dignity toa person in the caseof an abortion procedure. Thus, the external dignity of a person comes from the field of social experience and the attitude of other  people to a person, which is most valuable in bioethics and medical practice. The pursuit of dignity in each person can help a doctor make truly valuable ethical decisions and can help other professionals make them.