In general, the business case for the Centers for Diabetes appears to bepositive since the project is closely aligned with the needs of the community and the targetsset by the AffordableCare Act(ACA). However, there are potential risks, as outlined in detail in the SWOT analysis,whichhas to be considered before the final decision ismade. This note will detail the risks for the Centers for Diabetes andproposepotential ways of mitigating them.
First and foremost, the idea of a community health center that addresses thecommunity health needs is closely aligned with the value-based care and the comm unity focus that are thetargets set byACA. Moreover, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and Healthy People 2030 report cites the need to focus onhow health issues are managed from a community  perspective and not an individual perspective. Hence, there is a threat of otherhealthcarefacilities that receive reimbursements from Medicare and Medicaid in the county choosing to create a similar ini tiative. This is because diabetes is a common probl em in the United States, affecting 10% of the general population and 14% of the Hispanic and African-American community.
The only way to mitigate this risk is to begin market ing and outreachactivities as soon as  the project is approved and there is funding to support the further stages of operations. In this way, the community will become familiarized with  the hospital and the Center,and even if other similar initiatives arise, this Center will already have anestablished brand image, which canguarantee that it will also have visitors.
Thesecond significant issue identifi ed in the report is the financial statements, since based on the assessments, the reimbursements,revenue, and grant funding will be insufficient to cover the costs of staffing and operations. Hence, there is a need to eitheradd ser vices that can be reimbursed under ACA or obtain an  additional source of funding. Alternatively,there can be a n option for cutting the costs, for example,  having fewer community workersor reducingthe expendituresassociated with traveling to help ensure that the funds that this Center will have been covering these expenses. However, it is a better option to request additional grant funding as it is vital to make certain that this Center addresses the health education needs of the community in a quality manner. Another alternative to obtain additional funding would be to request help from the hospital, as the community center helps reduce the number of complications and, therefore, expenditures needed to care for the patients with diabetes. Moreover, the hospital can refer its patients to the health center to advocate for their health educ ation and self-care, and in return, support the operations of this facility.
In summary, this note identifies the potential risks that the Center for Diabe tes may face. The two main concerns that should beconsidered before the launch of the Center for Diabetes are the potential t hreat of other community initiatives addressing the same health disparity. This issue ca n be resolved through earlyoutreach and marketing. The secondproblem is the funding issue, as the financial statements make it clear that the revenue and grant will not be enough to cover the operational costs. Hence, the Centerhas an option of additional services, requesting additional gran ts, or asking for support from the ho spital.