If the Boar d of Governors of the U.S. Federal Reserve System does as expected ear ly Friday andvotes to expand banks' non-banking activities, it will only heighten the drive in Congress to overhaul U.S.banking regula tions completely, analysts and industry officials said.
TheFed is expected to vote to allow ban ks' section 20 subsidiaries to derive 25 percent oftheir revenue from non-banking activities such as securities underwriting, up from the current 10 percent ceiling.  
The section 20 proposal was released for comment in July, but since then another bank regulator has stolen some of the Fed's thunder. Comptroller of the Curren cy Eugene Ludwig saidhis office will begin approvingbank affiliates moving intoan assortment of non-banking businesses.
Both the Fed's proposal and the Compt roller's actions will raise the pressure on Congress to scrapthe Glass- Steagall Act, according to Robert Litan, director of economic studiesat the Br ookings Institute.  
In the past, banks led th e charge to change the law because they wanted to get intoother businesses, like selling insurance or underwriting stock deals. Insurance companies and securities firms generally opposed the banks creating legislative gridlock.
"Now the tables have been turned,"  Litan said. "But it's not a two-way street.  Other industries will want to level the p laying field."  
B oth moves also reflect current market realities. The financial servicesindustry, from banks to insurance companies to mutual funds,is converging. Mutual fu nds already  offer checking account-like money market funds and some ofthe leading sto ck and bond underwriters are commercial banks.
In the words of one top regulator, the Fed's move from 10 to 25 percent, "is not material." The Fed has required banks totake certain steps toprevent problems in the subsidiaries from affecting the bank itself, andits government-insured deposits.
Competitors inother fields fret that the banks insured deposits are a form of  government subsidy giving the banks an unfair advantage when the y venture into other field s.
Comptroller Ludwig disagreed. Speaking to reporters after delivering a speech her eThursday, Ludwigsaid that walling offthe subsidiary "basically eliminatesany subsidization."
He opposes efforts by some in Congress to keep banks out of certain fields, such as real estate or merchant banking, entirely."It's  a mistake to  set product limits, particularly inthis day and age when we have such a dynamic marketplace," hesaid.