Britain's Britannic Assurance declared onTuesday a 209 million pound ($336 million) special bonus for life insurance policies, following discussions with the government on ownershipof surplusinsurance funds.
The payoutwill apply to  all "wit h profits" policies in for ceon February 17, 1997. Details will be given with the 1996 bonus due to  be announced next month.
The company said last year it discussing with the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) ownership of long-term assets, and a way todistribute the surplus  to policyholders and shareholders.
Britannic has now agreed with the DTI that 902 million pounds of theexcess assets within the long term fund can be attributable to shareholders.
Britannic also said it i ntende d to increase its dividend for the year by 82 percent to 23 pence persharefollowing an increase in life profits. This would be the basis for continuing the company's progressive dividend policy.
Thenews boosted Brita nnic shares, which jumped 71 pence, or nearlynine percent, at one stage before settling for a rise of 29 pence at 832.5.
The  money attributable  to shareholders forms part of total assets in the life funds which amounted to 5.682 billion pounds at the end of  1995.
Those assets were estimated to have risen by the endof 1996, Britannic chief executive Brian Shaw said, and updated figures would be rel eased on March18.
Britannic also announced a restructuring of its long-term funds and the results of a strategic review of its business.
The review will lead to new sales mana gement and premium  collection systems, streamlining of head office and investment in market analysis and product research.
The initiatives are expected  to cut operating costs by around 25 million  pounds, based on 1995 figures.
Britannicsaid it planned to build on its brand, investment management and distribution skills, financial strength and product development abilities to strengthen its position and improve value to policy and  shar eholders.Restructuri ngthe long-term fund will create two continuing "withprofits" funds, one for its industrial branch and the other forthe ordinary branch -- life and pensionsbusiness.
In future at least 90 percent of the surplus in the with profits funds will beallocated each year  to with profits policies. Thebalance  will be shareholders' profit for transfer tothe profit and loss acco unt.
Th e company has also created two separate non-profit sub funds -- one for life, one for pensions -- whic h will contain non-profits business and both of which will be owned by shareholders.
The shareholder transfer  for 1996 wil l be increas ed by 23 million pounds following thedeclaration of the 209 million pound special bonus. ($ = 0.621 British Pounds)