Oneok Inc. and Western Resources Inc. on Thursday agre ed to a $660 m illion deal that comb ine s their natural gas assets and gives Western Resources access to a broader base of customers for its ele ctricity and security services.
The deal reflects the moves within the utility industry to prepare forfurther deregulat ion.
Under the agreement, Oneok will take all the natural gas assets of Western Resources, making it the ninth l argest gas distribution company in the United States serving 1.4 million customers. Tulsa-based Oneok is the parent of Oklahoma Natural Gas Co.
Western Resources, based in Topeka, Kan., will become the largest equity holder in Oneok, receiving about 3 millionnew shares of Oneok common stock and preferred stock that  will beconvertible, upon necessary regulatory approvals, into about another 19.3 million shares of Oneok common. Its total stake in Oneok is about 45 percent.
The deal is expected to close by mid-1997, following approval by Oneok shareholder s and federal and state regulatory authorities.
"They (Oneok) are a total gascompany. They understand the gas business better than we do," Western Resourcespresident David Wittig said in a telephone in terview.
By swapping itsgas assets, Western Resources will be able to focus its efforts on growing its electricity and home-security businesses, both of which involve a customer base of home owners and 24-hour monitoring of co nsumers.Oneok's 735,000 customers could become potential clients of Western Resources' services."Wester n Rseources has been becoming a nationwide marketer of retail energy -- electricity and/or gas --and home security," Everen Securities analyst Dan Rudakassaid."This combination gives them direct accessto another 735,000 gas customers, which in  the future ... would be potential elec tric customer s a nd also electronic homesecurity customers."
The companies  said the alliance will position the companies to take advantage of the expected deregulation of theelectricity industry, al lowing customers to buy electrical power from several sources instead of just the localutility. That type of deregulation is alr eady taking place in the natural gas industry.
"Eventuallly there will be total competition in electricity and in gas," John Hayes Jr, Western Resources chairman, told a teleconference. "We are just pr eparing for the future."
The companies said Oneok's inde pendence would be preserved by standstill pr ovisions in the agreement that define the rights and responsibilities of the respective companies for at least the next 15 years.
Western Resources will receive a preferred dividend of 1.5 times the underlying common dividend, which now stands at 30 centsa share,but no less than $1.80 per preferred share per year for the first five years.
George K. Baum analyst Dennis Hudson said Western R esources' natural gas assetsearned  that company about $20  millionin 1995 . As part of Oneok, the assets likely will earn more, given that company's expertise in gas distributions and synergies from its existing gas business.
With i ts stake in Oneok, Western Resources will still benefit from a portion of the gas earnings, as well as future gas alliances that Oneok might enter into in the future.
"Oneok would continue to search for opportunities to acquire more customers on the gas side. We're most supportive of that," Wittig said.
He added that WesternResources continues to lookfor waysto expand its electricity  and home-security businesses.