The businessworld is ever-changing, and companies must always  beflexible to these changes. One of the changes that a business might need to adapt to  is an expanding target market. P&Gcurrently sells personal care products to a market that is comprised primarily of women. However, research shows that there is a growing market among male consumers due to the rise of male grooming. P&G should restructure to take advantage of the new market for men’s care products.
P&G will need to make several changes to capitalize on the “ignored” market. The restructuring will affect various departments such as research and development, product design, and sales and marketing. Their redesign will affect their employee recruitment and selection practices (Szymczyk, 2016). For instance, currently, most employees that deal with skin and hair care products, cosmetics, and fragrancesare female. Th is is because the target market is mostly women, which means that the products are probably developed, designed, and marketed by women. To attract a new target audience of men, the company will need to hire more male employees (Nadube & Didia, 2018). Male consumers will bemore satisfied with male-onlypersonal care products.These products are best develope d by pe ople who  are male themselves andunderstand what other men would want. The research and development, product design, and salesand marketing departments must compri se more male employees.
The main contextual variable that le d to P&G’srestructuring was the changes in the target market as revealed by astudy. The study was conductedby Male Grooming Trends: Profiting in 2009 and Beyond. It showed that although female consumersdominated the marketfor personal grooming products, the marketfor male consumers was quickly expanding. P&G saw an opportunity to profit from an expanding market. Therefore, redesigning was necessitated by changes in themarket characteristics.Several companies have restructuredto capitalize on a larger target market. Examples include Harley Davidson Motorcycles, NFL, and Stryx. Traditionally, the demographic market for motorcycleswas older white men. However, following a decrease in motorcycle sales, Harley Davidson started targeting female  customers (Moreno,2017).They customized their bikes to women’s needs and found creative ways to market these bikes to women.  Second, the National Football League discovered in a study that wom encomprised over 40% of their viewership (Townes, 2019). They then expanded their target market beyond the usual male customers and  started to make merchandise forwomen. Finally, Stryx is a company that has capitalized on the growing market for male makeup products. The companies mentioned have been widely successful in expanding their markets. Other companies should also capitalize ontheir expandi ng ta rget market. For instance, traditionally male-dominated gyms should consider opening women-only gyms. Although women are now exercising just as much as men, there are not enough gymsfor them. Overall, companies should be quick to adapt tochanges in the market.
In conclusion, companies should keep up-to-date with any changes in the market. All industries are constantly evolving, and it would be unwise for businesses to stick to old  ways. In the given casestudy, P&G has the potential to generate profit from anew market for personal care products. It willneed to re design its recruitment practices to exploi t this opportunity. Restructuring for a new reality can be a profitable venture if donecorrectly as shown by Harley  Davidson, NFL, and Stryx.