The article comprehensively describes thedefinition of an introvert,the features ofhis behavior, and p ersonal a ttitudes in the modern mod el of society. This category ofpeople oftenremains misinterpreted in a world focused on predominantly extroverted and energetically intense people. The purpose of the author is in the clearlyexpresseddesire to convey to society thegoalsand wishes of introverts, whose thoughts and feelings often gounrecognized or neglected. A superficial analysis of the text captures a vivid personal appeal of the author and intensely expresses subjectivesentiments due to indi vidual experience. A large number of rhetorical questions at the beginning of the message immediately attract the reader’s att ent ion. The article is written in a journalistic style  and has a bright emotionalcoloring with a hint of a pronounced rejection of the  global focus on extraversion.
Th e observant text analysis allows the readerto better un de rstand the personal message of the author. The article is well  structured and includes general  questions  regarding  the life and worldview of introverts. The text is characterized by a high degree of subjectivism and a pronounced bias towards the category  of extrovert readers. The author compares extroverts with “pupp y dogs” who can listen to a person for a minute and then start “barking” again. Such a comparison is pejorative and may cause an ambiguous reaction in the reader (Rauch133). In addition, the author directly states that introverts are a more intelligent,reflective,and sensitivecategory of people. Every conclusion h as the right to be presented for acceptance; h owever, a rather d ismissive tone towards extroverts may, on the contrary, cause  rejection of the message.
The position of the author is coherent andhas the potential to find its reader and supporter. However, the aftertaste from its reading is rather ambiguous and makes one thinkabout th e excessive tendentiousness of the writer. The textdoes not compare two different categories of people but vigorously downplays the pr incipal personality traits of extroverts. The author says that the  world would be much calmer and saner under the guidance of introverts. This theory may well be valid; however, perhaps theworld should not be so sharply divided into “white” and “black,” “extroverts,” and “introverts.” This article does a good job of its central purpose: to illustrate an alternative radical vision ofthe modern model of society separatedmainly  between extroverts and introverts.