Lear Corp. has announced the acquisition of Borealis Industrier AB, a Swedish automotive interior systems provider, to create a truly comprehensive offering for automake rs worldwide. The deal, w hich i s expected to closewithin t he  next few months, willsee Lear Corp. take full control of the privately-held company, adding to its already impressiveportfolio of automotive components and electronics .
With the acquisition of Borealis, Lear Corp. is lookingto p rovide a total solu tion for automakers, including everything from seating systemsandelectronics to complete interior solutions. This move follows a successful year for Lear Corp., who have enjoyed solid demand across all of their product categories, despite the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
Borealis has proven itself to be an excellent partne r for Lear Corp.  over the years, working cl osely toge therto provide innovative interior solutions that meet the unique needs of each automotive customer. This acqui sition will allow LearCorp. to integrate Borealis’ design, engineering, and manufacturing capabilities directly into its own operations, creating a tru ly streamlinedand ef ficient experience for automakers.
The acquisition ofB orealis also means that Lear Corp. will be able to offer customers a wider range of colors, mater ials,and finishes  for their automotive interi ors. The company has already indicated that it will be investing heavily in Borealis’ manufacturing facilities in Sweden, giving itaccess to state-of-the-art equipment and processes that will further streamline its operations and improve out put q uality.
In announcing the acquisition, Lear Corp. CEO Ray Scott said that the move would “grow our pres ence in the automotive interiors market and support our ongoing efforts to provide customers with inno vative products  that are safe, sustainable, and afforda ble.” He add ed that building on the strengths of the two companies would help Lear Corp. “adapt to the evolvingmarket conditions and position ourbusiness forlong-term growth.”
Theacquisitionof Borealismarks a significant step forward for Le ar Corp. in its mission to build the most compreh ensive range of automotive interior component s and systems in the world. As automakers look to differentiate themselves in an increasingly competitive market, LearCorp.is well-positioned to deliver the quality, reliability, and innovatio n that they demand.