These days never get easier . Actually, the da ys I like, that's when I get to r est. It's when the sun goes down that things start to bother me.
You see that kid above me? Cute kid, good with his parents, and never causes  any problems. I've seen him outgrow his crib and move into this racecar bed with flames down the sid e. It's agood upgrade from the cramped space under the crib, let me tell ya. Ihaven't seen the kid much outside  of this room; the truthis I'm not allowed anywhere else. Boss's rules, not his. I don't mind though, the view is good and I can hear everything  in this small house which makes me feel like I'm part of the family.
I like to think he turned out alright since he gets such good rest at night, but I wouldn't want to take too much credit. To be honest, I've never actually met the kid. When he first moved into the new bed, his father was in here just before the lights went out. For what seemed like months the father would come in and listen to the boy talk about his fear of me, the Boogeyman. He would come in and say:
"Taylor, buddy it's alright. The lights go out, but everything is fine."
To which the boy would say"Butdad I know he's in here".
"It's just your mind playing games with you. I knew we shouldn't havelet you watch the movies with mom and I last H allowee n." The dad said jokingly with a smile on his face.
Taylordidn't want his dad to think he wasn't ready to bea big boy so he shouted
"No way dad, I can handle anything!"
"Okay then bud, sleep well. Remember it's ju st like any other night." The dad said as he turned out the lights and shut the door behind him.
Maybe another night for youTaylor, but I'll be busy.
I mean, how this kid can be scared of me when we've never met!
I've tried to come out and say hia few times before, but everytime this kid hears the slightest noise I can sense he gets worried. So I stick down here and haven't moved since. Not that I get much spare time to even come out, but one day would be nice.
You see, where I'm from is a rough part of town. It's not your ordinarytown with the kids playing out front of their homes with white picket fences. As a  matter of fact, no one in Taylor's world knows my world even exists. Sure, everyone around seems to get along, but at night the real creeps come out. These guys like to cause problems and they can do that to each other. I wish they would keep it amongst the other monsters, but they don't. It's when they startseeking the small ones for an extra rush that boils my blood and Istep in.
You see these guys night  after night go out seeking kids like Taylor. They don't even call them kids; they call them "dessert" … real sickos.. Lu ckily, for the little ones they've each been assigned their own"Boogeyman" to make sure theystay safe and don't get snatched up. So when I hear Taylor tell his dad that he is scaredof *me*, it hurts.
If only Taylor knew what fighting these  bastards was like. You've got Aeran withhis scaled skin and claws the length of a cable car. How about Zeila with spiked arms thatburn like hell whenthey hit you, not to mention she's twice my size.Don't want to leave out Leera. Yeah he's small,  but lightening fast with a ferocious bite. It's always the small ones that give you the most trouble. Yeah I get lots of bumps and bruises in this line of work. I'm fortunate enough I can heal fast. If I wasn't trained for these guys then I wo uld have problems and by problem I mean dead. And with me dead that means the creeps win and they would have their feast. Sounds bad but really though, it's all in a nightswork.
I lovemy job, I really do. Might sound weird after hearing that every night I'mbusy beating up the bad guys, but hearing Taylor's laugh  in the day is whatkeeps me going. I just wish the kid knew the truth. All those noises Taylor hearsin the night are just me doing my job. Making sure  Taylor stays warm and asleep in his bed. And for that, I'm the one he worries about. I would loveto actually meet one of these kids I get to watch o ver, bu t it hasn't happened yet. Taylor isn't my first and won't bemy last, but I still have hope. Gotta run, I can hear the chatte ring of claws on the pavement heading my way. Sleeptight Taylor…