China's usually  rubber stamp parliament failed on Mondayto pass an anti-corruption bill after the proposed law fell victim to fierce debate over whether it should specifically target government officials.
State mediahad reported heated  discussion at the week-long session of the standing committee of the National People's Congress, or parliament, that closed on Monday.Disputes among China's usually  tame lawmakersranged from controversy surrounding the scope of the death penalty as contained inproposed amendments of the criminal law to wheth er  corrupt state managers should be executed.
The draft law on administrative supervision, which wouldtarget corruption and had been due to be adopted this week, was eventuallywithdrawn from voting, the Xinhua news agency  said.
The law waswithdrawn "because legislators sharply disagreed with the name of the law", it  said, quoting parliament chairman Qiao Shi.
Some lawmakers believed the bill shouldbe named the Law On Administrative Supervision in line with its regulation of the government.
However, they ran into opposition on constitutional grounds from legisla tors  who argued it should becalled simply the Law onSupervision, without reference to the administration, Xinhua said, but did not elaborate.
Qiao suggested  the issue be put forward for a vote at the next standing committee session in February, 1997.
Beijing has launched repeated crackdowns on graft, which senior leaders have called a cancer that threatens the Communist Party's grip on power, but  many Chinese say enforcement of anti-cor ruptionmeasures at senior levels ispatchy at bes t.
Debate had swirled around amendmentsto combat corruption, including more than 60 clauses thatwould specifically define draft and dereliction of duty, while increasing to 32 from seven thety pes of officials subject to the law, state media said.
One sour ce of contention was the designation of managers of state firms as governmentemployees, who are subject to a maximum penalty of death for corruption, it said.
One body of opinion held that go v ernment factory managers be defined as public servants since 75 percent of all official cases of corruption involved state enterprise managers.
Others argued this was unfair since managers of non-state firms faced a maximum of only 15 years in jail for graft.
All should be equal be fore thelaw, the newspaper quoted the criminal law as saying regarding the need to tackle corruption
The failure of the anti-co rruption law to pass came as senior leade rs considered whether to punish scandal-hit formerBeijing Party boss Chen Xitong -- the highest-ranking victim of China's anti-corruption campaign -- for derel iction of duty.
Under the law, prosecutors would have the powers to investigate a suspect's bank accountand ask the courts to freeze bank accounts ofthose suspected of graft, bribery and embezzlement.
In the first 11 months o f 1996, Chineseprosecutors hadbegun action in 77,611 cases of corruption, bribery and economic crime and had dealt with  33,879 cases, upyear-on-year 9.4 percent, the media said.
Corruptionwas virtually wiped out in theyears after the communists took over in 1949 but has staged a comeback after economic  reforms were introduced 17 years ago.