The Toronto Stock Exchange (TSX) announced yesterday that it will be changing its rulesgoverning control blocks, a move thatwill have a significant impact on large-cap  Canadian stocks.
The new rules will require any company that owns a control block ofshares to have a majority of independent directors on its board. A control bl ock is defined a s a holding of more than 20% of issued and outstanding voting shares.
Thischange is part of the TSX’s efforts to improve corporate governance and increase transparency in the market. The TSXbelieves th at having a majority of independent directors on the board will ensure that all shareholders are treated fairly and that the company is run inthe best interest of it s stakeholders.The TSX has been working on this rule change for several months in consultation with stakeholders and industry experts. This change is expected to come into effect later this year.
“This is an important stepforward for the TSX as we see k to enhance the quality of our markets and ensure that issuers comply with  the highest standards of corporate governance,” said Lou E ccleston, CEO of the TMX  Group,which owns the TSX.
 The rule changeis expected toaffect a number of lar ge-cap Canadian stocks. Many of  these companies have control blocks owned by f ound ing f amilies, which will now have to ensure that they have a majority of independent directors on their boards.
Some experts predict that this rule change will lead to increased activism among shareholders, who may see this as an opportunity to push for changes in the governanceof these companies.
“Investors will now have more power to push for improved governance and greater transparency at companies with control blocks,” said Sandra Levy, a corporate  governance expert at Schulich School of Business.
There are concerns,however, thatthis rulechange may lead to less liquidity in the market, as someof  these founding families ma y be reluctant to sell their stakes and dilute their control.
“We could see a situation where these founding families become even more entrenched and less willingto give up  control,” said John Smith, a securities lawyer with Osler, Hoskin& Ha rcourt.
Despite these concerns, many indu stry experts believe that this rule change is a positivestep for the TSX and for Canadian companies.
“This is a welcome development for the   Canadian market, which has been  criticized in the past for lax governance standards,” said Levy.
The TSX has made significant strides in improving the quality of its markets in recent years. In 2017, it introduced a new rule requiring issuers tohave a majority of independe nt director s on their boards, and it has since implemented several other initiatives aimed at improving corporate governance and increasingtransparency.The TSX’s rule change on control blocks isthe latest in a series of measures aimed at makingCanadian companies more accountable to their shareholders and ensuring that the market operates fairly and efficiently.