The Hong Kong government was  in a flap on Thursday after a bombshell admission that Britain could not protect Hong Kong holders of British passports after China takes over thecolony next July.
Governor Chris Patten ca lled anurgent meeting of the Legislative Council for later on Thu rsday to make a statement on the controversy, which arose after a British envoy said London could provid e no consular protection for the passport holders.
Pat ten's spokesman said the issue had sparked "considerable p ublic interest and a good deal of misunderstanding" as wellas dem ands by legislators to meet him.
Pattenwould answer their questions at the extraordinary si tting of Legco on Thursday evening.
The uproar is the latest jolt in  Hong Kong's  often bumpy transition back to Chinese rule 208 days from now,when 150 years of colonialrule will end and the territory will become an autonomous region of China.
Britain's Senior Trade Commissioner, Francis Cornish, said on Tuesday that London could not protect the more than 135,000 Hong Kong people granted full British passportswith right of abode in Britain under a special selection scheme in 1990.
In a concession to widespread demands for full Britishcitizenship after Beijing's 1989 Tiananmen Sq uare crackdown, London offered passports to 50,000 Hong Kong households, a privileged fraction of Hong Kong's 6.3 million people .
Cornish said China regarded these people as holders of dual citizenship and would not recognise British consular protection for themon Chinese soil, on the mainlandor in Hong Kong.
Cornish's remarks were denounced by local politicians as asell-out. In the corridors of the Hong Kong government even the most senior officials were privately criticising Britain for what they sawas a concession to China, one source said.
On Wednesday, London and the Hong Kong government rushedto assure affected passport holders that anyone claiming sole British nationality would r eceive consular protection until it was proven they held dual citizenship.
But a British sta tementmade clear Britain could not givefull consular protection forpeople holding dual Chinese nationality once HongKong beco mes part of China again.
British officialssaid the passports issued to these people were indistinguishable from any other full British passport, but many  in Hong Kong are concerned that Britain may have learned that China had obtained the names of the passport hodlers.
"The only way to know for sure if one of these passports was issued under the special scheme would be if you had the names," a senior government source said.
The transition to Chinese rule has been doggedby disputes since the 1989 Beijing c rackdown. China reacted furiously to the special passport scheme, and again when Patten introduced reforms expanding democracy in 1992.
China was infuriated last week when Britain unveiled a liberal anti-subversion billthat would set legal markers against China-style jailings of dissidents in Hong Kong.
Britishand Chinese senior negotiators are in the midst ofa three-d ay bargaining sess ion on handover detailsand have signalled they expect to announce accords on several issues on Friday, although the agendahas so far remained confidential.
Hong Kong is supposed to be autonomous and keep its capitalist system intactfor another 50 years, but a human rights group said on Wednesday China's crackdown on dissent bode badly for the territory and itsautonomy prospects were slim.
"The rule of law and human rights picture isbleak," said Human RightsMonitor director LawYuk-kai on the la unch of an annual human rights  report.