Royal Bank of Scotland, which repo rts full year data next Thursday, is expected to raise its pre-tax profit from last year's 602 million stg but not by as much as analysts tho ught just a few months ago.
They expect Royal Bank's profits to rise to between 670 and 700 million stg, with  a much smaller contribution from itsDirect Line low cost insurance, but benefits continuing to accrue from the bank's efforts to reduce costs.
Total dividend is expecte d to be around 18.6 pence a share versus last year's 16.2p.  
The pre-tax figures will be complicated by an exceptional gain from Royal Bank's disposal of its 50 pct stake in Germany's CCGroup, fromwhich it said it would make 70 million stg, and by restructuring costs of around 23 million pounds stemming from an acquisition by itsNew England subsidiary  Citizens.
Forecasts for Direct Line vary widely but analysts are generally pessimistic, with the company's main market -- motor insurance -- going through "probably the most diffucult period in its history", as chiefexecutive  Ian Chippendale told Reuters in an interview last week.  
"I think Chippendale was sen ding a  strong message," said oneanalyst who declined to be named. "I think he was softening up the market for a poor set of results."
Some analysts suspectthe resultsmay not be quite as poor as hs been feared by some.
They see the core bank as continuing to perform quite well withthe positiveresults o f its "Project Columbus"helping costs and income.
David Poutney expects a pre-tax profit of 695 million stg, which includes the exceptional items, while BZW analysts expect 675 million.  
The market received abig clue on the performance ofCitizens from the recent results o f Bank of Ireland whichowns 23 percent of the operation.
"Citizens is doing reasonably well," P outney said, but analysts say itis being affected by the rather lacklustre NewEngland economy.
The market wil l be expecting improvement in the cost income ratio but analysts say that even animprovement this time will leave the bank plen ty of scope for improvement.  
The market willbelooking for furtherclues on lending whic h showed good gro wth, mostly in corporate lending area, in the first half.Inevitably, Royal Bank will also be watched for sign s of acquisitions.
I t is known to be interested in buying a buildingsociety to extend it s presence in England but  in the current climate, it is unlikely tobe willing to pay the high prices likely to be asked.
In any case, analysts say RoyalBank would have to raise cash to be able to perform any major acquisition.  
In the meantime, the market will be  looking to its relationship with mutually ownedinsurance and pens ionsfirm Scottish Widows, whichsome think may result in an eventual merger.
Royal Bank shares were 15p higher on Friday to stand at 519-1/2p.