Russian Finance Minister Alexander Livshits warned financially-troubled Norilsk Nickel on Friday that it  must pay overdue taxes, but analys ts said the firm would not be liquidated or that its would assets would be frozen.
"Norilsk really is a big debtor, both to the federal and regional budgets," said KonstantinChernyshev, equities analyst at Moscow brokerageRinaco Plus and a Norilsk watcher. "Livshits's words are anattemp t toput pressure on the company."The official Itar-Tass news agency quoted Livs hits as telling parliamentarydeputies that RAONorilsky Nikel 0#NKEL.RUO  had to pay its tax arrears and that bankruptcy procedures applied to the metals group.
"If it was an unsolicited statement and a bolt out of the blue, then it obviously means something," said Ch ristopher Granville, chief economist at United City Bank in Moscow.
"But if it was a response to a deputy's questionthat was essentially loaded,then it was theonly  answer he could have given."
Russian tax and ca binet authorities, under pressure from the International Monetary Fund to boost taxrevenues as a cond ition for receiving payments of a $10 billion, three-year loan to Moscow, have been striking fear into the hearts of some of Russia's most prominent industrial firms by saying they must pay up or face liquidation.
"They couldfreeze metal, but it's not a long-term solution to theproblem andwouldn't put money in the budget," Chernyshev said.  "I don't think th ey would do that."
Entire social infrastructures in the icy Far North where Norilsk  is based d epend  on the company, and Moscow has said it has no finances to resettle hundreds of thousands of people -- an expenditure which could fa r outstrip Norilsk's debts.
Norilskofficials declined to comment.
Analysts said the government, while anxious about Norilsk's debts, is highly unlikely t o bring the nickel, copper, cobalt, platinum and platinum group metals producer to its knees or take measures that could significantly affect output.But it al so wants Norilsk, the world's second-largest nickel producer, t o clean up its act.
"The procedure of  bankruptcy will be applied," Tass quoted Livshits as telling Duma deputies about Norilsk.
It indirectly  quoted him as saying Norilsk should first pay salary arrears, whichin the past have led to worker strikes.
"It is unlikely that  Norilsk will pay these debts in the near-term -- thecompany will remaina debtor in the near future," Chernyshev said.
He estimated thecompany's regionaldebts at least one trillion roubles and said 30 percent of the giant Krasnoyarsk regional budget was fuelled by Norilsk money.
Norilsk's new majority shareholder, Russian commerical bank Uneximbank, has said it is reorganising metal exports through Interrosimpex in order to boost rev enues.
But t he changes have yet to improve significantly Norilsk's situation.
"Uneximbank has inherited a mountain and whether or not they climb out and ov er it remains to beseen," said one metals source.
Norilsk said in September that it total debts, including unpaid salaries to workers, were 13 trillion roubles. The company said last month that it hadworked out atax payment schedule with authorities, after regional tax officials threatened toseize some nickel and copper assets.