Barry Diller has recently an nounced that his company, Silver King Communications, will soon launch a new national br oadcasting network. The announ cement came hot ontheheels of Silver King'sacquisition of the Home Shopping Network (HSN), a move that Diller says willprovide the funding necessary to support the company'sambitious plans.
Silver King is no stranger to broadcasting – thecompany already has a succ essful network of local television stations across the U.S. However,Dillerbelieves that the  time is ripe for a new national broadcasting outlet that will be geared toward a younger, more tech-savvy audience. The new network will feature a mix of original programming an d contentfrom other media companies, as w ell as live events and interactive elements that  will bedesigned to engage viewers innew  and exciting ways .
The acquisition ofHSN, which is expected to close in the comingweeks, will give Silver King the financial clout necessary to make its new network a reality. HSN, whichis a popular home shopping channel, generates revenue of over $2.5 billion per year. Diller be lieves that t he company canleverage HSN's existingcustomer base to help promote its new network, which he hopes will be available to viewers across a variety of platforms, including tr aditional television, streamin g services, and social media.
" We see a hugeopportunityin creating a new type of broadcasting network that is truly designed for the 21st century," Dil ler said in a statement. "The acquisition of HSN gives us the resourceswe need to make this vision areality, and we'r e excited to get to work building something truly special for viewersacross the country."
While the specifics ofthe new network haveyet to be revealed, Diller has hinted that it will focuson lifestyle and entertainment content, with an emp hasis on technology and innovation. It remains to beseenwhether Silver King's new broadcastingventure will be successful, but with the acquisition ofHSN, the company is certainly poised to make a big splash inthe world of media and entertainmentin the years to come.