Digital forensics toolsare highly popular among   digital investigators, as they allow easily conducting of the necessary technical analyses. One of the most famous software programs for digital forensics isAutopsy, a toolkit that examines the images present on a device’s hard drive. Capable of interacting with personal computers  and smartphones, Autopsy is highly versatile and contains several functions for properly inves tigating the image files present on the storage unit ( Autopsy , n.d.). Specifically, Autopsy allows viewing graphical information stored on thedevice , searching the repository for specific items, or extracting thedata ( Autopsy , n.d.). Althoug h th is softwareis distributed freely, i t remai ns an excellent tool for forensicanalysis and is continuously updated to follow technological advances.
Some digital forensics software is incredibly specific,created to examine aparticular system. As such, Arsenal Recon is ani nstrumen tconstructed to explore the Windowsoperating system and  its registry, thus accessing informat ion about the device’s configuration speci fics. Considering that a Windows registrycontains a vast amount of information about the applications installed and data processed, Arsenal Recon can be extremely valuable when conducting a digital forensic  investiga tion ( Arsenal Recon , n.d.). However, this software is pro duced commercially, it cannot be obtained free of char ge,  and $65 a  month or$756a year must be paid toreceive access.
Finally, unique programsare re quired whe n working with a smartphone system. CellebriteUFED is one ofthe methods used  to retrieve data from various types of mobile devices, primarily modern-day smartphones that have distinct operating systems ( Cellebrite UFED ,n.d.). In light of this evidence, Cellebrite UFED possesses a range of functions t o remove the phone’s se curity measures, and access the information stored in the intern al storage or on external cards ( Celle brite  UFED , n.d.). Nevert heless, the software can only bepurchased  for particular purposes, with prices starting at $2499.