Britain's Serious Fraud Office has yet to contact London-based securities houses after  arequest for help wi th aFrenchprobe into Eurotunnel SA /Plc share dealings, marketsource s saidonMonday.
The SFO said on Sunday it had been asked to lend a hand in an investigation by theFrench authorities into alleged market manipulation of the debt-lad en channel tunnel operator's shares.
The SFO said it wouldhelp in the Fr ench probe althoughith ad no grounds tolaunch an investigation of its own into the dealings which form the basis of the latest Paris investigation.
Securities firms contacted by Reuters on Monday saidthey had received no approach from th e SFO and did not expect to do so. They all said they would co-operate fully if they were approached.
The investigation is another chapter  in a troubled corporate story littered with incidents, which earlier this year saw two firms -- Salomon Bro thers and Swiss Bank Corp (SBC) -- cleared of insider trading.
The two had been among underwriters of a Eurotunnel rights issue in 1994 and, although never named by Paris stock exchange watchdog theCommission de Operations de Bourse (COB), said that they were underin vestigation in July last year.
The underwriting group also included Banque Indosuez, Morgan Grenfell, now owned  by Deutsche Bank AG, Societe de Banque, Banque Nationale de Paris, BanqueParibas, Caisse des Depots,Crdit Agricole, Credit Lyonnais, Robert Fleming, S.G. Warburg (now part of SBC) and Bel gian utility Tractebel SA. 
About two thirds of Eurotunnel shares are held in France and, as a general rule, more trading in the shares goes on in Paris than in London.
The SFO's usual practise is to issue notices which require a person or ins titution to be interviewed or hand over documents, although it can also apply for  a  search warrant if it wants to surprise its target.
On Monday, it remained unclear what period is currently under investigation.
The COB has already investigated the period surrounding the rights issue, thoughit could be revisiting this highly volatiletime.
There have been persistent suggestions that some operatorswere short-selling at around the time of the rights issue -- forcing the prices down by sellingshares they donot own in the hope of buying them back morecheaply late r.
Eurotunnel has called on stock exchange authorities on both sides of the Channel to inves tigate volatiledealings a t various times over the years.
Another example wa s in Agust 1995, when a rogue report that the company had signed a debt rescheduling  agreement sent the stock reeling.
The Anglo-French tunnel operatorat that time denied it had signed a debtagreement and demanded an inquiry into the trading activity and erroneousreports surrounding its shares and the incident might well be the focus of the Fren ch probe.