 From ancient ages, humans have used symbols and myths to expr ess their experience of a reality that transcends the physical world and  transmits it to future generations. Nowadays, famous brands ap ply  mythology to successful products due to their magical power. The logo of the h ouseof Versace is a very extravagant and extraordinary mark; it was designed in 1978 by Gianni Versace. The logo represents the head of the ancient Greekmythology of Medusa Gorgon. The designer explained why he chose this character; it isa synthesisof beauty and simplicity, which is able to mesmerize anyone, just like the clothesproduced by the brand. Other exampl es are Lamborghini; first, the Italian company was engaged in the product ion of tractors. The bull becam e the emblemof the br and, as t he bull is t he  sacred animal of Zeus. According to some people, this animal is extremely  hardy and st rong, which endows t he brand with great powe r. Now, Lamborghini cars are high-performance, expensive supercars, and the emblemof the golden bull is very appropriate for them.
Iprefer the myth of Prometheus because evil never prevails, and goodness and justice win. The mighty titan Prometheus stole thesacredfire from Olympus to provide it forhumankind. He made humanity independent of the gods.  Prometheus trained peopleto write, count, cr afts and introduced them tometals. Before, people wereafraid of the elements of th e sea, but now the titan taug htthemhow to buildships; humans became proficient in the art of medicine (Travis, 2021). Prometheus was destroying people’s faith in the deity, and for this, the thundererZeus decided to punish him. Prometheus was chainedto  a rock, the sunburnedhimmercilessly, and therain was pounding him. However, this wasnot the end of the titan’s torment; a giant eagle saton Prometheus’s chest everyday and tore his liver (Travis, 2021). Heracles, the strongest men, killed the eagle that tortured Prometheus , broke Prometheus’ chains, and the titan was free.