English football champions Mancheste r United extended their outstanding recent stock market form on Monday as renewed bid specul ation sent the share price soaring by over 10 pe rcent for the second straight session.
The latestgains were by a we ekend  report in the Sunday Express that  American Mark McCormack's IM G marketingagen cy was considering a bid for United.
"Wenev er make comments on unsubstantiated press stories," said an official at IMG's London office. But he said that IMG, most active in sports such as tennis and golf, was interested in increasing its involvement in football.
Earlier this year IMG lost out tosportwear company Adidas in abattle for control of former Fr ench football champions Olympique Marseille.
The Expre ss report said that any credible bid for United would have to be pi tched at around 650-700 pence per share, valuing the club at around 430 million pounds ($678million).
United shares rocketed againon Monday, rising 54.5p to 568p, valui ng the clubat around 350 million pounds.
Theshare price has virtual ly trebled si nce the start of the year and added almost 25 percent in the last two sessions alone.
The latest winning run was triggered when chief executive Martin Edwardssaid lastweek that United's status as Britain's most  profit able soccer club made it a likely bid target.
Pu blishing group VCI is reported to have made a 300 million pound  bid for United ear lier th is year which was rejected.
Analysts say that United would   be an attractive target fo r media companies, citing the U.Sexample of television mogul Ted  Turner who owns the Atlanta Braves baseball team.
The potenti al i ncome from pay-per-view television deals is also helping to drive the share price and may make United's main shareholders think twice about selling now.
"The directors own 22 percent of the club...They can sit back for five years and enjoythe football and then enjoy the benefits when the really big money comes in from pay-per-view," said Vinay Bedi of brokerage Wise S peke.
Pay-per-view is expected to  beintroduced by the end ofthe century and could allow leading clubs  such as United to earn tens of millions of pounds annually from television.
Focus on such juicy future pickings als o lifted shares in Tottenham Hotspur, the other Premier League club with a full London Stock Ex changelisting. They added 11p to 461p.
United, who last season won the coveted Englishleague and F.A. Cupdouble, had television income of 5.7 million pounds in 1995-96 when the club made a profit of 15.4 million before tax.