Czech power produc er CEZ a.s. on Fridaysaid its nine month net profit hit 8.4 billion crowns($312.6 mill ion), up from 7.4 billion for the same period last year, according to international accounting stan dards, after household electricity demandsurged.
CEZ's Director of Planning and Analysis section Petr Voboril  told a news conferencethat higher depreciation write-offs due to the opening of new installations cut  the company'stax obligations, and boosting its bottom line.
The company's gross profit for the period remainedflat at 13.1 billion.
Czech accounting pu t the firm's profit for the first nine months at7.04 billion, up from 6.7 billion last year .
CEZ said the result did not change the firm's profit forecast under Czech standards for the whole year, which is 8.1 billion crowns, equal to last year's.A financial statement showed CEZ wrote off 4.1 billion in thefirst nine months compared with 3.4 billion in the same period of 1995, and paid 4.7 billion in income tax after 5.7 billion last year.
"Above all, lowering of  tax obligations in connection with depriciation policy have influenced this (profit) increase," Voboril said.He saidthat overall demand for electricity rose by 5.5 percent in the period, andis expectedto reach a record high of 55.3 terrawatthours, 6.1 p ercent up year-on-year, for t he whole 1996.
Household consumption drove the increase, rising 10.5 perce nt, while large clients demanded almost two percent more power over the same period of the last year.
Voboril said that a recent ruling by the F inance Minstry on maximum prices CEZ can charge regional power distributors did not effect results thanks to the sales increase.
The ministry decided that the maximum average price CEZcan charge forsupplies this year is 1,035 crowns permegawatthour, up two crowns from the last year but below the firm's 1,040crown expecta tion included inbusiness  plan.
Voboril said that short-term indebtedness of CEZ increased as well as financial expenditures due to unpaid debts from some of the eight regional distributors, which totalled  3.2 billion crowns as of September 30.
CEZ and six of the country's eight regional grid operators had been locked in a price dispute w ith CEZ until the ministry ruling last month.
CEZ is also considering an international bond issue next year as it ne eds financing but has alreadyflooded the domestic marke t with paper, Voboril said.
Loc al analysts welcomed the results but saidthey did not expect them to help CEZ's share price much as the Prague Stock Exchang eis plagued by a lack of confidence.
"The CEZ results are slightly better than I expected. CEZ i s fundamentally undervalued but genereal market sentimentis not  very strong," said Petr Dousa of Zivnostenska Banka. "I don 't expect t he price to go up to 1,000 in the next few days."
CEZ shares closed up 14 crowns on the Prague StockExchange on Friday to closeat 937. -- PragueNewsroom, 42-2-2423- 0003