Mercury Finance Co is likely to spend a tense weekend with its bankers trying to work o ut arrangments to sol ve its liquity crisis, the failu re of which could force the company to file for bankrupcty protection,analysts and attorney's said.
The Lake Forest, Illinois-based auto finance company said Friday it could not raise new commercial paper to repay maturing debt and could not pay $17 million in commercial paper due Friday.
A finance companylike Merc ury makes moneyon the difference, or spread,between what it pays to borrow money and th e higher rates it c harges its customers. Afinance company without a source of funds is like a retailer without a source of merchandise, analysts noted.
"Ifyou can't fund, you're out  of busines s,"one equity analyst that followsthe company said, requesting anonymity.
Some rating agencies, including Standard & Poor'sCorp, lowered Mercury's commercial paper to a default rating Friday.
"They're very close to some reorganization, bankruptcy filing, probably a voluntary reorganization," said Thomas Kmiotek, analyst at Duff & Phelps Credit Rating Co.He and other analyst s  noted the company has another $100 million in commercial paper due Thursday, February 6.
A Mercury  spokesmandid not return repeated calls seeking comment  on the company's financing Friday afternoo n.
Aside from the company's current inability to sell debt, Mercury is also facing a host of shareholderlawsuits, filed after the company said it had to restate its net income over the past four years bya total of about  $90 million because of accounting irregularitie s.
Lawsuits do not become a financial liability for the company unless there is a judgment in favor of the shareholders. However, the company's admission of mi sstatements makes it easier for the sharheolders topro ve their case, leaving only the ques tions of who would have to pay how much, one securitieslawyer said.
"Securities laws are very, very simple," said  Ted Koenig, a partner with Chicago-based lawfir m Holleb & Coff "If there is an ommission or misstatement o f a material fact... there's liabiltiy."
Also, the company's market capitalization plungedby about $2.2 billion Friday, based onthe 13 point fall ofMercury's shares and the 172 mill ion shares thecompany said ithad outstanding late last year. That reduces the  equity cushion the company has available to show its creditors, Koenig said.
But analysts also said the company had about $1 billion in loans receivable on its books  at the end of October,1996 -- an asset to show creditors.
" No one hasquestioned the validity of the amount of receivables they have on their books or the quality of those receivables,"Kmiotek said.
Also, Mercury has generally been well regarded inthe sub-prime credit quality loan business, which could help it negotiate with its banks and continue as a going concern, said analysts and lawyers familiar with thecompany.
Mercury said in a statement it is in discussions with its lenders to satisfy working capital needs, butthat it could not predict the outcome of those discussions.