T he U.S. government's top Asia official, Win ston Lord, was to hold talks with Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister Liu Huaqiu in Beijing on a range of issu es including human rights, diplomats said on Wednesday.
Lord, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, arrived on Tuesday fo r the unannounced visit and was keeping a low profile while in Beijing, a U.S. embassy official said.
However he was due to hold talks withDeputy Foreign Minister  Liu anda possib le meeting withForeign Minister Qian Qich enwas on the agenda before Lord left on Thursday for Japan, diplomats said.
InWashington, State Department spokesman Nicholas Burns said on Tuesday that Lord was preparingfor a visit next month by Secretary of State Warren Christopher, but officials said a wide range of other issues would almo st certainly be raised.
"Human rights will come up," one diplomat said.
Washington last week sharply criticisedthe sentencing of dissident  Liu Xiaobo to three years in a labour camp, as well as apparent plans to try another pro-democr acy activist , Wang Dan, on the capital charge of plotting to subvert  the government.
U.S. officials say relations with China have generally improved in recent months, but there have been frictions in the past two weeks over its treatment of dissidents and over fresh reports of Chinese nuclear sales to Pakistan.
"I think all issues are on the table in (Lord's) discussions with the Chinese. Itwouldn't surprise me at all if that issue of the allegedsale ofitems between China and Pakistan came up," Burns said.
Nevertheless, he said Washington continued to maintain that Chinahad not violated past pledges with th e sale, which the Washington Times said lastweek consisted of a special industrial furnaceand high-tech diagnostic equipment.
Burns also said human rights issues were likely to be raised.
Diplomatssaid Beijing would almost certainly be angered by reports that Chinese dissident Wang Xizhe had arrived in San Francisco for asylum in the United States.
A row over human rig hts scarred Chr istopher's last visit to China in 1993.
Christopher is due to visit China on November 21-22 on a trip  originally announced in July.
The visit would mark the highest point in relations since ties plunged after Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui paid a privatevisit to the United States in June, 1995 -- a trip that enraged Beijing.
Both sides have said they are moving towards a possible exchange of presidential visits during 1997.
Am  ong outstanding issues that could spark U.S. anger ar e the alleged nuclear sales and Chin a's human rights record, while Beijing  blames Washington for holdin g up its application for membership of the World Trade Organisation.
U.S. officia ls said Lord had considered the possibility of extending his trip beyond Sou th Korea when he left Washington  last week, but did not finally decideto do so  until he was already in Asia.
Lord came to China after a visit toSouth Korea to discuss tensions over the beaching ofa North Koreansubmarine on the South Korean coast last month.  
"With more and mo re (listed) firms involving in suchtakeovers, regulation and supervision has become a tough task," said one analyst with ChinaGuotai Securities.
"The central government should not wait until there are too many headaches before taking measures to sort things out," he said.
But the analyst said that despite the problems, takeoverswould be a focus of the stock market over the next few years because of restrictions in other areas, including a ban  on mergers between listed firms and unlisted firms.
In the six-year history of modern China's stock markets, there has been no case of a takeover of one listed firm by another.