"You really promise? Really *really* promise?""Of coarse I promise ! Look, I've got the fiver now in my pock et."
Henry fishes a crumpled £5 note out of his  back pocket. In Bill's own hands the pigeon struggles and squawks.
The group had seen the nest in the corner of the roof and immed iately their thoughts turned to throwin g eggs at cars and windows. How disappo inted they were when, upon inspection, they found not eggs but a full grown pigeon sitting in the nest. Not to be put off James turned to Bill and dared him to catch the bird. He accepted and slowly c rept closer to the nest, pausing  to wave away Henry w ho had decided to try as well. After taking a moment to collect himself he leaped for the pigeon, not scared in the  least of the 20story drop just inches away, there wasno safety barrier. Sure enough he cau ght the pigeon. Butthen came the question: *What do we do with it? * This time it was Henry who supplied the dare.
"Tie your stoneto it and I'll give you a fiver."
Of coarse, they haveall been taught better than this. As young as they were they had all been told at one point or another not to do anything so reckless with a stone. They were at all times to be kept hidden and safe. Nevertheless, Bill was keen to earn the respectof his friends and, handing the pigeon to Henry, went jogging down stairs to fetch his stone.
Henry's stone wasn't actually a rock , none of them were nowadays, that's just what peoplecall them. His was a ring bought especia lly for the purpose. This was a popular approach to stones butrealistically they could be anything, you could bind your soul to a balloon if you wanted.
Presently Bill returned with his stone an d after a fewminutes had it tied to the bird s leg.
"Now what?" He asks.
"Now..." says Henry "You need to get it back!" Heshoots agrin atJames and releases the pigeon with a jump. It squawks and begins to fly towards the neighbouringapartment block.
Bill takes his promised money from the devious friend and startsrunning in the opposite direction, towards the edge of the roof. Henry and James are giggling now, excited for whatsgoing to happe n next. Without stopping Bill jumps and falls screaming to the hard concrete floor. Of coarse the fall is lethal. From the top of the building the other two can faintly hear the sound of him landing. They're out right  laughing at this point, Henr y is trying to use his phone to get a video.
Reincarnation only takesa few seconds and soon enoughBi ll is falling again,this time watching the pigeon carry on it's flight, getting smaller and smaller  until his lifeends once again. Before it can land Bill appe ars once more in front of it, this time reaching for the rings stuck to its leg. This scares the bird and it turns fromthe tower blocks and heads away from the centre of town. It's flight takes it to areaswith ever smaller buildings and it shows no sign of wanting to land or descend at all. And as it goes  it carries  Bill away withit. Henry and James stop laughing at this point, consideringif this is why they were told to be sensible with reincarnation stones.