The Poem of The Righteous Sufferer is a Mesopotamian poe m about the unjust suffering  of a suffering man. The Poem is small, consisting of n early 500 lines, and written in Akkadian. It is relevant to its timeof creat ion because, by the 13thcentury B.C., people had already begun to understa nd the need for moral foundations. The story is told in the first person, who honors his gods, but suffers from many illnesses. The Poem is a kind of reflection of alienation from the divine, drawing attention to injustice and the  problem of morality.In this regard, the Poem of the Righ teous Sufferer allows the historicalcommunity to explor e ancientMesopotamia’s cultural valuesand so cial attitudes.
First and for emost, the Poem is seen as one of the beginnings of the biblical narratives of the Old Testament. The fall of man and his repentance are essential elements of the Poem. In terms of its cultural contribution, it is crucial to understand the Babylonians’ view of the divine. Awareness becomes thecompanion o f the Poem’s protagonist, and he realizes that notall the good that happens to him is good to God. His lamentations are seen as a pr ayer complaint against the injustice accompanying a man, no matter how much wealth he possesses.
The source demonstrates how people’s consciousness and doubts about life’s val ue have been transformed. This cultural heritage shows that a righteous lifestyle does not mean good treatment from the deities. Possible injustice significantly affectssociety, so the protagonist laments, “the persecutor persecutes me day in and day out,” without understanding what he deserves it for (Poem of the righteous suff erer). Even the healing of his troubles does not make him happy, and he thinks that “the grave is near, the shroud is ready for me” because he has already once confronted God’s will(Poem of the righteous sufferer). The culture of the time forced the ma n to hope for the best, even though th e deities did not explain theirdecisions.
The social problems in the Poem are revealed as a set of attitudes followe d by the protagonist. He considers “the joy of the heart” the days of honoring God, glorifying the king, and striving for the state’s prosperity (Poem of the righteous sufferer). In his  fi gure, one can discern the image of the man of antiquity, who, through suffering, goes through the hard way of life. The sufferer’s experience, adherence to trad ition, and established social principles received moral merit. These merits canbe seen as a justifiedhope, and with th isknowledge, we can understand why biblical motifs originated in Babylon. The social reality was that divine grace could be earned only by hope and faith.
Based on the source, one can appreciate how  th e man was tightly  bound to society. The protagonist speculates about fate and its volatility, trying to u nderstand whygood deeds and praise of God have  not brought him grace. He wonders why just laws and rewards do not accompany good people (Poem of the righteous sufferer). Thus, the o verall social mood of the Poem is restless andunknown: the reasons why the gods send misfortune to society remainunspecified and unknown.
The Poem of the RighteousSufferer thus reveals the issues of culture and society that existed in the middle of the second decade B.C. The cultural precepts ofsociety gradually changed fro m complete trust in deities to an understanding of the necessity of morality. Human consciousness at that time was transformed, and hope for the best wasthe companion. Society’s social attitudes are expressed through the main character’s ritual s: honoring God and praising the king. The hope for the  best was only fulfilled through the execution of these rituals.