Australia-based transportequipment hire and logistics firm, Brambles Indu stries Ltd, reported a 15.8 percent profit lift for the 1995/96 year o n Friday despite flat Australian and European economies.
Surging profitsfrom Brambles' U.S. and European CHEP pallet hire joint venture with Britain'sGKN Plc compensated forotherwise slow growth from Australia, the company said.  
"The continuing improvement in our performance reflects, in part, the successful  retionalisation of our wholly own ed businesses andstrong growthfrom our CHEP joint venture  s," Brambles Chief Executive John Fletcher said.
"CHEP USA, in particular,continues to justify our confidence in its long term growth prospectsin the region,"he said in Bramble's profit statements.
Brambles' netprofit rose to A$215.1 million (US$169.9 million) for the year to June 30, 1997 from A$97.7 million in 1994/95, but the previous year's result was undermined by a large abnormal loss.  
Pre-abnormal profits for1995/96rose 15.8 percent to A$214.8million,at the top end of analysts' expectations.
Pre-tax profits rose 13 percent and 30 percent from Europe and the United States respectively, while Australian  p rofits rose eight percent.
"Overseas profits grew at twic e the rate in Australia and the trend islikelyto continue,"Fletcher said.
"Inparticular we expect further contributions from CHEP i n Europe and North America," he said.  
Fletcher later told Reuters this strong peformance from Bramble's non-Australi an operations had encouraged it to actively look at further acquisitions ou tside Australia.
"You should anticipate some acquisition work in the Northern Hemisphere, but in businesses we already operate in here," he said,  referring to areas like transport equipment rentals andrecords managements.
Looking ahead, he said strong contributions from the  United States and Europe should continue to offset soft Australianconditions and help produce profit growth.  
"We haven't got an expectation tha t we will get too muchhelp from thiseconomy ... for at least another six months," he said. "But all in all we've got enough things  going to see another (profit) increase for this year," he added.
The result generally pleased analysts, who also pointed to the strong U.S. pallet operations as the main bullish note.
"CHEP USA is the outstanding area," said Macquarie Equities analyst  Ian Myles.
"As long as they'resayin g positive things aboutCHEP in the USA then they'll be alr ight a nd there's  areasonable amount of momentum there," another Sydney transport analyst said.  
Brambles' shares closed upfive cents at A$18.90 against a soft marketoverall.