Financial services and property group Liberty International Holdings on Thursday unveiled a move into the British pensions market in ventures involving the British Telecom Pension Scheme and pension fund management group Hermes.
Liberty is establishing itsown pensions company, Liberty International Pensions, which will targetboth the needs of money purchase pension sch emes and retail pensions.
BT Pension Scheme, which owns Hermes, is to pay five million pounds ($7.8 million) for 10 percentof the equity of Liberty  International Pensions,with the rest held by Liberty.
Liberty and Her mes said in a joint statement they were also setting up a new subsidiary cal led Hermes Liberty International Pensionsto offer specialised investment services to th e Britishpensions industry,with Hermes as fund manager.
BT Pension Sc heme is giving the HermesLiberty joint venture "critical mass from the outset" with a 1.5 billion pound transfer of assets to the new funds, Liberty's chairman Donald Gordon said.
Gordon s aid Liberty was "well positioned to tak e advantage  ofthe changes affecting the  UK pensions industry." Hermes' expertise in investment management and track record would help it to provide quality and competitively pricedpension services.
David Fischel, Liberty's managing director, said Liberty International Pensions still req uired approval of Brita in's Department of Trade and Industry but was otherwise ready for launch.
Hermes called the joint pensions venture a meeting of minds.
"Liberty has the ability and techniques of selling  pensions, ital so has the systems...and the administration. We on the otherhand are good at our particular core areas of investment management...we think that's a very good marriage," Alastair Ross Goobey, chief ex ecutive of Hermes, said.
RossGoobey said Hermes had approached Liberty International only to find the group had been consider ingan approach to Hermes.
"It really was ameeting of minds on this. Whether it develops further from this we shall see. I think one step at a time is quite enoughfor us."
He said the venture would probably not be up and running until the first quarter of  nextyear asregulatory approval f irst had to be obtained for the new group.
Thedecision by the giantBritish Telecom Pension Schemeto transfer assets to the new Hermes Liberty International Pensions funds would give the new ventu re a boost.
"I would hope it gives some people some feeling of securitythat BT Pension Scheme, which is after all the biggest inthe country,  is willingto do this," he said.
Liberty plans tosell personal pensions at its regional shopping centres, which are held through a majority-owned subsidiary Capital Shopping Centres. The se hav e more than150 mill ion customervisits a year, Liberty said.