Bre-X Minerals Ltd. has been silent since  it said last month that itformed a partnership with the son of  the Indonesian ruler Suharto, a move  that has worriedshareholders and prompted regulators to seek more information.
Despite a whirl of rumours and persistentquestions that have sent the Canadian mining company's shares on a roller-coaster ride, Bre-X hasmaintained a dogged silence.
The Calgary-based company that controls one of the world's biggest gold prospects in Indonesia has not talked  to the press forweeks.Company officials will take calls only from a handful of favoured analysts, according to market sources.
"I haven't had any calls returned," said gold analyst Rick Cohen with Goepel Shields in Vancouver. "Thereseems to be a certain numberof people they talk to. Everybody's abit in the dark."
Bre-X on Oct. 28 announced its alliance with Suharto's son, Sigit Harjojudanto, whose b usiness influence is pervasive in Indonesia.
Since then, instead of directly addressing questions about its business in Indonesia-- many of which are playing havoc  with the stock price -- Bre-X has opted instead to leak to the market carefully selected press material.
On Sunday, for example, the companyfaxed the media, analysts and shareholders a copy of a story from the  Far Eastern Economic Reviewdetailing its linkswith Sigit.
The article referred to Sigit's possible ties wit h the Indonesian army, stated that one of Bre-X's Indonesian partners has been bought out and asserted that gold giant Barrick Gold Corp.tried to push Bre-X into a bad deal.
Despite questions about the article, Bre-Xrefused to respond and still has not said whether it endorses the story or puts  any faith in the statements.
"I've certainly suggested afew times that they talk to the media and clearthings up," said NeilWinchester, manager of surveillance  for the Toronto Stock Exchange. "It would be advantageous to the marketp lace."
Rumours have shrouded Bre-X since the Indonesian governmentsaid last month itwould not issue essential contracts for work on the project until Bre-X cleared up an ownership dispute with some of itsIndonesi an partners.
The dispute has put a cloudover Bre-X's search to find a major mining partner to help it develop the rich Busang gold deposit in East Kalimantan, but the alliance with Suharto's son was expected to help the company clear up its problems.
"They're optimistic that they can get everything within a couple of weeks," said goldanalyst Michael Fowler of Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion, who said he spoke with Bre-X on Tuesday.
But he said Bre-X would not comment on the article itdistributed. "They just sent it out for general interestpurposes."
Still, statements in the article andother gossip were taking its toll on shares linked to Bre-Xand other expl oration companies inAsia have com plained the uncertainty has hurt their stocks.
Minorca Resources Inc., a Can adian mining company that has an interest in the Busang deposi t through an alliance with Bre-X's Indonesian partner, PT Askatindo Karya Mineral, has found itself on the defensive.
Talk about Askatindo being bought out is unfounded, Minorca President Roland Horst said in an interview. "They have no intention to sell out," he said.
Minorca's chairman is in Indonesia this week meetingwith Askatindo officials and verified the company's intentions, Horst said.
Horst said he had a slew of unanswered questions about Bre-X's arrangem ents withSuharto's son too. "To be frank, the relationship between Minorcaand Bre-X is relatively cool."