I sat at my de sk, racking my brain to find whocould have possibly disc overed the truth behind the death of P hillip Mercer, the heir to one of the mostpowerful p etroleum companies in theworld.The job was done without  a scrap of evidence, I madesure of that much. It simply made no sense, every living soul that knew I killed Mercer were the very ones that orchestrated it. I may not know who this mysterio us person is  but I do know that I will answer their question with a bullet to the brain.
It was nearly3:00 AM when I heard muffled footsteps down the hallway. I reached  for the silenced 9MM pistol in my bag, aiming for the only entrance to my corner office. The doorknob began to turn as I steadied my aim. Sweat was trickling down my s pine, my heart pounding as if I were about to come face to face with the devil himself. The second it took forthe door to open felt like an eternity, but I would have rather endured that second of agonizing torment for the rest of my life then to meet the eyes ofPhillip Mercer when the door opened.
His face was covered in scar tissue, leaving it almost unrecognizable. It wasthe eyes that were the giveaway. The look in his eyes was the same as the night I thought I killed him. There was a look of superiority in them, as if to   let me know I wouldnever be capable of surpassing him in any way.
"There is no way, you should be dead!" were  the only wordsI was capable of mustering.
"For all intensive purposes I still am, thanks to you" he replied with an odd sense of calm in his voice. "Will youat least give me the courtesy of an answer now that I am here? God knows I have been to the depths of hell andback in these last 5 years so surely you can give me that. I will answer any questions yo u have after."
I recounted the entire tale that crossed our two paths o n that fateful night 5 years ago. I told  him how I was approached by a man that worked for P rismInternational, the most powerful energy corporation in the world. Prism stood to ga in billions from the collapse ofMercer Petroleum, giving them an even tighter stranglehold on the energy market. The terms were si mple enough, killPhillip  Mercer or have everyone I love syste matic ally killed. The  choi ce was made for me. My military backgroundcoupled with the fact I helped my step-father design the Mercer home made me the obvious choice for the job no doubt. Fromthere I told him ho w I was able to bypass the security of his mansion because  I helped design it. "What itboils down too is your life meant less t o me then those of my loved ones. The part I don't understand though is how your still alive! I shot you in the head, then as you collapsed you knocked over a candle, starting a fire  that destroyedyour home."
"I survived by nothing more then luck. Your bullet went throughthe side of my jaw, lodging itself in the cheek region of my skull. The heat of the fire brought me surging back to consciou sness allowing me to escape but not without being badly burned. The thought of revenge has been the only force driving me to stay alive. I have feared that you might have been merely a pawn being controlled by Prism so that they could buy up my fathers company. But dammit would have been so mucheasier to enact my revenge if it had simply been you though. But now that I know my worst fears have been realized I at least know what I am up against."
"You can't possibly think you could take down Prism single handed!"
"I won't have to do it alone because your going to help me." He said with his eyes glimmering with more determination than superiority. It was the kind of look that was impossible to refuse.