Outboard Marine Corpsaid it i s only five percent finished with a radical restructuring that it expects will result in mo re charges against earnings in 1997  and possibly in1998, the company said.
Restructuring is about "five percent complete as far as going down theroad and getting the savings," said spokesman Stan Main. "That does not mean that we've taken only five percent of ourrestructuring charges ... There will likely be more charges during '97 and perhaps even into '98."
Sh ares in Outboard on Friday we re off 1/4to 15-3/4.  
The Waukegan, Ill.-based maker of boats andboat engines reported fourth-quarter profits Thursday that, excluding restructuring charges, beat Wall Street estimates.
Analysts cautioned, however, thata turnaround at Outboard remains along-term project.
"They're goingto be continuing this restructuring process in '97 and they're going to continue to have some more charges ... They d escribe the phase they're i n now as the discovery process,"said Lehman Brothers analyst Harriet Baldwin.
A key moment couldcome Tuesday when Outboard executives are  scheduled to meet with analysts and investors in New York.  
Expected to bein attendance are the principals of Greenway Partners, an investment firm ledby former Carl Icahn associates Alfred Kingsley and GaryDuberstein. Greenway bought an 8.5-percent stake in Outboard thissummer.
Although the firm is known for activism, Greenwayso far has not pressured Outboard to alter course, Mainsaid. Norhas there been further communication between Greenway and company ex ecutives since initial discussions in August, he said.
A nalystsspeculated there could be fireworks next week or at the January 16 annual meeting of shareholders, who are said to be growing impatient for a cohesive recovery plan.  
A restructuring was set in motion this year by chief executive H arry Bowman, who came aboard in 1995, when the stock was trading in the low 20s. Bowman continues to deliberate over  how to fix Outboard and key pieces rema in to be put in place, analysts said.
Thebusiness is under evaluationfrom topto bottom, Main said. Once restructuring is complete, Outboard "certainly will be a marine products company," he said.  
"Longer term, we could get into products that would not be marine related. But our initial focus over the next two to three years is to fix the business that we're in and then perhaps look at other areas that might be less cyclical or seasonal," said Main, who isdirector of strategic planning.
Bowman has spoken of finding more stability for Outboard, which suffers more from boating's boom-bust cycles than rivals, such as Lake Forest, Ill.-based Brunswick Corp, which has diversified into bowling, fishing and camping gear.
Outboard sees opportuniti es to enter other markets -- such as motorcycles, snowmobiles and personal watercraft -- via its innovative FICHT fuel injecti on engine technology, Main said.
Spending on capital and tooling in fiscal 1996, ended September 30, fell to $52.7 million from $66.5 millionthe ye ar before, bu t spending on FICHT is holding steady as the company converts more of its engine line to it, he said.
Sales of 150-hp FICHT engines to dealers will begin in Decemberand consumers will see the engines in January. A promotional roll-out is underw ay.
The company plans to convert its entire outboardengine line above 20-hp to  FICHT eng ines, which will cost 22 to 25 percent more than their traditional equivalents, Main said.