Kellogg Co. on Friday reporteda drop of more than 30 percentin its third quarter profits as its cereal volume dropped in an intenselycompetitive market.
Kellogg, which makes Corn Flakes, Frosted Flak es, Rice Krispies, Fruit Loops and Special-K, is fighting back, launching marketing plans for the fourth quarter that are aimed at boosting its sales.
"We'll be taking what we believe are appropriate actions," Kelloggspokesman Richard Lovell said.
The company, the world's biggest maker of ready-to-eat breakfast cereals, said its net income for the third quarter fell to $159.5 million, including a $21.3 million charge, from $230 million a year ago .On a per share basis, Kellogg's earnings dropped 29 percent to 75 cents, with fewer shares outstanding, from $1.05 last year.
Kellogg said its overallsales slipped 9 pe rcent to $1.68 billion from $1.84 billion as continued weak prices for breakfast cereals offset a 1 percentgain in worldwide sales volume.
"As previously forecast, our third quarter performance was influenced significantly by competitive conditions inthe U.S. cereal category," Kellogg Chairman Arnold Langbo said in a statement.
Analysts estimate thatKellogg's domestic cereal sales volume fell 9percent to 10 percent in the third quarter.
"We can' t detail it. It was a challenging  quarter in the U. S. and our volume was down," Lovell added.
Kellogg said its fourth quarter 1996 earnings likely will show a slight risefrom the 77 cents it earned a yea r ago.First quart er 1997 earnings, however, may not match the 99 cents ea rned in the 1996 period.
"It's a challenging comparison," Lovell said.
Kellogg's stock fell on concern over U.S. cereal sales volume and the outlook for earnings, dropping $1 at $64.50 a share, on the New York Stock Exchange.  Earlier,it set a new 52-week low of $64.125.
Kell ogg said the U.S. cereal market overall was sluggish, with sales growing about 1.5 percent, measuring  grocerystores, mass merchandisers and all other outlets.
Looking ahead, Kellogg refused to outline whatpromotional programmes it was planning for the fourth quarter.
Analysts said they did not expect the Battle Creek, Mich.-based cereal giant to return to deep-discount coup onsor buy-one, get-one-free promotional giveaways.
"It's sort of left tospeculation what they're going to do," SBC Warburg analyst Chris Jakubik said.
"There is no indication that, at this time, theyhave shifted from their long-term strategic goal, which is to reduce ine fficientpromotions," added BT Securities analyst John O'Neil.
Kellogg reduced prices onabout two-thirds of its breakfast cereals in June. Other major manufacturers also cut prices this year as they battled for mar ket share and  tried to jump-start consumer purchases. 
But those price cuts alone apparently were not enough to jump-start consumer purchases,according to Smith Barneyanalyst David Rabinowitz.
"The message there is that prices have to come down further," Rabinowitz said.
According to Informati on Resources data, U.S. ready-to-eatcereal salesin grocery stores fell 1.6 percent to 2.6 billion pounds for the 52 weeks endedAug.11,according tothemost recent data available, compared with a year earlier.
Kellogg's sales volume declined in that period by 4.1percentto 881.3 million pounds for a market share of about 34.4 percent, Information Resourc es said.