Learning history helps people draw connections between the  past and present and allows making predictions for the future based on previous lessons. Climate change is one of the most significant topics of interest and rese arch. No matter how well societies develop in terms of technology,  the y will inev itably face disasters if they neglect the issues of nature. The Chornobyl nuclear accident, which happened in 1986, was one of the most devastating ecological events that changed the fatesof thousands of people in many countries.
Myprior knowledge of the topic is not ample, but I do know that the major release of radioactive materials occurred, which led to the contamination of airand wat er, causing numerous diseases and deaths. I have also read somewhere that the then-ruling government of the USSR kept the explosiona secret, which prevented people from sav ingtheir lives within the first few hours and daysafter the accident. Unfortunately, ind ividuals living next to the nuclear plant, as well as those living farther, had no chance of survival. The accide nt led tothe increase in radiation levels to “between ten and one hundred times normal” (Price, 2021, para. 1). I have also  readabout the courageousness and self-sacrifice of those who were involved in fire extinguishing processes.
I would like to learn more about the reasons that led tosuch a disaster and to find out whether it was preventable. Also,I want to investigate the reasons behind the decision of the USSR government to conceal the truthand not let people save their lives. I cannot understand how they could have been silent at a  time when thousands  of citizens we rebeing gradually driven into an ecological trap.
The values, assumptions, and beliefs I have related to the chosen topic are two-dimensional. On the one hand, I am concerned that such catastrophes can occur a nd harm people’s lives. On theother hand, I am deeply disturbed by the fact that the authorities can act so thoughtlessly and dare to neglect people’s lives. I have always considered freedom and healt h a s the most important values. I believe that world leaders should doeverything po ssible to prevent such disasters or at least not conceal them.
My opinion  about the topic is that people should learn from such disasters and use this devastatin g lesson in the future. However, my perspect ive is very closelyconnected to the current world situation. The relevant events happening due to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine are alarming. In  the context   of my topic, I should note that a few days ago, Russians attacked Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant, which is the largest in Europe (Borger & Henley, 2022). Whereas the very question of the Russian invasion of Ukraine is highly tragic and relevant, I will focus on the nuclear plants’ seizure in this paper. Russians seized Chornobyl and Zaporizhzhia nuclear plants, and they seem not torealize what aftermath explosions there could bring.
Sadly, it seems that history has not taught some people anything. After so many deaths in 1986 and following years, one couldthink that countries ofthe wor ld had learned the value of people’s healthand lives. That is why I want to inve stigate the topic of the Chornobyl nuclear accident. This way, I will be able to learn more about that disaster and drawconclusions on the present-day threats and the nee d for pr eventive measures to stop the  possibility of its repetition.