British National Lottery operator Camelot  LOTT.CN on Tuesday posted lower interim profits as income from scratchcard sales fellby ov er450 million pou nds ($750 million).
Came lot chief executive Tim Holley also told Reuters th at the planned second weekly National Lotte ry draw would be launched on February 5 and be held e very Wednesday thereafter. Camelot,which has faced a storm of criticism overits  jackpotearnings since the lottery was launched two yearsago, reported pre-tax profits of 31.5 million poundson sales of 2.1  billion pounds for the 24weeks to September 14.
Th is  compares with pre-tax profitof 36.2million pounds an d sales of 2.51 billionpounds in t he same period a  yearago.
Camelot's fiveshareholdingcompanies -- Cadbury Schweppes, De La Rue, GTech UK, Racal Electronics and ICL shared a total dividend payount of 10 million pounds,up from 9.5 million.
Sales for the weekly National Lottery game rose two percent to 1.68 billion pounds. Two thirds of the adult populat ionregularly buy tickets f or the Saturdaydraw, an event which is televised live and has become a ritual for many Britons.
But sales of Camelot's "Instants" scratchcards fell from 871 million pounds last year to 419 millionthis time.
Camelot executives said that the decline in scratchcard sales wasto be  expected as the initial enthusiasm  generated by their introduction in March 1995 waned.
"Mirroring the experience of lotteries worldwide, s ales of Instants have fallen since their launch and are now settled at around  17 million pounds per week," ChairmanSir George Russell said in a statement.
Chief executive Holley said that the second weekly draw should boost sales ofNational Lottery game tickets by 15-20 percent from their current weekly average of 69 million.
Camelot said that over one billion  pounds -- 50 percent of turnover -- had been handed out in prize money in the first half and that 56 7 million pounds had gone to "Good Causes"-- including charities and projects in sports and the arts.
Camelot, which has been granted a seven-year licence, saidthat over 40 percent of turnover went to "Good Causes" and the governnment in duti es, making it the world's mostefficient lottery operator.
P rofit after tax is just under onepercent of total sales and Hol ley dismissed criticisms of C amelot's performance.
"I think we have a slight problem in this country with success," he said, adding that foreign lottery companies were bemused by the atacks on Camelot.
The group confirmed plans to set up The Camelot Foundation to support organisations helping the disadvantaged and disabled.