Colombian Anti-Drug Prosecutor Dismisses Move to LiftBan on Extradition as Virtually Meaningless
The Colombian government's recent move to lift the ban on extradition of its citizens ac cused of drug trafficking to the United States has been dismissed by the country's anti-drug prosecutor as virtually meaningless.
Theban on extradition of it s citizens had b een in place since 2012 when the government passed a law prohibiting the extradition of Colombian na tionals accusedof crimes committed in the country to any oth er jurisdiction, including the United States. The move was seen as an attempt to protect Colombiandrug traffickers from extradition to the US, which is among the major countries that de mand the extradition of Colombian nationals.
However, the Colombian govern ment announcedlast month that it had decided to lift theban on extradition of its citizens related to  drug trafficking to theUS. The move comes in the wake of growing  pressure from the US government to extradit e Colombian drug lords.
While the Colombian government hailed the move as a major step in the fight against drug trafficking, the co untry'santi-drug prosecutor, Claudia Carrasquilla, rejected it as virtually meaningless. She said the move would not change the situation on the ground, as the ban hadalready been liftedin practice. She pointed out that Colombia has been extraditing itscitizens accused ofdrug traffic king  to the United States even when the ban wasin place.
Carrasquilla said that since the ban was enacted in 2012, Colombia has extradited about 1,200 individuals to the US, including several notorious drug lords, such as Juan Carlos Ramírez A badía, alias "Chupeta," and Diego Montoya Sánchez, alias "Don Diego." She added that the Colombian government had approved all these extraditions despite the ban.
Therefore, Carrasquillaargued that the recentdecision to lift the ban was merely a "symbolic gesture" aimed at pleasing the US government, which has been pushing for more extraditio ns. She warnedthat the move would not help Colombia tackle drug trafficking, which remainsa major problem in the country.
Colombia is one of the world'slargest producers of cocaine, and drug trafficking has long been a serious problem in the country. Despite the government's efforts to combat the trade, drug lords continue to operate across the country, using violence and corruption to maintain their illegal operations.
The US government has been a key ally of Colombia in the fight againstdru g trafficking, providing financial  and military support to the country's security forces. However, the US has also been critical of Colombia's handling of drug lords, accusing the country of being too lenient  on them.
The recent move to lift the ban on extraditionof its citiz ens related to drug trafficking to the USis seen as an attempt by the Colombian government t o appease the US administration, which has demanded that the country hand over several high-profile drug lords, including Dairo Antonio Úsuga, who heads Colombia's most powerful drug cartel.
Howev er, the anti-drugprosecutor's dismissal of the move as virtually meaningless suggests that it maynot have the desired impact. While the Colombian government may have lifted the ban, it remains to be s een if it will actually start extraditingits citizens accused of drug t rafficking to the US in significant  numbers. If it does not, the move will be little more than a symbolic gesture.