The rock and music pop scene were introduced to a nd gained popularity on television through massive hit showsf or teenagers. The three primary ones were Where the Action Is on CBS, Shinding on ABC, and Hullabaloo onNBC. As more households had access to  televisions along with thegrowth o f widespread range of  pr ogramming, inclu ding musical ones, thetelevision played a significant role in distributing the music to the public. Th e bands that appeared on these hit TV shows went on to see significant success in the charts. The television shows helped to articulate the new sort ofyouth musi c culture and almo st  becamea star-making mechanism in a relatio nship and profits that the music and television industries shared. Some bands, such as the Monkees, the American response to the Beatles, were created with the purpose of television performance as their acting and on-camera comfort as a groupwere initially prioritized over music. However, the Monkees’ music tookoff astronomically beyond anyone’s expectations. Nevertheless, they were a band groomed by the entertainment indust ry with an emphasis on television performances which took away muchof the authe nticity, even when compare d to their counterparts The Beatles, who although made visual content, focuse d on their own music strongly (Covach and Flory212).
Television drastically wenton to change the landscape of the music industry. First, a split formed among artists and fans, with one side focusing on the pop-oriented, performan ce-focused television music, while the other, typicall y older audience was drawn to serious-minded music of rock which continued to be played on the radio r ather thanTV. Television also brought about th e phenomenon of fictious bands, such as the popular Archies, a cartoon drawnband popular with young teens (Covach and Flory 214). This hasnever been done before and similarly created a new genre of music-television entertainment. However, until the advent of cable-networkof television resulting in dedicated channels such as MTV,the television phenomenonin the 1960s hadits limitations. Most TV sets at the time hadpoor audio and visual quality, and as recording an d radio sound quality improvedwith hi-fi recordin g and FM, the dispar ities were noticeable. Television is not by nature of design a sound medium, and the musical experience is meant to be enveloping leading to the split in t he fanbase, where younger  audienceswho generally cared less about so und  quality appre ciated the visual medium to their  music (Frith 279).