NatWest Markets, the investment banking arm of National Westminster Bank, on Monday named Peter Hall as the man to run its expanding operations but other questions over the bank's strategy remained, analysts said. 
NatWest said Hall, who currently runs its American operations, would take over as chief operating officer of the investment bank, reporting to chief executive Martin Owen.
Atthe same time, NatWest Markets said i t wouldstreamline origination and distributionfunct ions into one Global Financial Markets divisionfrom the current capital markets and treasury divisions.
NatWest said no job losses would result from the consolidation. 
The  bank has been on the a cquisition trail rece ntly, buying corporate finance boutique J O Hambro Magan in October, spending $590 mi llio n on U.S. primary dealer Greenwich Capital and 472 million pounds onGartmore, the British fund manager. It also acquired U.S. merger and acquisitions specialist Gleacher for $135 million.
But analysts have expressed concern thatNatWest will find itdifficult to bring t hese all together, despite the fact that the businesses seem to compliment ea ch other.
Some feel that NatWestis spending large amountsof cash on buying businesses that could be near the top of their business cycle.
"The NatWest markets business is robust and it can make returns whi le it is still building," said one analyst. "But a revenue d ownturnwill tend to hit the players who are buildingrather than those who are already established."
Currently, investment banks are enjoying generally the low-inflation , steady growth conditionsseeninmany major economies wi th an accompanying healthy amount ofmergers andacquisitions activity. 
But a substantial downturn on Wall Street, predicted bymany stra tegists, could leave some high-cost acquisitions looking a little less appetizing, analystssay.
Owen said the fast growth of NatWest markets, both organically and  by acquisition, had led him to the conclusion that the day-to-day operational management should be separated from strategy, client develop ment and financial supervision.
"As Pr esident and COO,Peter will be charged with implementing our operationalplan, leaving me more time towork w ith global productheads toshape our strategies," Owen said.
Analysts were happy that NatWest had brought an insider to the job.
"Sometimes it gets difficult to keep continuity and things can start to fall apart," said one analyst. "I would classthisappointment as continuity, so that's good."