Lear Corp., furthering its ques t tosupplycomplete car interiors, said Friday it agreed to buy the instrument panel and trim partsunit of Denmark-based Bo realis Holding AB.
Lear said itsigned a memorandum of understan ding to acquire Borealis Industrier AB for undisclosed terms.
Based in Gothenburg, Sweden, Borealis Industrier manufacturers instrument panels, door panels, climate systems,  exterior trim and various othercomponents for the Europ ean car and truck industry.
Borealis Industrier had 1995 sales of  about $230 million and owns five plants in Sweden that employ about1,800 peopl e.
Primary customers for the business include Swedish carmakers AB Volvo and Saab Aut omobile AB and truckmaker Scania AB.
Borealis Holding is owned by Finnish state-controlled oil and energy group Neste Oy  and Norwegian state-owned oil group Statoil AS.
Completion of the transaction is subje  ct to approval by the Swedish competition authority andotherconditions.
Lear said  the acquisition supports its strategy of having in-house capability toprovide total automotive interior systems, including instr ument panels.
"Not only does this acquisition strengthen relations with our Europea n customers, but it positions Lear asthe only independent automotive supplier intheworld with in-house capabiliti es in all five interior systems -- broade ning the appeal of our already strong one -stop-shopping competitive advantage," Lear Chairman Kenneth Way said in a statement.
The deal is the latest of a series  of con solidation moves in theautomotive interior market. Lear earlier this year purchased carpet and floor-mat maker  Masland Corp. for $384million, and last year bought door panel and console maker Automotive Industries Inc for $626 million.
Lear's U.S. operations include the manufacturing of a wide ran ge of automotive interior components.
The company's  stock was unchanged Friday at $38 a share on the New York Stock Exchan ge .
Lear's competitors are also pursuing the same acquisitionstrategy.
Johnson Controls Inc., which has a st rong se ating business, recently acquired interior parts maker Prince Automotive, based in Holland Mich.,for $1.35 billion in cash.
Canada's Magna International Inc ., one of the "Big Three" automotive interio r firms along with Lear and Johnson Controls, recentlyacquired seat maker Douglas & Lomason Co. for $135 million.