In the grand scheme of things, prosecutors and victims of violen t crimes are natural alli es. The prosecutors strive to bring the offenders to j ustice, whether to  fulfilltheir duty before thelaw or achieve career progress. At the same time, the victims get moral satisfaction when the criminals are brought to justice. Therefore, one might think that prosecutors and victims are naturally supposed to cooperate. However, this logical scenario does not necessarily happen in practice. Sometimes,the victimscannot adequately c ooperate with the prosecutors due to the experienced shock, fear, or mistreatment inthe prosecutor’s office.During the mid-70 s, the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration funded the first Victim/Witne ss Assistanc e Projects (VWAPs) in order to enhance cooperation between   the prosecutors’ offices and victims (Karmen, 2019). With time, the VWAPs have become firmly established institutions charged w ith the noble mission of supporting crime  victims.
Prosecutor offices can assist the victims of violent crimes through various means. The best practices includepsychological he lp in hotlines and crisis  counseling, shelter, food, transportation, and property recovery (Karmen, 2019). In addition, most VW APs make referrals to local agencies, which providethe victimswith long-term care (Karmen, 2019). Furthermore, prosecutor offices offer legalassistance through pamphlets about the adjudication process. Finally, VWAPs mitigate confusion by notifying the victims aboutindictments, postponements, acqui ttals, convictions, and other possible developments in the case (Karmen, 2019). As such, the modern prosecutor offices are well equipped for ensuring the victims ’  cooperation through legal, psychological, and even financial support.
The San Diego County District Attorney’s Office serves as a specific exampleof a  well-rounded victim services project. The Victim Assistance Program offers emergency (crisis intervention), legal (cou rt support, orientation in the criminal justice system ), and psychological (referral assistance) help (San Diego County District Attorney, n.d.). In addition, victims of violentc rimes may receive  special reimbursement for  eligible losses fromthe Victim Compensation Board, which is funded by restitution fines (San Di ego County District Attorney, n.d.). Thesereimbursemen ts cover such losses as medical expenses, home securi ty improvements, or outpatie nt mental treatment, among others. Overall,crime vict ims in the County of San Diego can rely ondecent support from their District Attorney’s office.