Infertility is one of the most  common problems these days, and it means that a person does not have a chance to getpregnant for several health issues. Many couples in the United States may face thisproblem, and the causes can vary from congenital diseases to acquired physical or psychological trauma. This body condition does notalways affect only females but also males can sufferfrom this issue.Genetics has a strong influence on infertility, and it may be connected to people of all ages and nationalities. Around 18% of women in the U nited States between the age of 21 and 52 stated that they had faced infertility  in their lives(Mancuso et al., 2020). I believe that environment plays a significant rolein this issue. Peopleshould be more  cautious about their health to predict health problems that may cause the inability to becom e pregnant or impregnate a partner.
The causes of infertility are diverse and might not beseen by non-professionals. For instance, ageplays a significant role as the older males and femalesare, the more chances of receiving infertility. Moreover, hormones play an important role in pregnancy, and when any type of disbalance appears in the human body, problems with pregnancy might arise. Obesity or anorexia can also indicate infertility as the human body spends crucial resources on other areas to support life with out giving achance for women to become pregnant.Some physiologicalproblems like anomalies of the uterus or ovaries mayalso become the main cause of the issue.
The percentage of maleinfertility is not  high compared to the opposite gender. Nevertheless, 7% of men suffer from this problem, and the causes of these cases are different (Krausz et al., 2022). Around 20% of those males who cannot i mpregnate their couples are suffering from genetic factors that were transferred throughout generations. When males check their health conditions and diagnose infertility at early stages, they have a chance to over come this problem and protect the ability to procreate. Low sperm production may also hap pen  due to psychological factors like depression or any type  of disorder.
The percentage of females suffering from infertili ty is higher,  and it is usuallyrelated to diseases that cannot be treated. When women become diagnosed with several health issues which do not allow them from becoming pregnant, doctors rarely have acha nce to restore the ability toprocreate (Barbieri, 2019). Nevertheless, a female’s mentalityis under  a lot of pressure due to sentimentality, which is specific to this gender, and this factor may cause psychological problems which cause infertility. Abortion might also become the reason for the inabilityto become pregnant. While the procedure is at the latestages of pregnancy, doctors might not restore the functions that allow women to become pregnant again. 
Infertilityremains th e main problem that  is not under full control. Insome cases, it may become impossible to give a person a chance to continue becoming pregnant or impregnate their partner. However, s ometimes it is possible to solve the problem by u sing medicines, surgical procedures, and In vitro fertilization (Repping, 2019). Moreover, apsychotherapist can help deal with psychological problems that are barriers to conceiving a child. Every case is unique, and only doctors can decide if any treatment would be useful orn ot.