Millions of people worldwide suffer from mental disorders: manias, phobias, and panic attacks exhaust and torment a lot of individuals. One of the widespre ad, long-lasting mental ailments is an obsessive-compulsive disorder or OCD, which consists of obsessive thoughts and compulsive behaviorthat arealmost impossible to control. Theanalysis  of this disorder due to the fou r D diagnostic indicators can let us explore it more profoundly and thoroughly.  * Distress: OCD often makes individuals feel abnormal when they are forced to fightthe terrible thoughts torturing their heads and repeat meaningless acts intended to decrease anxiety. In addition, having “unwanted, recurrent and persistentimages or impuls es that evoke anxiety or extremedistress”and realizing “the unreasonable nature of symptoms” people cannot stopthem (Van Leeuwen et al., 2020, p. 1-2). They become nervous and depressed: the refore, the level of distress is high and complicates the person’s life.
  * Dysfunction: This disorder significantly influences the daily lifeof a patient. Firstly, obsessive thoughts often interferewith the usual people’s acts and causea s urge of panic, disturbing to complete their work. Somet imes, “cognitive biases cause dysfunctional beliefs” (Van Leeuwen et al., 2020, p. 2). Secondly,compulsive actions interrupt a patient’sdaily routine, forcing them to do specificsteps a certain numberof times. Such acti vities can lasteven fo r an hour or more: therefore, the extent of dysfunction is also noticeable.
  * Danger: OCD may representa significant danger for an individual since sometimes, peop le feel so depressed that they are ready to commitsuicide. In addition, sometimes, they may try to defeat their obsessive thoughts, causingself-pain:for instance, they can strike themselves to get rid of the unwanted image. However, although one of the most widespread fears of people with OCD is to harmothers, they rarely do it (O’Connor & Aude, 2019). Thus, the level of danger to self is significantly  higher than tha t ofdanger to others.
* Deviance: Since OCD causes abnormal thoughts and behavior, people with such a disordercan be ch aracterized as deviant. However, it would be wr ong to claimthat itis easy to “determine the degree of deviation  from the norm” (Davis,2009, p. 1).OCD causes anxiety ,stress, and panic; it makes people live in fear that if they do not do specific actions, theywill not be able t o avoid danger. Therefore, an individual should visit a clinic and let specialists help themfight.