Sierra Semiconductor Corp.'s stock jumped more than 27 percentThursday on expec tations the company will emerge as a smaller but more profitable operationafter it exits the computer modem business.
The San Jose, Calif.-based company's stock gained afte r its anno uncement Wednesdaythat it plans to pull out of the highly competitive modem-chip business and focus instead on the fast-growing market for computer net working equipment.
The stockrose $2.625 to $11.875 in late tradin g on NASDAQ.
"Certainly the company will be a much smaller company now, butit will be a more profitable business," said analyst Elias Moosa of Robertson Stephens & Co.
But analysts noted that Sierra still has muchpainful work ahead of it, including cutting as many as 150 jobs from its work force, which currently has 500 people, and building up the businessof its PMC-S ierra unit, which makes routing devices and chipsets for high-speed computer networks.
Thecompany has announced pl ansto take acharge against earnings of $50 mill ionto $80 million to write down the value of assets and inventories and cover severance payments.
Scott Randall of Soundview Financial Group said thecompany likely would have difficulty selling its modem-chipbusiness.
"Once you announc eyour intention to exit a business, itbecomes a complete buyer's market,"he said.
 He said that while the company is focusing  on thefastest-g rowing part of its business, the  market for networking chips has begun to attractthe attention of much-larger pl ayers such as  International BusinessMachines  Corp
"As the market develops the question is, are they able to make that transition to be a much larger company?" Randall said.
Other analysts were more bullish, even though the company is expected to shrink to slightly more than half its current size in sales.
"It'sapositive strategic move," said Miles Kan of Hambrecht & Quist. "The modem business is  a low-margin,commodity business," he said.
Sierra's PMC-Sierra unit generated $33 million of the company's $117 million in sales in the first half  of the year,compared with $45 million insales of modem chips, Kansaid. But the PMC unit is far more profitable, he said.
Sierra's sto ck has fallen from a high ofnearly $25this year as th ecomputer chip sector hasbeen batter ed by falling prices and concern about slowing demand.