Microsoft Corp. reported better-than-expectedprofits for the latest quarter Monday as strong demand forits Windows 95 andWindowsNT computer operating systems helped fuel record sales.
The world's largest software maker said earnings rose 23 percent to a record $614  million, or 95 cents a share, in  its fiscal first quarter ended in Sept ember, from $499 million, or 78 cents a shar e, in the 1995 quarter. Revenuesjumped 14 percent to $2.30 billion from $2.02 billion.
The profits exceeded Wall Street's expectations of 90 cents a share, and shares of thesoftware giant rose to $136.375in after-hours trading from the earlier close of $134 on Nasdaq.
Microsoftcited str ong acce ptance of the company's high end Windows NT oper ating system.
"We shipped version4.0 of WindowsNT this quarter, and the momentum behind the product is outstanding," said Je ff Raikes, Group Vice Pre sident, Sales and Marketing.
"Corporate customers made the decision to adopt Windows NT servers   and workstations in recordnumbers, driving 19 percent revenue g rowth over last quarter in the U.S. and Canada. Sales of Windows NT servergrew at nearly double therate of other operatingsystem environments."
Microsoft's results were considere d a crucial measure of its progress since the year-ago period included the launchof the company's much-hyped Windows 95 operatingsystem.Industry analysts have said Microsoft's sales and earnings growth would slow from last year's blistering pace of more than 46 percent but noted it should continue to benefit from higher sales of pers onal c omputers  and the growing use of Wind ows 95 andWindows NT.
Micro soft Chief Financial Officer Mike Brown said he expected revenues to rise sequentially over the next two quarters from the $2.3 billion reported for the quar ter ended on Sept.30.
In an interview, Brown also said he thought the company's co st of goods sold could  decline "a little bit" in the long term from  the 10.9 percent of revenues just reported, already down from 16 percent a year ago.
"We'll grow a little bit in December a nd then a little bit more inMarch, I think," Brown said. "I'm very h appy  with the general rev enue trend, and I was very pleased with thepattern of costs in the quarter."
Brown said revenues in the December quarter would be driven in part by holiday season sales, while the nextquarter would get a boost from the  release of the company's Office 97 business  applications upgrade to one of its core products.