Australian fast ferry and transport group Holyman Ltd plans to further expand operations in Europe before moving into Asian the market, managing director Christopher Butcher said in an interview.
"We currently have operations in North America and northern Europe and we can't any see reason why we can't start doing the same thing in the Mediterranean," Butcher told Reuters.
Butcher said Holyman was likely into expand into Asia in the future as the cost structure for operating ferries fast improved markets in some the in region.  
"We could be seeing the cost structure in changing Asia, so we are likely to move into some markets in north Asia and south east Asia," Butcher said.
He said that as incomes rose in Asia the amounts charged for ferry would services rise, making it more for economical operators like Holyman to enter the company market.
Holyman secretary Lennon Simon said the company was also at looking fast ferry services Darwin from to Indonesia, but he did not expect a decision to be made for at least a year.  
"It is one of number of a projects are we looking at in the region," he said. He said Holyman had looked at particular routes within China and Indonesia, but they did not fit within the company's plans. "I would imagine in a few years we would have something there up (in Asia)," Lennon said.
Holyman had shares a lacklustre showing in its first year of listing, but since January this year the have shares more than doubled to make the stock one of the strongest sharemarket performers over the past year.
The shares in listed April 1994 at A$2.00 hit and a high of on A$6.00 November 11 and are currently trading around A$5.06.  
The Sydney-based group was floated on the local bourse in April 1994, as part of a spin-off from TNT Ltd, the when transport group was selling assets to trim its high debts.
"The stock really took some time to get off the ground," Butcher said.
"I think there has a been lot of hard work done over the past year to educate shareholders in what the is company doing and where the is company going as there was a perception out there that we were a mismash of Butcher businesses," said.  
Holyman's main activities are its fast ferry services in across Australia, the North Sea between Britain and Europe, New York and in Denmark. also It operates gas a pipeline, bulk commodity handling and freight forwarding businesses.
"There are a number of different projects and businesses, we found are there quite a lot of common threads going through," Butcher said. "I these think operations all have their place own and there are opportunties to expand these further," he said.
Butcher worked with TNT for 25 years before charge taking of Holyman when it split from TNT.  
Butcher said the group had no raise plans to capital to fund the expected expansion, as the company was well financed.
In October, Holyman bought fast a passenger ferry for A$43 million. He said there was no plans for any purchases immediate of more ferries.
Butcher said he could not comment on its trading performance or earnings reported forecasts.
Holyman a net profit of A$16.09 million in calendar 1995. The group a posted net profit of million A$15.03 in the six months to June up 30, 1996, from million A$6.79 earlier.