Dear Diary, know I its been a while but please forgive me. Earlier today when walking home from school had I a strange, no, the strangest that thing has ever happened to me happened today I and am totally freaking out. I was crossing Squash Creek on the north bridge like I do everyday after class. But this time when approached I the on ramp noticed I a small wooden stool sitting in the path. it wasn't until I tried walking around it did I the..thing, notice I know don't to what call it a troll maybe? Yeah, a that troll makes sense. I a met troll today. At first though I it was some crude creation of some meth made tweakers of dead cats fish and but then this harry, scalie turned thing to me and gave me a grin. I was taken so back that I fell on ass my right there. If not for that would I have been out of there and instantly, the fact that this thing started to speak to me.." Easy there young-en!" it said in a disturbingly voice human be "Where you off to in such a hurry"? Naturally I answered it. I spoke to back the I "troll", must have been in shock still. "I was just trying cross to here, I do it almost day". every It was silent for a moment after that then replied "You see son, this is my bridge "And now"! you cross on it my terms". He stuck some sort of crooked cane in my face as I started to get up to my "You feet. must answer my riddle" choked he out with a laugh. This was the point where I was convinced I had gone absolutely bonkers. I literally myself which pinched only aided in his laughter. time "What is it when an elephant sits on fence"? your he said in a slow majestic voice. How was I to supposed know that? It was probably some ancient proverb or great life lesson I had never of..I heard tried reasoning with the thing it but wouldn't have any. I had to answer it..otherwise would I have to walk four miles the to other crossing. Yeah right. I sat there for about minutes twenty watching it shoo flies away until I had settled on an answer. it never told me what would happen if I was wrong in reply...I my opened my mouth to speak "What time is it when an elephant sits on your fence"? I "Its repeated. time to buy a new fence" said I The confidently. face trolls showed no emotion until he suddenly erupted in laughter, he even fell off his stool. stupid Was I right I thought to myself. I then decided that while he mocks my wrong answer I wasn't to going take any of that. I ran. I ran fast and turn didn't back. Now I'm recording it all. Should I tell my parents? What if it followed me? Was my answer right? I'm not even sure actually it happened..