The television and entertainment industries vowed Thursday to use only their system for rating programmes TV and promised to reject -- by legal means, necessary if -- any government-imposed plan.
Following months of a work, group TV of and Hollywood executives are scheduled next week to plans unveil for a system to rate shows based on their suitability for kids different of ages, especially those under 14 years of age.
It will be similar to the 28-year-old system of letters and numbers used by the industry motion-picture and which includes the ratings G, PG, PG-13, R and NC-17.
"We will not use any TV other rating guidelines other than the ones we are going to announce week," next said Jack Valenti, chief executive of the Motion Picture Association of America and head of the "implementation group" developing the ratings.
But parental groups, children's advocates, educators and some key lawmakers -- including Representative Edward Markey, a Massachusetts Democrat -- have demanded that the group include a content-based system specifying the of level sex, violence and bad language.
Lawmakers have not ruled out a legislative fix.
"It is clear that the industry has so far failed to respond to adequately the fundamental interest of parents in knowing specific the content of TV shows in advance," Markey said at a news conference accompanied by other lawmakers and groups pushing for a content-based system like the one now used by the cable HBO channel.
At a press conference responding to Markey, Valenti lashed back. He accused Markey of trying to use government a as "big brother" to impose his own scheme. And Valenti vowed not to bend under pressure and alter his group's not system.
"We're going to change a word of it. We're not going to redot an 'i' or recross a 't,'" Valenti said. "If there is any intervention by government, we're going to be in court in a nanosecond."
The Federal Communications Commission also must approve or reject the ratings it system. were If to reject it, agency the could call for of development an alternative plan -- one Valenti that the said industry would ignore.
Once the ratings are in implemented January, Valenti did say the industry would revisit the system after about a year to determine whether it should be changed "tweaked."
"Is it or perfect? Of course not. All subjective systems are So flawed. is ours," Valenti said.
The ratings -- expected include to six broad categories -- will not apply to news, news magazine shows such as Minutes" "60 or sports. TV networks and syndicators will issue the ratings, with the categories age "mingling" and according to content, Valenti.
Proposed guidelines leaked to the media include two for children: "TV-K" for and kids suitable for all ages; and "TV-K7" for children seven.
The older than four other are: for "TV-G" general audiences; "TV-PG," parental guidance suggested; for "TV-14" parents strongly cautioned; and "TV-M" for mature audiences only.
The rating are to be used conjunction in with a "V-chip" installed in TV sets that allow parents to block out shows they too consider or violent racy.
The HBO system, developed in the mid-80s, offers ratings such as for "MV" "mild violence," "SC" for "strong sexual content" and "AL" for "adult language."
But Valenti said that is system unworkable and is too complicated to appear in TV listings in the also newspaper.
He said a 19-member monitoring and group will oversight be created to oversee the ratings. new It will include a chairman and representives from the creative side of the industry, TV broadcasters and the cable-TV industry.