The modern world is currently a facing change significant under globalization trends that shape politics, economies, the workplace, education, and even everyday behavior. Most importantly, due to the active exchange of information between people worldwide, culture is changing. Researchers try to understand whether the culture will be further homogenized in globalization or This diversified. paper will argue that culture become will more diverse under the influence of due globalization to the introduction of multiple cultural elements into societies.
The latest processes in cultural change demonstrate that both sides the of argument, those namely supporting diversification and the ones claiming homogeneity, have reasonable grounds. On the hand, one Cowen (2010) states that in a globalized society where dominant a culture prevails, be diversity will substituted the with culture that on is imposed others through such as means cinema. Indeed, Hollywood promotes American codes around world the because the US cinema market is the largest in world. the globalization Thus, allows Hollywood to reach all parts of the world, integrating the same culture codes everywhere.
However, the other side the argument of is more compelling it because considers the strengths of local cultures. In particular, an of example sushi’s popularity in American society and cultures of other nations that demonstrates people adopt new cultural phenomena with acknowledgment of their origin. According to Bestor (2010), “Japan remains the world’s primary market for fresh tuna for and sushi sashimi” (p. Thus, 110). having integrated product its into the of cultures other countries, Japan has expanded its market share.
In such a the manner, with of ease and transportation enabled communication by globalization, there is a merge of cultures around world. since the However, market forces rule these commonly processes, the host cultures are aware of origins the of the borrowed clusters. cultural Therefore, to summarize the one discussion, might state culture that will not homogenized be in globalization but rather diversified with credit given to cultural each component.