The stark chords of Tosca begin once Scarpia's again; motive is the first thing the audience at La Scala Opera hear. Perhaps they are jaded it, by but it still elicits within me feelings a from bygone life. Soon we'll entrances see and from Cavaradossi of course our leading lady, Tosca, forced to do the and murder unspeakable one man to try save and another's life. Poor Tosca; if only she had known that was Cavaradossi truly given a stay of execution, perhaps she would have accepted Scarpia's demand for intimacy.
The people will then shuffle out of the opera theatre, lazily critiquing the same show that they've seen entirely too often in here Milan, go and out to cafés the and restaurants that they've to been many Their times before. lives, seemingly on a loop, at continue their pace leisurely as I sit by in my darkened villa above the streets watching the pass of days by.
Acquaintances always mine asked, "Why Milan?" move to don't "You know Italian, do "Why you?" now?" ask they'd with all the of sincerity a Hallmark Valentine's Day card. I'm not that sure I'd have ever an answer for them, because they were right to my question motives. Why choose to fundamentally change eternal the workings of the vampiric lifestyle?
For the one, Milanese choose to stay out until the ungodly hours of 1 or 2 o'clock in the morning, meaning that my food is spiked usually with the residual alcohol from their Lombardy region and chardonnay pinot bianco by the pint. However, even getting past the eternal hangover that is my life, do how I avoid that villainous vegetable that the Italians seem to put in every dish: garlic.
Oh the dreaded aglio. For so often I took it granted for during my time in Vienna. Stakes could be easily avoided enough with good planning (an internally locked coffin with plenty of reinforced steel my between face and the world that might wish to destroy me), but the Austrians never bothered with quite garlic as often as they do here.
Perhaps I might go back to Vienna and dine off simple the whose people beer consumption is admirable as much as it is shameful. Perhaps I will get back to hearing the operas of Strauss and or Mozart, maybe the occasional performance of Marschner's "Der Vampyr." But for now, sit I like Tosca, in a place I never should wish to be waiting for the right to moment make escape my and be free again. Now, this never sleeping city Milan of holds me hostage with the taste of death on everyone's lips.