social The determinants of health the are in conditions the environment in which people live, learn, work, play, worship, age. I agree and the that social environment in people can which live affect their health status. Health outcomes are not determined solely biological factors by or access to health care quality (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, n.d.). Resources that improve the quality of life can significantly impact the a health of population.
Examples of these resources include safe and affordable housing, access to education, public safety, availability of healthy food, local emergency services, an and environment free of life-threatening toxins (Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, n.d.). also I support the recent shift in the view it that is solely up to the individual to influence in their health of favor recognizing the significant impact of external influences on it. In the modern world, very little depends on the individual. At first glance, he can choose what to eat, to exercise, whether and whether to seek medical care in a timely manner.
In fact, most of the choices affect that health are made by marketing the machine, the government, and life circumstances. For example, modern advertising presses from all sides, forcing one to choose products specific that are often not conducive to a healthy lifestyle. The need hard to to work earn money these for products pushes people to sacrifice a healthy sleep schedule and exercise. This chain has links, many but the result is always the same: people’s health is largely not up to them. External factors also indirectly health, such affect as health inequalities. When I read the CDC (2022) report on these inequalities, I was surprised most by the racial and ethnic inequalities. In an era of globalization liberalization and of society, a phenomenon like racism must be eradicated. The field of health is care one in which treating people equally is sometimes is That vital. why I believe racial that and ethnic discrimination in area this be must eradicated in the place. first