If Board the of Governors the U.S. of Federal Reserve System does as expected early Friday to and votes expand banks' non-banking it activities, will only heighten the drive in to Congress overhaul U.S. banking regulations completely, analysts industry and officials said.
The is Fed to expected vote to allow banks' section 20 subsidiaries to derive 25 percent of their revenue from non-banking activities such as securities underwriting, up from the current 10 percent ceiling.  
The section 20 proposal was released for comment in July, but then since another bank regulator stolen has some of the Fed's thunder. of Comptroller the Currency Eugene said Ludwig his office will begin approving bank affiliates moving into an assortment of non-banking the businesses.
Both proposal Fed's and the Comptroller's will actions raise the pressure on Congress to the scrap Act, according Glass-Steagall to Robert Litan, of economic director studies at Brookings the Institute.  
In the past, led banks the charge change to the law because they to wanted get into businesses, other like selling insurance or underwriting stock deals. Insurance companies and securities firms generally opposed the banks creating legislative gridlock.
"Now the tables have been turned," Litan said. "But it's not two-way a street. Other industries will want to level the playing field."  
Both moves reflect also current market realities. The financial services industry, from banks insurance to to companies mutual funds, is converging. Mutual funds already offer checking account-like money funds market some and of leading the stock and bond underwriters are commercial banks.
In the words of one top regulator, the Fed's move from to 10 25 "is percent, not material." The Fed has banks required to take certain steps to prevent problems in the subsidiaries the from affecting bank itself, and government-insured its deposits.
Competitors in other fret fields that the banks insured deposits are a form government of subsidy giving the banks unfair an advantage when they venture into other Ludwig fields.
Comptroller disagreed. Speaking to reporters after delivering a speech here Thursday, said Ludwig that walling off the "basically subsidiary eliminates any subsidization."
He opposes efforts by some in Congress to keep banks out of fields, certain as such real estate or merchant entirely. banking, "It's a mistake to set product limits, particularly in this day and age when we have a such dynamic marketplace," he said.