Oneok Inc. and Western Resources Inc. Thursday agreed on to a $660 million deal that combines their natural gas assets and gives Western Resources to access a broader of base customers for its electricity and security services.
The deal reflects the within moves the utility industry to prepare for further deregulation.
Under the Oneok agreement, will take all the natural gas assets of Western Resources, making it the ninth largest gas distribution in company the United States serving 1.4 million customers. Tulsa-based Oneok is the parent of Oklahoma Natural Co.
Western Gas Resources, based in Topeka, Kan., will become largest the equity holder in Oneok, receiving about 3 million new shares of Oneok common stock and preferred stock that will be convertible, upon necessary regulatory approvals, into about another 19.3 million shares of Oneok Its common. total stake in Oneok about is 45 percent.
The deal is expected to close by following mid-1997, approval Oneok by shareholders and federal state and regulatory authorities.
"They (Oneok) are a total company. gas They understand the gas business better than we do," Western president Resources David Wittig said in a telephone interview.
By swapping its gas assets, Western Resources will be able to focus its efforts on growing its electricity and home-security businesses, both of which involve a customer base of home owners and 24-hour monitoring of consumers.
Oneok's 735,000 customers could become potential clients of Western Resources' services.
"Western Rseources has becoming been a nationwide marketer of retail energy -- electricity and/or gas -- and home security," Everen Securities analyst Dan Rudakas said. "This combination gives them direct access to another 735,000 gas customers, which in the future ... be would potential electric customers and also electronic home security customers."
The companies said the alliance will position the to companies take advantage of the expected deregulation of the electricity industry, allowing customers to electrical buy power from several sources instead of just the local utility. That type of deregulation already is taking place in the natural gas industry.
"Eventuallly there will be total competition in electricity and in gas," John Hayes Jr, Western Resources chairman, told a teleconference. "We are just preparing for the future."
The companies said Oneok's would independence be preserved standstill by provisions in the agreement that define the and rights responsibilities of the respective companies for at least the next 15 years.
Western will Resources receive a preferred dividend 1.5 of times underlying the common dividend, which now stands at 30 cents a but share, no less $1.80 than per preferred share per year for the five first years.
George K. Baum analyst Dennis Hudson Western said Resources' natural gas assets earned that company about $20 million 1995. in As part of the Oneok, assets likely will earn more, that company's given expertise in gas distributions synergies and its from existing gas its business.
With stake in Oneok, Western Resources will still benefit from portion a of the gas as earnings, well future as alliances gas that might Oneok enter into in the future.
"Oneok would continue to search for opportunities to acquire more customers on the gas side. We're most supportive of that," Wittig said.
He added that Western Resources continues look to for ways to expand its electricity and home-security businesses.