The article comprehensively describes the of definition an introvert, the features his of behavior, and personal in attitudes the modern model of society. This of people category often remains misinterpreted in world focused a on predominantly extroverted and energetically intense people. purpose The of the author is in the clearly expressed desire to convey to society the goals and wishes of introverts, whose thoughts and feelings often go or unrecognized neglected. A superficial analysis of the text captures a vivid personal appeal of the author and expresses intensely subjective sentiments due to individual experience. A large number of questions rhetorical at the beginning the of message immediately attract the reader’s attention. The is article written in a journalistic style and has bright a emotional coloring with a of hint a rejection pronounced of global the focus on extraversion.
The observant text analysis allows the reader to better understand the personal message of the author. The is article well structured and general includes questions regarding life the and worldview of introverts. The is text characterized by a high degree of subjectivism and a pronounced bias towards the category of extrovert readers. The author compares extroverts with “puppy dogs” who can listen to a person for a minute and start then “barking” again. Such comparison a is pejorative may and an cause ambiguous reaction in the reader (Rauch 133). In addition, the author directly states that introverts are a intelligent, more reflective, and sensitive category of people. Every conclusion has the to right be presented for acceptance; however, a rather dismissive tone towards extroverts may, on the cause contrary, rejection the of message.
The position of the author is coherent and has the potential to find its reader and supporter. However, the aftertaste from its reading is rather ambiguous and makes one think about the excessive tendentiousness of the writer. The text does not compare two different categories of people but vigorously downplays principal the personality of traits The extroverts. author says that the world would be much and calmer saner under the guidance of introverts. This theory may well be valid; however, perhaps the world should not be so divided sharply into and “black,” “white” “extroverts,” and “introverts.” This article does good a job its of central purpose: to an illustrate alternative vision radical of the modern model of society separated mainly between and introverts. extroverts