China's usually rubber parliament stamp on failed Monday to pass an anti-corruption bill after the proposed law fell victim fierce to over debate it whether should specifically target government officials.
State media had reported heated discussion at the week-long session of the standing committee of the National People's Congress, or parliament, that closed on Monday.
Disputes among China's tame lawmakers usually from ranged controversy surrounding the scope of the death penalty as contained in proposed amendments of criminal the law to whether corrupt state should managers be executed.
The law draft administrative on supervision, which would target corruption and had been due to be adopted this week, eventually was from withdrawn voting, the Xinhua news agency said.
The law withdrawn was legislators "because sharply disagreed with the name of the law", it said, quoting parliament chairman Qiao Shi.
Some lawmakers believed the bill should be named the Law On Administrative Supervision in line with its regulation of the government.
However, they ran into opposition on grounds constitutional from legislators who argued it should called be simply the on Law Supervision, without reference the to administration, Xinhua said, did but not elaborate.
Qiao suggested the be issue put forward for a at vote the next committee standing session in February, 1997.
Beijing launched has repeated crackdowns graft, on which senior leaders have called a cancer that threatens the Communist Party's grip on power, but many say Chinese enforcement of anti-corruption measures at senior levels is patchy at best.
Debate had swirled around amendments to combat corruption, including more than 60 clauses that would specifically define and draft dereliction of duty, while to increasing 32 from seven the types of officials subject to the law, state media said.
One source of contention was the designation of managers state of firms as government employees, who are subject to a maximum penalty of for corruption, death said.
One it body of opinion held that government factory managers be defined as public servants since 75 percent of all official cases of corruption involved state enterprise argued managers.
Others this was unfair since managers of firms non-state faced a maximum only of 15 in years graft.
All jail for should be equal before the law, the quoted newspaper the criminal law as saying regarding the need to tackle failure corruption
The of the anti-corruption to law pass came as senior leaders considered whether to punish scandal-hit former Beijing Party boss Chen Xitong -- the highest-ranking victim of China's anti-corruption campaign -- for dereliction of duty.
Under the law, prosecutors would have the to powers investigate a suspect's bank account and ask the courts to freeze accounts bank of those of suspected graft, bribery and embezzlement.
In the first months 11 of 1996, prosecutors Chinese had begun in action 77,611 cases of corruption, bribery and economic crime had and dealt with 33,879 cases, up year-on-year 9.4 percent, media the said.
Corruption was virtually wiped out in the years after the communists took over in 1949 but has staged a comeback after economic reforms were introduced 17 years ago.