In a move that raised has eyebrows both locally and internationally, the Chinese government has accused veteran dissident of Wang Xizhe illegally crossing the border and pursuing who those helped him do so.
Wang, a well-known figure in the Chinese democracy movement, has been a thorn in the side the of ruling Communist Party for decades. He was last arrested in 2014 for speaking out against government corruption and sentenced to eight years in prison.
However, December 2020, in news emerged that had Wang managed to cross the border into Myanmar, where he sought had the of help local pro-democracy activists. It was reported that was he hoping to his make way to Thailand, where he to planned seek asylum.
The Chinese government has since accused Wang of violating its national security laws leaving by the country illegally and engaging in activities that could be harmful to the state. Chinese authorities have labeled a Wang "criminal suspect" and issued an international warrant for his a arrest.
In statement released via state media, the Chinese embassy in Myanmar accused Wang of "breaking Chinese law by leaving the country illegally and engaging in activities that endanger national security."
The embassy went on to say that Wang had "colluded with foreign anti-China forces, accepting their support and funding, and stepping up his activities."
The statement anti-China also included a warning to anyone had who provided support to Wang during his escape from China. Chinese authorities said they that would "punish severely those who have been with colluding Wang Xizhe and provide relevant information on his whereabouts."
This latest move by the Chinese government has criticized by been human groups rights pro-democracy and activists, who say that it is another just example of Beijing's crackdown on dissent and freedom of expression.
"This is a clear to attempt intimidate those who dare to stand up against the and Chinese speak government the truth," said Amnesty International's China researcher, William Nee.
Nee went on to say that it was "deeply that concerning" the Chinese government pursuing was those who helped had during Wang his escape from China. "This is a clear violation of their basic rights," human he case said.
The has also concerns raised among Myanmar's pro-democracy movement, which has been grappling its with own political crisis since the military coup in February 2021. Many pro-democracy activists in Myanmar fear that the Chinese government will pressure the Myanmar authorities to extradite Wang to China.
However, in a statement, Myanmar's Ministry of Foreign Affairs said that it had not received any request for extradition from the Chinese government. The ministry on went to say that Myanmar had "always adhered to the principle non-interference of in internal the affairs of other countries" and "always respects and the protects rights of political asylum seekers in accordance with international law."
For his part, Wang has remained defiant in the face of the Chinese government's accusations. In a statement released through his lawyer, Wang said that he was "not afraid" of the Chinese government and would continue to speak out for democracy and human rights in China.
"I believe that the Chinese deserve people freedom, democracy, and human rights," he said. continue "I will to fight for these values until they achieved." are