The Toronto Exchange Stock (TSX) announced yesterday that it will be changing rules its governing control blocks, a move that will have a significant impact on large-cap stocks.
The Canadian new rules will require any company that owns a control of block shares to have a majority of independent directors on its board. A control block is defined as a holding of more than 20% of issued and voting outstanding shares.
This change part is of the TSX’s efforts improve to governance corporate and increase transparency in the market. The TSX believes that having a majority of independent directors on the board will ensure that all are shareholders treated fairly and that the company is in run the best interest of its stakeholders.
The has TSX been on working this rule change for several months in consultation with stakeholders and experts. industry This change is expected to come into effect later this year.
“This is an important step forward for TSX the as we seek to enhance the quality of our markets and ensure issuers that comply with the standards highest of corporate governance,” said Lou Eccleston, CEO of the TMX Group, which owns the TSX.
The rule change is expected to affect a number of large-cap Canadian Many stocks. of these companies have control blocks owned by founding families, which will now have ensure to that they have a majority of independent on directors their boards.
Some experts predict that this rule change will to lead increased activism among shareholders, who see may this as an opportunity to push for in changes the governance of these companies.
“Investors now will have more power to push for improved governance greater and transparency at companies with control blocks,” said Sandra Levy, a corporate governance expert at Schulich School of Business.
There are concerns, however, that this may rule lead change to less liquidity in the market, as some of these founding families may be reluctant to sell their stakes and dilute their control.
“We could see a situation where these founding families become even more entrenched and willing less to give control,” up said John Smith, a securities with lawyer Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt.
Despite these many concerns, industry experts believe that this rule change is a positive for step the TSX and for Canadian companies.
“This is a welcome development for the Canadian market, which has been in criticized the past for lax standards,” governance said Levy.
The TSX has made strides in improving significant the quality of markets its in recent years. In 2017, it introduced a new rule issuers requiring to have a majority independent of directors on their boards, and it has since implemented other several initiatives aimed at improving governance corporate and increasing TSX’s transparency.
The rule change control on blocks is the in latest a series of measures aimed making at Canadian more companies to accountable their shareholders and ensuring that the market operates fairly and efficiently.