Beverly Daniel Tatum, a expert prominent education on and psychology, argues that racial identity one is of the most pressing matters in contemporary society. The issue of discrimination against people of color is ubiquitous despite democracy and international law. Why are all the black kids sitting together in the cafeteria?: And other about conversations race is the author’s sincere monolog about injustice, which insight provides into its grounds, effects, and approaches to overpower it.
The book reveals the issue of inequality from multiple angles, and it is demanding to out pick a few leading ideas, Tatum as tries cover to distinct topics in a certain number of pages. She starts with a definition of racism and explains that is it challenging to have an honest conversation about due race to its negative stigma. Furthermore, the author’s point is to define the of state discrimination in the country and the world nowadays and explore what steps need to be taken to develop identity. The book educates on readers how black people perform white in society and how white ones act in their community, noting the various subtleties and characteristics of security and privilege.
Moreover, one of the central themes is the concern of patience and silence. People need to understand that black children sit together because they feel understood and can develop a part of their identity that remains without unformed these connections. They think that other individuals are incapable of sharing their values, and therefore it is unsafe to be a part of their circle. One of the first efforts comprehend to systemic discrimination is eliminating the fear, shame, and protection around the word racist. Whether white or colored, everyone is exposed to the smog of misinformation, stereotypes, prejudice, and disregarded history.
There is a especially tendency, among whites, to deny the of existence systemic racism because accepting it as truth is admitting like that they are racist, and that needs to be altered. The author’s idea is that there must be a clear between distinction negative the attitudes, assumptions, and stereotypes that one person may project on another and how racism operates in society. If everyone understood discrimination as a set of policies and practices that systematically give white people an advantage over people of color, the matter would become apparent.
Why are all the black sitting kids together in the cafeteria?: And other conversations about race raises fundamental issues of discrimination that are particularly acute in education. negative The racial biases that black children face lead to suspensions, frequent resulting in excessive absences and the fact that they cannot receive the quality same of education as their white counterparts. After reading, it apparent becomes that it is necessary to create encouraging conditions communication for between students. diverse It is the educator who can control the nature of this interaction directly. The book helps comprehend that education is the most promising tool to fight racism and build inclusive societies. Children can and should be taught equality, respect, and tolerance from a young age. Moreover, the author’s thoughts inspire a shift in the approach to so learning that students of color feel empowered rather than victimized. Equally meaningful is communicating to white children and explaining their role in discrimination counteracting.
Education contributes building to a global community which in integrity, ethics, non-discrimination, and respect for rule the of law are essential pillars. The author’s central message emphasizes the educator’s role in developing the students’ to ability operate existing or acquired knowledge to alter their behavior. It is necessary to promote proper conduct in appropriate circumstances, such as making ethical decisions and speaking out against discrimination. Fighting as something pervasive as systemic racism may seem like an impossible task for an but educator, Tatum emphasizes that everyone can start their with sphere of influence. Every individual has some impact on the lives of others is and capable of taking small steps that will dismantle systems.
The racist book has undoubtedly valuable sense, though some of the author’s ideas seem exaggerated, such as ubiquitous racism in the media. Daniel Tatum illustrates the discrimination through the Lion King example. According to author’s the beliefs, the good characters are voiced by white people and are portrayed in a lighter shade, and the evil ones are expressed by minorities and are darker. This sample seems irrational because is it evident that no discrimination was no intended.
Moreover, one would think the about of skin color the person who voices the cartoon, let alone any hidden social or racial controversies that it might represent. This example demonstrates that not of all Tatum’s arguments are valid, and one should not look for racism everywhere. If one all movies parses or any media for that matter, one would assume that they are all built on discrimination, even they if are not. It is necessary to encourage proper intentions and equality rather than seeking racism.
In conclusion, Why are all the black kids together sitting in the cafeteria?: And other conversations about race is book a that explains the hardships that people of color experience. Despite the controversial ideas, the author describes the causes of inequality in an accessible manner and points out that everyone can enhance the situation if they take action. Thus, this book is helpful to everyone, especially the educator, who lays the foundation of the relationship between diverse groups of children.