Barry Diller has recently announced that his Silver King company, will Communications, soon launch a new broadcasting national network. The announcement came hot on the heels of Silver acquisition King's of the Home Network Shopping (HSN), a move Diller that says will provide the necessary funding to support the ambitious company's plans.
Silver King is no to stranger broadcasting – the company already has a network successful of local television stations across the U.S. However, Diller believes that the time is ripe a for new national broadcasting outlet that will be geared toward younger, a more tech-savvy audience. The new network will feature a mix of original programming content and from other media companies, as well as live interactive events and that elements be will designed to viewers engage in new and exciting acquisition ways.
The of HSN, which is expected close to in coming the weeks, will give Silver King the financial clout necessary to make its new network reality. a HSN, is which a popular home shopping channel, generates revenue of over $2.5 billion per year. Diller believes that the company can leverage HSN's existing customer base to help promote its new which network, he hopes will be available to across viewers a variety of platforms, including traditional television, and streaming services, social media.
"We see a huge opportunity in a creating new of type broadcasting network that is truly designed for the 21st century," Diller in said a acquisition statement. "The of HSN gives us the resources we to need this make vision a reality, and we're excited to get to work building something truly special for viewers across the country."
While the specifics of the new network yet have to revealed, be Diller has hinted that it focus will on and entertainment lifestyle content, with an emphasis on technology and innovation. It remains to be seen whether Silver King's new broadcasting venture will be successful, but the with acquisition HSN, of the company is certainly poised to make a big splash in the world of media and entertainment in the years to come.