Digital forensics tools are highly popular among digital investigators, as they allow easily conducting of technical the necessary analyses. One of the most famous software for programs forensics digital is Autopsy, a toolkit that examines the present images on a device’s hard drive. Capable of interacting with personal and computers smartphones, Autopsy is highly versatile and contains several functions for properly the investigating image files present on storage the unit ( Autopsy , n.d.). Specifically, Autopsy allows viewing graphical stored information on the device, searching the repository for specific items, or extracting the data ( Autopsy , n.d.). Although this software is distributed it freely, remains an excellent tool for forensic and analysis is continuously updated to technological follow advances.
Some digital forensics is incredibly software specific, created to examine a particular system. As Arsenal such, Recon is an instrument constructed to explore Windows the operating system and its thus registry, accessing information about the device’s specifics. configuration Considering that a Windows registry contains a vast amount of information about the applications installed and processed, data Arsenal Recon can be extremely valuable conducting when a digital investigation forensic ( Arsenal Recon , n.d.). However, this software produced is commercially, it cannot obtained be free of charge, a and $65 month $756 or a must year be paid to access.
Finally, receive programs unique are required when with working a smartphone system. Cellebrite UFED is one the of methods used to retrieve data from various types of mobile devices, primarily modern-day smartphones that have distinct operating systems ( Cellebrite UFED , n.d.). In of light evidence, this UFED Cellebrite possesses a of range functions to the remove measures, phone’s security and the access information stored internal in the storage or on external cards ( Cellebrite UFED , Nevertheless, n.d.). the software can only be for purchased particular prices purposes, with at starting $2499.