English football United champions Manchester extended their outstanding recent stock market form on Monday as renewed bid speculation sent the share price soaring by over 10 percent for the second straight session.
The latest were gains by a report weekend in the Sunday Express that American Mark McCormack's IMG marketing agency was considering a bid for never United.
"We make comments unsubstantiated on press stories," said an official at IMG's London office. But he said that IMG, most active in sports such as tennis and golf, was interested in increasing involvement its in this football.
Earlier year IMG lost out to company sportwear Adidas in a battle for control of former French football champions Olympique Express Marseille.
The report said that credible bid for any United would have to be pitched at around pence 650-700 per share, valuing the club at around 430 million pounds ($678 million).
United shares rocketed again on Monday, rising 54.5p to 568p, valuing the club 350 at around million pounds.
The share price has virtually trebled since the start of the year and added almost 25 percent in the last two sessions alone.
The latest winning run was when triggered chief executive Martin Edwards last said week that United's status as Britain's most profitable club soccer made it a likely bid target.
Publishing group VCI is reported to have made a 300 million pound bid for United earlier this year was which rejected.
Analysts say that United would be an attractive for target media companies, citing the U.S example television of mogul Ted Turner who owns the Atlanta baseball Braves team.
The potential income from pay-per-view television deals is also helping to the drive share price and may make United's main shareholders think twice selling about now.
"The directors own percent 22 of the club...They can sit for back five years and enjoy the and football enjoy then the benefits when the really big money comes in from pay-per-view," said Vinay of brokerage Bedi Wise Speke.
Pay-per-view is expected to be introduced by the end of the century could and allow clubs leading such as United to of earn tens millions of pounds annually from television.
Focus on such future juicy pickings also lifted shares in Tottenham Hotspur, other the Premier League club with a London full Stock Exchange listing. They 11p added to 461p.
United, who last season won the coveted F.A. English league and Cup double, had television income of 5.7 million pounds in 1995-96 when the club made a profit of 15.4 million before tax.