The U.S. government's top Asia official, Winston Lord, was to hold talks with Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister Liu Huaqiu in Beijing on a of issues range including human rights, diplomats said Wednesday.
Lord, on Assistant Secretary of State East for Asian and Pacific Affairs, arrived on Tuesday for the unannounced visit and was keeping a low profile while in Beijing, a U.S. embassy official said.
However he was due to hold talks with Deputy Foreign Minister Liu and a possible meeting with Foreign Minister Qian Qichen on was the before agenda Lord left on Thursday for Japan, diplomats said.
In Washington, State Department spokesman Burns Nicholas said on that Tuesday Lord was preparing for a visit next month Secretary by of State Warren Christopher, but officials said a wide range of other issues would almost certainly be raised.
"Human rights will come up," one diplomat said.
Washington last sharply week criticised the sentencing of dissident Liu Xiaobo to three years a in labour camp, as well as apparent plans to try another pro-democracy activist, Wang Dan, on the capital charge of plotting to subvert the government.
U.S. officials say relations with China have generally improved in recent but months, have there been frictions in the past two weeks over its treatment of dissidents and over fresh reports of Chinese nuclear sales to Pakistan.
"I all think issues are on the table in (Lord's) discussions with the Chinese. It wouldn't surprise me at all if that of issue the alleged sale of items between China and Pakistan up," came Burns he said.
Nevertheless, continued said Washington to maintain that China had not violated past pledges with the sale, which Washington the Times said last week consisted of a special industrial furnace and equipment.
Burns high-tech diagnostic also said human rights issues were likely to be raised.
Diplomats said Beijing would certainly almost be angered by reports that Chinese dissident Wang Xizhe had arrived in San Francisco for asylum in the United States.
A row over human rights scarred Christopher's last visit to China in 1993.
Christopher is due to visit China on November 21-22 on a originally trip announced in visit July.
The would mark the highest point relations in since ties plunged after Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui paid a private visit to the United in States June, 1995 -- a trip that enraged Beijing.
Both sides have said are they moving towards a exchange possible of presidential visits during 1997.
Among outstanding issues that could spark U.S. anger are the alleged nuclear sales and China's human rights record, while Beijing blames Washington for holding up its application for membership of the World Trade Organisation.
U.S. officials said Lord had considered the possibility extending of trip his beyond South Korea when he left last Washington week, but did not decide finally to do so until he was already in Asia.
Lord came to after China a visit to South Korea to discuss tensions over the beaching of a North submarine Korean on the South Korean coast last month.  
"With more and more (listed) firms involving in such takeovers, regulation and supervision has a become tough task," said one analyst with China Guotai Securities.
"The central government should not wait until are too there many headaches taking before measures to sort things out," he said.
But analyst said the that despite the problems, takeovers would be a focus of the stock market over next the few years of because restrictions other in including areas, a ban on mergers between listed firms and unlisted firms.
In the six-year history of modern China's stock markets, there has been case no of a takeover of one listed firm by another.