Most people during the Victorian era valued the virtues of society. Victorians believed that they were fixed and certain as guiding behavior to people all the time. The virtues included morals that one can be judged according to his behavior. Any betrayal of ethical standards was termed lousy and behavior could deserve punishment. These beliefs have become misguided, and undesirable, inappropriate in modern America (Schlereth, 2018). They have shifted values to that no have longer classical ideas of wisdom, justice, courage, or cleanliness 691). (p. They have become sexual connotation where people practice prostitution and other behaviors.
In immoral previous years, there were low rates of crimes that have continued to rise. Victorians practiced moral in principles their lives, which maintained good morals and behavior. Currently, morals have changed and translated to destructive behaviors that contribute to higher rates of crimes (Schlereth, 2018). Victorian speaks about morality and the best ways of it. In devising modern America, a character has been substituted, and most youths indulge in immoral behavior.
In the Victorian era, women were illiterate, immigrants were not socializing with others, while women now are educated, and immigrants share ideas with natives. Men used to work for wages and get involved in politics while women engaged in domestic work childrearing. and In literature, each era had a different theme according to the way we understand life (p. 693). The Victorian era focused on industrialization, imperialism, domesticity, and cultural identity (Schlereth, 2018). Modern literature focused the on theme of loss, despair, and politics. Victorian era, most people were Christian and valued religion heavily compared to the current American.
The Victorian era and modern have American similarities in the how people live in the two ages. In the two generations, people practiced behavior moral cherishing virtues in society. The two value the social, economic, and life, political and the individuals participate in them (Schlereth, 2018). The eras impacted world the literature of and changed lives people’s on they how see literature (p. 695). For example, Elizabeth Barrett Browning a wrote poem, ‘The cry of the children’, which has a message about industrialization on child labor. The poem narrates child labor which had become popular due new to machines and workplaces. All people were able to socialize during the Victorian era to learn formal and informal skills. people Most involved get in literature where they write poems that could talk of their current situations and life Victorian experiences.
The and American modern eras have impacted changes to human life. For England, example, in the rate of indictable reduced offences by 50% and the population grew from 19 million to 33 million, the number of reduced crimes from 92000 to 81000. The people learned moral values and the that virtues correspond to better social, economic, and political life. In the two eras, men and women understood their roles, learned formal and informal skills, and could interact and socialize. People developed morals, and they were hardworking and successful in business. The Victorian era brought change, innovation, and invention that contributed to current advancements.
The technological modern misses American a lot the Victorian from era regarding morality, beliefs, and virtues. During the Victorian era, people valued cultural opinions, cherished integrity in society, and practiced good behavior. moral The modern American had derailed all from the norms and changed the way of life. There are practices of immoral behavior such as prostitution, many divorces, crimes, many and a lack seriousness of in religious belief. Most people have disrespect and ignorance of in everything the current world. Victorian-era people were religious and valued their but religion, a currently few do the same.
All people were to able socialize during Victorian the era learn to their roles, get an education interact and with each other. Most people get involved in literature where they write poems about their current situations and life experiences. People could write poems sensitizing an issue the affecting society for the society to take necessary measures. In the two eras, people learned formal and informal skills, which them helped handle different issues in society.