Learning history helps people draw connections between the past and allows present making and predictions for the future based on lessons. previous Climate change is one of the most significant topics of interest research. and No matter how well societies develop in terms of technology, they will inevitably face disasters if they neglect the issues of nature. The Chornobyl nuclear accident, which happened in 1986, was one of the most devastating ecological events that changed the fates thousands of of in people many countries.
My prior knowledge the of topic is not but ample, I do know that the major of release radioactive materials occurred, which led to the contamination of air and water, causing diseases numerous and deaths. I have also read somewhere that the then-ruling of government the USSR kept the explosion a secret, which prevented people from saving their lives within the first few hours and days after the accident. Unfortunately, individuals living next to the nuclear plant, as as well those living farther, had no of chance survival. The accident led to the increase in radiation levels to “between ten and one hundred times normal” (Price, 2021, para. 1). I have also read about the courageousness and self-sacrifice of those who were involved in fire extinguishing processes.
I would like to learn about more the reasons that led to such a disaster to and find out whether it was preventable. Also, I to want investigate the reasons behind the decision of the USSR government to conceal the truth and let not people save their I lives. cannot understand how could they have been silent at a time when thousands of citizens were being gradually driven into an ecological trap.
The values, assumptions, beliefs and I have related to chosen the topic are two-dimensional. On one the hand, I am concerned that catastrophes such can occur and harm lives. people’s On the other hand, I am deeply disturbed by the fact that the authorities can act so and thoughtlessly dare to neglect people’s lives. I have always considered freedom and health as the most important values. I believe that world leaders should everything do possible to prevent such disasters or at least not conceal them.
My opinion about the topic is that people should learn from such disasters and this use devastating lesson in the future. However, my perspective is very closely to connected the world current situation. The relevant events happening due to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine are alarming. In the context of my topic, I should note that a few days ago, Russians attacked Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant, which is the largest in Europe (Borger Whereas & Henley, 2022). the very question of the Russian invasion of Ukraine is highly tragic and relevant, I will focus on the nuclear plants’ seizure in this Russians paper. seized Chornobyl and Zaporizhzhia nuclear plants, and they seem not to realize what explosions aftermath there could it bring.
Sadly, seems history that has not some taught people anything. After so many in deaths 1986 and following one years, could think that countries of the world had learned the value of people’s health and lives. is That I why want to investigate topic the of the Chornobyl accident. nuclear This way, I will be able to learn more about that disaster and draw conclusions on the threats present-day and the need for measures preventive to stop the possibility of its repetition.