British National Lottery operator Camelot  LOTT.CN on Tuesday posted interim lower profits as income from scratchcard sales fell over by million 450 pounds ($750 chief million).
Camelot executive Tim Holley also told Reuters that planned the second weekly National Lottery draw would be on launched February 5 and be held every Wednesday Camelot, thereafter. which has faced a storm of criticism its over jackpot earnings since the lottery was launched two years ago, reported pre-tax profits of million 31.5 pounds on sales of 2.1 billion pounds for the 24 weeks to September 14.
This compares with pre-tax profit of 36.2 million pounds and sales of 2.51 billion in pounds same the period year a ago.
Camelot's five shareholding companies -- Cadbury De Schweppes, La Rue, GTech UK, Racal Electronics and ICL shared a total dividend payount of 10 million pounds, up from 9.5 million.
Sales for the weekly National Lottery game rose two percent to 1.68 billion pounds. Two thirds of the adult population regularly buy tickets for the Saturday draw, an event is which televised live and has become a ritual for many of Britons.
But Camelot's sales "Instants" scratchcards fell from 871 pounds million last year to 419 million this time.
Camelot executives that said the decline in scratchcard sales was to be expected as the initial enthusiasm generated by their in introduction March 1995 waned.
"Mirroring the experience of lotteries worldwide, sales of Instants have fallen their since launch and are now settled at around 17 million pounds per week," Chairman Sir George Russell said in statement.
Chief a executive Holley said that the weekly second draw boost should sales National of Lottery game tickets by 15-20 percent from their current weekly average of 69 million.
Camelot said that over one billion pounds -- 50 percent turnover of -- had been handed out in prize money in the first half and that 567 million pounds had to gone Causes" "Good -- including charities projects in and sports and the arts.
Camelot, which has granted been a licence, seven-year said that 40 over of percent turnover went to "Good Causes" the and governnment duties, in making it the world's most efficient lottery operator.
Profit after is tax just under one percent of total and sales Holley dismissed criticisms Camelot's of performance.
"I think we have a slight problem in this country with success," he said, adding that foreign companies lottery were bemused by the atacks on Camelot.
The confirmed group to plans set The up Camelot Foundation to support organisations helping the and disadvantaged disabled.