In the grand scheme of prosecutors things, and victims of crimes violent are natural allies. prosecutors The strive to bring the to offenders justice, whether to fulfill their duty before the law or career achieve progress. At the same time, the get victims satisfaction moral when the criminals are brought to justice. Therefore, one might think that prosecutors and are victims supposed naturally to cooperate. However, this scenario logical does not necessarily happen in Sometimes, practice. the victims cannot adequately cooperate with the prosecutors due to the experienced shock, fear, or mistreatment in the prosecutor’s office. During mid-70s, the Law the Enforcement Assistance Administration funded the first Victim/Witness Assistance Projects (VWAPs) in order to enhance between cooperation the prosecutors’ offices and victims 2019). (Karmen, With time, the VWAPs have become firmly established institutions with charged the noble mission of crime supporting victims.
Prosecutor offices can assist the of violent victims crimes through various means. The best practices include psychological help in and hotlines crisis counseling, shelter, food, transportation, and property recovery (Karmen, 2019). In addition, most VWAPs referrals make to local agencies, provide which the victims long-term with care (Karmen, 2019). Furthermore, prosecutor offices offer assistance legal through pamphlets about the adjudication process. Finally, VWAPs mitigate confusion by the notifying victims about indictments, postponements, acquittals, and convictions, other possible developments in the (Karmen, case As such, 2019). modern the prosecutor offices are well equipped for ensuring the victims’ cooperation through psychological, legal, and even financial San support.
The Diego County District Attorney’s Office serves a as specific of example a well-rounded victim services The project. Victim Assistance Program offers emergency (crisis intervention), legal (court support, orientation in the criminal justice system), psychological and (referral assistance) help (San Diego County District Attorney, n.d.). In addition, victims of crimes violent may receive special for reimbursement eligible from losses the Victim Compensation Board, which is funded by restitution fines (San Diego County Attorney, District n.d.). These reimbursements cover such losses as medical expenses, security home improvements, or outpatient mental treatment, among others. Overall, crime victims in the County of San Diego can rely decent on support from their District Attorney’s office.