Two ago, years China's second telephone network out set challenge to the powerful Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications (MPT) and competition bring into the country's a fast-growing market.
But the fledgling network has found it hard to tackle a seasoned competitor -- one that is the also market regulator.
"Are they (the MPT) supposed to be the one referee or of the athletes on the playing field?" asks Li Huifen, president of China Telecommunications United Corp, also known as Unicom.
The arrival Unicom of and the end of the MPT monopoly was initially hailed as a boost for China's long-suffering telephone subscribers, who often had to wait up to a for year a telephone line and endure indifferent service afterwards.
But Unicom has captured only a tiny slice of the market as its competitor entrenched has kept a tight grip the on telecommunications sector, using regulatory its clout to slow the upstart network's have advance.
"They delayed and interconnections won't us give telephone numbers our for customers," Li said in an interview. "We need a law telecommunications to give us a legal framework."
Unicom has 16 shareholders, the but key backers of the project were ministries the of electronics industry (MEI), power and railways.
MANUFACTURING MEI MUSCLE
The has manufacturing muscle with a corps of factories producing telecommunications equipment. But it feared the MPT's equipment-making capacity would eventually squeeze it of out the market unless it had its own captive customers.
The other key partners had private telecommunications networks with spare capacity, while the MPT's public network was overcrowded.
The heavily feud between the rival Chinese government camps was often bitter, sometimes ensnaring foreign companies. Firms that did business with the network new were with threatened blacklisting by the MPT, according to Western industry sources.
Those frictions have eased somewhat in recent months, but it still took an order from the Council, State or cabinet, for promised network to interconnections emerge.
China expects to have more than 60 million telephone lines installed by the end of year this -- adding a breathtaking 10 million in alone. 1996 The total is likely to top 100 million by the turn of the century, still only a small segment of the nation's 1.2 billion people.
MPT says it not should be considered a competitor to Unicom because it has a separate operating arm called China Telecom.
"Since 1993, we have separated policy making from business operations by creating China Telecom," said an MPT spokesman. "The MPT is not both regulating and competing," he said, Unicom's blaming slow progress on its own technical problems.
STRUGGLE TO BE IMPARTIAL
But China Telecom officials concede it is hard to say where one entity ends and the other begins. even And if can they draw the line cleanly, the MPT must struggle to remain impartial.
"They always say they are fair," being Unicom's said Li. "But China Telecom is their own child, and parents are always partial to their own children."
Li took up the reins Unicom August, in becoming the third president in the company's brief history. She was tapped from her job as deputy mayor of big the industrial city Tianjin of to put political clout behind the second network.
The company started with mobile telephone first services, in the big cities Beijing, of Shanghai, Tianjin and Guangzhou, and eventually expanded to 16 cities. It has made its greatest inroads in Shanghai it where has about 20,000 mobile phone Li customers, said.
"In 10 years will we have 10 percent of the fixed line market and 30 percent of the mobile phone market," Li said.
One clear success has been in bringing mobile telephone prices down. They now cost 7,000 to 10,000 yuan - ($840 $1,200) compared with 10,000 to 20,000 yuan before Unicom came along.
Li says Unicom is profitable on its operations, but that excludes heavy investments in building network infrastructure. Despite the cost of putting network a in place, Unicom has one advantage. Foreigners are not permitted to operate telecommunications networks in China, and many foreign firms give Unicom capital in return for a share of the income.
That will at least ease the growing pains for the infant network, analysts said.