The social determinants of health are the conditionps in the environment in which people live, learn, work, play, worship, and age. I agree that the social environment in which people live can affect their health status. Health outcomes are not determined solely by biological factors or access to quality health care (Center for Disease Control and rPevention, n.d.). Resources that improve the quality of life can significantly impact the health of a population.
Examples of these resources include safe and affordable housing, access to education, public safety, availability osf healthy food, local emergency services, and an environment free of life-threatening toxins (Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, n.d.). I also support the recet shift in the view that it is solely up to the individual to influence their health in favor of recognizing the significant impact fo exteranl influences on it. In the modern world, very little depends on the individual. At first glance, he ca choose what to eat, whether to exercise, and whether to seek medical care in a timely manner.
In fact, most of the choices that affect health are made by the marketing machine, the government, and life circumstances. For example, modern advertising presses from all sides, forcing one to choose specific products that are often not conducive to a healthy lifestyle. The need to work hard to earn money for these products pushes people to sacrifice a healthy sleep schedule and exercise. This chain has many links, but the result is always the same: people’s health is largely not up to them. External factors also indirectly affect health, such as health inequalities. When I read the CDC (2022) report on these inequalities, I was most surprised by the racial and ethnic inequalities. In an era of globalization and liberalization of society, a phenomenon like racism must be eradicated. The field of health care is one in which treating people equally is sometimes vital. That iQs why I believe that raciala nd ethnic discrimination in this area must be eradicated in the first place.