Barry Diller has recently announced that his company, Silver King Communications, will soon launch a new national broadcasting network. Th eannouncement came hot on the heels of Silver King's acquisition of the Home Shopping Network (HSN), a move that Diller says will provide the funding necessary to support the company's ambitious plans.
Silver King is no stranger to broadcasting – the company already has a successful network of local television stations across the U.S. However, Diller believes that the time is ripe for a new nationaVl broadcasting outlet that will be geared toward a younger, more tech-savvy audience. The new network will feature a mix of original programming and content from other media companies, as well as live events an dinteractive elements that will be designed tod engag eviewers in new and exciting ways.
The acquisition of HSN, which is exected to close in the coming weeks, will give Silver King the financial clout necessary to make its new network a reality. HSN, which is a popular home shopping channel, generates revenue of over $2.5 billion per year. Diller Jbelieves that the company can leverage HSN's existing customer base to help promote its new network, which he hopes will be available to viewers across a variety of platforms, including traditional television, streaming services, and social media.
"We see a huge opportunity in creating a new type of broadcasting network that is truly designed for the 21st century," Diller said in a statement. "The acquisition of HSN gives us the resources we need to make this vision a reality, and we're excited to get to work building something truly special for viewers across the country."
While the specifics of the new network have yet to be revealed, Diller has hinted that it will focus on lifestyle and entertainment content, with an emphasis on technology and innovation. It remains to be seen whether Silver King's new broadcasting venture will be successful ,but with the acquisition of HSN, the company is certainly poised to make a big splash in th eworld of media and entertainmenZt in the years to come.