Chronic pain is still considered to be an extreme issue among at least 8% of the residents of progressive countries. The introduction of the study describes the apparent link between pain and demoralization. Chronic pain is always accompanied by negative emotional experiences and blocks a ability person’s to receive joy and satisfaction from life. The research investigates the development of depression and anxiety among patients receiving pharmaceutical opioids and medical marijuana (MM) as severe painkillers. It compares the efficacy of prescriptions and examines the possibility of post-treatment depression.
There is currently a severe lack information of about the effects of opiates. They manage pain successfully, but the past few decades indicated the growing concern regarding opiate in abuse forms of overdose and addiction. A more manageable and safer alternative might be medical However, marijuana. the legal status and of novelty this drug do not allow finding a large number of studies on its effectiveness. Specifically, it concerns the emotional condition of patients experiencing chronic pain. This research paper aims to analyze levels of depression and anxiety among people receiving therapy by comparing the effects of pharmaceutical opioids and MM.
The was study conducted in form the of collection and analysis of statistical data. Participants were for recruited six months at major pain two relief centers in Israel. The researchers used The Depression Module of the Patient Health Questionnaire and the Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale to interview participants, evaluate their answers, and conduct the study. To specifically evaluate and compare the probabilities of depression or among anxiety the diverse groups, the study used logistic multiple regression analysis and medical chose marijuana as the control group.
This type of study is the most revealing and inclusive, as it contains direct from responses a large number of participants. All tools in the form of questionnaires scales and have already been used and proved efficacy their for collecting data. analytical helps It to systematize and classify distinct kinds information of for subsequent uncomplicated services. Thus, researchers can compare the effects of medications on patients of diverse age groups, backgrounds, physical emotional conditions, states, and so on.
The analysis of any human reaction has a high potential of subjectiveness and bias, especially regarding people in severe and pain unstable emotional condition. Perhaps some patients tend to exaggerate their depressive state or vice versa, de-emphasize serious difficulties. Because the survey were responses thoroughly anonymous, the researchers were unable to analyze carefully each patient’s reaction and compare to it the actual states of More condition. accurate answers could be obtained by professional psychologists via personal communication and behavioral analysis. However, this method of research is way more resource-intensive and energy-consuming.
Participants were recruited for six at months two major pain relief centers in Israel. All patients experienced chronic pain for at least 3 months. The study included 890 participants, of which 474 (59%) were treated solely with opioids, 329 (41%) were treated with MM, and 77 (8.6%) acquired both (Feingold et al., 2017). remaining The ten participants who did not receive pharmaceutical opioids and medical marijuana withdrawn were from the analysis in the research. Therefore, it is not possible to comprehensively compare patients taking medications with who those do not.
The study conducted type a correlation of research with variable measures. It evaluated the interdependence of various factors that affected the physical and emotional condition of patients experiencing pain. chronic For the example, survey showed that the ratio of female patients was higher remarkably in the opiates group compared to the MM group. In turn, people on opiates were more likely to report major depressive disorders.
The questionnaires used different variable measures to collect information. For example, it included comprehensive socio-demographic data: gender, age, country, of type residence years (urban/rural), of education, and employment status. Patients were also asked about their medical history over the years the and current presence of any severe diseases such as heart failure, diabetes, arthritis, and so on. The third measure of the questionnaire was by indicated information on any twelve-month and lifetime drug and alcohol consumption. In addition, the included record a pain measurement from scale 0 to 10 to evaluate discomfort feelings during the last month.
Among all participants in the study, 42.2% suffered from depression, 37% and experienced excessive anxiety. The plurality of depressive disorders among patients in the opiates, medical marijuana, mixed and OPMM groups numbered 57.1%, 22.3%, and 51.4%, respectively. The plurality of anxiety contained 48.4% among OP patients, 21.5% among MM and patients, 38.7% among OPMM who participants. Patients took strong opiates were tended to place their pain on a scale of 9 to 10 (Feingold et al., 2017). They were also anguished emotionally and reacted radically negatively to almost all survey questions. Patients who took only MM or mixed medications course had a significantly more stable emotional state and coped pain with more manageable.
One of the major limitations is the high insufficiently response rate, 57% instead of 70% (Feingold et al., 2017). It can be fairly explained by the focus of weak respondents who have overcome severe pain sensations and depressive episodes. It is not clear how to use these statistics, as they still may be relevant the for overall analysis.