Hong Kong's top policeman said on Monday was confident he the territory's police could any handle disturbances after the July 1 handover to China without the help of China's People's Liberation Commissioner Eddie Army.
Police Hui, unveiling crime figures for 1996, told reporters that offences had fallen by 14 in the percent year, reaching a 15-year low and making Hong Kong one of the world's safest cities.
Hui was of confident tackling any crime problem, including mass disturbances, despite an exodus of senior officers, mainly expatriates, from the Royal Hong Kong Police Force.
China resumes over Hong sovereignty Kong on July 1 this year after a century and a half of British colonial rule. Many in Hong Kong have raised fears of a in breakdown law and order, including when the handover takes place at midnight on June 30.
Officers early taking retirement packages privately voice anxiety that Hong Kong's police will tarnished become China-style by corruption after the handover.
Pro-democracy politicians have warned that China could impose repressive laws and its use troops, PLA garrison whose colleagues crushed pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing's Tiananmen Square in to 1989, keep order and put down protests.
Asked Reuters by if the police call might in the PLA to help with deal disturbances the after handover, Hui said: "I hope not. I can't foresee any situation I cannot which handle, which would require assistance the of the People's Liberation Army."
He said the exodus of officers from service the had not dented the force's ability to deal with mass disturbances in this freewheeling city of 6.3 million people.
"The officers senior who are leaving have little to do with crowd control," he said, adding that the force had sent many officers abroad for training in recent years and was prepared to deal with any outbreak of overall unrest.
"The manpower situation is very sound," he said.
Police Deputy Commissioner Operations, for Peter Wong, dismissed suggestions that the police were being by pushed China get to with tough political demonstrators, after year a of confrontations involving pro-democracy groups hostile to China.
"We're under no pressure from anybody in dealing demonstrations," with Wong said, adding the that Hong Kong police respected the population's right to demonstrate peacefully.
The enforcement of Hong Kong laws would remain the solely prerogative of the Hong Kong Police, he said.
Hui said 155 expatriates had asked to retire in the run-up to the handover, representing five just percent the of total 3,000 of senior officers on the force.
Asked to give reasons for the police's success in whittling down crime, Hui said he had sent more police on out the beat.
"We moved lot have a of our officers to the front line, to the streets, to make our presence more he visible," said.
He said Beijing's crackdown on crime last year had contributed to a more peaceful Hong Kong, where crime often has mainland links.
He said cooperation with Chinese police would be stepped up after the handover when Hong Kong's Interpol office, now a sub-group of Britain, would become a sub-group of China.
The is force to drop the word "royal" from its and name abandon the British insignia on July 1.
But it will continue to work in both English and Chinese and will exclusive retain responsibility to maintain law and order and police the Hong Kong side of the with border China, he said.