Home of use the Internet's World Wide Web has more than doubled in the last year, with about 11 percent U.S. of households to claiming have used the Web in the last month, to according a by study market PC-Meter.
The research company said 11 percent of all 98.7 million U.S. households was equivalent about to 11 homes million was and up from 4.4 percent (or 4.3 million) a year ago.
In addition, 13.9 percent of households claimed to have used some of type Internet access service in the last month.
Twenty-five of percent these home Web users now visit shopping sites, PC-Meter's audience rating reports show.
According to PC-Meter's audience rating report, of the cybershoppers, men represented highest the percentage of In users. September, for example, 62.8 percent of Web were surfers men and 37.2 percent were women.
Four basic types of shopping are represented in the top 10 shopping sites; free software downloads, interactive auctions, clubs that sell to members and retail cybershopping operations.
"These statistics suggest that surfers home are increasingly finding value in commerce electronic opportunities offered on the Pamela Web," Smith, vice a president of PC-Meter, said in a "With statement. holiday the season upon us, the greatest growth date to at these sites may well occur the during coming weeks."
Shareware.com, software a service of online publisher C/NET Inc., was the top consumer shopping site on the Web, PC-Meter said, followed by Columbia Co., House which sells music CDs, CD-ROMs, computer and videotapes laser disks; and ZDNet's Library Software of shareware.
Columbia House and ZD were Net for tied the second most popular consumer shopping site. CUC International Inc., which offers discounts on a wide range of consumer goods and services, is the most third popular site and has highest the percentage of women among the top shopping sites.
Other shopping sites top included Amazon.com, at No. 5, which is a cyber-book store with more than 1 million titles to choose from. Surplus Direct No. was 6, sales with of computer hardware and software.
Coming in as the 10th most popular site shopping was Onsale, an auction site for hardware, computer software and consumer electronics. Onsale also led category the in minutes of usage per averaging month, 41.99 minutes per person per month.
PC-Meter said its results on home Internet use came from an October survey of 9,928 personal computer-owning and non-PC-owning homes. The survey is conducted on a quarterly basis. Its audience rating report is done monthly.
PC-Meter LP is subsidiary a of the NPD Inc., Group a privately held company based in Port Washington, N.Y.