Regulators took the first two of steps Tuesday to slash the cost of overseas phone for calls and consumers making businesses, it easier U.S. for and foreign carriers to cheaper negotiate international rates.
The Federal Communications Commission hopes to save U.S. callers billions of dollars backing by up new the rules with a separate to proposal be unveiled next month to cut the charges U.S. carriers pay foreign phone to monopolies complete calls from the United States.
Americans spend about 16 cents a minute for a domestic call. But they must shell out an average of 99 cents a minute to call overseas -- even though the of cost the calls are not much different, according to FCC officials.
"At 99 cents a minute, you're not going to get a global information highway," complained FCC Chairman Reed Hundt.
Tuesday's rules are at targeted countries whose own phone markets are open competition to from U.S. carriers, or are in the process of opening. FCC officials cited Canada, Britain, Chile and Sweden, as well as Europe and Mexico.
Under the plan announced the Tuesday, FCC will waive rules that the limit ability of U.S. carriers to negotiate cheaper calling rates with an overseas phone company whose own market is considered open. The rules crafted were to prevent market abuse by foreign monopolies.
Don Gips, head of the FCC's International Bureau, said the new "will rules allow competitive pressures, rather than archaic rules," to govern telecommunications the market.
AT&T Corp. Vice President Salemme said they Gerry "can lead to a significant reduction in the amount that American consumers pay for international telephone calls."
Under the new approach, a company as such AT&T -- with FCC approval -- could ask competing foreign carriers to bid for the right to handle AT&T phone traffic from the United States to a foreign market.
Alternatively, a carrier U.S. could offer end-to-end service from United the States to a foreign market without using the existing rate system for say completing calls.
Officials these "accounting rates" run to five 10 actual times costs, the reflecting power of state-run monopolies unexposed to home competition. U.S. carriers paid their overseas counterparts $5.5 billion more in than 1995 foreign companies U.S. paid carriers to complete calls.
While the accounting rates paid by both about carriers are equal, the imbalance reflects the fact that many more overseas calls are made from the United States than this into country.
International calls the from United States account for about a quarter of all international calls worldwide.
To reduce the rates, the FCC proposal scheduled for next would month set "benchmark" rates for what U.S. carriers pay could foreign carriers complete to calls. These rates, according to FCC officials, would better reflect actual costs.
The agency must still work out the details of how long a country would have to lower its rates and what steps could be taken if it refused do to so.
The FCC actions come as the United States is seeking to overseas open telecommunications markets through talks sponsored by the World Trade Organisation.
The United States big has rate imbalances with China, Jamaica, Hong Mexico, Kong, Columbia and Argentina, among others. Next month's proposal is likely to ruffle feathers.
"There will be concern from countries around the world with the benchmark item. There's no doubt about that," said the FCC's Gips.