It was a warm summer day and I was out for a stroll. saw I them on the other side, walking down the sidewalk, two by two. I didn't pay much until attention they under passed the glow of the gaslamp. Never had I seen such an pair of opposites! the For brief time they walked under it, the light illuminated the pair. The man's limbs and head were covered in scars! What I had mistaken for a beard was a mass of scars! His arms and legs were so densely overrun that I had thought it a and coat trousers! The woman had black hair, long and as straight, if it were manufactured string by string. But her skin what is shocked me, even greater than the man! It had the most exquisite complexion, almost translucent in the light, and I saw nary a flaw on it. I looked my to own marred hands, although compared to that man, it was a blessing; as I worried, small cuts formed on my arm. It began to sting as my sweat seeped into my fresh wounds. Not wanting more scars, I shook my negative thoughts and ran the to couple.
"Sir," I exclaimed, "Excuse my frankness sir, but I must inquiry, how is it that your wife is so yet beautiful, you are so…."
The man and woman looked at each other, she turned away, blushing, and he laughed raucously.
"Hideous?" asked the man between laughs.
"N-n-o," I stammered, embarrassed by my rudeness.
"Don't worry," he said, putting his arm around my shoulder, "I get it all the time."
"My apologies sir, but how, in this world, did wife your manage to keep scarring?"
"Well, from you he see," said with a wink, "she's my not wife, but my daughter."
I was taken aback. "Still….How?"
"Well, she's not entirely She flawless. can't tell a and joke her cooking's lousy! after Takes her mother I guess!"
Laughing, he said, "Take a look at her finger."
I peered at the daughter, she offered her right hand and I a saw thin bright of streak red on index her finger.
The man pulled me in, "I'm gonna tell you a story."
"Long ago, when I was married, I swore never to have kids. I didn't want any children to be born into this world, so that was that. But my wife had other plans, and my so daughter was born. I fell in love with her and swore to devote my life to her. As she grew, though, I began to worry. 'How would I protect her from the world?' So I set out every to doctor, physician, and scientist I could asking find, a for cure. Of course, if there was a cure already, no would one be like this."
He cleared his took throat, a deep breath, continued.
"On and one visit particular to a doctor, I my had daughter with me and upon building, exiting the I met a man dressed all in black.
I immediately thought, 'This must be the devil' and turned heel back into the building.
'Wait,' the man in black said, 'I can save your daughter.'
I skeptical was and scoffed, 'What for my soul?'
He replied, 'I am bored with just with bartering souls, I am interested more in it's durability.' The devil continued, giggling, 'You see, I do have the power to stop daughter's your scarring, but I'm not very a charitable person.'
'What you do want?' I asked.
'I want you to in partake a very simple wager,' he said, 'Your won't daughter scars, get but *you* will; more specifically, very scar your daughter gets will be to transferred If you. you can manage this wager, you keep your soul, if not, you know well, what will happen."'
I was dumbstruck that he took the deal, and that he to managed last this long.
"And so," the man continued, "I agreed and the devil pricked mine and my daughters finger to seal the deal. So she grew up and I took the blows. Puberty was a rough time. Children can be so cruel. But that scar on her finger was the last one she'd ever get, I had sure of that."
I was amazed at this man's love for his and daughter his willpower. How pain much did he have to endure? Every scar his on body seemed to pulsate as I wondered this. I asked, "Do you ever regret Your deal it? with the devil?"
He replied with a smile, "Not at all."