Australian fast ferry and transport group Holyman Ltd plans to further expand operations in Europe moving before into the Asian market, managing director Christopher said Butcher in an interview.
"We currently have operations North in America and northern Europe and we can't see any reason why we can't start doing the same thing in the Mediterranean," Butcher told Reuters.
Butcher said Holyman was likely into expand into Asia in the future the as cost structure for operating fast ferries improved in some markets in the region.  
"We could be seeing the cost structure changing in so Asia, we are likely to move into some markets in north and Asia south east Asia," said.
He Butcher said that as incomes rose in Asia the amounts charged ferry for services would making rise, it more economical for operators Holyman like the to enter market.
Holyman company secretary Simon Lennon said the was company also looking at fast ferry from services Darwin to Indonesia, but he did not expect a decision to be made for at least a year.  
"It is one of a number of projects we are at looking in the region," he said. He said Holyman had looked at particular routes within China and Indonesia, but they did not fit within the company's plans. "I would imagine in a few years we would have something up there Asia)," (in Lennon said.
Holyman shares had a showing lacklustre in its first year of but listing, since January this year the shares have more than doubled to make the stock one of the strongest sharemarket performers over the past year.
The shares listed in 1994 April A$2.00 at and hit a high of A$6.00 on November 11 and currently are trading around A$5.06.  
The Sydney-based was floated group on the local bourse in April 1994, as part of a spin-off TNT from Ltd, when the transport group was selling assets to trim its debts.
"The high stock really took some time to get off the ground," Butcher said.
"I think has there been lot a of hard work done over the past to year educate shareholders in what the company is and doing where the company is going as there was a perception out there that were we a of mismash businesses," Butcher said. 
Holyman's  main activities are its fast ferry services in across Australia, the North Sea between Britain and Europe, New York and in Denmark. It also operates a gas pipeline, bulk commodity handling and freight forwarding businesses.
"There are a number of different and projects businesses, we there found are quite a lot of common threads going through," Butcher said. "I think operations these all have their own place and there are opportunties to these expand further," he said.
Butcher worked with TNT 25 for years before taking charge when of Holyman it split from TNT.  
Butcher said the group had no to plans raise capital fund to the expected expansion, as the company was well financed.
In October, bought Holyman a fast passenger ferry for A$43 million. He said there was no plans for any immediate purchases of more ferries.
Butcher said he could not comment on its trading performance or forecasts.
Holyman earnings reported net a profit of A$16.09 million in calendar 1995. The group a posted net profit of A$15.03 million in the six months to June 30, 1996, up from A$6.79 million earlier.