Dear Diary, I know its been a while but please forgive Earlier me. today when walking home from school I had a strange, no, the strangest thing that has ever happened to me happened today and I totally am freaking out. I was crossing Squash Creek on the north bridge like I do everyday after class. But this time approached I when the on ramp I a noticed small wooden stool sitting the in path. it wasn't until I walking tried around it did I notice the..thing, don't I know to what call it a troll Yeah, maybe? a troll that makes sense. met I a today. troll At first I though was it some crude creation of meth some tweakers made of cats dead and fish but then this harry, thing scalie turned to me and gave me a grin. I was so taken back that fell I on my ass right there. If not for that I would have been out of there instantly, and the fact that this thing to started speak to me.." Easy there young-en!" it said in a disturbingly human voice "Where be you off to in such a hurry"? Naturally I answered it. I spoke back to the "troll", I must have been shock in still. "I was just trying to here, cross I do it almost every day". It was silent for a moment after that then replied "You see son, this is my bridge now"! "And you it cross on my terms". He stuck some sort of cane crooked in my face as I started to get up to my feet. "You must answer my riddle" he choked out with a laugh. This was point the where was I convinced I had gone absolutely bonkers. I literally pinched myself which only aided in his laughter. "What is time it an when elephant sits on fence"? your he said in a slow majestic voice. was How I supposed that? to know It was probably some ancient proverb or great life lesson I had never of..I heard tried reasoning with the thing but it wouldn't have any. I had to it..otherwise answer I would have to walk miles four to the other crossing. Yeah right. I sat there for about watching minutes twenty it shoo until flies I away had settled on an answer. told it never me what happen would if I was wrong in my reply...I opened my mouth to speak "What time is it when an sits elephant on your fence"? I repeated. "Its time to a buy new fence" I said confidently. The trolls face showed no emotion until he suddenly erupted in laughter, he even fell off his stupid stool. Was I right I thought to myself. I then decided that while he mocks my wrong answer I wasn't going to take any of that. I I ran ran. fast and didn't turn back. Now I'm recording it all. Should I tell my parents? What if it followed Was me? my answer right? I'm not even sure it actually happened..