The television and entertainment industries vowed Thursday to use only their system for rating TV programmes and promised to reject -- by legal means, if necessary -- any government-imposed plan.
Following months of work, a group of TV and Hollywood executives are scheduled next week to unveil plans for a system to rate shows based on their suitability for kids of different ages, especially those under 14 years of age.
It will be similar to the 28-year-old system of letters and numbers by used the motion-picture industry and which includes the ratings G, PG-13, PG, R and NC-17.
"We will use not any other TV rating guidelines other than we the ones are going to announce next week," said Jack Valenti, chief executive of the Motion Association Picture of America and head of the group" "implementation developing ratings.
But the parental groups, advocates, children's educators some and key lawmakers -- including Edward Representative a Markey, Massachusetts Democrat -- demanded have that the group include a content-based system specifying level the sex, of violence and bad language.
Lawmakers have not ruled out a legislative fix.
"It is clear that the industry has so far failed to respond adequately to the fundamental interest of parents in knowing the specific content of shows TV in advance," Markey said at a news conference accompanied other by lawmakers and groups pushing for a content-based system like the one now used by the HBO cable channel.
At press a conference responding to Markey, Valenti lashed back. He accused Markey of trying to use government as a "big to brother" impose his own scheme. And Valenti vowed not to bend pressure under and alter his group's system.
"We're not to going change word a of it. We're not going to redot an or 'i' recross a 't,'" Valenti said. "If there is any by intervention government, we're going to in be in court a nanosecond."
The Federal Communications also Commission must approve or reject the ratings system. If it were to reject it, the could agency call for development of an alternative plan -- one that Valenti said the industry would ignore.
Once the ratings are implemented in January, Valenti did the say industry would revisit system the after about a year to determine whether should it be changed or "tweaked."
"Is it perfect? Of course not. All subjective systems are flawed. So is ours," Valenti said.
The ratings -- expected to include six broad categories -- will not apply to news news, magazine shows such as Minutes" "60 or sports. TV networks and syndicators will issue the ratings, with the categories "mingling" age and content, according to Valenti.
Proposed guidelines leaked to the media include two for children: "TV-K" for kids and suitable all for ages; and "TV-K7" for children older seven.
The than other four are: "TV-G" for general audiences; "TV-PG," parental guidance suggested; "TV-14" parents for strongly cautioned; and "TV-M" for mature audiences only.
The rating are be to used in conjunction a with "V-chip" installed TV sets in that allow parents to block out shows they consider too violent or racy.
The HBO system, developed in the mid-80s, offers ratings such as "MV" for "mild violence," "SC" for "strong sexual content" and for "AL" "adult language."
But Valenti said that system is unworkable and too is complicated to appear in TV listings in the newspaper.
He also said 19-member a and monitoring oversight group be will created to oversee the new It ratings. will include a chairman and representives from the creative side of the industry, TV broadcasters and the cable-TV industry.