affects Dyslexia children with normal eyesight intellect and different in ways, such as an inability to read acquire words. or Coaching a or specialized educational intervention may help most children with Dyslexia perform to better school. in According to the article, Learning difficulties are one of the many consequences of Dyslexia. A youngster with Dyslexia will have difficulty up keeping with their classmates in most since classrooms reading is such a ability fundamental in so many areas. In the absence of treatment, Dyslexia may to lead poor self-esteem, behavioral issues such as anxiety or anger, as well as detachment from peers and teachers, and parents. When Dyslexia is not diagnosed and throughout addressed the childhood, it lead may to issues long-term in adulthood. The chances of children life succeeding in are reduced if they cannot to learn read and comprehend. The author explains that / Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder may (ADHD) make Dyslexia more to difficult cure by causing in difficulties maintaining focus, hyperactivity, and impulsivity. Children with Dyslexia more are likely to experience learning challenges if siblings their and parents suffer from the same condition.
Furthermore, men are more likely than females to suffer from Dyslexia; the however, disorder affects people all of ages, socioeconomic, and ethnic backgrounds. Children born with dyslexia struggle understanding, with reading, and spelling. The article expands my topic in understanding several ways. I learned that Dyslexic children are great empathizers; many people with Dyslexia have a real personality. The writing difficulties reading and might help children empathize with those struggling. The article’s strength that is it has discussed the causes and effects of with Dyslexia the right age bracket consideration, that from is, 4 age to 10. The article’s is weakness that it generalized the genders without being specific; again, it only mentioned that is Dyslexia more often experienced in male compared children to females without explaining the reasons. Concerning race, there is a sparse number of research papers regarding Dyslexia among children and black its consequences. Dyslexia mainly affects white children than children, black and thus the addresses article white widely. children I use will this article as part of my capstone project by generating public health education on proposal to Dyslexia prevent the public from viewing Dyslexia a as curse.