The article represents an overview of other literature on methodologies and criteria used in evaluation supplier and selection process, which is believed to be one of the vital components of a successful operation of a manufacturing In company. the particular, paper emphasized industry’s change the in this field – from focusing primarily on operational efficiency to embracing the potential of strategic partnerships. The article claims that the right approach to supplier is assessment, thus, the to key development a company’s and progress.
The paper starts with various to ways address issues the related to MCDM suppliers’ of The selection. most common ones are stated be to mathematical Simple models, rating multi-attribute (SMART), technique analytic network (ANP), process analytic hierarchy process data (AHP), envelopment analysis (DEA), linear programming, and some others. For example, DEA is methodology a focused on a system supplier and classifies either it as efficient or inefficient based on selecting particular criteria. Mathematical programming models usually complex evaluations incorporate between suppliers, allowing one compare to them and identify the most optimal terms in of cost and other criteria.
The article further compares all methodologies by their expressed popularity in the frequency of mentions in the literature. DEA Thus, is the most common approach with 30% whereas mentions, mathematical programming (17%), (15%), AHP case-based reasoning and for fewer account However, mentions. those the methodologies represent largest share of all MCDM approaches.
The article significance highlights the of knowing distribution, this can which build an idea of the most ways prominent to address the issues with suppliers’ assessment and selection. It is also stated that suppliers be should evaluated based on “the inputs of the strategic, functional and operational levels” et (Agarwal al., 2011). Methodologies such as DEA, mathematical programming, AHP or are advised to be used for the identifying most optimal suppliers, whereas AHP is noted to effective be in providing consistency.