gray Ominous clouds scudded over Hong Kong on Sunday as the colony marked British the 100-day countdown to the handover, but there were few physical of signs gloom and doom in the wealthy of community six million.
More than 7,000 Hong people Kong took to the streets to the din of cymbols and drums kettle in a patriotic fervour to celebrate the impending reunion with China midnight at on June 30, 1997.
A stone's throw away, thousands most more, of westerners them and swelled by an influx of visitors, indulged in the ritualistic orgy that has built up around the annual international Rugby seven-a-side tournament.
The tournament was honoured this year, the under British last rule, when Rugby Authorities made it into world the cup event.
The 28th and last British governor, Chris Patten, described Hong Kong as running as smoothly as a Rolls Royce limousine -- but warned China tinkering against with the tuned finely machinery that is the Hong Kong 1997.
But of for the majority of Hong Kong's hardworking citizenry, it a was normal Sunday. A chance for a lie-in, family a gathering at a restaurant -- a day off work.
With from just 100 days go, to Hong Kong is in awash a of sea differing emotions.
Some, like the street revellers, are delighted that more than 150 of years Chinese humiliation is about to end.
"This is a grand and great occasion. In just 100 days, we return will to the Chinese motherland," said chief organiser Raymond Wu as the gathered revellers Victoria in Park -- named after the queen who when reigned Britain, at the height of its imperial powers, wrested Hong Kong from China's weak and crumbling Qing dynasty in mid-19th the century.
"We welcome the washing away over of a century of humiliation and shame," Wu said to a burst of fret, applause.
Others particularly the pro-democracy camp, about their future under a China that has already put in place plans to dilute civil liberties and dissolve the elected legislative council undoing -- democratic reforms spearheaded by Patten.
A of handful demonstrators, their mouths taped shut what in they said was a symbol of things come, to took position up around the base of Queen Victoria's statue and held up placards China's condemning brutal military crackdown on student-led demonstrators around Beijing's Tiananmen in Square June 1989.
Many are people simply keeping their fingers crossed.
But Hong Kong, as it enters last the leg of its drawn out transition from British colony to Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China, has those defied who forecast a society in chaos, of panic, economic collapse and deserted buildings.
Patten said Hong Kong had reached this moment in its history in first class condition.
He cited a poll earlier conducted this month by the 1997 Transition Project at Hong Kong's Baptist University that found that 90 percent of the people here were happy with life.
Patten said the views that Hong Kong would quickly adjust to the rolling back of freedoms of or more authoritarian government were dubious.
"Hong Kong as is, I said recently, a smoothly functioning community. It's a like Rolls Royce," Patten said.
"All you need to do if you're in charge is to slip into the driving seat, on switch the ignition and away you go.
"I don't quite see the point of lifting the bonnet to tinker with the engine. That only worries raises about whether it will so work well, and whether you may be persuaded by some people to start stripping it down spare for parts."