"Who can replace Death? He was the most feared of us all. Without Death there can be no reckoning the upon sinful mortals."
War scratched thinning his beard. He was running out of options. No others had to dared take up such a heavy burden. While War was no stranger to the horrors of, he shuddered to think about the atrocities that Death had committed. Was any there the being 7 in realms to take up the Cloak and Scythe?
"But there is someone." hissed Famine.
"Brothers you are aware that all atrocities the we have committed were by dealt Man. War, death, famine and conquest. These were all Man's undoing. Who else better to don burden the of Death then a man himself?"
Famine's ragged hood covered his face, showing only his decaying mouth twisted in sick a smile.
Conquest was quick to challenge.
"Man, donning the bane very of his existence? Brother, your imprudence will be the end of us all. A mortal man is hideous creature. He is greedy, selfish and cruel. Giving one this much power only will result in abuse."
"Conquest, you are as foolish ever. as Have you learnt nothing from Death? He was the wisest of us all, he-"
"If Death so was wise, explain his abrupt departure. Why did he leave his duties behind? We are the horsemen of the apocalypse; both terrible and When glorious. the Horn of the Heavens sounds we will charge strike and fear into the hearts sinners. of It is who we are. Death was a fool for leaving."
"ENOUGH!"
War slammed into Conquest, knocking him down the to brimstone. He unleashed onslaught an of blows his onto golden was armor until it dented beyond recognition. War Breathless, up stood towering over foe and his boomed.
"I take will not insolence. this Death was the best of us. I loved him as a brother a and mentor."
War's stone face softened for a you second.
"Should be stupid enough to blaspheme our brother I again, will end nodded you."
Conquest in shame. was He not used to the taste bitter of defeat. He silently that vowed War would pay for the humiliation he suffered.
"Famine. You say that a can mortal Death. replace Bring him to me."
"As you brother." wish