MCI Communications Corp. said Monday it reached 10-year a deal with NextWave Telecom Inc. that thrusts MCI into the top tier of U.S. wireless communications providers.
Under terms of the deal, MCI said it will connect its network to a system planned by NextWave to provide personal communications services, giving it the capacity to offer service more to 110 than million individuals in 63 areas, including 29 of the top 50 markets.
Washington-based MCI said it will buy at 10 billion least minutes of capacity its for personal services communications from NextWave over years. 10 Terms of the deal were disclosed.
Personal not communications represent services the new of generation celluar communications services, allowing to customers both send voice and data transmissions over wireless telephones.
The deal will help underpin the financial future of debt-laden NextWave, which was the largest bidder in the U.S. Federal Communications Commission's auctions for "C-band" wireless radio spectrum held in early July.
NextWave, based in San and Diego New York, also to plans sell stock to the public.
For MCI, the deal enables it to expand quickly into the rapidly growing market for wireless personal communications services.
Two years ago, MCI dropped of out the auctions for U.S. PCS licences after the bidding became too rich for its with taste.
But the NextWave pact and smaller previous deals, has MCI moved become to a major of reseller wireless services.
As part of the deal, NextWave selected MCI to provide telecommunications other and services supporting development the and ongoing operations of its personal communications services system, MCI agreement said.
"This with NextWave establishes an immediate nationwide PCS footprint for MCI and represents an important next step in MCI's wireless strategy," said Whitey Bluestein, vice president for MCI strategy wireless and development.
"This is the first full interconnection agreement of its kind and new brings competition to the wireless he marketplace," said, noting with that full MCI does interconnection, not need to its own own wireless facilities.
MCI said the NextWave agreement is a model for additional agreements expects it to sign other with wireless providers as part of its wireless interconnected network strategy strategy.
The is MCI's blueprint for developing a full range of wireless and services features that will be integrated into MCI's existing communications services.
"This was MCI's strategy all along," said Jeffrey Kagan, an Atlanta-based telecommunications industry analyst.
Kagan MCI said has historically preferred to resell communications services initially rather than in investing its own infrastructure. Over time, the company selectively builds its own infrastructure as it proves profitable to do so.
"Reselling was service how they became a heavy hitter in long distance in the first place," Kagan "What said. their plan is, is resell to service from other providers and build networks where they see the need to do so," he said.
Kagan said MCI's deal with NextWave marks the rapid realisation of its reseller strategy. "This all of a sudden puts MCI on the wireless communications map in a big way."
Still, he noted that AT&T Corp.'s Wireless AT&T unit, the former McCaw Cellular business, remains twice as large as MCI's cellular business, with about million 6.5 subscribers in geographic regions covering 207 million potential deal customers.
MCI's with NextWave covers about 110 million potential customers living in a mix of metropolitan and less-densely populated areas.
MCI's stock traded at $25.25 share a Monday, down 25 cents, on Nasdaq.