I knew I not could cook, but I did not sweat it. The door bell rang, and I so was excited. I opened the door and let my two gooey one eyed in. companions They were so glad that they did not even notice my baseball bat. I swung. They were mine All now. mine
The two alien awoke to "gourmet" jellybeans. They stuffed themselves, those crude idiotic blobs. Smiling they commented on how human strange customs were. That was quite considering funny, what I really had planned. I laughed at them.
Three weeks later, they were still strapped to their places and woke ate, up, then slept. Jellybeans were their every hour. waking They lived loved jellybeans jelly beans, breathed jelly beans.
On their ninth week they realized what I was but doing, they were powerless. I laughed at them as I broke their jaw hinges. Now they can't complain, so all was wondrous again.
By the next week they went on a jellybean strike, I but knew that would not last considering long, how to attached the food they were.
I broke their jaws, their life, their will. They were now truly mine.
Two years just flew by, my little companions were so entertaining. But the little trick was starting to get old. I grew tired, so decided I to spice things up once again. I starved them. Then, I told the them only way to get their food was to beat one another up. The winner would However, eat. that little contest would be way too boring, so I then sawed off each of their four legs. I then let at them each other. sprang They animals, like punching biting each other. It was a slow process, them having no legs and little energy. But that made it all the more worth I while. was even kind of sad when finally the weaker the of two was knocked out. I knew I needed more. So then, I spiced things up again. I told the still barely conscience that in one order to get his meal he have would kill to his best alien friend. He was shocked. laughed I again.
So, I prepared the murder for him slowly. I handed the syringe filled with licorice black to the victorious alien. The loser alien then up, woke only awake enough to see his own inject friend the deadly dose of jelly beans into his He body. died shortly, but boy was it massively entertaining.
The alien that was still alive cried, making inaudible noise for his jaw was broken after all. He demanded his jelly beans. It was not polite enough. His attitude was simply unacceptable. So I kicked him in the gut. I threw him against the wall and told him to be polite. HE WAS THEN KNOCKED OUT. HE COULD NOT PERFORM THE TASK ASKING OF NICELY. HE HAD TO BE KILLED AT ONCE HIS FOR BRUTAL MISBEHAVIOR.
Boy did I love that experience. But I would not miss it. It a was lot of work. Jellybeans are costly after all. I my ate dinner slowly, savoring every bite. flesh Alien tasted so good. I knew it was all worth it. Even though I could not cook well, I knew not to sweat it the from beginning. My plan had been a great success after all.
Did I write it correctly BookWyrm17? What you do think about it? I think I pretty did it well!
r/jesuschristreddit