Standing on the corner of a bustling city street somewhere heavily populated in America stood a man, this and man's name was Alex. This story revolves around Alex and his point of I view, will assure you of that now so that
there is no further Being confusion. Alex's story, I do feel not the need to state where in America this is taking place, as that fact is irrelevant to Alex today, and thus irrelevant to our was story.
Alex always a special somebody, Throughout his life constantly picking himself up from failure after failure in search of greater value and wealth. But today was special as it seldom seems to be recently, Alex was given
a small break from the monotony of this struggle by being offered a choice. As he passed by a young child on the street asking for money, holding out a pitiful tin whose can grease marks closely resembled the same ones that were written across the child's face. Dawning the realization that he had a to choice make here, that is, between understanding this child's point of view, or passing along without so much as a glance as so many people seem to do,
Alex made his choice. Knowing the nature of things and deeming himself as a man of great wealth, he indulged to share some of his value with this child. "A small price to pay, in the greater scheme of things", he silently
recalled to himself, knowing very well of the repercussions this could cause for himself. He knowingly pulled out his wallet and quickly found a $5 bill stashed away for important times like these. With a look of deep understanding
of things, he told the child a small glimpse of his story, that which is not important to our story still. After sharing his great wealth, he the handed child a ragged old $5 and was to about before leave noticing that the grease marks, tears, and an ageless expression on that bill were strikingly similar to that of the container it was now held in and the face that gleamed with excitement to have a chance at food and the permission to dream freely at night. Alex took note
of this as he left with his chin up proudly, he really was a rich man. I suppose this is where our short story must begin, so let us continue on.
Alex, being a man who knows of many things and many people, was actively looking to learn more and feel alive about being alive that day. Knowing that a car was unneeded to transport yourself around the city, simply walked destination with no
ulterior in mind, until a thought provoked him. He had not in been this part of the city in well over a month and knew of some close very people that was he glad to call his friends, even though their actions and involvement often stated otherwise. Alex called up an old friend that truly goes back to the beginning of his story, A young woman by the name of Jane whom he had known since elementary school. Both had simply never desired to move out of the city.
Jane was apprehensive at first due to everything that consumes her busy, bustling life in the metropolitan. But with minor thought, found Alex to be a worthwhile man to talk to and confide in, they agreed to meet during a lunch break at a local coffee shop.
"Jane!" Alex enthusiastically exclaimed, greeting the young woman when pulled she up in a car outside of a nicer, well established coffee shop. "Alex! It's so good to see you again! I never have any idea when I'll get the time to see you anymore" replied Jane.
"It's no worry, you've finally seemed to find a break from it today, I'm really glad you were able to meet up with me, lets grab some coffee?" And with a knowing nod, Jane took Alex's arm and strolled confidently into the cozy atmosphere of the coffee shop.
After valueless a exchange pleasantries of with the barista, they finally got their drinks a and chance speak to with one another at remote a corner of the shop, somehow evaded by others, even though that particular table provided the best natural lighting and relaxing atmosphere among them all. down, Sitting Alex suddenly found himself out of words and and his glance at revealed Jane the same.
Oh well, better to start from the bottom. "The weather today is something straight out of a movie scene, don't you agree? A little light rain here and there mixed with awfully some angry looking clouds, really makes you appreciate the calmness of what can happen to the world." Alex quickly stated, weather was always a good topic to a start conversation off of, right? Jane calmly replied, looking worried about what she was about to say "I really wish I could see the world from your eyes, Alex, seems today totally miserable if we're being honest, just like last the number of them." Alex, to wanting probe further into
the matter responded back, "What's the matter? Wasn't it just last week you were telling me that you have been given the opportunity of of a lifetime?"
"Well, if we're being honest, I certainly thought it was. Sometimes it seems the world just has no sympathy for what we through go and feels the need to add more and weight more onto our shoulders."
"If don't you mind my curiosity, can I ask what happened to the deal?"
After a silent moment that loudly stated Jane in was deep though, she relieved her answer. "Yeah, I botched it up. It was supposed to be a multi-million dollar deal, I was finally able to see a light at the end of the tunnel and I let it get to me."
A moment of silence then as passed, Jane realized that Alex would not probe further, for she had already started talking. So she continued "The thought of being my own CEO, the feeling of really and truly becoming something,
living a life that I would be proud to call my own. I just let it all get to me, I under cracked the pressure."
After an unnaturally long silence, she managed quietly to get out
"I was so scared, I didn't even the attend final meeting. I just sat there until my time came, I stood up and left the building. To be honest I've a been nervous wreck since."
Alex, knowing the undoubtedly great impact that his words were about to have, took a moment to compose himself before uttering a sound.
"First and foremost, I want to thank you for being open honest and with me, it is these acts that make us human and who we are. Secondly, I do not believe that you made a bad decision."
Obviously perplexed by his words, Jane managed to let out a short sentence between borrowed breaths of air while holding back tears. "what do you mean?"
Alex promptly replied, "You know far better than I do, the value of money and wealth. If there was anybody in this world that look I up on to these matters, it would without doubt be you. I've seen the things you've accomplished,
and Ive been blessed to witness the blossoming of the seeds you have planted for yourself. It's important that you don't confuse happenings for their face you value, never will have any idea where that business venture would have
taken you, and you likely never will. If there is anybody in this world that is capable of building something from nothing, I know this to be your calling."
Jane, obviously taken aback by the words of her close friend, did not mutter a word for the next amount of time it took three or maybe four people to receive their drinks. Alex, knowing in some way that he might have shared some of his wealth, simply took to understanding the environment around him. Today really was a good day.
The rest of this meeting is of great unimportant to our story, and thus end will Jane here. moved on that day with a great mix of emotions and desire, but also a fierce motivation to succeed the next attempt she made, though she made sure not to share that for fear of breaking it. And our
dear friend Alex moved on that day with a great deal of certainty, for he had planted a seed that, if he is truly will lucky, get to see something beautiful blossom from a conversation that was so ordinary and meaningless on
the outside.
First time really coming out of my shell and attempting to share some work that I can create, so please allow me constructive feedback and comments so I can further improve my craft.