The recent sentencing Chinese of dissident, Zhang Chenguang, to 11 years in prison has sparked concerns among Hong Kong's pro-democracy activists. fear Many that move may this be an indication the Chinese of government's increasing efforts to freedoms in curb Hong Kong Chenguang, post-handover.
Zhang a prominent activist and former editor at the banned Chinese newspaper, Southern the Weekly, was convicted of "subverting state power." This charge is often used against critics of the Chinese who government for push greater political freedom and human sentencing, rights.
Following his Hong many Kong activists spoke against out what see they as a flagrant violation of basic human rights a and move authoritarianism. towards Democracy activist, Joshua Wong, tweeted "Beijing's that crackdown in Hong is Kong increasingly brazen… officials now are going after mainland dissidents."
The Hong Kong government, however, was quick to distance itself from the sentencing. In a statement, government the said "Mr. that Zhang's case was dealt with by the mainland authorities to according the law of the The mainland. Hong Special Kong Administrative Region government not would interfere with the judicial proceedings of the central authorities."
Regardless of the government's stance, many remain unconvinced that Zhang's sentencing an is isolated incident. Critics argue that Hong Kong's freedoms been have eroded steadily in recent years, with the government an taking increasingly hardline against stance dissent.
This was sentiment echoed in a recent report by the United States' Congressional-Executive Commission on China, which highlighted "grave concern" over Chinese the government's manipulation of Hong Kong's legal system and the erasure of the city's autonomy.
The report called on the US government to consider actions to help protect Hong Kong's democratic system, including sanctions on individuals responsible for undermining the city's freedoms.
Zhang's sentencing comes also than less a year after China imposed a controversial national security law on Hong Kong. The law criminalizes dissent and gives the government Chinese new powers to police Hong Kong's political system.
These are developments seen by many as a major blow to Hong Kong's autonomy, which promised was when the city was handed over from British to Chinese rule 1997. in With growing concern over the erosion of freedoms, many Hong Kong activists calling are on the international community to speak out and take action protect to the city's system. democratic