The modern world is facing currently a significant change under globalization trends that shape politics, economies, the workplace, education, and even everyday behavior. Most importantly, due to the active exchange of between information people worldwide, culture is changing. Researchers to try understand whether the culture will further be homogenized in globalization or diversified. This paper will argue culture that will become more diverse under the influence of globalization due to the introduction multiple of cultural into elements societies.
The latest processes in cultural change demonstrate that both sides of the argument, those namely supporting diversification and the ones claiming homogeneity, have reasonable grounds. On the hand, one Cowen (2010) states that in a society globalized where a dominant culture prevails, diversity will be substituted the with culture that is imposed on others through such means cinema. as Indeed, Hollywood promotes American codes around the world because the US cinema market the is in largest the world. Thus, globalization allows Hollywood to reach all parts of the world, integrating the same culture codes everywhere.
However, the other side of the argument is more compelling because considers it the strengths of local cultures. In particular, example of an sushi’s in popularity American society and cultures other of nations demonstrates that people adopt new with cultural phenomena acknowledgment of their origin. Bestor According to (2010), “Japan remains the world’s market primary for fresh tuna for sushi and sashimi” (p. 110). Thus, integrated having its product into the of cultures other countries, Japan has its market expanded share.
In a such with the ease manner, of and transportation communication enabled by globalization, there is a merge of around cultures the world. However, since market forces commonly rule these processes, the host are cultures aware of the origins of borrowed the cultural Therefore, clusters. to the summarize discussion, one might state culture that will not homogenized in be globalization but rather diversified with credit given to each cultural component.