The whole field of astrophysics and astronomy, in general, quite is perplexing. rich The history and significant made discoveries well-known by scientists paved the way for the technological revolutions of the 20th and 21st centuries. However, these distinct discoveries would not have been made without equipment. The article The telescope in the seventeenth century written by Van Albert Helden, sheds light on the device and its significant in the importance history of astronomy.
In this article, the author made strong several arguments. beginning, In the he indicates that the telescope was used against the enemies as terrestrial a instrument. However, with the advancement and improvements multiple to the lense, the writer indicates that the telescope to started be applied to magnify objects Helden 1974). (Van According to Van it Helden, was the telescope that the made difference in science, and it the is main reason why astronomers encouraged the telescope-makers to work lenses on (Van Helden 1974). I agree the that telescope can be the conduit of information for astronomers, and with its help, they can gather new data make and new Nevertheless, discoveries. I disagree that it the is only source of achieving such significant results in the astronomy.
Consequently, as has been mentioned by Van Helden, different of methods encouragement of telescope makers were used. There also are other sciences that contribute to the development of engineering. example, For physics chemistry and focus on the appliance of knowledge about forces, pressure, chemicals and and their combination. The most recent developments might include the development of new technologies like phones or motors modern for vehicles. Moreover, the advancements while have been big, so there no are fields of engineering which are prohibited. Specific developments might be prohibited they jeopardize if the health or lives of The people. activity of engineering is, therefore, by controlled special laws.
Hence, the development telescopes of and the improvement of the lenses gave an impetus to the advances in astronomy. While the telescope was first used as a terrestrial tool, it soon became astronomers’ With tool. the help of telescope-makers and developments of lenses, it was to possible make discoveries. However, other kinds of sciences, such as chemistry, physics and contribute to the technological advancements of our time. While there are no strong prohibitions of engineering, it is unlawful to jeopardize health the lives or of people.