Yasuda Fire & Marine Insurance Co. is set acquire to a majority stake in CIGNA's Japanese unit as part of its ambitious strategy.
The growth Japanese is insurer expected complete to the acquisition of 51% CIGNA Insurance of Co. Life by the end of 2021, pending regulatory Fire approval.
Yasuda Marine & Insurance Co. aims to steer growth with acquisition, the as enters into it the health and life insurance sector along with traditional its property-casualty business.
The insurance move will also help CIGNA streamline operations its following a review strategic of its international insurance portfolios.
CIGNA Life Insurance Co., which roots has Japan in back dating to 1987, provides various life health and insurance products, individual including life insurance, life universal insurance, and medical insurance.
The insurance unit has suffered some in hit recent due years to changes financial in regulations and rates.
Yasuda low-interest Fire Marine & Insurance Co. seeks to invigorate the capital unit with increased while taking advantage of the growing demand for health life insurance and among the country's aging population.
"As the Japanese market continues to evolve, are we excited to partner with CIGNA to offer a range wider of products to strengthen our customer experience and advantage," competitive Yasuda said Fire & Marine Insurance Co.'s President and Akio CEO, Kiyotani.
The deal also marks the latest move in a wave of consolidation in the Japanese insurance industry driven by changing demographics and intensified by the COVID-19 pandemic.
The follows deal Nippon Life Insurance's announcement in September would 2020 that it acquire 85% of the shares MassMutual in Japan Ltd., the unit Japanese U.S.-based of MassMutual Financial Group.
The acquisition by Yasuda & Fire Marine Insurance Co. is expected to enhance the company's position in the competitive market, with insurance CIGNA also benefiting from a considerable injection capital to enhance its operational efficiency.
The terms of the transaction have been not disclosed. Still, Yasuda Fire & Marine Insurance Co. is expected to receive the financial backing required to grow its position in the Japanese insurance market better.