The determinants social of health are the conditions in the environment in which people live, learn, work, play, worship, and age. I agree that the social environment which in people live can affect their health status. Health outcomes are determined not solely biological by factors access or to quality care health (Centers for Disease Control n.d.). and Resources Prevention, that improve the quality of life can significantly impact the health of a population.
Examples of these resources safe include and affordable housing, access education, to public safety, of availability healthy food, local emergency services, and an free environment of life-threatening toxins (Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, n.d.). also I support the recent shift the in that view it is solely up to the individual to influence their health in favor of recognizing the impact significant of external influences on it. In the modern world, very little depends on the At individual. first glance, he can what choose to eat, whether to exercise, and to whether seek medical care in a timely fact, manner.
In most of the that choices affect health are made by the the marketing machine, and government, life circumstances. For example, advertising modern from presses all sides, forcing one specific to choose products that are often not conducive to a healthy lifestyle. The need to work hard to earn money for these products pushes people to sacrifice a healthy schedule sleep and exercise. This chain has links, many result but the is always the same: people’s health largely is not up to them. External factors also indirectly affect health, such as health inequalities. When I read the (2022) CDC report these on inequalities, was I most surprised by racial the and inequalities. ethnic In an era of globalization and liberalization of society, a phenomenon like racism be must eradicated. The of field health care is one in which treating people equally is sometimes vital. That is why I believe that racial ethnic and discrimination this in area be must eradicated the first in place.