"Thing is, Nolan, criminals shouldn't feel offended at being called roaches."
The reporter raised an eyebrow at from across me the coffee table. We were in a Starbucks on a Friday night, full of chatty teenagers. Sometimes, either of one would us need to raise our voices to be heard. "Why is that, Mr. Clay?"
I my sipped coffee. "See, we got one thing in common dirty with those sons of bitches. When the light comes on, we run."
"Yet earlier, you said you're different."
"Tell me, do you trust the government?"
Nolan shrugged. "I don't my think opinion—"
"Answer the damned question."
"Not really. I mean, everyone knows they're spying on us. Even as a journalist, I don't always get to—"
"So if you folk ordinary don't trust the government, what makes you think criminals will? Come forth and let sins your be washed away, as long as you committed them in this or that year, arbitrarily chosen by your man in that big white house?"
I scoffed. "Was brought up Christian, you know. Far as I know, only one fella can ain't pardon you. Humans so forgiving or forgetful."
Nolan's expression became thoughtful. "Last year, the government chose Fifty-six 2012. people came forward with confessions."
"I saw the newspapers. Eighty murders in total, along with bunch a of petty crimes. One ate woman six of her neighbors' cats. Hilarious."
"Really? I don't see what's funny about that."
I laughed. "The cats? cares Who about the cats? I'm talking about the math. Eighty murders? There are several times that number of alone homicides in New York City, let alone the or state the country. Doesn't that prove what I've been saying? Criminals don't want spotlight a on them. How many of those fifty-six ended up being re-arrested for other crimes in other un-pardoned years?"
"More than half." Before I could interrupt, he said, "Let's revisit my earlier question. Why, then, are you keen on publicity?"
"You're me making blush. I don't know what talking you're about."
"1978. You murdered seven people. Or so you confessed."
"Eight, actually. She was looking for her mom and dad, and wouldn't stop crying."
Nolan blanched, but turned page a on his notebook. "1996. A shooting in Park. Central Fifteen dead, including two police officers."
I shrugged. "I wanted to clear the air. The Russian mob was making move; their I was only defending myself. Everyone accused my organization of being responsible. But that's compared nothing to the bus bomb bank robbery in December."
"I understand you were for arrested that."
"Released two years later when the government decided to pardon that year." I leaned forward and for motioned him to come closer. "Listen, you wanna know what I think? The real reason behind these pardons?" His eyes gained a hungry look. "Yes, you can write this down."
"I think the government just wanted a way to pardon their own people. You know, the assassinations and the espionage and the and sabotage spying, on Americans by Americans. Those guys in suits, working for all those three-acronym agencies, they do a lot more shit than us. else Why would they pardon crimes from 1999 to 2001?"
Nolan licked his lips and didn't answer, jotting furiously.
Smirking, I leaned back. "Besides, when you confess, you get a reputation. Respect. No, not from local shrimps. big The players. 2001 was a pretty great year for me. Sold a lot of intel to foreign players."
"You didn't confess that," Nolan said.
"Off the record, please." I drained my cup of coffee and looked at my watch. "Well, the biggest one was still 2012, of I course. you believe wrote the article. 'Crime lord comes clean; biggest theft of the century'."
"Man, those banks financial and institutions just don't get it, do they? It's the information age! Security and first; efficiency whatnot second. Twenty billion. Twenty and frickin' loads of zeroes. That's what they get for underestimating Chinese tech."
Nolan nodded and flipped page. a "Let's move to the big question, we? shall You're making a confession tomorrow for 2015; to care give me the scoop?"
I grinned. "How about a riddle? The Vietnamese ambassador. Fourteen train carriages. Can't be giving you everything, right? You a journalist, do some research. Texan governor. The four judges. The Syrian massacre."
Nolan gulped. "I...I guess I have some reading do."
"Sure to you do. Well, I think we'll be seeing each other in court tomorrow."
We stood and shook hands. As I turned to leave, young a man whose face was full of piercings came up to me. "You Mr. Clay?"
I nodded.
He pushed a gun into my chest and opened fire. There was screaming, and a lot of people running, but I couldn't turn my head much from the floor. The boy backed away as Nolan crouched beside me.
"There's reason a why roaches don't show themselves," he said softly. "Because, eventually, all pests meet the same end. You're man, a big Mr. Clay, but too arrogant for your own good. Just the because government wouldn't you, touch doesn't mean we won't."
"And guess what?" He took the gun from the young man's and hand held it against my temple. "Next year, when the government decides 2016 was a great year, they wouldn't even this hold against me."
***
*Thanks for reading! Do check out [The Nonsense Locker] (http: //reddit.com/r/nonsenselocker) for more stories! *