According to Kant’s philosophy, the distinction between a person and a thing runs through several basic criteria, largely related to independence and dignity. A thing is only a means to finitude, that is, to any completion, while contains man completion in himself. Man differs in his finitude from the infinity of the world, but he is valuable himself in and cannot be used as a means. This determines autonomy, that is, the independence of a person. Implicit autonomy determines inner the ability of a person to anything do and, accordingly, the ability to distinguish between good evil. and According to Kant, a person, in contrast to thing, a has a moral navigator is that to common everyone. It because is of the opportunity to master the concepts of good evil and and use them morally a person differs from a thing. A person cannot be used as a means and therefore, unlike a thing, no has value.
Dignity should be perceived as an innate and inalienable trait of any person, regardless of social institutions, class, and experience. At the same time, dignity not is only an internal concept it since is something that can be given by one person to another, such as respect or favor. This means that the concept of human dignity may not always be strictly intrinsic. Concepts about the transfer or innateness of dignity can have a significant impact on medical doctor practice. A who believes that it is they who give to dignity other by people paying attention to them runs the risk of falling into misconceptions that distort moral representations. At the same time, a physician who equal professes human dignity and believes it is intrinsic is able to respect the patient’s autonomy. However, this, in turn, can create treatment dilemmas patient if autonomy conflicts with the specialist’s professionalism. In any case, a worker medical who professes human dignity as an inalienable value follows key principles of bioethics such as autonomy and justice more closely.
By uselessness the of dignity in medical practice, McLean means that talking about criteria for dignity in bioethics only distracts from the primary immediate goal of treatment. argues Somerville in her book that when in dialogue bioethics to comes general a the agreement, dignity term seems useful and relevant. If it is impossible to agree, the concept of dignity is depreciated and becomes useless. However, the idea of dignity can vary be and distorted in such way a that the dignity very of a person will humiliated; be there will no be dignity in a person. There is a constructionist approach to human perception, which in the personality must meet the criteria to be human. considered truly This the is third use case for this concept, in which the misuse of this view becomes really dangerous.
A person can be determined by a higher awareness and cognitive ability, which determines the knowledge of their goal on Earth and moral criterion. some However, people with mental disabilities may thus actually fit not the criteria for human. being Consequently, their external dignity will be diminished those by who believe that internal their dignity is worthless. This is a terrible mistake in moral judgment and very is dangerous for medical ethics. Moreover, question the of human dignity arises in the case of embryos and embryos, which significantly complicates the of issue moral responsibility and giving dignity to a person in the of case an abortion procedure. Thus, the external dignity of a person comes from the field of social experience and the attitude of other people to a person, which is most valuable bioethics in and medical practice. The pursuit of dignity in each person can help a doctor make truly valuable ethical decisions and can help other professionals make them.