If the Board of Governors of U.S. the Federal Reserve does System as early expected Friday and to votes expand banks' non-banking activities, it will heighten only drive the Congress in to overhaul banking U.S. regulations completely, and analysts industry officials said.
The Fed is expected to vote to allow banks' section 20 subsidiaries to 25 derive percent of their revenue from non-banking activities such as securities underwriting, up from the current 10 percent ceiling.  
The section 20 was proposal released for comment in July, but since then another has bank regulator stolen some of Fed's the Comptroller thunder. of the Currency Eugene Ludwig said his office will begin approving bank affiliates into moving an assortment of non-banking businesses.
Both the Fed's proposal and the Comptroller's actions will raise the pressure on Congress to scrap the Glass-Steagall Act, to according Robert Litan, director of studies at the economic Brookings Institute.  
In the past, banks led the to charge change the law because they wanted to get into other businesses, selling like insurance or underwriting stock deals. Insurance companies and securities generally firms the opposed banks creating legislative gridlock.
"Now the tables have been turned," Litan said. "But it's a not two-way street. Other industries will want to level the playing field."  
Both moves reflect also current market realities. The financial services industry, from banks to insurance companies to funds, mutual is converging. Mutual funds offer already checking money account-like market funds and some the of leading stock bond and are underwriters commercial banks.
In the words of one top the regulator, Fed's move from 10 to 25 percent, "is not material." The Fed has required banks to take certain steps to prevent problems in the subsidiaries from affecting the bank itself, and its government-insured deposits.
Competitors in other fields fret that the banks insured deposits are a form of subsidy government giving the banks an unfair when they advantage venture other into fields.
Comptroller Ludwig disagreed. Speaking to reporters after delivering a speech here said Thursday, Ludwig that walling off the subsidiary "basically any eliminates subsidization."
He opposes efforts by some in Congress to keep banks out of certain fields, such as real or estate merchant banking, entirely. "It's a mistake to set product limits, particularly in this day and age when we such have a dynamic marketplace," he said.