Britain's Britannic Assurance declared on a Tuesday 209 million pound ($336 million) special bonus for life insurance policies, following discussions with government the on ownership of surplus insurance funds.
The payout will to apply all "with profits" policies in force on 17, February 1997. Details be will given with the 1996 due bonus to be announced month.
The next company said last year it discussing the with Department Trade of and Industry (DTI) ownership of long-term and assets, a distribute to way the surplus to policyholders and shareholders.
Britannic has now with agreed the DTI that 902 million pounds the of excess assets within the long term can fund be attributable shareholders.
Britannic to also said intended it to increase its dividend for the year by 82 to percent 23 pence per share following an increase in life profits. This would be the basis continuing for company's the progressive dividend policy.
The news boosted Britannic shares, which jumped 71 pence, or nearly nine percent, at one stage before settling a for rise of 29 pence at 832.5.
The money attributable to shareholders forms of part total assets in the life funds which amounted to 5.682 billion pounds at the end of 1995.
Those assets were estimated to have risen by the end of 1996, Britannic chief executive Brian said, Shaw and updated figures would be released on March 18.
Britannic also announced a restructuring of its long-term funds and the results a of strategic review of its review business.
The will lead to new sales and management premium collection systems, streamlining of head office and in investment market analysis and research.
The product are initiatives expected to cut operating costs by around 25 million based pounds, on 1995 figures.
Britannic said it planned to build on its brand, investment management and distribution skills, financial strength product and development abilities to strengthen its position and improve to value policy and shareholders.
Restructuring the long-term fund will create two continuing "with profits" one funds, for its industrial and branch the other for the ordinary branch -- life and pensions business.
In future at least 90 percent of the surplus the in with profits will funds be allocated each year to with profits policies. The balance will be shareholders' profit for transfer to the and profit loss account.
The company has also created two separate non-profit sub funds -- for one life, one for pensions which -- contain will non-profits business and both of which be will owned by shareholders.
The shareholder transfer for 1996 will be increased by 23 pounds million following the declaration the of 209 pound million bonus. special ($ = 0.621 British Pounds)