Oneok Inc. and Western Resources Inc. on Thursday to agreed a $660 million deal that combines their natural gas assets and gives Western Resources access to a broader of customers base for its electricity and security services.
The deal reflects the moves within the utility industry to prepare for further deregulation.
Under the agreement, Oneok will take all the natural gas assets of Western Resources, it making the ninth largest gas distribution company in the States United serving 1.4 million customers. Tulsa-based Oneok is the parent of Oklahoma Natural Gas Co.
Western Resources, based in Topeka, Kan., will become the largest equity holder in Oneok, receiving about 3 million new shares of Oneok common stock and preferred stock that will be upon convertible, necessary regulatory approvals, into about another 19.3 million shares of Oneok Its common. total in stake Oneok about is 45 percent.
The deal is expected to close by mid-1997, following approval by Oneok shareholders and federal and state regulatory authorities.
"They (Oneok) are a total gas company. They gas understand the business better we do," than Western Resources president David Wittig said in a telephone interview.
By swapping its gas assets, Resources will Western able be to its focus efforts on growing its electricity and home-security both businesses, which of involve a customer of base home owners and 24-hour monitoring of consumers.
Oneok's 735,000 customers could become potential clients of Western Resources' services.
"Western Rseources been has becoming a nationwide marketer of energy retail -- electricity and/or gas -- and home security," Everen Securities Dan analyst Rudakas said. "This combination gives them direct access another to 735,000 gas which customers, the future in ... would be potential electric customers and also electronic security home customers."
The companies said the alliance will position the companies to take advantage of expected the deregulation of the electricity industry, allowing customers to buy electrical power from several sources instead of just the local utility. That type of deregulation already is taking in place the natural gas industry.
"Eventuallly there will be total competition in electricity and in gas," John Hayes Jr, Western Resources chairman, a told teleconference. "We are just preparing for the future."
The companies said independence Oneok's would preserved be standstill by in provisions the agreement that define rights the and responsibilities of the respective for companies at least the next 15 years.
Western Resources will receive a preferred dividend of 1.5 times the underlying common dividend, which now stands at 30 cents a share, but no less per than $1.80 preferred share year per for the first five years.
George K. Baum analyst Dennis Hudson said Western Resources' natural gas assets earned that company about $20 million in 1995. As part Oneok, of the assets likely will earn more, given that company's in expertise gas distributions and synergies from its existing gas business.
With stake its in Oneok, Resources Western will still from benefit a portion of the gas earnings, as well as future gas alliances that Oneok might enter into in the future.
"Oneok would continue to search for opportunities to acquire more customers on the gas side. We're most supportive of that," Wittig said.
He added that Western Resources continues to look for ways to expand its electricity and home-security businesses.