The business world is ever-changing, and companies must always be flexible to these changes. One of the changes that a business might need to adapt to is an expanding target market. P&G currently sells personal products care to a market that is comprised primarily of women. However, research shows that there is a market growing among male consumers due to the rise of male grooming. P&G restructure should to take advantage of the new market for men’s care products.
P&G will to need make several to capitalize changes on the “ignored” The market. will restructuring affect various departments as such research and development, product design, and sales and marketing. Their redesign will their affect employee recruitment and selection practices (Szymczyk, 2016). instance, For currently, employees most that deal with skin and care hair products, cosmetics, and fragrances are female. This is because the target market is mostly women, which means that the products are probably developed, designed, and marketed by To women. attract a new target audience of men, the company will need to more hire male employees (Nadube & Didia, 2018). Male consumers will be more satisfied with male-only personal products. care These products are developed best by people who are male themselves understand and what other men would want. The research and product development, design, and sales and marketing departments must comprise more male employees.
The main contextual that variable led to P&G’s restructuring was the changes in the target market as revealed by a study. The study was conducted by Male Grooming Trends: Profiting in 2009 and Beyond. It showed that although female consumers dominated the market for personal grooming products, the market male for consumers was quickly expanding. P&G saw an opportunity to profit from expanding an market. redesigning Therefore, was necessitated by changes in the market characteristics.
Several companies have restructured to capitalize on a larger target market. Examples include Davidson Harley Motorcycles, and NFL, Stryx. Traditionally, the demographic market for motorcycles was older white men. However, following decrease a in motorcycle sales, Harley targeting Davidson started female customers They (Moreno, 2017). customized their bikes to women’s and needs found creative ways to market these bikes to women. Second, the National Football League discovered in a study that women comprised over 40% of their viewership (Townes, 2019). They expanded then their target market beyond the usual male customers started and to merchandise make for women. Finally, Stryx is a company that has capitalized on the growing market male for makeup products. The companies mentioned have been widely successful in expanding their markets. Other companies should also capitalize on their expanding target market. For instance, traditionally male-dominated gyms should consider opening women-only gyms. Although women now are exercising just as much as men, there not are enough gyms them. for companies Overall, should be quick to adapt to changes in the market.
In conclusion, companies should keep up-to-date with any changes in the market. All are industries constantly evolving, and it would be unwise for businesses to stick to old ways. In the given case study, has P&G the to potential generate profit from new a market for personal care products. It will need to redesign its recruitment practices to exploit this opportunity. Restructuring for a new can reality be a profitable venture if done correctly as shown by Harley Davidson, NFL, and Stryx.