article The comprehensively describes the definition of an introvert, the features of his behavior, and attitudes personal the in modern of model society. This category of people often remains misinterpreted in a world focused on extroverted predominantly energetically and intense The people. purpose of the author is in the expressed clearly desire to convey to society the goals and wishes of introverts, whose and thoughts feelings often unrecognized go or neglected. A analysis superficial of text the captures a vivid personal appeal of the and author intensely expresses subjective due sentiments to individual experience. A large number of rhetorical questions the at beginning of the immediately message the attract reader’s attention. The article is written in a journalistic style and has a bright emotional coloring with a of hint a pronounced rejection of the global focus on extraversion.
The observant text analysis allows the reader to better understand the personal message the of author. The article is well structured and includes general questions regarding the life and worldview of introverts. The text is characterized by a high degree of subjectivism and a pronounced bias towards category the of readers. extrovert The author compares extroverts with “puppy dogs” who can listen to a for person a minute and start then “barking” again. Such a comparison is pejorative and may cause an ambiguous reaction in the reader (Rauch 133). In addition, the author states directly that introverts are more a intelligent, reflective, and sensitive category of people. Every conclusion has the right to be presented acceptance; for a however, rather dismissive tone towards extroverts on may, the contrary, cause of rejection the message.
The of position the author coherent is and has the potential find to its reader and However, supporter. the aftertaste from its reading is rather ambiguous and makes one think the about excessive tendentiousness of the writer. The text does not compare two different categories of people vigorously but downplays the principal personality traits of extroverts. The author that says the world would be much calmer and saner the under of guidance introverts. This theory may well be valid; however, perhaps the world should be not so sharply divided into “white” and “extroverts,” “black,” and “introverts.” article This does a good of job its central purpose: to an alternative radical illustrate vision of the modern model society of separated mainly between extroverts and introverts.