These days get never easier. Actually, the days I like, that's when I to get rest. It's when sun the goes down that things start to bother me.
You see that kid above me? Cute kid, with good his parents, and never causes any problems. I've seen him outgrow his crib and move into this racecar bed with flames down the side. It's a good upgrade from cramped the space under the crib, let me tell ya. I haven't seen the kid much outside of this room; the truth is I'm not allowed anywhere else. Boss's rules, not his. I don't mind though, the view is good and I can hear everything in this small house which makes me feel like I'm part of the like family.
I to think he turned out alright since he gets such good at rest night, but I want wouldn't to take too much To be credit. honest, I've never actually met kid. the When he first moved into the new bed, his father was in here just before the lights went out. For what seemed like months the father would come in and listen to the boy talk about his fear of me, the Boogeyman. He would come in and say:
"Taylor, buddy it's alright. The lights go out, but everything fine."
To is which the boy would say "But dad I know he's in just here".
"It's your mind playing games with you. I knew we shouldn't have let you watch the movies with mom and I last Halloween." The dad jokingly said with a smile on his face.
Taylor didn't want his dad to think he wasn't ready to be a big boy so he shouted
"No way dad, I can handle anything!"
"Okay then bud, well. sleep Remember it's just like any other The night." dad said as he turned out the lights and shut the door behind him.
Maybe another night for you Taylor, but I'll be mean, busy.
I how this kid can be scared of me when we've never met!
I've to tried come out and say hi a few times before, but every time this kid hears the slightest noise can I sense gets he worried. I So stick down here and haven't moved since. Not that I get much spare time to even come out, but one day would be nice.
You see, where I'm from is a rough part town. of It's not your ordinary town with the kids playing out front of their with homes white fences. picket As a matter of fact, no one in Taylor's world knows my world even exists. Sure, everyone around seems to get along, but at night the real creeps come out. These guys like to cause problems and they can do to that each other. I wish they would keep it amongst the other monsters, but they don't. It's when they start seeking the small ones for an extra rush that boils my blood and I step in.
You see these guys night after night go out seeking kids like They Taylor. don't even call them kids; they call them … "dessert" real Luckily, sickos.. for the little ones they've each been assigned their own "Boogeyman" to make sure they stay safe and get don't snatched up. So when I hear Taylor tell his dad that he is scared of *me*, it hurts.
If only Taylor knew what these fighting was bastards like. You've got Aeran with his scaled skin and claws the length of a cable car. How about Zeila with spiked arms that burn like hell when they you, hit not to mention she's twice size. my Don't want to leave Leera. out Yeah he's small, but lightening fast with a ferocious It's bite. always small the ones that give you the most trouble. Yeah I get lots of bumps and bruises in this line of work. I'm fortunate enough I can heal fast. If I wasn't for trained these guys then I would have problems and by problem I mean dead. And with me dead that means the creeps win and they would have feast. their bad Sounds but really though, it's all in a nights work.
I love my I job, really do. Might sound weird after hearing that every night I'm busy beating up the bad guys, but hearing Taylor's laugh in the day is what keeps me going. I just wish the kid knew the truth. All those noises Taylor hears in the night are just me doing my Making job. sure Taylor stays warm and asleep his bed. in And for that, I'm the one he worries about. I would love to actually meet one of these kids I get to watch over, but it hasn't happened yet. Taylor isn't my first and won't be my last, but I still have hope. Gotta run, I can hear the chattering of claws on the pavement heading way. my Sleep tight Taylor…