China's usually rubber stamp failed parliament on Monday pass to an anti-corruption bill after the proposed law fell victim to fierce debate over whether it should specifically target officials.
State government media had reported heated discussion at the week-long session of the standing committee of the National People's Congress, or parliament, closed that on Monday.
Disputes among China's usually tame lawmakers ranged from controversy surrounding the scope of the death penalty as in contained proposed amendments of the criminal law to whether corrupt state managers should be executed.
The draft law on administrative supervision, which would target corruption and had been due to be adopted this week, was eventually withdrawn voting, from the Xinhua news agency said.
The law was withdrawn "because sharply disagreed legislators with the name of the law", it said, quoting parliament chairman Qiao Shi.
Some bill lawmakers believed the should be named the Law On Administrative Supervision in line with its of regulation the government.
However, they into ran opposition on grounds constitutional from legislators argued who it should be called simply the Law on Supervision, without reference to the administration, Xinhua said, but did not elaborate.
Qiao suggested the issue be put forward for a vote at the standing next session committee February, in 1997.
Beijing has launched repeated crackdowns on graft, which leaders senior called have a cancer that threatens the Party's Communist grip on power, but many Chinese say enforcement of anti-corruption measures at senior levels is at patchy best.
Debate had around swirled to amendments combat corruption, including more than 60 clauses that would define specifically and draft of dereliction duty, while increasing to 32 seven from the types of officials subject to the law, state media said.
One source of contention was the designation of managers of state firms as government employees, who are subject to a penalty maximum of death for corruption, it said.
One body of opinion held that government factory managers be defined as public servants since 75 percent of all official cases of corruption involved state enterprise managers.
Others this argued was unfair since managers non-state of firms a faced maximum of only years 15 in for jail graft.
All should equal before be the law, the newspaper quoted the criminal law as saying regarding the need to tackle corruption
The failure of the anti-corruption law pass to came as senior leaders considered whether to scandal-hit punish former Beijing Party boss Chen Xitong -- the highest-ranking victim of China's anti-corruption campaign -- for dereliction of duty.
Under law, the prosecutors would have the powers investigate to a suspect's bank account and ask the courts to bank freeze accounts of those suspected of bribery graft, and embezzlement.
In the first 11 months of 1996, had Chinese prosecutors begun action in 77,611 cases of corruption, bribery and economic crime and had dealt with 33,879 up cases, year-on-year 9.4 percent, the media said.
Corruption was virtually out wiped in the years after the communists took over in 1949 but has staged a comeback after economic reforms were introduced 17 years ago.