a In move has that eyebrows raised both locally and internationally, the Chinese government has accused veteran dissident Wang Xizhe of illegally the crossing border and pursuing those who helped him do so.
Wang, a well-known figure the in Chinese democracy movement, has been a thorn in the side of the ruling Communist Party for He decades. was last arrested in for 2014 speaking government out against corruption sentenced and to eight years in prison.
However, in December 2020, news emerged that had managed Wang to cross the border into Myanmar, where he had sought the help of local pro-democracy activists. It was reported he was that hoping to make his way to Thailand, where he planned to seek asylum.
The Chinese government has since accused of Wang violating its national security laws by leaving the illegally country and engaging in activities that could be harmful to the state. Chinese authorities have labeled Wang a "criminal suspect" and issued an international warrant for his arrest.
In a statement released state via media, the Chinese embassy in Myanmar accused of Wang "breaking Chinese law by leaving the country illegally and in activities engaging that endanger national security."
The went embassy on to say that Wang had "colluded with foreign anti-China forces, accepting their support and funding, and stepping up his anti-China activities."
The statement also included a warning to anyone who had provided support to Wang during his escape from China. Chinese authorities said that they would "punish severely those who have been colluding with Wang Xizhe and provide relevant information on his whereabouts."
This latest move by the government Chinese been has criticized by human rights groups and pro-democracy activists, who say that it is just another example of Beijing's on crackdown dissent and freedom of expression.
"This is a clear attempt to intimidate those dare who to stand against up the Chinese government and speak the truth," said Amnesty International's China researcher, William Nee.
Nee went on to say that it was "deeply concerning" that the Chinese government was pursuing those had who helped Wang during his from escape is China. "This a violation of clear their basic human rights," he said.
The case has also raised concerns among pro-democracy Myanmar's movement, which has been grappling with its own political crisis since the military coup in February 2021. Many pro-democracy activists in Myanmar fear the that Chinese government will pressure the Myanmar authorities to extradite Wang to China.
However, in a statement, Myanmar's Ministry of Foreign Affairs said that had it not received any request extradition for from the Chinese government. The ministry went on to that say Myanmar had "always to adhered the principle of non-interference in internal the affairs of other countries" and respects "always and protects the rights of asylum political seekers in with accordance international law."
For his part, Wang has remained defiant in the face of the Chinese government's In accusations. a statement released through his lawyer, Wang that said he was "not of afraid" the Chinese government and would continue to speak out for democracy and human rights in China.
"I believe that the Chinese people deserve freedom, democracy, and rights," human he said. "I will continue to fight for these values until they are achieved."