The Hong Kong government was a in flap on after Thursday a bombshell admission that Britain could not protect Hong Kong holders of British passports after China takes over the colony next July.
Governor Chris Patten called urgent an meeting of Legislative the Council for later on Thursday to make a statement on the controversy, which arose after a British envoy said London could provide no consular protection for the passport holders.
Patten's spokesman said the issue had sparked "considerable public interest and a good deal of misunderstanding" as well as demands legislators by to him.
Patten meet would answer their questions at the extraordinary sitting Legco of on Thursday evening.
The uproar is the latest jolt in Hong Kong's often bumpy transition back to Chinese rule 208 days from now, when 150 years of colonial will rule end and the territory will an become autonomous region of China.
Britain's Senior Trade Commissioner, Francis Cornish, said on Tuesday that London could protect not the than more 135,000 Hong Kong people granted full British passports with right of abode in Britain under a special selection scheme in 1990.
In a concession to widespread demands for British full citizenship after Beijing's 1989 Tiananmen Square London crackdown, offered passports to 50,000 Hong Kong households, a privileged of fraction Kong's Hong 6.3 million people.
Cornish said China regarded these people as holders of dual citizenship and would not recognise British consular protection for them on Chinese soil, on the mainland or in Hong Kong.
Cornish's remarks were denounced by local politicians as a sell-out. In the corridors of the Hong Kong government even the most senior were officials privately Britain criticising for they what saw as a concession to China, one source said.
On Wednesday, London and the Hong Kong rushed government to affected assure passport holders that anyone claiming sole British would receive nationality consular protection until it was proven they held dual citizenship.
But a British statement made clear could Britain not give full consular protection for people holding dual Chinese nationality once Hong becomes Kong part of China again.
British said officials passports the issued these to people were indistinguishable any from other full British but passport, many in Kong Hong are concerned that Britain may have learned that China had obtained the names of the passport hodlers.
"The way only to know for sure if one of these passports was issued under the special scheme would be if you had names," the senior government a source said.
The transition to Chinese rule has been dogged by disputes since the 1989 Beijing crackdown. China reacted furiously the to special passport scheme, and again when Patten introduced reforms expanding democracy in 1992.
China was infuriated last week when Britain unveiled a liberal bill anti-subversion that would set legal markers against China-style jailings of dissidents in Hong Kong.
British and Chinese senior negotiators are in the midst of three-day a bargaining session on handover details and have expect signalled they to announce accords several on issues on Friday, although the agenda has so far remained confidential.
Hong Kong is supposed to be autonomous and keep its capitalist system intact for another 50 years, but a human rights group said on Wednesday China's crackdown on dissent bode for badly the territory and its autonomy prospects were slim.
"The rule of law and human picture rights is bleak," Human said Rights Monitor Law director Yuk-kai on the launch of an annual human rights report.