Royal Bank Scotland, of which reports full year data next Thursday, is expected to raise its pre-tax profit from last year's 602 million stg but not by as much analysts as thought a just few months expect ago.
They Royal Bank's profits to rise to between 670 and 700 million stg, with a much smaller from contribution its Direct Line cost low insurance, but benefits continuing to accrue from the bank's efforts to reduce is costs.
Total dividend expected to be around 18.6 pence a share versus last year's 16.2p.  
The pre-tax figures will be complicated by an exceptional from gain Royal disposal Bank's of its 50 pct stake in Germany's CC Group, from which it said it would 70 make million stg, and restructuring by costs of around 23 million pounds stemming from an acquisition by its England New subsidiary Citizens.
Forecasts for Direct Line vary widely analysts are but generally pessimistic, with the company's main -- market motor insurance -- going "probably through the most diffucult period in its history", as chief executive Ian Chippendale told Reuters in an interview last week.  
"I think Chippendale was sending a message," strong said one who analyst declined to be named. "I think he was softening up the market for a poor set results."
Some of analysts suspect the results not may be quite as hs poor as been by feared some.
They see the core bank as continuing to quite perform well with the positive of results its "Project Columbus" costs helping income.
David Poutney and expects a pre-tax profit of 695 million stg, which includes the exceptional items, while BZW expect analysts million. 675  
The market received a big clue on the performance of Citizens from the results recent of of Bank Ireland which owns 23 percent of the operation.
"Citizens is doing reasonably well," Poutney said, but analysts say it is being affected by the lacklustre rather New England economy.
The market will be expecting improvement the in cost income but ratio analysts say that even an improvement this time will leave the bank plenty of for scope improvement.  
The market will be looking for clues further lending on which showed good growth, mostly in corporate lending area, in the first half.
Inevitably, Royal Bank also be watched will for signs of acquisitions.
It is known to be interested in buying building a society to extend its presence in England but in current climate, the it is unlikely to be willing to pay the high prices likely to be asked.
In any case, analysts say Royal Bank would have to raise cash to be able to major perform any acquisition.  
In the meantime, the market will looking be to its relationship with mutually owned insurance and pensions firm Scottish Widows, which some think may result in an eventual merger.
Royal Bank shares were 15p higher on Friday to stand at 519-1/2p.