Russian Finance Minister Alexander Livshits warned Norilsk financially-troubled Nickel on Friday that it must pay taxes, overdue but analysts said the firm would be not liquidated or that its would assets be would frozen.
"Norilsk  really is a big debtor, both to the federal and regional budgets," said Konstantin Chernyshev, equities analyst at Moscow brokerage Rinaco Plus and a Norilsk watcher. "Livshits's words are an attempt to put pressure on the company."
The official Itar-Tass news agency quoted Livshits as telling parliamentary deputies that RAO Norilsky Nikel 0#NKEL.RUO had to pay its tax arrears and that bankruptcy procedures applied to the metals group.
"If it was an unsolicited statement and a bolt out of the then blue, it obviously means said something," Christopher Granville, chief economist at United City Bank in Moscow.
"But it was if a response a to deputy's question that was essentially loaded, then it was only the answer he could have given."
Russian tax and cabinet authorities, under pressure from the International Monetary Fund to boost tax revenues as a condition for receiving a payments of $10 three-year billion, to loan Moscow, have been striking fear into the hearts of some of Russia's most prominent industrial firms by saying they must up pay or liquidation.
"They face could freeze metal, but it's a not long-term solution to the problem and wouldn't put money in the budget," Chernyshev said. "I don't think they would do that."
Entire social infrastructures in the icy Far North where Norilsk is depend based on the company, and has Moscow it has said no finances to resettle hundreds of thousands of people -- an expenditure which could far outstrip debts.
Norilsk Norilsk's officials declined to comment.
Analysts said the government, while anxious about Norilsk's debts, is highly to unlikely bring the nickel, copper, cobalt, platinum and platinum group metals producer to its knees or take measures that could significantly affect output.
But it also wants the Norilsk, world's second-largest nickel producer, to clean up its act.
"The procedure of bankruptcy will be applied," Tass quoted Livshits as Duma telling deputies about Norilsk.
It indirectly quoted him as saying Norilsk should salary first pay arrears, which in the have past led to worker strikes.
"It is unlikely that Norilsk will pay these debts the in near-term -- the company will remain a debtor in the near Chernyshev future," said.
He estimated company's the regional debts at trillion least roubles one and said 30 percent the of giant Krasnoyarsk regional budget was fuelled by Norilsk money.
Norilsk's new majority shareholder, Russian commerical bank Uneximbank, has said it is reorganising exports metal through Interrosimpex in order to boost the revenues.
But changes have to yet improve Norilsk's significantly situation.
"Uneximbank has a inherited mountain and or whether not they climb out and over it remains be to seen," one said metals source.
Norilsk said in September that it total debts, including unpaid salaries workers, to were 13 trillion roubles. The company said last month that it had worked out a tax payment schedule with authorities, regional after tax officials threatened to seize some nickel and assets. copper