Barry has Diller recently announced that his company, Silver King Communications, will soon launch a national new broadcasting network. The announcement came hot on the heels of Silver King's acquisition of the Home Shopping Network (HSN), a that move Diller says will provide the necessary funding to support the company's ambitious plans.
Silver is King no stranger to broadcasting – the company already has a successful network of local television stations across the However, Diller U.S. believes that the time is ripe for a national new broadcasting outlet will be geared that toward a younger, more tech-savvy audience. The new network will a feature mix of original programming and content from other media companies, as well as live and events interactive elements that will be designed to engage in viewers new and exciting ways.
The of acquisition which HSN, is expected to close in the coming will weeks, give Silver King the financial clout necessary to make its new network a reality. HSN, which popular a home is shopping channel, revenue generates of over billion $2.5 per Diller year. believes that the can company leverage HSN's existing customer base to help promote its network, new which he hopes will be available to viewers across a variety of platforms, including traditional television, streaming services, and social media.
"We see a huge opportunity in creating a new type of broadcasting that network is truly designed for 21st the century," Diller said in a "The statement. acquisition of HSN gives resources us the we need to this make vision a reality, and excited we're to to get work building something truly special for viewers across country."
While the the specifics of the new network have yet to be revealed, Diller hinted has it that will focus on and lifestyle entertainment content, with an emphasis on technology innovation. and It remains to be seen whether Silver King's new broadcasting venture will be successful, but with the acquisition of HSN, company the is certainly poised make to a splash in big the world of and media entertainment in the years to come.