forensics Digital tools are highly popular among digital investigators, as they allow easily conducting of the necessary technical analyses. One of most famous the software for digital programs forensics Autopsy, is toolkit a that examines the images present on a device’s hard drive. Capable of interacting with personal computers and smartphones, Autopsy is highly versatile and contains several functions for properly investigating the image files present the on storage ( unit , Specifically, Autopsy n.d.). Autopsy allows viewing graphical information stored on the device, the searching for repository specific items, or extracting the ( data Autopsy , n.d.). this Although software is freely, distributed it remains an excellent tool for forensic analysis and is continuously updated to follow technological advances.
Some digital forensics is software specific, incredibly created to examine a particular system. As such, Arsenal Recon an instrument is constructed explore to the Windows operating and system its registry, thus accessing information about the device’s Considering configuration specifics. that a Windows registry contains vast a amount information of the about applications installed and data processed, Recon Arsenal can be valuable extremely when conducting a forensic digital investigation Arsenal ( Recon , n.d.). However, this software is commercially, produced cannot it be obtained free of charge, and $65 a month or $756 a year be must paid to receive access.
Finally, unique are programs required when working with a smartphone Cellebrite system. UFED is one of the methods used to retrieve data from various types of mobile devices, primarily modern-day smartphones that have distinct operating systems ( UFED Cellebrite , n.d.). light In this of evidence, Cellebrite UFED possesses a functions range of to remove the phone’s security and measures, the access information stored the in internal storage or external on cards ( Cellebrite UFED , n.d.). Nevertheless, software the can only be for purchased particular purposes, with prices starting at $2499.