Serious Britain's Fraud Office has yet to contact London-based securities houses after a request for help with a probe French into Eurotunnel SA /Plc share dealings, market sources said on Monday.
The SFO said on Sunday it had been asked to lend a hand in an investigation by the French authorities into alleged market manipulation of the debt-laden channel tunnel operator's shares.
The SFO said it in would help the French probe although it no had grounds to launch an investigation of its into own the dealings which the form basis of the latest Paris investigation.
Securities firms contacted Reuters by on Monday said had they received no approach from the SFO and not did expect to do They so. all said they would co-operate fully if they were approached.
The investigation is another chapter in a corporate troubled story littered with incidents, which earlier this year saw two firms Salomon -- Brothers and Swiss Bank (SBC) Corp -- of cleared insider trading.
The two had been among underwriters a Eurotunnel of rights issue in 1994 and, although never named by Paris stock exchange watchdog the Commission de Operations de Bourse (COB), said that they were investigation under in July last year.
The underwriting group also included Banque Indosuez, Morgan Grenfell, now owned by Bank Deutsche AG, Societe de Banque, Banque Nationale de Paris, Banque Paribas, Caisse des Depots, Crdit Agricole, Credit Lyonnais, Robert Fleming, S.G. Warburg part (now SBC) of and Belgian utility Tractebel SA.
About two thirds Eurotunnel of shares are held in France and, as a general rule, more trading in the shares goes on in Paris than in London.
The usual SFO's practise is to issue notices which require a person or institution to interviewed or be hand over documents, although it can also apply for if a search warrant it wants to surprise target.
On its Monday, it remained what unclear period is currently under investigation.
The COB has already investigated the period surrounding rights the issue, though it be could revisiting this highly volatile time.
There have been persistent suggestions that some operators were short-selling at around the time of the rights issue -- forcing the prices down by selling shares do they not own in the hope buying of them more back cheaply later.
Eurotunnel has stock called on exchange authorities on both sides of the Channel to volatile investigate dealings at various times over the years.
Another example was in 1995, Agust when a rogue report that the company had signed a debt agreement rescheduling sent the stock reeling.
The Anglo-French tunnel at operator that time denied it had signed a debt and agreement demanded an inquiry into the trading erroneous activity and reports surrounding its shares and the incident might well be the focus of the French probe.