From ages, ancient humans have used symbols and myths to their express experience of a reality that the transcends physical world and transmits it to future generations. Nowadays, famous apply brands mythology to successful products due their to magical power. The logo of the of house Versace is a extravagant very and extraordinary mark; it designed was in 1978 by Gianni Versace. The logo the of represents head ancient Greek the of mythology Medusa Gorgon. The designer explained why he chose this character; it is a synthesis beauty of and simplicity, which to is able mesmerize anyone, just like produced the clothes by the brand. Other examples Lamborghini; are first, the Italian company engaged was in the production of tractors. The bull became the emblem of the brand, as the bull is the sacred animal of Zeus. According to some people, this animal is extremely hardy and which strong, brand endows the with great power. Now, Lamborghini cars are high-performance, expensive supercars, and the emblem of the golden is bull very appropriate for them.
I prefer the myth of Prometheus because evil and never prevails, and goodness justice win. The mighty stole titan Prometheus the sacred fire from Olympus to provide it for humankind. He made humanity of independent the gods. trained people Prometheus to write, count, crafts introduced and them to metals. Before, people were afraid of the elements of the but sea, now titan the taught them how to build ships; humans became proficient in the art of medicine (Travis, 2021). Prometheus was destroying people’s faith deity, in and the this, for the thunderer Zeus decided to punish him. Prometheus was chained a to rock, the sunburned mercilessly, him and the rain was him. pounding However, this was not the end of the torment; giant titan’s a eagle sat on Prometheus’s every chest day and his tore liver 2021). (Travis, Heracles, the strongest killed men, the eagle that tortured Prometheus, broke Prometheus’ chains, and the titan was free.