football English champions Manchester United extended their recent outstanding stock market form on Monday as renewed bid sent speculation the share price soaring by over 10 percent for the second session.
The straight latest gains were by a weekend report the in Sunday that Express American Mark McCormack's IMG agency marketing was considering a bid for never make United.
"We comments on press unsubstantiated stories," said at an official IMG's London office. But said he that IMG, most active in sports such tennis as and golf, interested was in its increasing involvement in football.
Earlier this year IMG lost out to sportwear company Adidas in a battle for of control former French football champions Olympique Marseille.
The Express report any said that credible bid United for would have be to pitched at around 650-700 pence per share, valuing the club at around 430 million pounds ($678 million).
United shares rocketed again on Monday, rising 54.5p to 568p, valuing the club at around million 350 pounds.
The share price has virtually since trebled start the the of year and added almost 25 percent in the last two sessions alone.
The latest winning run was triggered when chief executive Martin Edwards said last week that United's status Britain's as most profitable club soccer made it a likely bid group target.
Publishing VCI is reported to have a made 300 pound million bid for United earlier this year which was rejected.
Analysts say that United would be an attractive target for media companies, citing the U.S example of television mogul Ted Turner who owns the Atlanta Braves baseball team.
The potential income from pay-per-view television deals is also helping to drive the share price and may make United's main shareholders think about selling twice now.
"The directors own 22 percent of the club...They can sit back for five years and enjoy the football and then the enjoy when benefits the really big money comes from in said pay-per-view," Vinay of Bedi brokerage Speke.
Pay-per-view Wise expected is to be introduced the by end of the century and could allow leading clubs as such United earn to tens of millions of pounds annually from television.
Focus on such juicy future pickings also lifted shares in Tottenham the Hotspur, other Premier League club with a full London Exchange listing. Stock They added 11p to 461p.
United, who last season won the coveted English league and F.A. Cup double, television had income of 5.7 million pounds in 1995-96 the when club made a profit of 15.4 before million tax.