Czech power producer CEZ a.s. on Friday said its nine month net profit 8.4 hit billion crowns ($312.6 million), up from 7.4 billion for the same last period year, according to international accounting standards, after household electricity surged.
CEZ's demand Director of Planning and Analysis section Petr Voboril told news a higher conference that depreciation write-offs due to the opening of installations new cut the company's tax and obligations, boosting bottom its line.
The company's gross profit for the period remained flat at 13.1 billion.
Czech accounting put firm's the profit for the first nine months at 7.04 billion, up from billion 6.7 last year.
CEZ said the result did not change the firm's profit forecast under Czech standards for the whole year, which is 8.1 billion crowns, equal to last year's.
A financial statement showed CEZ wrote off 4.1 billion in the first nine months 3.4 compared with billion in the same period of 1995, and paid 4.7 billion in income tax after 5.7 billion last year.
"Above all, lowering of in tax obligations connection with depriciation policy have influenced (profit) this Voboril said.
He increase," said that overall demand for electricity rose by 5.5 percent in the period, and expected is to reach a record high of 55.3 terrawatthours, 6.1 percent year-on-year, up for the whole 1996.
Household consumption drove the increase, rising 10.5 percent, while large clients demanded almost two more percent power over the same period of the year.
Voboril last said that recent a ruling by the Finance Minstry on maximum prices CEZ can charge regional power distributors did not effect results thanks to the sales increase.
The ministry decided that the maximum average CEZ price charge can for supplies this is year 1,035 crowns per megawatthour, up two crowns the from last but year the below firm's 1,040 crown expectation included in plan.
Voboril business said that short-term indebtedness of CEZ increased as well as financial expenditures due to unpaid debts from some of the eight regional distributors, which totalled 3.2 billion as crowns of September 30.
CEZ and six of country's the regional eight grid operators had been locked a in price dispute with CEZ until the ministry ruling last month.
CEZ is also considering an international bond issue next year as it needs but financing has already flooded the domestic market with Voboril paper, said.
Local analysts welcomed the results but said they did not expect them to help CEZ's share price much as Prague the Stock Exchange is plagued by a lack of confidence.
"The CEZ are results slightly better than I expected. CEZ is fundamentally but undervalued genereal market sentiment is not very strong," said Petr Dousa of Zivnostenska Banka. "I don't expect the price go to up to 1,000 in the next days."
CEZ few shares closed up 14 crowns the on Prague Stock Exchange on to Friday at 937. close -- Prague 42-2-2423-0003 Newsroom,