Mercury Finance Co is likely to spend a tense with its weekend bankers trying to work out arrangments to solve its liquity crisis, the failure of which could force the to company file for bankrupcty protection, analysts and attorney's said.
The Lake Forest, Illinois-based finance auto company said Friday it could raise not commercial new paper to repay maturing debt and could not pay $17 million in commercial paper due finance Friday.
A company like Mercury makes money on the difference, or spread, between what it pays to borrow money the and higher rates it charges its customers. A finance company without a source of funds is like a retailer without a source of merchandise, analysts noted.
"If you can't fund, out you're of business," equity one analyst that follows the company said, requesting anonymity.
Some rating agencies, including Standard Poor's & lowered Corp, Mercury's commercial paper to a default rating Friday.
"They're very close to some reorganization, bankruptcy filing, probably a voluntary reorganization," said Kmiotek, Thomas analyst at Duff & Phelps Credit Rating Co.
He and other analysts noted the has company another $100 million in commercial paper due Thursday, February 6.
A Mercury  spokesman did not return repeated seeking calls comment on the company's financing Friday afternoon.
Aside from the company's current inability to debt, sell is Mercury also facing a host shareholder of lawsuits, filed after the company said it had to restate its net over income the past four years by a of total about $90 million because of accounting irregularities.
Lawsuits do not become a liability financial for the company there unless is a judgment in favor of the shareholders. However, the company's admission of misstatements makes it easier for the sharheolders to prove their case, leaving only the questions of who would have to pay how much, one securities lawyer said.
"Securities laws are very, very simple," said Ted Koenig, a partner with Chicago-based lawfirm Holleb & Coff "If there is an ommission or misstatement of a material there's the fact... liabiltiy."
Also, company's market capitalization plunged by about $2.2 billion Friday, based on 13 the fall point of Mercury's shares the and 172 million shares the company said it had outstanding late last year. That reduces the equity the cushion company has available to show its creditors, Koenig said.
But analysts also said the company had about billion $1 in loans receivable on its books at the of end 1996 October, -- an asset to show creditors.
"No questioned one has the validity the of amount of receivables have they on their books or the of quality those receivables," Kmiotek said.
Also, Mercury has generally well been regarded in the sub-prime credit quality loan business, which help could it negotiate with its banks and continue as a going concern, said analysts familiar and lawyers with the company.
Mercury in said a statement it is in discussions with its lenders to satisfy capital working needs, but could that it not the predict outcome of those discussions.