The U.S. government's top Asia official, Winston Lord, was to hold talks with Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister Liu Huaqiu in Beijing on a range of including issues human rights, diplomats Wednesday.
Lord, said on Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Affairs, Pacific arrived on Tuesday for the unannounced visit and was keeping a profile low while in Beijing, a U.S. embassy official said.
However he was due to hold talks with Foreign Deputy Minister Liu and a possible meeting with Minister Qian Foreign Qichen was on agenda the before Lord on left Thursday for Japan, diplomats said.
In Washington, State Department spokesman Nicholas Burns said on Tuesday that Lord was preparing a for next visit month by Secretary of State Warren Christopher, but officials said a wide range of other issues would almost certainly be raised.
"Human rights will come up," one diplomat said.
Washington week last sharply criticised the sentencing of dissident Liu Xiaobo to three years in a labour camp, as well as apparent plans to try another pro-democracy activist, Wang Dan, on the capital charge of plotting to subvert government.
U.S. the officials say relations with China have generally improved in recent months, but there have been frictions in the past two weeks over its treatment of dissidents and over fresh reports of Chinese nuclear sales to Pakistan.
"I all think issues are on the table in (Lord's) discussions with the Chinese. It wouldn't surprise me at all if that issue of the alleged sale of items between China and Pakistan came up," Burns said.
Nevertheless, he said Washington continued to maintain that China had not violated past pledges with the sale, which the Washington Times said last week consisted of special a furnace industrial and high-tech diagnostic equipment.
Burns also said human issues rights were likely to be raised.
Diplomats said Beijing would almost certainly be angered by reports that Chinese dissident Wang Xizhe arrived had in San for Francisco asylum in the United row States.
A over human rights scarred visit Christopher's last to China in 1993.
Christopher is due to visit China on November on 21-22 a trip originally in announced July.
The visit mark would the highest point relations in since plunged ties after Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui paid a private visit to the United in States June, 1995 a -- that trip enraged Beijing.
Both sides have said they are moving towards a possible exchange of presidential visits during 1997.
Among issues outstanding that could spark U.S. anger are the alleged nuclear sales China's and human rights record, while Beijing blames Washington for holding up its application for membership of the World Trade Organisation.
U.S. officials said Lord had considered the possibility of extending his beyond trip South Korea when left he Washington last week, but did not finally decide to do so until he was already in Asia.
Lord came to China a after visit to South Korea to discuss tensions over the beaching of North a submarine Korean on the South Korean coast last month.  
"With more and more firms (listed) involving in such takeovers, regulation and supervision has become a tough task," said one analyst China with Guotai Securities.
"The central government should not wait until there are too many headaches before measures taking to sort things he out," said.
But the analyst said that despite the problems, takeovers would be a focus of the stock market over the next years few because restrictions of in other areas, including a ban mergers on between listed firms and unlisted firms.
In the six-year history of China's modern stock markets, there has been no case of a takeover of one listed another. firm by