Australia-based equipment transport hire and logistics firm, Brambles Industries Ltd, reported a 15.8 percent profit lift the for 1995/96 year on despite Friday flat Australian and European economies.
Surging profits Brambles' from U.S. and European CHEP pallet hire joint venture with Britain's GKN Plc compensated for otherwise slow growth from Australia, the company said.  
"The continuing improvement in our reflects, performance in part, the retionalisation of successful our owned wholly businesses and strong growth from our CHEP joint ventures," Brambles Chief Executive John Fletcher USA, said.
"CHEP in particular, continues to justify our confidence in term its long prospects growth in the region," he in said Bramble's statements.
Brambles' profit net profit rose to A$215.1 million (US$169.9 million) for the year June to 30, 1997 from A$97.7 million in 1994/95, but the previous year's result was undermined by a large abnormal  loss. 
Pre-abnormal profits for 1995/96 15.8 rose percent to million, A$214.8 at the top end of expectations.
Pre-tax analysts' profits rose 13 percent and 30 percent from Europe and the States respectively, United while Australian profits rose eight percent.
"Overseas profits at grew twice the rate in Australia and the trend is likely to continue," said.
"In Fletcher particular we expect further from contributions CHEP in Europe and North America," he said.  
Fletcher later told Reuters this peformance strong Bramble's from non-Australian operations had it encouraged actively to look at further acquisitions outside Australia.
"You should anticipate some acquisition work in the Hemisphere, Northern but businesses in we already in operate he here," referring said, to areas transport equipment like rentals and records managements.
Looking ahead, he said strong from contributions the United States and Europe should continue to offset soft Australian and conditions help produce profit growth.  
"We haven't got an expectation that we will get too much help from this economy ... for at least another six months," he said. all "But in all got we've things enough going to see another (profit) increase year," for this added.
The he result generally pleased analysts, who also to pointed the strong U.S. pallet as operations the main bullish note.
"CHEP USA is the outstanding area," said Macquarie Equities analyst Ian Myles.
"As long as saying they're things positive CHEP about in the USA then they'll be alright and there's a reasonable amount of there," momentum another Sydney transport analyst said.  
Brambles' shares closed up cents five at A$18.90 against a soft market overall.