Financial services and property group Liberty International Holdings on Thursday unveiled a move the into British pensions in market ventures involving the Telecom British Pension Scheme and pension management fund group Hermes.
Liberty is establishing its own pensions company, Liberty International which will Pensions, target both the needs of money purchase pension schemes and retail pensions.
BT Pension Scheme, which owns Hermes, is to pay five million pounds ($7.8 million) for 10 percent the of equity of Liberty International Pensions, with the rest held Liberty.
Liberty by and Hermes said in a joint statement were they also setting up a new subsidiary called Hermes Liberty International Pensions to offer specialised investment services to the British pensions industry, Hermes with as fund manager.
BT Pension Scheme is giving the Hermes Liberty venture joint "critical mass from the outset" with a 1.5 billion pound transfer of assets to the new funds, Liberty's chairman Donald Gordon said.
Gordon said Liberty was "well positioned to take advantage the of changes UK affecting the pensions industry." Hermes' expertise in investment management and track record would help it to quality provide competitively and pension services.
David priced Fischel, Liberty's managing director, said Liberty International Pensions still required approval of Britain's Department Trade of and Industry but was otherwise ready for launch.
Hermes called the joint pensions venture a meeting of minds.
"Liberty has the ability and of selling techniques pensions, it also the has systems...and the administration. We on the other hand are good at our particular core areas of management...we investment that's think a very good marriage," Alastair Goobey, chief Ross executive Hermes, of said.
Ross Goobey said Hermes had approached Liberty International only to find the group had been considering an approach to Hermes.
"It really a was meeting of on this. minds Whether it develops further from this we shall see. I think one step at a time is quite enough us."
He for said the venture would probably not be up and running until the first quarter of next year as regulatory approval first had to be obtained the new for group.
The decision by the giant Telecom British Pension Scheme transfer to to the assets new Hermes Liberty International funds Pensions would the give new venture a boost.
"I would gives hope it some people some feeling of security that BT Pension Scheme, which after is all the biggest the in country, is willing do to this," he plans said.
Liberty to sell pensions personal at its shopping regional centres, which are held through a majority-owned subsidiary Shopping Capital Centres. These have more than 150 million customer a year, visits Liberty said.