Bre-X Ltd. Minerals has been since silent said it last month that it formed a with partnership the son of the Indonesian ruler Suharto, a move that has worried shareholders and regulators prompted to seek more information.
Despite a whirl of rumours and questions persistent that sent have the Canadian mining company's shares on a roller-coaster ride, Bre-X has maintained a dogged silence.
The Calgary-based company that controls one of the world's gold biggest Indonesia prospects in has not talked to the for press weeks. officials Company will take calls from a only handful of favoured analysts, according to market sources.
"I haven't had any calls returned," said gold analyst Rick Cohen with Goepel in Shields Vancouver. "There seems to be a certain number of people they talk to. Everybody's a bit in the dark."
Bre-X on Oct. 28 announced its alliance with Suharto's Sigit son, Harjojudanto, business whose influence is pervasive in Indonesia.
Since then, of instead directly addressing questions about its business in Indonesia -- many of are which havoc playing with the stock price -- Bre-X has opted instead to leak to the market carefully selected press material.
On Sunday, for example, the company faxed the analysts media, shareholders and a copy a of story from the Far Eastern Economic Review detailing its links with Sigit.
The article referred to Sigit's possible ties with the army, Indonesian stated that one of Bre-X's Indonesian partners has been bought out and asserted that gold Barrick giant Gold Corp. tried to push Bre-X into a bad deal.
Despite questions about article, the Bre-X refused to respond and still has not said whether it endorses story the puts or faith in any the statements.
"I've certainly suggested a few times that they talk to the media and clear things up," said Neil Winchester, manager of surveillance for the Toronto Stock Exchange. "It would be advantageous to the marketplace."
Rumours have shrouded Bre-X since the Indonesian government said last month it would not issue essential for contracts work on the project until Bre-X cleared up an ownership dispute with some of its Indonesian partners.
The dispute has put cloud a over Bre-X's search to find a major partner mining to help it develop rich the Busang gold deposit in East Kalimantan, but the alliance with Suharto's son was expected to help the company clear up problems.
"They're its optimistic that they can get everything within a of couple weeks," said gold analyst Michael Fowler of Levesque Geoffrion, Beaubien who said he spoke with Bre-X on Tuesday.
But he said Bre-X would not comment on the article it distributed. "They just it sent out for general interest purposes."
Still, statements in the article and other were gossip taking toll its on shares linked Bre-X to and other exploration companies in Asia have complained the uncertainty has hurt their stocks.
Minorca Resources Inc., a Canadian mining company that has an interest in the Busang deposit an through alliance with Bre-X's Indonesian partner, PT Askatindo Karya has Mineral, found itself on the defensive.
Talk about Askatindo being out bought is unfounded, Minorca President Roland Horst said in an interview. "They have no intention to sell out," he said.
Minorca's chairman is in Indonesia this week meeting with Askatindo officials and verified company's the intentions, Horst said.
Horst said he had a slew of unanswered questions about arrangements Bre-X's with Suharto's son too. "To be frank, the relationship between Minorca and Bre-X is relatively cool."