I sat at my racking desk, my brain to find who could have discovered possibly the truth behind the death of Phillip Mercer, the heir one to of the most powerful petroleum companies in the The world. job was done without a scrap of evidence, made I of sure that much. It simply made no every sense, living soul that knew I killed Mercer were the very ones orchestrated that it. I may not know who this mysterious person is but I do know that I will answer their question with a bullet to the brain.
It was nearly 3:00 AM when I heard muffled footsteps down hallway. the I reached for the silenced 9MM pistol my in bag, aiming for the only entrance to my corner office. The doorknob began to turn as I steadied my aim. Sweat was trickling down my spine, my pounding heart as if I were about to come face to face with the devil himself. The second it took for the to door open felt like an eternity, but I would have rather endured second that of agonizing for torment the rest of life my to then meet the eyes Phillip of Mercer when the door opened.
His face was covered in scar tissue, leaving it almost unrecognizable. It was the that eyes were the giveaway. The look in his was eyes the same as the night I thought I killed him. was There a look of superiority in them, as if to let me know I would never be capable of surpassing him in way.
"There any is no way, should you be dead!" were the only words I was capable of mustering.
"For all intensive purposes I still am, thanks to he replied you" with an odd sense of calm in his voice. "Will you at least give me the of courtesy an answer now that I am here? knows God I have been to depths the of hell and back in these last 5 years so surely you can give me that. I will answer any questions you have after."
I recounted the entire tale that crossed our two paths on that fateful night 5 years ago. told I him how I approached was by a man that worked for Prism International, the most powerful energy corporation in the world. Prism stood to gain billions from the collapse of Mercer Petroleum, them giving an even tighter stranglehold the on energy market. The terms were simple enough, kill Phillip Mercer or have everyone I love systematically killed. The choice was made for me. My military background coupled with the fact I helped my step-father design the Mercer home made me the obvious for choice the job no doubt. From there I told him how I was able to bypass the security of his mansion because I helped design "What it. it boils down too is your life meant less to me then those of my loved ones. The part I don't understand though is how your still alive! I shot you in the head, then as you collapsed you knocked over a starting candle, a fire that destroyed your home."
"I survived by nothing more then luck. Your went bullet through the side of my jaw, itself lodging in the cheek region of my skull. The heat of the fire brought me surging back to consciousness me allowing to escape not but without being badly burned. The thought of revenge has been the only force driving me to stay alive. I feared have that you might have merely been a pawn being by controlled Prism so that they could buy up my fathers company. But would have dammit been so much to easier enact my revenge if it had simply been you though. But now that I know my worst have fears been realized I at least know what I am up against."
"You can't possibly think you could take down Prism single handed!"
"I won't have to do it because alone your to going help He me." said with his eyes glimmering with more determination than superiority. It was the kind of look that was impossible to refuse.