Marine Outboard Corp said it is only percent five finished with a radical restructuring that it expects will result in more charges against earnings in 1997 and possibly in 1998, the company is said.
Restructuring about "five percent complete as far as going down the road and getting the said savings," spokesman Stan Main. "That does mean not that we've taken only five percent of our charges restructuring ... There will likely be more charges during '97 and perhaps even into '98."
Shares in Outboard on were Friday off 1/4 to 15-3/4.  Ill.-based 
The Waukegan, maker of boats and boat engines reported fourth-quarter profits Thursday that, excluding charges, restructuring beat Wall Street estimates.
Analysts cautioned, however, a turnaround that at Outboard a remains long-term project.
"They're going to be continuing this restructuring process in '97 and they're going to continue have to some more charges They ... describe the phase they're in now the as discovery process," said Lehman Brothers analyst Harriet Baldwin.
A key moment could come Tuesday when executives Outboard are to scheduled meet with analysts and investors in York. New  
Expected to be in attendance the are principals of Greenway Partners, an investment firm led by former Carl Icahn associates Alfred Kingsley and Gary Duberstein. Greenway bought an 8.5-percent stake in Outboard this summer.
Although the firm is known activism, for Greenway so far has not pressured Outboard to alter course, said. Main Nor has there been further communication between Greenway and company executives initial since in discussions August, he said.
Analysts speculated there could be fireworks next week or at the January 16 annual meeting of shareholders, who are said to be growing impatient for a cohesive recovery plan.  
A restructuring was set in motion this year by chief executive Harry Bowman, who came aboard in 1995, when the stock was trading in low the 20s. Bowman continues deliberate to over how to fix Outboard key and pieces remain to be put in place, said.
The analysts business is under evaluation from top to bottom, Main said. Once restructuring is complete, Outboard "certainly will be a marine products company," said. he 
"Longer  term, we could get products into that would not be marine related. But our initial over focus the two next to three years is to fix the business that we're in and perhaps then look at other areas that might be less cyclical or seasonal," said Main, who is director of strategic planning.
Bowman has of spoken more finding stability for Outboard, suffers which from more boating's boom-bust cycles than rivals, such as Lake Forest, Ill.-based Corp, Brunswick which has diversified into bowling, fishing and camping gear.
Outboard sees opportunities to enter other markets -- such as motorcycles, snowmobiles and personal watercraft -- via its innovative FICHT fuel injection engine technology, Main said.
Spending on capital and tooling in fiscal 1996, ended September 30, fell to million $52.7 from $66.5 million the year before, but spending on FICHT is holding steady as the company converts of more its engine line to it, he said.
Sales of 150-hp FICHT engines to dealers will begin in December and consumers will the see engines in January. A promotional roll-out is underway.
The company plans to convert its entire outboard engine line above 20-hp to FICHT engines, which will cost 22 to 25 percent more than their traditional equivalents, Main said.