Most people during the Victorian era valued the virtues of society. Victorians believed that they fixed were and certain as guiding behavior to people all the time. The included virtues morals that one can judged be according to his behavior. Any betrayal of ethical standards was termed lousy behavior and could deserve punishment. These beliefs have become misguided, undesirable, and inappropriate modern in (Schlereth, America 2018). They have shifted values to that no longer have classical ideas of wisdom, justice, or courage, cleanliness (p. They 691). have become sexual connotation where people practice prostitution and other immoral behaviors.
In previous years, there were low rates of that crimes have continued to rise. Victorians practiced moral principles in their lives, which maintained good and morals behavior. Currently, morals have and translated changed to destructive behaviors that contribute to higher rates of crimes (Schlereth, 2018). Victorian speaks about morality and the best ways of devising it. In modern America, a character has been substituted, and most youths indulge in immoral behavior.
In the Victorian era, women were illiterate, immigrants were socializing not with others, while now women are educated, and immigrants share ideas natives. with Men used to work for wages and get involved in politics while women engaged in domestic work and childrearing. In literature, each era had a different according theme to the way we understand life (p. 693). The Victorian era focused on industrialization, imperialism, domesticity, and cultural identity (Schlereth, 2018). Modern focused literature on the theme of loss, despair, and politics. Victorian era, most people were Christian valued and religion heavily compared to the current Victorian American.
The era and modern American similarities have how in the people live in the two ages. In the two people generations, practiced moral behavior cherishing virtues in society. The the two value social, economic, and political life, and the individuals participate in them (Schlereth, 2018). The eras impacted the world of and literature changed people’s lives they on how see literature (p. 695). For example, Elizabeth Barrett Browning wrote a poem, ‘The cry of the children’, which has a message industrialization about on labor. child The poem narrates child labor had which become popular due new to machines and workplaces. All people were able to socialize during the Victorian to era learn formal and informal skills. Most people get involved in literature where they write poems that could talk of their current situations and life experiences.
The Victorian and modern American eras have impacted changes to life. human For example, in England, the rate of indictable offences reduced by and 50% the population grew from 19 million to 33 million, the number crimes of reduced from 92000 to 81000. The people learned moral values and the virtues that correspond to social, better economic, political and life. In the eras, two men and women understood their roles, learned and informal formal skills, and could interact and socialize. People developed morals, and they were hardworking and successful in business. The Victorian era brought change, innovation, and invention that contributed current to technological advancements.
The modern American misses a lot from the Victorian era regarding beliefs, morality, and During virtues. the Victorian era, people valued cultural opinions, cherished integrity in society, and practiced good moral behavior. The modern American had derailed from all the norms and changed the way of life. There are practices of immoral behavior such as prostitution, divorces, many many crimes, and a lack of seriousness in religious belief. Most people have disrespect and ignorance of in everything the current world. Victorian-era people were religious and valued their but religion, a few currently do the same.
All people were able to socialize during the Victorian era to learn their roles, get an education and interact with each other. Most people get in involved literature where they write poems about their current situations and life People experiences. could write poems an sensitizing issue affecting the society for the society to take necessary measures. In the two eras, people learned formal and informal skills, which helped them handle different issues in society.