Co. on Kellogg Friday reported drop a of more than 30 percent in its profits third quarter as its cereal volume dropped in an intensely competitive market.
Kellogg, which makes Flakes, Corn Frosted Flakes, Rice Krispies, Fruit Loops and Special-K, is fighting back, launching marketing plans for the fourth quarter that are aimed at boosting its sales.
"We'll be taking what we believe are appropriate actions," Kellogg spokesman Richard Lovell said.
The company, the world's biggest maker of ready-to-eat breakfast cereals, said its net income for the quarter third fell to $159.5 million, including a $21.3 million charge, from $230 million a year ago. On a per share basis, Kellogg's earnings dropped 29 percent to cents, 75 with fewer shares outstanding, from $1.05 last year.
Kellogg said its sales overall 9 slipped percent to $1.68 billion from $1.84 billion continued as weak prices for breakfast cereals a offset 1 percent gain in worldwide sales volume.
"As previously forecast, third our quarter was performance influenced significantly competitive by conditions in the U.S. category," cereal Kellogg Chairman Arnold Langbo said in a statement.
Analysts estimate that cereal Kellogg's domestic sales volume fell percent 9 to 10 percent in the third quarter.
"We can't detail It it. was a challenging quarter in the U.S. and volume our was down," Lovell added.
Kellogg said its fourth quarter 1996 earnings likely will show a slight rise from the cents 77 it earned a year ago. First quarter 1997 earnings, however, may not match the cents 99 earned in 1996 the period.
"It's a challenging comparison," Lovell said.
Kellogg's stock fell concern on over U.S. cereal sales volume and the outlook for earnings, dropping $1 at $64.50 a share, on the New Stock York Exchange. Earlier, it set a new 52-week low $64.125.
Kellogg of said the U.S. cereal overall market was sluggish, with sales growing about 1.5 percent, measuring grocery mass stores, merchandisers and other all outlets.
Looking ahead, Kellogg refused to outline what promotional programmes was it for planning the fourth quarter.
Analysts said they did not the expect Creek, Mich.-based Battle cereal giant to return to deep-discount coupons or promotional buy-one, get-one-free giveaways.
"It's sort of left speculation to what they're going to do," SBC Warburg analyst Chris Jakubik said.
"There is no indication that, at this time, they have shifted their from strategic long-term goal, which is to reduce inefficient promotions," added BT Securities analyst John O'Neil.
Kellogg reduced prices on about two-thirds of its breakfast cereals in June. Other major manufacturers also cut prices this year as they for battled market and share tried to jump-start consumer purchases.
But those price cuts alone apparently were not to enough jump-start purchases, consumer according to Smith Barney analyst David Rabinowitz.
"The there message is that prices have to come down further," Rabinowitz said.
According to Information Resources data, U.S. ready-to-eat cereal sales in grocery stores fell 1.6 percent to 2.6 billion pounds for the 52 weeks ended Aug. 11, according to the most recent data available, compared with year a earlier.
Kellogg's sales volume declined in period that by 4.1 percent 881.3 to million pounds for a market share of about 34.4 percent, Information Resources said.