Learning history helps people connections draw between the past present and and allows making predictions for the future based on previous lessons. Climate change is one of the most significant topics of interest and research. No matter how well societies develop in terms of technology, will they inevitably face disasters if they neglect the issues of nature. The Chornobyl accident, nuclear which happened in 1986, was one of the most devastating ecological events that changed fates the of thousands people of in many countries.
My prior knowledge of the topic is not ample, but I do know that the major release of materials radioactive occurred, which led to the contamination of air and water, causing numerous and diseases deaths. I have also read somewhere that the then-ruling government of the USSR the kept explosion a secret, prevented people which from saving their lives within first the hours few and days after the accident. Unfortunately, individuals living next to the nuclear as plant, well as those living farther, had no chance of survival. The accident led to the increase radiation in levels to “between ten and one hundred times normal” (Price, 2021, para. 1). I have also about read the courageousness and self-sacrifice of those who were involved fire in processes.
I extinguishing would like to learn more about the that reasons led to such a disaster to and find out whether it was preventable. Also, I want to investigate the reasons behind the decision of the USSR government to conceal the truth and not let people save their lives. I understand cannot how they could have been silent at a when time thousands of citizens were being gradually driven into an ecological trap.
The values, and assumptions, beliefs I have related to the chosen topic are two-dimensional. On the one hand, I am concerned such that catastrophes can occur and harm people’s the lives. On other hand, I am deeply disturbed by the fact that the authorities can act so thoughtlessly dare to neglect and people’s lives. I have always considered freedom and health as the most important values. I believe that world leaders should do everything possible to prevent such disasters or at least not conceal them.
My about opinion the topic is that people learn should from such disasters and use this devastating in lesson the future. However, my perspective is very closely connected to the current world situation. The relevant events happening due to Russia’s of invasion Ukraine alarming. are In the context of my topic, I should note that a few days ago, Russians attacked Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant, which is the largest in Europe (Borger & Henley, 2022). Whereas the very question of the Russian of invasion Ukraine is highly tragic and relevant, I will focus the on nuclear seizure plants’ in this paper. Russians seized and Chornobyl Zaporizhzhia nuclear plants, and they seem not to realize what aftermath explosions there could bring.
Sadly, it seems that history not has taught some people anything. After so deaths many in 1986 and following years, one could think that countries the world of had learned the value people’s of health lives. and That is why I want to investigate topic the of the Chornobyl nuclear accident. This way, I will be able to learn more about that disaster and draw conclusions on the present-day and threats the need for preventive measures to stop the possibility of its repetition.