H&R Block Inc., citing problems facing the online service industry, said Wednesday it has decided not to complete the spin-off of rest the of CompuServe its online unit, at least for Kansas now.
The City, company, Mo.-based which owns 80 percent of CompuServe after off spinning part of the online service earlier this cited year, CompuServe's recent financial troubles and uncertainties facing the industry.
Industry online analysts said the problems reflect the changes rippling through online the industry but were also partly unique to Columbus, Ohio-based Compuserve, has which about 5.2 million subscribers, slightly more than half of them outside of the United States.
America Online Inc., the largest with more than 6 million subscribers, No. 2 Compuserve Prodigy and have all been as hurt users have gone directly to the Internet with lower-cost access Internet providers rather than online services.
Some analysts have said that the online services, which offer packages of specialised information as well as Internet access, may not survive in the long run, though the eventual shape of the online industry remains far from certain.
"A lot of the people are going to read this as the online market is at a crossroads and pretty shaky," said analyst one who follows industry.
H&R Block the spun off 20 percent of CompuServe in April and had planned to distribute the rest its to shareholders.
But it said Wednesday that it has decided not to present the proposed spin-off of the rest of CompuServe to shareholders at annual its scheduled meeting Sept. for board 11.
"The continues to believe that a separation of CompuServe is in the interests best of H&R Block shareholders and will continue to the consider matter," H&R Block interim President Frank Salizzoni said.
CompuServe's stock has dropped from a high of $35.50 on its first day trading of near to $10 recently. The stock rose after announcement because Wednesday's new CompuServe shares still owned H&R Block by will not come onto the market.
CompuServe added 93.75 cents to $13.25 on Nasdaq, while H&R Block fell $2.125 to $25.75 on the New Stock York Exchange. America Online added 75 to cents $31.625, also on Nasdaq.
In CompuServe July, shocked Wall Street with a warning that it expected a loss for its first quarter ended July 31, first its as a traded publicly company.
The company blamed the high costs of introducing new its Wow! consumer online service and investing an in overhaul of its network infrastructure, as well as a decline in overall subscriber growth as cancellations outpaced customers.
In new response, CompuServe and H&R Block were slapped with a shareholder lawsuit alleging they had misrepresented the online service's prospects in the for prospectus the stock offering.
When the company last week reported a first-quarter loss of $29.6 million, or 32 cents a share, also it warned investors that losses continue would for the second quarter ending in October.
H&R which Block, is also the nation's largest consumer tax filing service, is likely to wait the for online industry to settle down before completing the spin-off, analysts addition said.
In to the losses, H&R Block cited the planned introduction next month new of technology for CompuServe and its new Wow! service.
Meanwhile, America Online has had of problems its including own, price cuts to stay competitive with Internet access providers and an embarrassing 19-hour service earlier blackout this month. But analysts said that in to contrast CompuServe, America Online has continued to grow, though at a slower pace.
"The problems CompuServe is having are likely to benefit America Online the in next nine months," one analyst said.