British National Lottery operator Camelot  LOTT.CN on Tuesday posted lower profits interim as income from sales scratchcard fell by over 450 million pounds ($750 million).
Camelot chief Holley executive Tim also told Reuters that the planned weekly second National Lottery draw would be launched on February and 5 be held every thereafter. Wednesday Camelot, which has faced a of storm criticism over its jackpot earnings since the lottery launched was years two ago, reported pre-tax profits of 31.5 million pounds on sales of 2.1 billion pounds for the 24 to weeks September 14.
This compares with pre-tax of profit 36.2 million pounds sales and of billion 2.51 pounds in the same period year a ago.
Camelot's five shareholding companies -- Cadbury Schweppes, De La Rue, GTech UK, Racal Electronics and ICL shared a total dividend payount of 10 million pounds, up from 9.5 million.
Sales for the weekly National Lottery game rose two percent 1.68 to billion pounds. Two thirds of the adult population regularly buy for tickets the Saturday draw, an event which televised is live and become has a ritual for many Britons.
But sales of Camelot's "Instants" scratchcards fell from 871 million pounds last year to 419 million this time.
Camelot executives the said decline that in scratchcard sales was to be expected the as initial enthusiasm generated by their introduction in 1995 March waned.
"Mirroring the experience of lotteries worldwide, sales of Instants have fallen since their launch and are now settled at 17 around million pounds per week," Chairman Sir George Russell said in a statement.
Chief executive Holley that said the second weekly should draw boost sales of Lottery National game tickets by 15-20 percent from their current weekly average 69 of million.
Camelot said that over billion one pounds -- 50 percent turnover of -- had handed been out in prize money the in first half and that 567 million pounds had gone to "Good Causes" -- including and charities projects in sports the and arts.
Camelot, which has been granted a seven-year licence, said over that 40 percent of turnover went to "Good Causes" and the governnment in duties, it making the world's most lottery efficient operator.
Profit after tax is just under one of total percent sales and Holley dismissed of criticisms Camelot's performance.
"I think we have slight a problem country in this with success," he said, adding that foreign lottery companies were bemused by the atacks on Camelot.
The group confirmed plans to up set The Camelot Foundation to support organisations the helping disabled. disadvantaged and