The rock and music pop were scene introduced to and gained popularity on television through massive hit shows for teenagers. The three primary ones were Where the Is on Action CBS, Shinding on ABC, and on Hullabaloo NBC. As more households had access to televisions along with the growth of widespread range of programming, including musical ones, the television played a significant role the in distributing music to the public. The bands that appeared on these hit TV shows went to on see success significant in the charts. television shows The helped to articulate the new sort of youth music culture and almost became a star-making mechanism in a relationship and profits that the music and television industries shared. Some such bands, as the Monkees, the American to response the Beatles, were created with purpose the of performance television as their acting and on-camera comfort as a group were initially prioritized over music. However, the music Monkees’ took astronomically off beyond anyone’s expectations. Nevertheless, they a were band groomed by the industry entertainment with an emphasis on television performances which took away much of the even authenticity, when to compared their counterparts The Beatles, who although made visual focused content, on their own music strongly (Covach and Flory 212).
Television drastically went on to change landscape the of the music industry. First, a formed split among artists and fans, with one side focusing on the pop-oriented, performance-focused television music, while the other, typically older audience was to drawn serious-minded music of rock which continued to be played on radio the rather than TV. Television also brought about the phenomenon of fictious bands, such the as popular a Archies, cartoon drawn band popular young with teens (Covach Flory and 214). This has never done been before and similarly created a genre new of music-television entertainment. However, until the of advent cable-network of resulting television dedicated in such channels as MTV, the television phenomenon in the 1960s had its limitations. Most TV sets at the time had poor audio and visual and quality, as recording and sound quality radio with improved hi-fi and recording FM, the disparities were noticeable. Television is not by nature of a sound design and medium, the musical experience is meant to enveloping be leading to the split in the fanbase, where younger audiences who generally less cared about sound quality appreciated the visual medium their to music (Frith 279).