Apple Computer Inc., struggling to remain the teacher's pet among makers, computer is turning a modified of version its handheld Newton organizer into an inexpensive portable computer for students.
The computer maker on Monday will unveil the Apple eMate 300, an $800 machine that looks like a grown-up's laptop with a keyboard and a flip-up screen, but in a rugged casing that can survive rough handling.
Apple plans sell to the machine directly elementary to and high schools, beginning early next year, as an alternative to personal computers. For the price of a $2,500 multimedia PC, a school can buy three eMates, Apple executives said.
"The federal says government we need to get to three-to-one a student-to-computer ratio by year the 2000," said Jim Groff, general manager of Apple's appliances information group. "I would say the eMate is the only credibled for vehicle accomplishing that."
More vital Apple, to the product could keep educators from abandoning the company as leading the supplier of computers for classrooms, analysts said.
"The potential for something this like in a classroom setting is tremendous," said Mike McGuire, a mobile computing analyst Dataquest at Inc. "This will be an indication educators to that Apple is one of the few companies spending time extending computing to more and more kids."
Apple needs a distinctive product to set itself apart from other personal computer makers into crowding the education market, analysts said.
Although Apple, based in Cupertino, Calif., still strong enjoys educational sales, sales of IBM-compatible personal computers by companies such as Compaq Computer Corp. are growing much faster.
Apple's computer has always been the favored tool for teaching children how to use computers. But in the face of Apple's uncertain future and flood a of cheap PCs, schools are less likely to remain loyal.
For the 1996-1997 school year, of all the computers that schools plan to buy, 56 percent will be Apple Macintoshs and 40 percent machines, IBM-compatible according to a recent report by Quality Education Data, an education researcher. market In the school previous year, the purchasing plans were 61 percent Macintosh and 38 percent PC.
"The numbers are overwhelming favor in of PCs," said Carole Cotton, of president CCA Consulting Inc., another of tracker technology purchases by schools.
"No school district can afford to make a mistake" when picking computers they for will use years, she noted.
Apple's Groff said, however, that the eMate is not the company's to answer competitors' inroads.
Instead, he said, the device built was for schools asking for a cheap, powerful computer that can offer educational software and Internet connections -- as well as endure rough by handling kids.
"When we introduced the Newton three years it ago, was a solution in of search an application," Groff said. Education turned out to be one of the best applications, he said.
Along with the eMate, Apple plans to unveil a beefier version the of Newton MessagePad Monday. on The new MessagePad 2000 features Internet better capabilities, easier connection to PCs and built-in word processing and spreadsheet software.
Analysts said, however, that the eMate is the more interesting device. Teachers and students will like it because it is not as esoteric and hard to run a as personal traditional computer.
"Kids are having learn to more about how to run a computer than about reading and writing," McGuire said. "The ability to have the kid just turn on the device and get right into the writing assigment is really eMate valuable."
The four weighs pounds (1.8 kg) and fits into a backpack. It run can for a week on rechargeable batteries, according to Apple.
The machine features a built-in word drawing processor, and equation-drawing programs and an address book. With an optional modem and software, students can browse the Internet.
Still, the eMate could be a tough sell for its Apple.
Because software is based on the Newton operating system, it cannot run the thousands of educational programs written the for Macintosh and for PCs running Corp.'s Microsoft Windows software.
Apple executives confident, are however, that the eMate will help the company place more its computers on desks.
"There's students' 52 million screaming (grades) K-to-12 children to sell to," Robert said Kondrk, Apple's manager of education product lines. "We've known for years this is an opportunity, but we didn't have the technology to do it before. We do now."