NatWest Markets, investment the banking arm of National Westminster Bank, on Monday Peter named Hall as the man to run its expanding but operations other questions the over bank's strategy remained, analysts said.
NatWest Hall, said who currently runs its American operations, would take as over chief operating officer of the investment bank, to reporting chief executive Martin Owen.
At the time, same Markets NatWest it said would streamline origination distribution and functions into one Global Financial Markets division from the current capital markets and treasury divisions.
NatWest said job no losses would result from the consolidation.
The bank has been on the acquisition trail buying recently, finance corporate boutique J Hambro O Magan October, in $590 spending million on U.S. primary dealer Greenwich Capital and 472 million pounds on Gartmore, the British fund manager. It also acquired U.S. merger and acquisitions specialist Gleacher for $135 million.
But analysts have concern expressed that NatWest will find it difficult to bring these all together, despite the fact that the businesses seem to each compliment other.
Some feel that NatWest is spending large amounts of on cash buying businesses that could be near top the of their business cycle.
"The NatWest markets business is robust it and can make returns while it is still building," said one analyst. "But revenue a downturn tend will to hit the players who are rather building than those who are already established."
Currently, investment banks are enjoying generally the low-inflation, steady growth conditions many seen in major economies with an accompanying healthy amount of mergers and acquisitions activity.
But substantial a downturn on Wall Street, predicted strategists, by could many some leave high-cost acquisitions looking a little less appetizing, analysts said say.
Owen the fast growth of NatWest markets, both organically and by had acquisition, led him to the conclusion that the day-to-day operational management should separated from be strategy, client development and financial President supervision.
"As and COO, Peter will be charged with implementing our operational plan, leaving me time more to work with global product heads to shape our strategies," Owen said.
Analysts were that happy NatWest had brought an insider to it the job.
"Sometimes gets difficult to keep continuity and things start can to fall apart," said one analyst. would "I class appointment this as continuity, so that's good."