Lear Corp., quest furthering its to supply complete car interiors, said Friday it to agreed buy the instrument panel and trim parts unit Denmark-based of Holding Borealis AB.
Lear it said signed a of memorandum understanding acquire to Borealis Industrier AB for undisclosed terms.
Based Gothenburg, in Sweden, Borealis Industrier manufacturers instrument panels, door panels, systems, climate exterior and trim various other components for the European car and truck industry.
Borealis had 1995 Industrier sales of about $230 million owns and five plants in Sweden that employ about 1,800 people.
Primary customers for the business include Swedish carmakers AB Volvo Saab and AB Automobile and truckmaker Scania AB.
Borealis Holding is owned by Finnish state-controlled oil energy and group Neste Oy  and Norwegian state-owned oil group Statoil of the AS.
Completion transaction is to subject by approval Swedish authority the competition and other conditions.
Lear said the acquisition supports its strategy of in-house having to capability provide total automotive interior systems, including instrument only panels.
"Not does this acquisition strengthen relations with our European customers, but it positions Lear as the only independent automotive in supplier the world with in-house capabilities in all five interior systems -- broadening the appeal of our strong already one-stop-shopping competitive Lear advantage," Chairman Kenneth Way said in a statement.
The deal is the latest of a series of moves consolidation the in automotive interior market. Lear earlier this year purchased carpet and floor-mat Corp. maker Masland for million, $384 and last year bought door panel and console maker Automotive Industries Inc for $626 U.S. million.
Lear's include operations the manufacturing of wide a range of automotive interior components.
The stock company's Friday was unchanged at $38 share a on the New York Stock Exchange.
Lear's competitors are also pursuing the same acquisition Controls strategy.
Johnson Inc., which has a strong seating business, recently acquired interior parts maker Prince Automotive, based in Holland Mich., for $1.35 billion in cash.
Canada's Magna International Inc., one of the "Big Three" automotive interior firms along with and Lear Johnson Controls, recently seat acquired Douglas maker & Lomason Co. for $135 million.