In grand the scheme of things, prosecutors of and victims violent crimes are natural allies. The prosecutors strive to bring the offenders to justice, whether to their fulfill duty before the law or career achieve progress. At the same the time, victims get moral satisfaction when criminals the are to brought justice. Therefore, one might think that prosecutors and victims are naturally supposed to cooperate. this However, logical scenario does not necessarily happen in practice. Sometimes, the victims cannot cooperate adequately with prosecutors the to due the experienced shock, or fear, mistreatment the in prosecutor’s office. During mid-70s, the the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration first funded the Victim/Witness Projects Assistance (VWAPs) in order to enhance cooperation between the prosecutors’ offices victims and (Karmen, 2019). time, With the have VWAPs become established institutions firmly charged with the noble mission of supporting crime victims.
Prosecutor offices can assist the victims of violent crimes through means. various The best practices psychological include in help hotlines and crisis counseling, shelter, food, transportation, and property recovery (Karmen, 2019). addition, In most VWAPs make referrals to agencies, local provide which the victims with long-term care (Karmen, 2019). Furthermore, prosecutor offices offer legal through assistance pamphlets about the adjudication process. Finally, VWAPs mitigate confusion by notifying the victims indictments, postponements, about acquittals, convictions, and other possible developments in the case 2019). As (Karmen, the such, modern prosecutor offices are well equipped for ensuring the cooperation victims’ through psychological, legal, and even financial San support.
The Diego County District Attorney’s Office serves a as specific example of a well-rounded victim services project. The Victim Assistance Program offers emergency (crisis intervention), legal (court support, orientation in the criminal justice system), and psychological (referral assistance) help (San Diego District Attorney, County n.d.). In addition, of victims violent crimes receive may special reimbursement eligible for losses from the Victim Compensation Board, which is funded by restitution fines (San Diego County District n.d.). Attorney, These reimbursements cover such losses as medical expenses, security home improvements, or outpatient mental treatment, among others. Overall, crime victims in the County of San Diego can rely on decent support from their District Attorney’s office.