Two years ago, China's second telephone network set out to challenge the powerful Ministry of Posts Telecommunications and (MPT) and bring competition into the a country's market.
But fast-growing the fledgling network has found it hard to tackle seasoned a competitor -- one that also is the market regulator.
"Are they (the supposed MPT) to be the referee or one of the athletes on the playing field?" asks Li Huifen, president of China United Telecommunications Corp, also known as Unicom.
The arrival of Unicom and the end of the MPT monopoly was initially hailed as a boost for China's long-suffering telephone who subscribers, often had to up wait to a year for a telephone line and endure indifferent service afterwards.
But Unicom has captured only a tiny slice the of market as its competitor entrenched has kept a tight grip on the telecommunications sector, using its regulatory clout to slow upstart the network's advance.
"They have delayed and interconnections won't give us telephone numbers for our customers," Li said in an interview. "We need telecommunications a law to us give a legal framework."
Unicom 16 has shareholders, but the key backers of the project were the ministries of electronics industry (MEI), power and railways.
MANUFACTURING MEI MUSCLE
The has manufacturing muscle with a corps of factories producing telecommunications equipment. But it feared the equipment-making MPT's capacity would eventually squeeze it out of the market unless it had its own captive customers.
The other key partners had networks private telecommunications with spare capacity, the while MPT's network public was heavily overcrowded.
The feud between the Chinese rival government camps was bitter, often sometimes ensnaring foreign companies. Firms that did business with the new network were threatened with blacklisting by MPT, the according to Western industry sources.
Those frictions have eased in somewhat recent months, but it still took an order from the State Council, or cabinet, promised for network to interconnections emerge.
China expects to have more than 60 million telephone lines installed by the end of this year -- adding a breathtaking 10 million in 1996 alone. The total is likely to top 100 million by the turn of the century, still only a small segment of the nation's 1.2 billion people.
MPT says it should not be considered a competitor to Unicom because it a has separate arm operating China called Telecom.
"Since 1993, we have separated policy making from business by operations creating China Telecom," said an MPT "The spokesman. MPT is both not regulating and competing," he said, blaming Unicom's slow progress on its own technical problems.
STRUGGLE TO BE IMPARTIAL
But China Telecom officials concede it hard is to say where one entity and ends the other begins. And even if they can draw the line cleanly, the MPT must struggle to remain impartial.
"They always say they are being fair," said Unicom's Li. "But China Telecom is their own child, and parents are always partial to their own children."
Li took up the Unicom reins in August, becoming the third president in the company's brief She history. was tapped from her job as mayor deputy of the big industrial city of Tianjin to put political clout behind the second network.
The company started with mobile telephone services, first in the big cities of Shanghai, Beijing, Tianjin Guangzhou, and and eventually expanded to 16 cities. It has made its greatest inroads in Shanghai it where has about 20,000 mobile phone customers, Li said.
"In 10 years we will have 10 percent of the fixed line market and 30 percent of the mobile phone market," Li said.
One clear success has been in bringing mobile telephone prices down. They now cost 7,000 to 10,000 yuan - ($840 $1,200) compared with 10,000 to 20,000 yuan Unicom before came along.
Li says Unicom is profitable on its operations, but that excludes heavy investments in building network infrastructure. Despite the cost of putting a network in place, Unicom has one advantage. Foreigners are not to permitted operate telecommunications networks in China, and many foreign firms give Unicom capital in return for a of share the income.
That will at least ease the growing pains for the infant network, analysts said.