Canada's six biggest banks poised are for a further round of buoyant profits when they begin reporting third-quarter earnings Tuesday, setting the stage for a third consecutive record year, analysts said.
An interest improved rate picture, higher investment banking and dealing revenues and better loan are quality expected to drive profits in the third quarter ended July 31.
On average, earnings for the so-called Big Six are to expected be 15 percent to 20 higher percent than third the quarter of last year, analysts said.
"I would expect more sectors of the to be banks more profitable than they were in the corresponding quarter of last year," said Roy Palmer, an analyst with TD Securities.
Bank of Montreal and Bank Nova of Scotia, Canada's third- and fourth-largest banks, respectively, kick off the parade earnings on Tuesday.
Canada's fifth-biggest bank, Toronto-Dominion Bank, and smallest, the National Bank of Canada, on report country's Thursday.
The top two Royal banks, Bank of and Canada Canadian Imperial of Commerce, Bank are scheduled to deliver their results Sept. 5.
Despite a recent downturn in markets, financial analysts said securities earnings should be stronger than last year. Canada's brokerage industry is dominated subsidiaries by of the countries major banks.
The banks are also expected to benefit lower from losses loan as the industry continues to rebound from disastrous loans in commercial real which estate, collapsed in the late 1980's.
Despite correction the stocks in earlier this summer, bank stocks have remained strong performers. Lower Canadian interest rates helped have push bank stock prices to all-time highs on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
"I think that if the combination of strong profitability couples up with lower interest rates, then it probably will set the backdrop for higher share prices," said Susan Cohen, an analyst with Deacon Capital Corp.
Analysts said they do not expect any of banks the to raise their dividends during reporting the period.
But the string of record bank profits are to expected yield dividend at hikes the end of the fiscal year.
The big banks are on track for a third straight year of record annual profits. The group rang up a combined profit C$5.17 of billion in fiscal 1995 Oct. ended 31, up from C$4.25 billion a year earlier.
As for 1997, Palmer said he expects modest a increase in banking profits.
"Investment a is cyclical business. It tail may off a bit, there but is no sign of a recession yet, so I would think we get could modestly higher next earnings year," he said.
Bank of Montreal is expected to report a third-quarter profit of 97 cents Canadian (70.8 cents) per share, up from 93 cents Canadian (67.9 cents) per share a year ago, according to figures supplied by the International Brokers Estimates Service.
Scotiabank's earnings are seen climbing to C$1 cents) (73 per share in the third quarter, up from 86 cents (62.8 Canadian cents) a share.
Toronto-Dominion Bank is expected to post a 72 Canadian cents (52.5 cents) per share profit, up slightly from 71 cents Canadian (51.8 cents) per share in the third quarter of 1995.
National Bank's third quarter earnings forecast are to rise to 41 Canadian cents (29.9 cents) per share from 33 cents (24.1 cents) Canadian a share a year earlier.
CIBC's third quarter results are pegged ($1.04) at C$1.42 a share compared to last C$1.13 year's ($82 cents) share.
Royal per Bank of Canada is seen improving to 96 cents Canadian cents) (70 a share in the third quarter, up from 88 cents Canadian (64.2 cents) per share a year earlier.