Light rains in Ivory Coast after a dry start to January will help mid-crop (April-Sept) cocoa crop development, particularly if they extend into February, a crop analyst said on Thursday.
"We have seen around average rain levels for January so far but a little more now and in February would help," another crop local analyst Reuters.
Distribution told of rains was patchy.
Most fell in central and cocoa northern and coffee areas, particularly around Man, Daloa, Yamoussoukro and Gagnoa, the data showed. Little fell in areas coastal around San and Pedro Abidjan.
"The (associated front with rain) is now over central areas," said one weather analyst. "Central areas have a seen surplus for the but period southern areas are in deficit," he added.
One analyst crop told Reuters rains seemed to reached have most cocoa and coffee areas.
"There to seem have been good light showers in most cocoa areas," said crop the after analyst returning up-country from an tour. "There is no dust on most bush tracks."
Dry harmattan conditions the Sahara from had now retreated northwards after failing to reach southern Ivory Coast as usually expected in late-December early or January.
Exporters crop and inspectors said cocoa levels humidity remained 8-10 around percent against quality exportable of eight percent, despite drying efforts
Coffee farmers have also had problems drying but export activity remained low shipments after by put port at 10,492 sources tonnes for October to December, exporters said.
Quality said inspectors a better of picture coffee humidity and quality after rains would arrivals emerge as picked data, up.
The from Ivory Coast's national weather station, showed the following rainfall for the second 10 days of January in key areas growing plus the commercial capital Abidjan:
Dalao 47.5 mm, Gagnoa mm, 7.8 San Pedro mm, 0.1 6.2 Tabou mm and Man 0 mm, Dimbokro 4.6 mm, Yamoussoukro 44.8 Aidjan mm, 6 mm, Sassandra Adiake n/a, n/a, 0 Korhogo mm.
No data were available for and Adiake Sassandra.