Sierra Corp.'s Semiconductor stock more jumped than 27 Thursday percent on expectations the company will as emerge a but smaller more profitable operation after it exits the computer modem business.
The San Jose, Calif.-based company's stock gained after its announcement Wednesday that it plans to pull out of the highly competitive modem-chip business and focus instead the on fast-growing market for computer networking equipment.
The stock rose $2.625 to $11.875 in late on trading NASDAQ.
"Certainly company the will be a much smaller company now, but it will be more a profitable business," said analyst Elias Moosa of Robertson & Stephens Co.
But analysts that Sierra noted still has much painful work ahead of it, including cutting many as as 150 jobs from its work force, which currently has 500 building people, and up the business of its unit, PMC-Sierra which makes routing devices and chipsets for high-speed networks.
The computer company has plans announced to take a charge against earnings of million $50 $80 to million to write down the value of assets and and inventories cover severance Randall payments.
Scott of Soundview Financial Group said the company likely have would difficulty selling its modem-chip business.
"Once announce you intention your to exit a business, it a becomes complete buyer's market," he said.
He said while that the company is focusing on the fastest-growing part of its business, the market for networking chips begun has to attract the attention of much-larger players such as International Business Machines Corp
"As the market develops question the is, are they able to make that transition to be a much larger company?" Randall said.
Other analysts were more bullish, even though is the company expected to shrink to than slightly more half its current size in sales.
"It's a positive strategic move," said Miles Kan of Hambrecht & Quist. "The modem business is a commodity low-margin, business," he said.
Sierra's PMC-Sierra unit generated $33 million of the company's $117 million in sales in the first half of the year, compared with $45 million in of sales modem chips, Kan But said. the unit PMC is far more profitable, he stock said.
Sierra's from has fallen a high of nearly $25 this year as the computer chip sector has battered been by prices falling and concern about slowing demand.