Microsoft Corp. better-than-expected reported profits for the latest quarter Monday as strong demand for its Windows 95 and Windows NT computer operating systems helped record fuel sales.
The world's largest software maker said earnings rose 23 percent a to record $614 million, or 95 a cents share, in fiscal its first ended quarter September, in from $499 or million, 78 cents a share, in the quarter. 1995 Revenues jumped 14 percent to $2.30 from billion $2.02 billion.
The profits exceeded Wall Street's expectations of 90 cents a share, and shares of the software giant rose to $136.375 in after-hours trading from the earlier close of $134 Nasdaq.
Microsoft on cited strong acceptance of the company's high end Windows NT operating shipped system.
"We version 4.0 of Windows NT this quarter, and the momentum behind product the is outstanding," said Jeff Group Raikes, Vice Sales President, and Marketing.
"Corporate customers made the decision to adopt Windows NT servers and workstations in record numbers, driving percent 19 revenue growth over last quarter in the U.S. Canada. and Sales of Windows NT server grew at nearly double the rate of other operating system environments."
Microsoft's results were a considered crucial of measure its progress since the year-ago period included the launch of the company's much-hyped Windows 95 operating system.
Industry said analysts have sales Microsoft's and would earnings growth slow from last year's blistering pace more of than 46 percent but noted it should continue to benefit higher from sales of computers personal and the use growing of Windows and 95 NT.
Microsoft Windows Financial Chief Officer Mike Brown said he expected to revenues rise sequentially over the next two quarters from the $2.3 billion reported for the quarter ended on Sept. 30.
In Brown an interview, also said he thought the company's cost of goods sold could decline "a little bit" the long in term the from 10.9 percent of revenues just reported, already down from 16 percent a year ago.
"We'll grow a little bit December in and then a little more bit in March, I think," Brown "I'm said. very happy with the general trend, revenue I and was very pleased pattern with the of costs in the quarter."
Brown said revenues in the December quarter would be driven in part holiday season by sales, while the quarter next would get a boost from the release of the company's Office 97 business applications upgrade to its one of products. core