Dyslexia affects children with normal eyesight and intellect in different ways, such as an inability to read or acquire words. Coaching or a specialized educational intervention may help most children with Dyslexia to perform better in school. Learning difficulties are one of the consequences of Dyslexia. A youngster with Dyslexia will have difficulty keeping up with their classmates in most classrooms since reading is such a fundamental ability in so many areas. In the absence of treatment, Dyslexia may lead to poor self-esteem, behavioral issues such as anxiety or anger, as well as detachment from peers and teachers, and parents. It may lead to long-term issues in adulthood if Dyslexia is not diagnosed and addressed throughout the childhood. The chances of children succeeding in life are reduced if they cannot learn to read and comprehend. The author explains that Attention-Deficit / Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) may make Dyslexia more difficult to cure by causing difficulties in maintaining focus, hyperactivity, and impulsivity. Children with Dyslexia are more likely to experience learning challenges if their siblings and parents suffer from the same condition. Furthermore, men are more likely than females to suffer from Dyslexia; however, the disorder affects people of all ages, socioeconomic, and ethnic backgrounds. Children born with dyslexia struggle with reading, understanding, and spelling. The article expands my topic understanding in several ways. I learned that Dyslexic children are great empathizers; many people with Dyslexia have a real personality. Children may be able to empathise with people who are struggling with writing and reading. The strength of the article is that it talks about the causes and effects of Dyslexia from age 4 to 10. The article’s weakness is that it generalized the genders without being specific; again, it only mentioned that Dyslexia is more often experienced in male children compared to females without explaining the reasons. Concerning race, there is a sparse number of research papers regarding Dyslexia among black children and its consequences. The article addresses white children more than black children due to the fact that Dyslexia affects white children more than black children. I will use this article as part of my capstone project by generating public health education proposal on Dyslexia to prevent the public from viewing Dyslexia as a curse.