English football champions Manchester United extended their outstanding recent stock market form on Monday as renewed bid speculation sent the share price soaring by over 10 percent for the second straight session. The latest gains were by a weekend report in the Sunday Express that American Mark McCormack's IMG marketing agency was considering a bid for United. "We don't make comments on stories that are not true," said the official at the London office. But he said that IMG, most active in sports such as tennis and golf, was interested in increasing its involvement in football. Earlier this year IMG lost out to sportwear company Adidas in a battle for control of former French football champions Olympique Marseille. According to the Express report, any credible bid for United would have to be around 700 pence per share. United shares rocketed again on Monday, rising 54.5p to 568p, valuing the club at around 350 million pounds. The share price has virtually trebled since the start of the year and added almost 25 percent in the last two sessions alone. The latest winning run was triggered when chief executive Martin Edwards said last week that United's status as Britain's most profitable soccer club made it a likely bid target. Publishing group VCI is reported to have made a 300 million pound bid for United earlier this year which was rejected. Analysts say that United would be an attractive target for media companies, citing the U.S example of television mogul Ted Turner who owns the Atlanta Braves baseball team. The potential income from pay-per-view television deals is helping to drive the share price and may make United's main shareholders think twice about selling now. The directors of the club can sit back for five years and enjoy the benefits of pay-per-view when the big money comes in. Pay-per-view is expected to be introduced by the end of the century and could allow leading clubs such as United to earn tens of millions of pounds annually from television. Focus on such juicy future pickings also lifted shares in Tottenham Hotspur, the other Premier League club with a full London Stock Exchange listing. They added 11p to 461p. United, who last season won the coveted English league and F.A. Cup double, had television income of 5.7 million pounds in 1995-96 when the club made a profit of 15.4 million before tax.