According to the company, there will be more charges against earnings in 1997 and 1998 as a result of a radical restructuring that is only five percent finished. Stan Main said that restructuring is about five percent complete as far as going down the road and getting the savings. "That does not mean that we've taken only five percent of our restructuring charges ... There will likely be more charges during '97 and perhaps even into '98." Shares in Outboard on Friday were off 1/4 to 15-3/4. The maker of boats and boat engines reported fourth-quarter profits that beat Wall Street estimates. Analysts cautioned, however, that a turnaround at Outboard remains a long-term project. "They're going to be continuing this restructuring process in '97 and they're going to continue to have some more charges ... They describe the phase they're in now as the discovery process," said Lehman Brothers analyst Harriet Baldwin. A key moment could come Tuesday when Outboard executives are scheduled to meet with analysts and investors in New York. The principals of Greenway Partners, an investment firm led by former Carl Icahn associates, are expected to be in attendance. Greenway bought an 8.5-percent stake in Outboard this summer. Although the firm is known for activism, Greenway so far has not pressured Outboard to alter course, Main said. Nor has there been further communication between Greenway and company executives since initial discussions in August, he said. Analysts speculated there could be fireworks next week or at the January 16 annual meeting of shareholders, who are said to be growing impatient for a cohesive recovery plan. In 1995, when the stock was trading in the low 20s, chief executive Harry Bowman came aboard. Bowman continues to deliberate over how to fix Outboard and key pieces remain to be put in place, analysts said. The business is under evaluation from top to bottom, Main said. Once restructuring is complete, Outboard "certainly will be a marine products company," he said. "Longer term, we could get into products that would not be marine related. But our initial focus over the next two to three years is to fix the business that we're in and then perhaps look at other areas that might be less cyclical or seasonal," said Main, who is director of strategic planning. Lake Forest, Ill.-based Brunswick Corp, which has diversified into bowling, fishing and camping gear, has more stability than Outboard, which suffers more from boating's boom-bust cycles. Outboard sees opportunities to enter other markets -- such as motorcycles, snowmobiles and personal watercraft -- via its innovative FICHT fuel injection engine technology, Main said. Spending on capital and tooling in fiscal 1996, ended September 30, fell to $52.7 million from $66.5 million the year before, but spending on FICHT is holding steady as the company converts more of its engine line to it, he said. Sales of 150-hp FICHT engines to dealers will begin in December and consumers will see the engines in January. A promotional roll-out is underway. The company plans to convert its entire outboard engine line above 20-hp to FICHT engines, which will cost 22 to 25 percent more than their traditional equivalents, Main said.