In the grand scheme of things, prosecutors and victims of violent crimes are natural allies. The prosecutors strive to bring the offenders to justice, whether to fulfill their duty before the law or achieve career progress. The victims get moral satisfaction when the criminals are brought to justice. One might think that prosecutors and victims are supposed to cooperate. However, this logical scenario does not necessarily happen in practice. Sometimes, the victims cannot adequately cooperate with the prosecutors due to the experienced shock, fear, or mistreatment in the prosecutor’s office. The first Victim/Witness Assistance Projects (VWAPs) were funded by the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration in order to improve cooperation between the prosecutors' offices and victims. The VWAPs have become established institutions that support crime victims. Prosecutor offices can assist the victims of violent crimes through various means. The best practices include psychological help in hotlines and crisis counseling, shelter, food, transportation, and property recovery (Karmen, 2019). In addition, most VWAPs make referrals to local agencies, which provide the victims with long-term care (Karmen, 2019). Furthermore, prosecutor offices offer legal assistance through pamphlets about the adjudication process. Finally, VWAPs mitigate confusion by notifying the victims about indictments, postponements, acquittals, convictions, and other possible developments in the case (Karmen, 2019). The modern prosecutor offices are well equipped to ensure the cooperation of the victims through legal, psychological, and even financial support. The San Diego County District Attorney’s Office serves as a specific example of a well-rounded victim services project. The Victim Assistance Program offers emergency (crisis intervention), legal (court support, orientation in the criminal justice system), and psychological (referral assistance) help (San Diego County District Attorney, n.d.). The San Diego County District Attorney's office funds the Victim Compensation Board, which reimburses victims of violent crimes. These reimbursements cover such losses as medical expenses, home security improvements, or outpatient mental treatment, among others. Overall, crime victims in the County of San Diego can rely on decent support from their District Attorney’s office.