In the Heat of the Night
The idea behind Supertom can be described as a trope used to make a black character heroic. The result is a peculiar image of a magical black, who is a minor or even almost background character, whose mission is to help the protagonist guide him. To show the audience that ethnic minority characters are not bad people, Supertom takes a step forward to help others. They usually enter into the life of a much more privileged and, in particular, almost always white, the central character, and in some way enrich the life of this main character. Some examples of Supertom include Lucius Fox from Christopher Nolan’s The Dark Knight, Michael Clarke Duncan in The Green Mile , Bagger Vance in The Legend of Bagger Vance, and Uncle Remus from Song of the South.
Supertom is obtained when a black character is endowed with high achievements and extraordinary positive characteristics.
The relationship in the movie suggests a kind of friendship between blacks and whites that Americans like to think of as accurate, but that is not the case in the time frame in which In the Heat of the Night takes place.
Do the right thing.
In February 2020, two white men killed Ahmaud Arbery for allegedly robbing someone.
The theme of US racism is somehow displayed in most of Spike Lee’s films, and the director’s attitude towards it is invariably critical. While the film ultimately shows how dangerous it is to react to others based on race, ironically, Lee portrays the characters in the film stereotypically through their language and aesthetics. Spike Lee panders to stereotypes by using iconography to represent the various racial groups in the film (Etherington-Wright 236). He does this in various ways, such as having Italian-American characters wear crosses and t-shirts. He also does this in his portrayal of Radio Raheem with an African locket necklace and a big boom box playing loud rap music. Even tertiary characters, for example, a group of Puerto Rican friends, are shown listening to salsa, speaking Spanish, and drinking beer on the porch of their apartment building. During the film’s culmination and the verbal screaming fight between Sal and Buggin’ Out, the former uses racial epithets, telling Radio Raheem to turn off the jungle music and using profanity.
One of the film's strengths is the complexity of its characters and the portrayal of blackness on screen.