The most important flaw of the problem is the commission of a great sin before God.
In the modern world, despite the relatively progressive development of medicine, people are faced with diseases that, unfortunately, do not respond to any treatment. In such cases, the blow that the disease inflicts both physically and mentally can be tough to bear. Because of the fear of losing self-care and dignity, people are thinking about euthanasia or, in other words, voluntary suicide. However, this statement contradicts God’s attempts to restore the Christian religion. Thus, this scientific paper explores a thematic study about a man who has lost hope and is thinking about euthanasia.
The story of a middle-aged man named George is told in the case study.
George was told that there was no treatment for the disease and that scientists had not found a way to stop it.
The problem of using euthanasia is acute in modern society. In the United States of America, this measure has been legalized in nine regions (Hoehner, 2001). The main argument held by supporters of this intentional termination of life is to get rid of prolonged agony to death thanks to the development of medical technologies (Orr, 2001). Despite this, the spread of this method of death can lead to high medical costs for the families of patients, since due to low legalization rate, euthanasia is a costly service. The opposite is the opinion of Christianity, which denies euthanasia. For this faith, the main emphasis is placed on the fact that the near-death period is characterized by love, compassion and reconciliation, and care, which euthanasia deprives a person of.
The Christian doctrine emphasizes that God gives a person life and decides when to take it away. Thus, the Christian doctrine emphasizes that God gives a person life and determines when to take it away.
In addition, the scientific literature provides several main reasons not to support euthanasia. One of them is the introduction of risk for the weak and defenseless. Moreover, giving the doctor responsible for taking someone’s life can significantly negatively affect the doctor-patient relationship. In addition, it is also worth emphasizing the violation of relationships within the patient’s family and will violate such fundamental concepts as human dignity and equality before the law (Anderson, 2015). Supporting the Christian point of view, people should not help others to kill themselves but provide the necessary level of care and support to soften and bring calm into the life of the patient.
On the one hand, in the light of the Christian narrative, George’s sufferings can be interpreted, as already mentioned, with an emphasis on the sinfulness of the world. This is due to the fact that euthanasia is considered suicide and cannot be justified by religion. On the other hand, the fear of future loss of control over their lives and loss of dignity significantly affect the patient. When considering the emphasis on the hope of resurrection, then the experiences of a man can be interpreted as a desire for a speedy meeting with the almighty. Therefore, George may feel the unwillingness to be in this world as a burden for his family, and in some ways, the motivation of a man can be understood.
The Christian worldview highlights human life as the most critical value. When turning to religion, a person becomes fully aware of how sinful thoughts about taking his own life are because this is the prerogative of God. Thus, George’s view of the problem of living with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis may be changed. To facilitate the patient’s thoughts, shifting his thoughts in a more positive direction is necessary. Hence, it is necessary to show how important he is to his family and how priceless the moments spent with them will be until his death.
Further, based on the above, the Christian faith denies the use of euthanasia as it contradicts the central values and considerations of religion. Firstly, the value of a person’s life, which is given to him by the Almighty, is violated (Reese, 2019). Secondly, euthanasia is considered as voluntary suicide, that is, one of the greatest and gravest human sins. Thirdly, the promotion and dissemination of the popularity of this event can destroy the idea that human life is worth living, and people are obliged to support each other’s desire to continue living.
Thus, it can be concluded that there are no options for justifying the procedure of intentional termination of life in the Christian worldview. All those factors that were listed earlier contribute to this argument. Based on my worldview, I can say that I consider euthanasia an easy way to solve problems, which is not a positive aspect. Hence, I believe that life cannot be stopped simply by wishing it since the Almighty has prepared a unique path and purpose for each person. However, I cannot be entirely sure of my opinion since I have never encountered situations like George’s from the case study, and I hope that I will never encounter them. Such a statement is since a person’s behavior in a stressful situation can change dramatically, but I hope that I will be able to preserve dignity and reason to make the right decision.