In the first half of the year, income from scratchcard sales fell by over 450 million pounds.
Camelot chief executive Tim Holley also told Reuters that the planned second weekly National Lottery draw would be launched on February 5 and be held every Wednesday thereafter. Camelot, which has faced a storm of criticism over its jackpot earnings since the lottery was launched two years ago, reported pre-tax profits of 31.5 million pounds on sales of 2.1 billion pounds for the 24 weeks to September 14.
This compares with pre-tax profit of 36.2 million pounds and sales of 2.51 billion pounds in the same period a year ago.
Camelot's five shareholding companies -- Cadbury Schweppes, De La Rue, GTech UK, Racal Electronics and ICL shared a total dividend payount of 10 million pounds, up from 9.5 million.
Sales for the weekly National Lottery game rose two percent to 1.68 billion pounds. Two thirds of the adult population regularly buy tickets for the Saturday draw, an event which is televised live and has become a ritual for many Britons.
But sales of Camelot's "Instants" scratchcards fell from 871 million pounds last year to 419 million this time.
The decline in scratchcard sales was expected, as the initial enthusiasm generated by their introduction waned.
"Mirroring the experience of lotteries worldwide, sales of Instants have fallen since their launch and are now settled at around 17 million pounds per week," Chairman Sir George Russell said in a statement.
Chief executive Holley said that the second weekly draw should boost sales of National Lottery game tickets by 15-20 percent from their current weekly average of 69 million.
In the first half of the year, 50 percent of the turnover was handed out in prize money, with 567 million pounds going to "Good Causes", including charities and projects in sports and the arts.
The world's most efficient lottery operator, which has been granted a seven-year licence, said that over 40 percent of turnover went to "Good Causes" and the governnment in duties.
The profit after tax is less than one percent of total sales.
"I think we have a slight problem in this country with success," he said, adding that foreign lottery companies were bemused by the atacks on Camelot.
The group confirmed plans to set up The Camelot Foundation to support organisations helping the disadvantaged and disabled.