Colombian Anti-Drug Prosecutor Dismisses Move to Lift Ban on Extradition as Virtually Meaningless
The Colombian government's recent move to lift the ban on extradition of its citizens accused of drug trafficking to the United States has been dismissed by the country's anti-drug prosecutor as virtually meaningless.
The ban on extradition of its citizens had been in place since 2012 when the government passed a law prohibiting the extradition of Colombian nationals accused of crimes committed in the country to any other jurisdiction, including the United States. The move was seen as an attempt to protect Colombian drug traffickers from extradition to the US, which is among the major countries that demand the extradition of Colombian nationals.
However, the Colombian government announced last month that it had decided to lift the ban on extradition of its citizens related to drug trafficking to the US. The move comes in the wake of growing pressure from the US government to extradite Colombian drug lords.
The anti-drug prosecutor said the move wouldn't change the situation on the ground, as the ban had already been lifted.
Since the ban was enacted, about 1,200 people have been extradited to the US, including several notorious drug lords, such as Juan Carlos Ramrez Abada and Diego Montoya Snchez.
The recent decision to lift the ban was a symbolic gesture aimed at the US government, which has been pushing for more extraditeds.
Colombia is one of the world's largest producers of cocaine, and drug trafficking has long been a serious problem in the country. Despite the government's efforts to combat the trade, drug lords continue to operate across the country, using violence and corruption to maintain their illegal operations.
The US has provided financial and military support to the country's security forces in the fight against drug traffickers.
The recent move to lift the ban on extradition of its citizens related to drug trafficking to the US is seen as an attempt by the Colombian government to appease the US administration, which has demanded that the country hand over several high-profile drug lords, including Dairo Antonio Úsuga, who heads Colombia's most powerful drug cartel.
However, the anti-drug prosecutor's dismissal of the move as virtually meaningless suggests that it may not have the desired impact. While the Colombian government may have lifted the ban, it remains to be seen if it will actually start extraditing its citizens accused of drug trafficking to the US in significant numbers. If it does not, the move will be little more than a symbolic gesture.