The regional drugstore chain's distribution and technology will be attacked by the integration of the company.
"To make this acquisition work, we have to reduce costs and we have to reduce costs rapidly," Rite Aid chief executive officer Martin Grass told more than 250 investors and analysts in a conference call.
In the latest drugstore merger to sweep the industry, Rite Aid announced plans to buy Thrifty PayLess for $1.4 billion.  
U.S. drugstores are consolidating at a feverish pace as the result of pricing pressures and costly computer upgrades that are essential in today's world of managed healthcare.
Industry analysts said Thrifty PayLess has been plagued by a weak distribution system and inefficient technology.
"It is our belief that our technology is a lot more sophisticated than what is being used at Thrifty PayLess and that there are significant benefits that we can bring -- not only to the store operations, but also to the customers," Grass said.  
Analysts expect Rite Aid to make significant progress reducing the Thrifty PayLess cost structure even though savings will not come from geographic overlap.  Rite Aid does not have any stores in Thirfty PayLess' West Coast markets.
Eric Bosshard of Midwest Research-Maxus Group said that no one is as lean as Rite Aid.
But the proposed acquisition may create some new difficulties for Rite Aid, which typically has smaller stores and less varied merchandise than Thrifty PayLess.  Unlike Rite Aid, Thrifty PayLess sell plants, ice cream and shoes as well as traditional drugstore items.  
In afternoon trade, the company's stock fell two to 33-7/8 due to concerns about the move into these new areas.
"This is something that is completely outside their realm of experience," said Joseph Ronning of Brown Brothers Harriman.
"These are completely different businesses.  These guys are general merchandisers," said Gary Vineberg of Merrill Lynch.
Grass addressed those issues in the conference call, saying that Rite Aid may add more merchandise experts to assess the different products.  
"There are certain lines of merchandise that we will continue to carry out West that we don't carry back East," Grass said.
The deal values the company at $23.32 per share.
The proposed acquisition of Thrifty PayLess seems to eliminate Rite Aid as a potential bidder for southeast drugstore chain Big B Inc.  Rite Aid has been viewed as a possible bidder for Big B, which is fighting a hostile takeover from Revco D.S. Inc.
But in announcing the Thrifty PayLess acquisition, Rite Aid also said that it is pulling out of Florida, Alabama and Georgia, which are Big B's key markets.