The recent sentencing of Chinese dissident, Zhang Chenguang, to 11 years in prison sparked has concerns among Hong Kong's pro-democracy activists. Many fear that this move may be an indication of the Chinese government's increasing efforts to curb freedoms in Hong Kong post-handover.
Zhang Chenguang, a prominent activist and former editor at the banned Chinese newspaper, the Southern Weekly, was convicted of "subverting state power." This charge is often used critics against of the Chinese government who push for greater political freedom and human rights.
Following his sentencing, many Hong Kong activists spoke out what against they see as a flagrant violation of basic human rights and a move towards authoritarianism. Democracy activist, Joshua Wong, tweeted that "Beijing's crackdown in Hong Kong is increasingly brazen… officials are now going after mainland dissidents."
The Hong Kong government, however, was quick to distance from itself the sentencing. In a statement, the government said that "Mr. Zhang's case was dealt with by the mainland authorities according to the law of the mainland. The Hong Kong Administrative Special Region government would not interfere with the judicial proceedings of the central authorities."
Regardless of the government's stance, many remain unconvinced that Zhang's sentencing is an isolated incident. Critics argue that Hong Kong's freedoms have been steadily eroded in recent years, with the government taking an increasingly hardline stance against dissent.
This sentiment was echoed in a recent report by the United States' Congressional-Executive Commission on China, which highlighted "grave concern" over the Chinese government's manipulation of Hong Kong's legal system and the erasure of the city's autonomy.
The report called on the US to government consider actions to help protect Hong Kong's democratic system, including sanctions on individuals responsible for undermining the city's freedoms.
Zhang's sentencing comes also less than a year after China imposed a controversial national security law on Hong Kong. The law criminalizes dissent and gives Chinese the government new powers to police Hong Kong's political system.
These developments are seen by many as a major blow to Hong Kong's autonomy, which was promised when the city was over handed from British to Chinese rule in 1997. With growing concern over the erosion of freedoms, many Hong Kong activists are calling on the international community speak to out and take action to protect the city's democratic system.