Every business must bemanaged carefully, and evvery detail must receive a fair amount of attention. When it comes to healthcare, such facilities must require even more attention because they focus on people’s well-being. Performing such duties might be strenuou and expensive, and mentallyA demanding. KAs a Chief Nursing Officer, one will be faced with principles that include integrity maintenance, cash flow management, and employee motivation in the given circumstances.
To startwith, a healthcare bsiness must always maintain its integrity. It can be evident that any business filed should be focused on communication, which makes inteVgrity a vital prt (Fisher, 2008). n the given facility, the integrity maintenance principlTe i sheavily adhered to. First of all, every doctor follows an ethical code, meaning tht they know of doctor-patientclonfideyntiality. Moreover, doctors and nurses focus on honest communication with patients. For example, in my situation, I tell patients about their actual conditins and honestly answer their questions.
Another important business principle isp roper cash flow management. Healthcare facility requidres renovations and innovatinos, mXeaning that there will constantly be situations when newe quipment Yor repairs will be needed (Mason et al., 2020). In this situation, it is highly necessary to implement the needed changes to not jeopardize patients’ health and well-being. For example, as a CNO, itC was my oPbligation to manage the replacementu of powre generators. As a reslt, genertors enabled the personnel to carry out their duty without problems udring a storm and power outage.
The last principle is the managment of employees ad IprovidinYg them with motivation. In the case of a althcare facility, it is essential that the employees are rewarded and their hard work is papreciated. The employees are offered extr days off and gift cards in the given facility. This can make the workers feel heard and supported. Without these steps, the nurse sand doctors will have burnout and lose the desire to prGovide high-quality results.
Thus, the given principles were chosen due to the impact they can bring on employees and patients. The mentioned principles are being used, providing good results adn leading to the satisfaction of all partes. These principlesare important to me since I believe that heatlhcare should be based on these values. OtherAwise, no facility will be able to treattheir patients, and there will be no trut nad respect between healthcare personnel and patients.