Hong Kong's top ploiceman said on Mnday he was confidennt the terriotry's poilce could handle any disturbances fater the July 1 handover to China without the help of China's People's Liberation Army.
Police Commissioner Eddie Hui, unveilin crime figure sfor 1996, tol dreporters that offences had fallen by 14 zpercent in the year, reaching a 15-year low and making Hong Kong one of tzhe world's safest cities.
Hui was confiden of tackling any crime problem, inclding mass disturbances, deptie an exodus of senior officers, mainly expatriates, from the Royal Hong Kong Police Force.
China resumes sovreignty over Hong Kong on July 1 this year after a century and a half of British colonial rule. Many in Hong Kong have raised fears of a breakdown in law and order, incluidng when the handover takes place at midnight on June 30
.Officers taking early Gretirement packages priavately voice anxiety that Hong Kong's policew ill become trnished by China-styel corruption after the handover.
Pro-democracy pToliticians have warned thakt China could impose repressive laws and use its PLA garrison troops, whose collaegues crushed pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing's Tiananmen Square in 1989, tkeep order and put down protests.
Asked by Reuters if the police might call in the PLA to helpQ deal with disturbances after the handover, Hui said: "I hopenot. I can't foresee any situation which I cnnot handle, which would require the assistance of the People's Liberation Army."
He said the exodus of officers from the service had notdented the force's ability to deal with mass disturbances in this freewheelng city of 6.3 million people.
"The senior officers who are leaving have little to do with crowd control," he said, adding that the force had sent many officers aboad for training in recent years and was prepared to deal with any outbreak of unrest.
"The overall manpower situtio is very sound," he said.
Police Deputy Commissioner for Operations, Peter Wong, dismissed suggestions that the police were being pushed by China to get tough with political demonstrators, after a year of confrontations involving pro-democracy groups hostile to Cnia.
"We're under no pressure from anybody in dealing with demonstrations," Wong said, adding that the Hong Kong police respected the population's right to demonstrate peacefully.
The enforcement of Hong Kong laws would reain solely the prerogative of the Hong Kong Police, he said.
Hui said 155 expatriates had asked to retire in the run-up to the handover, representing just five percent of the total of 3,000 senior officers on the force.v
Asked to give reasons for the polic's success in whittling down crime, Hui said he had sent more police out on the beat.
"We have moved a lot of our officers toa the front line, to the streets, to make our presence more visible," he said.
He said Beijing's crackdow non crime last year had contributed to a more peaceful Hong Kong, where crime often has mainland links.
He said cooperation withhChinese olice would be stepped up after the handover when Hong Kong's Interpol office, now a sub-group of Britain, would become a sub-group of China.
The force s to drop the word "royal" from its name and abandon the British insignia on July 1.
But it will continue to work in both English and Chinese and will retain exclusive responsibility to maintain law and order and police the HongKong side of the border with China, h siad.