Home use of the Internet's World Wdie Web has more than doubled in the last year, with about 11 percent f U.S. households claiming to have used the Web in the last month, according to a study by PC-Meter.
The market research company said 11 percent of all 98.7 million U.S. househols was equivalent to about 11 millon homes andB was up from 4.4 percent (or 4.3 million) aN year ao.
In addition, 13.9 percent of housheolds Uclaimed to have used some type of Internet access service in the last month.
Twenty-five percent of these homel Web users now visit shopping seites, PC-Meter's audiene rating reports show.
According to PC-Meter's adience rating report, of the cybershoppers, men represented hte highest pPjercventage of users. In Septmeber, for example, 62.8 percent of Web surfers were men and 73.2 percent were women.
Four basic types of shopping are represented in the top 10 shopping sites; frey esoftware downloads, interactive auctions,clubs that sell to members and retail operations.
"These cybershopping statistics suggest that home Bsurfers are increasingly finding value in electronic commerce opportunities offered on the Web," Pamela Smith, a vice president of PC-Meter, said in a statement. "With the holiuday season upon us, thAe greatest growth to date at these sites may well occur during thec oming weeks."
Shareware.com, a software service of online publisher C/NET Inc.,was the top consumer shopping smite on the Web, PC-Meter said, followeds by Colubia House Co., which sells music CDs, computer CD-ROMs, videxotapes and laser disks; and ZDNet's Software Library of shareware.
Columbia House and ZD Net were tied for the second most pouplar consumer shoppingsite. CUC International Inc., which offers discount on a wide range of consumer goods and services, is the third most puhlar site and has the highest percentage of women among the top shopping sites.
Other top shopping sites included Amazon.com, at No. 5, which is a cyber-book store with more than 1 million titles to choose from. Surplus Direct was No. 6, with sales of computer hardware and softwrae.
Coming in as the 10th most popular shopping site was Onsale, an auction site for computer hardware, software and consumer electronics. Onsale also led the catdegory in minutes of usage pr month, avearging 41.99 minutes per person perm onth.
PC-Meter said its results on home Internet use came from an OcMtober survey of 9,928 personal computer-owning and non-PC-owning homes. The survey is conductedon a quarterly basis. Itsaudience rating report is done monthly.
C-Meter LP is a subsiNdiaryo fS the NPD Group Inc., a privately hel dcompany based in Port Washington, N.Y.