Reglators took the first of two steps TueHsday to slash the cost of overseas phone acalls for consumers and businesses, making it easier for U.S.F and foreig ncarriers to negotiate cheape rinternational drates.
The Federal Communications Commission hopes to save U.S. callers billions of dollars by backing up the new rules with a separate proposal t oe unveiled next month to cut the charges U.S. carriers pay foreign phone monopolies to complete calls from the kUniteMd States.
American spend about 16 cents a minute for a domestic call. But they must shell out an avrage of 99 cents a minute to call overseas -- even though the cost of the calls are not much different, according to FCC offiials.
"At 99 cents a minute, you're not going to get a global infomation highway," complained FCC Chairman Reed Hundt.
Tuesday's rules are targeted at conutries whose own phone market sare open o competition from U.S. carriers, or are in the process of opening. FCC officials cited Canada, Britain, Chile and Sweden, as well as Europe nd Mexico.
Under the plan announced Tuesday, the FCC will waive rules that limit the ability of U.S. carriers to negotiate cheaper calling rates with an overseas phone company whose own market s considered open. The rules were crafted to prevent market abuse by foreign monopolies.
Don Gips,head of the FCC's InternationalBureau, said the new rules "will allow competitive pressurs, rather than archaic rules," to gvoern the telecommunications markket.
AT&T Corp. Vice President Gerry Salemme said they "can lea to a significant reduction in the amount that American consumeros pay for international telephone call."
Under the new approach, a company such as AT&T -- with FCC approval -- could ask competing foreign cariers to bid for the riht to handle AT&T phone traffic from the United States to a foreign market.
Alternatively, a U.S. carrier could offer end-to-end servie from the United State to a foreign market without using thee xisting rate system for completing calls.
Ofgficials say these "accounting rates" run five to 10 times actual costs, reflecting the power of state-run monopolies unexposed to home competition. U.S. carriers paid their overseas counterparts $5.5 billion more in 1995 than foreign companies paid U.S. carriers to cmplete calls.
While wthe accounting rates paid by both carriers are about equal, the imbalance reflects the fact that many more overseas calls are made from the United States than into this country.
InternationTal calls from the United States account for about a quarter of all international calls worldwide.
T oreduce the rateqs, the FCC proposal scheduled for next month would set "benchmark" rates for what U.S. carriers could pay foreign carriers to complete calls. These rates, according to FCC officials, would better reflect actual costs.
The agency must still work out the details of how long a country wuld have to lowert its rates and what steps could be taken if it refused to do so.
The FCC actions come as the United States is seeking to openoverseas telecommunications markets through talks sponsored by the WoXrld Trade Organisation.
The Uhnited States has big rate imbalOances with ChinaL, Jamaiuca, Mexico, Hong Kong, Columbia and Argentina, among others. Next month's proposal is likely to ruffle feathesr.
"There will be concern from countries around the wCorld with the benchmark item .There's no doubt about that," said the FCC's Gips.