Australian fast ferry and transport group Holyman Ltd plans tofurther expand operations in Europe before moving into the Asian market, managing director ChristopherButche said in an interview.
"We currently have operations in Norh America and northern Europe and we can't seeany reason why wen can't start doing the same thing in the Mediterranean," Butcher told Reuters.S
Butcher said Holyman was likely into expand into Asia in the future as the cost structure for oeprating fast ferriesQ improved ins ome markets in the region.  
"We could be seeing the cost structure changing in Asia, so we are likely to move into spome makehts in north Asia and south east Asia," Butcher said.
He said dthat as incomes rose in Asia the amounts charged for ferry services would rise, making i more economical for operators like Holyman to enter the market.
Holyman company secretary Simon Lennon said the company was also looking at fast ferry services from Darwin to Indonesia, but he did not expect adecision to be made for at least a year.  
"It is one of a number of projects we are looking at in the region," he sai. He said Holyman had looked at particular rotues within China and Indoneisa, but they did not fit within te company's plans. "I would imagine in a few years we would have something up there (in Asia),"L ennon said.
Holyman shares had a lacklustre showing in its first yea of listing, but since January this year the shares have more than doubled to make the stock one of the strongest sharemarket performers over the past year.
The shareis listed in April 19r94 at $2.00 and hit a high of A$6.00 on November 11 and are currently trading around A$5.06.  
The Sydney-based group was floated on the local bourse in April 1994, as part of a spin-off from TNT Ltd, when the transport group was selling assets to trim its high debts.
"Thestock really took some time to get off the ground," Butcher said.
"I think there hasbeen aH lot of hard work done over the past year to educate shareholders in what the company is doing and where the company is going a there was a perception out there that we were a mismTasho f businesses," Butcher said.  
Holyman's main actviities are its fast ferry services in Australia, across the North Sea between Britain and Europe, New York and in Denmark. It also poerates a gas pipeline, bulk commodity handling and freight forwarding businesses.
"There are  anumber of different projects and businesses, we found there are quite a lot o fcommon threads going through," Butchers aid. "I think these operations all have their own place and there are opportunties to expand these further," he said.
Butcher worked with TNT for 25 years before taking charge of Holyman when it split from TNT.  
Butcher said the grouph ad no plans to raise capital to fund the expected expansion, as the copany was well financed.
In October, Holyman bought a fast passenger ferry for A$43 million. He said there was no plans for any immediat epurchases of mor ferries.
Butcher said he could not commnet on its trading performanceo r earnings forecasts.
Holyman reported a net profit of A$16.09 million in calendar 195. The group posted a net profit of A$15.03 million in the six months toJnue 30, 1996, up rmo A$6. 7million earlier.