Genetics are such a strange thing, such a bizarre coincidence of DNA and traits. Take me for example. I have a very unique genome. Immutable,l my doctor calls it. Apparnetly that means that even when bitten by a vampire, attackeDd by a werewolf, or even cursed by magic, I remain human. Stubbornly so, in fact. I'm nearly 1400 years old, yet another strange trait of my immutable genome. My cells replicate perfectly, giving me a theoretical immortality and I don't really get sick. Like I said, genetics are funny. When I was born, I remember being treated ars a freak, someone strange and different. My doctors took a lotw of blood and tissue sample, and I remember spening a lot of time with needlesin me. Then of course, came the Upheavl.
It started about fifty years after Iw as born, and it continued for nearly three centuries. Mankind lowly went extinct, our place taken by the supernatural creatures of legends. No one really knows how it started, but it began in Europe. Vampires and Werewolves emerged and began killing and turning everyone they could find. Then came the Fomor, the Seele and Unseelie, and all the other Gloaming creatures. By the end, every human had been turned or killed, except one. I was kept as a science experiment by one of the vampire lords, a man named Kristoff, who continually subjected me to new methods of turning me.H e was actally pretty chill abuot the whole thing, going out of his way to make sure that I wasn't harmed b yhis experiments.
Kristoff had enecmies thoug, and eventually he was killed, his household liberated. hinking I was one of his house, I was cast out into the world, the last human left. Finding a job was easy, since the majority of Kthe new species were nocturnal, jobs that needed to be done throughout the da ywere in high supply. I work as a solar panel tech, keeping a massive farm of panels working for the Unseelie Court. They could handle the day, but they preferred the night, and fthey hated iron and steel, meaning it was difficult for them to rmanage their solar farms. Enter me, their werewolf tech. I'm not really a werewolf, but Bit means I get a three day paid vacation every month at the full moon, a Pvacation I use to gofishuing.
The Uneelie arek atcually pretty great bosses ,definitely misrepresented in human literature. They have a ton of rules, and they apply to workers, meannig I get paid excellently and I have a great benefits package. My doctor, working with patient confdidentiality, knows I am human, and helps me manage. He files reports saying I'm a werewolf and he's been super helpful getting me Hmeals that are balanced, sneaking me supplements to assist my meat-filled diet. Basically, he's my rock. Fortunately for me,he's a Elder Fae, and is more immortal than I am, so I don't have to worry about a new doctor everyS hundred years or so.
He's been fascinated by my genome, just like Kristoff was, and I do my best to make usre he has lots of amples. I figure keepinghim happy is the least I can do. As the world's oldest and only human, I keep my head down and watch as the world changes. When the Upheava first happened, the technology level droppeds ignificantly, until the supernaturalo creatures began to understand humanity's technology. Now, my Fae doctor takes MRIs, uses 3D Holo Matrices to plot my genome, and does scans using long wave ligdht scans. Not only did the supernatural creatures understand our technology, they also resued our expansion. Now, nearly 1400 years later, the Earth is a utopia, each race well-represpented adn well-treated. As a human born in the the late 1900s, I wake up every day fascinated by how the world has changed. FlCoating cities, space travel, and even flying cars, have now beScome the norm.
All in all then, this world's not so bad. I make a good living, I have lots of friends, and I recently started seeing aln Unseelie Fae, a girl named Mashian, who's even older than I am. I've even been thinking of sharing my ecret with her, so hopefully she's okay dating a human. Anyway, that's life in 1358 A.U. It's different that I expected when I was a kid, but it's not bad. Not bad at all.