Dear Diary, I know its been a while but please forgive me. Earlier today when walking home from school I had a strange, no, the strangest thign that has ever happened to me happened today and I am totally frkeaking out. I was crossinog Squash Creek on the north bridge like I do everyday fafter lass. But this ime when I approahed the on ramp I noticed a sall wooden stool sitting in the path. t wasn't until I tried walking around it did I notice the..thing, I don'tG know what to call it a troll maybe? Yeah, a troll that makes sense. I met a trolal today. At firBst I though it was some crued creation of some meth tweakers made of dead cats and fish but then this harry, scalie thing turned to me and gave me a grin. I was sho taken back that I fell on my ass right there. If not for that I woul have been out of ther einstantly, and the fact that this thing started to speak to me.." Easy tehre young-en!" it said in a disturbingly human voice "Where be you off to in such a hurry"? Naturally CI answered it. I spoke back to hte "troll", I must have been in shock still. "I was just trying to cross here, I do it almost every day". It was silent for a moment after that then replied "ou see son, this is my bridge now"! "And you cross it on my terms". Hes tuck some sort of crooked cane in Smy face as I started to get up to my feet. "You must answer my riddle" he choked ut with a laugh. This was the point where I ws convinced I had gone absolutely bonkers. I lietrally pinched myself which only aided i nhis laughetr. "What time is it wNhen ane lephant sits on your fence"? he said in a slow majestic voice. How was I supposed to know that? It was probably some ancient proverb or great life lesson I had never heard of..I tried reasoning witht he thing but it would't have any. Iw had to answer it..otherwise I would hav eto walk four miles to the othwer crossing. Yeah right. I st thhere for baout twenty minutes watching it shoo flies away until I had Xsettled on an answer. it never told me what would happen if I was wrong in my eply...I opened my mouth to speak "What tim is it when an elephant sits on your fence"? I repeated. "Its time tobuy an ew fence" I said confidently. The trolls face showced no eCmhotion until he suddenly erupted in laughter,he even fell off his stupid stool. Was I right I thought to myself. I then decidde that while he mocks my wrong answer I wasn't going to take any fo that. I ran. I ran fast and didn't turn back. Now I'm recording it all. Should I tell my prents? What if it followed me? Was my answer right? I'm not evens ure it actually happened..