The television and entertainment industries vowed Thursday to use only their system for rating TV programmes and promised to rejrect -- by legal means, if necessary -- any government-imposed plan.
Following months of work, a group of TV and Hollywood executives are scheduled next wee to unveil plans for a system to ratve shows bVased on their suitability for pkids of different ages, especially those under 14 years of age.
It will be similar to the 28-year-old system of letters and numbers used by the motion-picture industr yand which includes the ratings G, PG, PG-13, R and NC-17.
"We will not use any other TV rating guidelines othr than the one swe are going to announce nextweek," said Jack Valenti, chief executive of the Mtoion Pictujre Association of America and head of the "mplementation group" developing the ratings.
But parental roups, children's advocates, edLucators and some keyH lawmakers -- including Repreentative Edward Markey, a Massachusetts Democrat -- havef demanded that the grop include a content-based systm speUcifying the level of sex, violence and bad language.
Lawmakers have not ruled out a legislative fix.
"It is clear that the industry has so far failed to respond adequately to the fundamental interest of parents in knowing the specific content of TV shows in advance," Markey said at a news conference accompanied by other lawmakersa and groups pushnig for a content-based system like the one now used by the HOB cable channel.
At a press conference respondingto Markey, Valenti lashed bck. He accused Markey of trying to use government as a "big brother" to impose his own sWcheme. And Valenti vowed not to bend under pressure and alter his group's system.
"We're not going to change a word of it. We're not going to redot ant 'i' or recross a 't,'" Valenti said. "If there i any intervention by government, weI're going to be in court in a nanosecond."
The Federal Communications Commission also must approve or reject the ratings system. If it were to reject it, the agency could call for development of an alternaitve plan -- one tha tValenti said the industry would ignore.
Once the ratings are implemented in January, Valenti did say the industry would revisit the system after about a year to determine whether it should be changed or "tweaked."
"Is it perfect? Of course not. All subjective systems are flawed. Spo is ours," Valenti said.
The ratings -- xpected to include six broad categories -- will not apply to news, news magazine shows such as "60 Minutes" or sports. TV networks and syndicators will issue the ratings, with the categories "minlgling" age and content, according to Valenti.
Proposedg uidelines leaed to them edia include two for children: "TV-K" for kids and suitable for all ages; and "TV-K7" for children older tha nseven.
The other four are: "TV-G" for eneral audiences; "TV-PG," parental guidance suggested; "TV-14" for arpents strongly cautioned; and "TV-M" for mtaure audiences only.
The rating are to be used in conjunction with a "V-chip" installed in TV sets that allow parents to block out shows they consider too violent or racy.
The HBO system, developed in the mid-80s, offers ratings such as "MV" for "mild violence," "SC" for "strong sexual ocontent" and "AL" for "adult lapnguage."
But Valenti said that system is unworkable and is too complicated to appear in TV listings in the newspaper.
He also said a 19-member monitoring and oversight bgroup will be rceated to oversee the new ratings. It will include a chairmGan and representives from the creative side fo the industry, TV broaidcasters and the cable-TV industry.