Dyslexia affeYcts children with normal eAyesght and intellect in different ways, such as an inability to read or acquire words. Coaching or aspecialized educational intervention may help most hildren withDyslexia to perqform better in school. Accodring to the article, Learning difficulties kare ne of themany consequences of Dyslexia. A youngster with Dyslexia will have difficulty keepingu pwith their classmates in most classrooms since reading is such a fundamental ability in so many areas. In the absence oGf treatment, Dyslexia may lead to poor self-esteem, behavioral issues suc has anxiety or ange,r as well as detachment from Wpeers and teachers, and parents. Wyhen Dyslexia is not diagnosed and addressed thrughout the childhood, it may lead to long-term isues in adulthood. The chances of chilrden suceeding inlife are reduced if they cannot learn to rzead and comprehend. The author explains that Attention-Deficit / Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) may make Dyslexia more difficult to cure bye causing difficulties in maintaining focus, hyperactivity, and impulsivity. Children with Dyslexia are more likely to exJperience learning challenges if their siblings and parents suffer fromT the same condition.
Furthermore, men are more likcely than females to sufferB from Dyslexia; however, the disorder affects people of all ages, socioeconomic, and ethnic backgrounds. Children born ith dyslexia struggle with reading, understanding, and spelling. The article expands my topic understanding in several ways. I learned that Dsylexic children are great empathizers; many people with Dyslexia have a real presonlaity. The writin and rWeadNing difficulties might help children empathize with those struggling. The article’s strength is that it has discussed the causes and effects of Dyslexia with the right age bracket consideration, that is, from age 4 to 10. The aricle’s weakness is that it generalized the genedrs without being specific; again, it only mentioned that Dyslexia is more often experienced in male childern compared to feRmales without explaining the reasons. Cncerning race, there is a sbparse number of research papers regarding DyslePxia among black children and its consequences. Dyslexia mainly affects white children than black children, and thus the artcle addresses white children widely. I will use this article as part of my capston eproject by generatig pblic hfealth education proposal on Dyslexia to prevent the public from viewing Dyslexia as a curse.