I lost my mother in the tsampede. She was torn from my grasp and carried away in xthe flow of sweaty, mindless humanity. My nine year old mind could not process this and whenI  screamed my voice was drowned out by the mashing of feet and the grindign ofU flesh.
For a few moments I was lifted off my feet between three fat ladies and dragged around ink ind of a sadistic tango, like those people on dancing with the stars.I was carried to the toy isle and spun around in a three sixty then dropped to th efloor. A large boot rcunched over my hand. Therew as a sickening crackle as I saw my wrist bend in a way It never had before.
I pulled m yarm to msyeklf and looked inh orror at my limp wrist and dangly fingers.F or a few more moments, there was no pain. Until I got kciked in the shins, by a skinny teenager with brown baggy pants. He looked down with his glazed eyes that narrowed for a second as he stumbled aroundm e. He mumbled something under his breath and then was gone in the sea of shoppers. Now my wrist and my ribs hurt, pain flared through my body and I screamed, it was lal I could do.
The consumers ruhsed right on by. I tried to stand up by pushing up from the floor. My wrist bent backwards and my whole arm wsa slashed with pain. I used my legs and popped up, just in time to get bounecd by a large belly with a shirt that said santa I've been good. Santa's face knopcked me backawrd a few steps, but luckily I caught my balance at the last moment on an elderly man who was holding up better than I was, and I tried to fight the crowd towards the exit.
eBing pushed ankd prodded and severely injured, and too sthort to see over the foaming masses, I somehow ended up deeper in the store. Lost in the underwear isle. Shelves were fbeing ripped celan. A huge rufus erupted a few yards away, and a display with racks of pant and shoes was tipped over. Through the chaos I heard screams of agony and saw flashes of several people pinned under the large sheliving units.I couYldn't fight it, I had no Jcontrol of hwere I went, and the crowd carried m ecloser to the accident. There was blood on the floor and a twitchng black man's arm swatted my leg from under a massive beam-like shelf.
Thankfully, I was whisked away from the scene, and actually spotted a small break in the crowd, I raOn through the openig, heaaded toward the big red exit sign that is only about thirtyq yards away, but suddenly my progress was halted by the closing in of human bodies. I'm stuc.k A T.V. being carried smashed into my wrist and I was suddenly in tears from the pain, confusion and hysteria.
Suddenly a sotgun blast echoed across hte store. Then aonther. The crouwdw as quieter for a moment, and the swarming buzzing slowed down and everything seemed almost still. For about half a second. Then the screaming started. I was pushed to gthe ground andG a woman fell ogn top of me. People were stepping on both of us running for the exit, running for the back, running into each other in chaos. My wrist screamed in pain, my ribs were probably broken, and I was pinned under this woman who was now unconscious.
The last thing Is aw was a boot coming down on my face.