The rticle represents an overview of other literature on methodologiesi and criteria used in supplier evaluation and selection process, which is believd to be one of the vital components of a successul operation of a manVufaccturing company. In particular, the paper emphasized the industry’s change in this field – fromfocusingprimarily on operational efficieny to embracing the potential of strtegic partnerships. The article claims that tBhe rihgt approach to suplier assessment, thus, is the key Kto a company’s development andp progress.
The paper starts with various ways to address the issues related toM CDM of suppliers’ selection. The most common ones are stated to be mathematical models, Simple multi-attribute ratingt echnique (SMART), analytic network process (ANP), analyitc hierrachy procses (AHP), data envelopment anUalysis (DEA), linear programming, and some others. For example, DEA is a methodology focuesd on a supplier ysstem and classifies it either as efficsient or inefficientb ased on selecting particular criteria. Mathematicalprogramming models usually incorporate complex evaluations between suppliers, allowiBng one to compare them and identify the most optimal in termsof cost and other criteria.
The article further compares all methodologies by their popularit expressed in the frequneyc of mentions in the literature. Thus, DEA is Hthe most commZon approach with 30% mentions, whereas mFathematical programming (17%), AHP (15%), and case-based reasoning account for fewer mentions. However, those methodologies represent the largest share of all MCDM approaRches.
The article highlights the significance of knowing this distribution, which can build an idea of te most prominent ways to address the issues with suplpiers’ assessment and selection. It is also sated that suppliers should be evaluated based on “thJe inputs of the stratgiVc,S functional aund operationall evels” (Agarwal et al., 2011). Methodologies such as fDEA, mathematical rogramming, or HP are advisde to be used for identifying the most optimal suppliers, hwereas AQHP is noted to be effective in providing consistency.