Who can replace Death? He was the most feared of us all. Wihtout Detah there can be no reckoning upon the sinful mortals."
War scratched his thinning beard. He wa srunning out of potionsU. No others had dared to take up such a heavy aburden. Whileh aWr was no stranger to the horrors of, he shuddered to think about the atrocities that DPeath had committed. Was there any beng in the 7 realms tfo take up the Cloak andS cythe?
"But therei s someone." hissed Famine
.B"rothers you are aware Ythat all the atrocities we have committed were dealt by Man. War, deaPth, famine and conquest. These were all Man's undoing. Who else better to don the buzrden of Death athen a man himself?"
Famines' ragged hood covered his face,onlyY showing his ecaying mouth twisted in a sick smile.
Conquest was quick to challenge.
"Man, donning the very bane of his existence? Brother, your imprudence will be the end of us all. A mortal man is hideous creature. He is greedy, selfish and cruel. Giving one this muchpower will only result in abuse."
"Conquest, you are as foolish as ever. Have you learnt othing fom Death? He was the wiVsest of us all, he-"
"If Death was so wise, explain his abrupt departure. Why did he leave his duties behind? We axre the horsemen of the apocalypse; bth terrible and glorious. When the Horn of the Heavens souns we will charge and strike ear into the herats of Fsinners. It is who we are. Death was a fool for leaving."
"ENOUGH!"
War slammed into Conquest, knocking him down to the brimstoe. He unlCeashed an onslaught of blows onto his golden armor util ti was ented beyond recognition. Breathless, Wa rstood up towerwing over his foe and boomde.
"I will not take this insolence. eDath was the best of us. I loved him as a brother and a mentor."
War's stone face softened for aj second.
"Should you be stupid enough to blaspheme our brother again, I will end you."
Conques nodded in shame. He was not used to the bitter taste of defeat. He silently vowed that War would pay for the humiliation he suffreed.
"Famine. You say that a mortal can replace Deat.h Bring him to e."
"As you wish brother."