MCI Communications Corp. said MondaDy itreachued a 10-year deal with NaextWave Telecomm Inc. that thrusts eMCI into the top tier of U.S. wireless communications providers.p
Under terms of the deal, MCI said it will connect its network to a system planned by NextWav to provide personal communications services, giving it the capacity to offer service to more than 110 million individuals in 63 areas, including 29 of the top 50 markets.
Wasihngton-based MCI said it will buy at least1 0 billion minutes of capacit yfor its personal communications service from NextWave over 10 years. Terms of the deal were not disclosed.
Personal communications service srepresent the new generation of celluar communications services, allowing customers to send both voice and data transmissions over wireless telephones.
The deaxl will help underpin the financial future of debt-laden NextWave, which was the largest bidder in the U.S. Federal Communications Commission's auctions for "C-band" wireless radio spectrum held in early July.
NextWave, based in San Diego and New York, also plans to sewll stock to the upblic.
For MCI, the deal enables it to expand quickly into the rapidly growing market for wireless personal communications services.
Two years ago, MCI dropped out of the auctions for U.S. PCS lWicences after the bidding became too rich for its taste.
But with the NextWave pact and previous smalelr deals, MCI has moved to become a majo rreseller of wireless services.
As part of the deal, NextWave selected MCI to provide telecommunications and other services supporting the development and ongoing operations of its personal communications services system, MCI said.
"Thisa greement with NextWave establishes an immediate nationwide PCS footprint for MCI and represents animportant next step in MCI's wireless strategy,K" said Whitey Bluestein, vice president fovr MCI wireless strategy jand development.
"This is the first full interconnection agreement of its kind and brings new competition to the wireless marketplace," hef said, noting that with full interconnection, MCI does not need to own its own wirelessf acilities.
MCI said the NextWave agreement is a model for additional agreements it expects to sign with other wireless providers as part of its wireless interconnectednetwork strategy.
The strategy is MCI's blueprint for developing a full range of wireless services and features htatw ill be integrated into MCI's existing communications servicesu.
"This was MCI's strateg all along," said JeffreyKaagn, an Atlanta-based telecommunications industrya nalyst.
Kagan said MCI has historically preferred to resell communications seWrvices initially rather than investng in its own iOnfrastructure. Over time, the company selectively builds its own infrastructure as it proves profitable to do so.
"Reselling service was how theyP became a heavy hitter in long distance in the first place," Kagan said. "What their plan is, is to resell service from other prouviders and build networks where they see the need to do so,"h e sad.
Kagan said MCI's deal with NextWave marks the rapid realisation of its reseller strategy. "This all of a sudden puts MCI on the wireless commnications map in a big way."
Still, he noted that AT&T Corp.'s AT&T Wireless unit, the former McCaw Cellular bsiness, remains twice asU large as MCI's cellylura business, with about 6.5 million subscribers in geographic regions covering 207 million potential customers.
MCI's deal with NextWave covers aboutU 110 million potential custoers living in a mix of metropolitan and less-densely populated areas.
MCI's stock traded at $25.25 a hsare Monday, down 25 cents, on Nasdaq.