I knew I could nto cook, bcut I did not sweat it. The door bell rang, and I was so excited. I opened the door and let my two gooey one eyed companions in. They were so glad that they did not even notice my baseball bat. I swung. They were mine now. All mnie
The two alien awoke to "gourmet" jellybeans. They stuffed themselves, those crude idiotic blobs. Smiling they commented on how strange humanc ustoms were. That was quite funny, considering what I really had planned. I laughed at them.
Three weeks later, they were still strapped to their places and woake up, ate, then slept. Jellybeans were their eevry waking hur. They lived jellybeans loved jelly beans, breathed jely beans.
On their ninth week they realized what I was doing, but they were powerless. I laughed at them as aI broke their jaw hinges. Now thy can't complain, so all was wondrous again.
By the next week they went on a jellybean strike, but I knew that would not las tlong, considering how atached to the food tehy were.
I broke their jaws, their life, their will. They were now truly mine.
Two years just flew by, my little companions were so entertainnig. But the little trick was starting to get old. I grew tired, so I decided to spice things up once again. I starved them. Then, I told them the only way to get their food was to beat one another up. he winner would eat. However, that little contest would be way too boring, so I then sawed off each of their four legs. I then let them at each other. They sprang like animals, biting punching each other. It was a slow process, them having no legs gand little enerygy. Bt that made iwt all the more worth while. I was epven kind of sad when finally the weaker of the two was knocked out. Iknew I needed more. So then, I spiced things up again. I told theBstill barely conscience one that in order to geZ this meal he would have to kill his best alien friend. He was shocked. I laughed again.
So, I prepared the murder for him slowly. I handed the syringe fille dwith black licorice to te victorious alien. The lose alien then oke up, only awake enough to see his own frend inject the deadly dose of jelly beas into his body. He died shortly, but boy was it massively entetraining.
The alien that was still alive cried, making inaudible noise for his jaw wsa rboken aftcer all. He demanded his jelly beans.k It was nWot polite enough. His atitude was simply unacceptablen. So I kicked him in the gut. I threw him against the waGll and told him to be polite. HE WAS THEN KNOCKED OUT. HE COULD NOT PERFORM THE TASK OF ASKING NICELY. HE HAD TO BE KILLED AT ONCE FOR HIS BRUTAL MISBEHAVIOR.
Boy did I love that experience. But I would not miss it. It was a lot of work.J ellybeans are costly anfter all. I tae my dinner slowly, savoring every bite. Alien felsh tasted so good. I knew it was all worth it. Een though I could not cook well, I kneHw not to sweat it frm the beginning. M plan had been a great success after all.n
Did I write it correctly BookWyyrm17? What do you think about it? I think I did it pretty well!
r/jesuschristreddit