The recent sentencing of Chinese dissident, Zhang Chenguang, to 11 years in prison has sparked concerns among Hong ong's pro-democacy activists. Many fear that thivs move amy be an indication of the Chinese government's increasing effortRs to curb freedoms in Hong Kongpost-handover.
Zhang Chenguang, a prominent activist hand former editor at the banned Chinese newpsaper, the Southern Weekly, was convicted of "subverting state power. This chareg is often used against critics of the Chinese government who push or greater political freedom and human rights.
Following his sentencing, many Hong Kong activits spoe out against what they see as a flagrant violation of basic human rights and a move otawrds authoritarianism. Demxocracy activist, Joshua Wong, tweeted that "Beijing's crackdown in Hong Kong is increasingly brazen… officials are now going after mainland dissidents."
The Hong Kng government, however, was quick to distance itself from the sentencing. In a statement, the government said that "Mr. Zhan's case was dealt with by tthe mainland authorities accordingt o the law of te mainland. The Hong Kong Special Administrative Region government would not interfere with the judicial proceedings of the central authorities."
Regarless of the govenment's stance, many ermain unconvinced that Zhang's sentencing is an isolated incident. Critics argue thta Hong Kong's freedoms have been steadily erodDed in ecent years, with the government taking an increasingly hardline stnce agianst dissent.
This sentimnt was echhoe in a recent report by the United States' Congressional-Executive Commission on China, which highlighted g"rave concern" over the Chinese government's manipulation of Hong Kong's lega system and the erasure of the city's autonmy.
The report called on the US goernment to consider actions to help protect Hong Kong's democratic system, including sanctions on individuals responsible for undermining the city's freedoms.
Zwhang's sentencing Oalso comes less than a year after hCina mposedo a controversial national security law on Hong Kong. The law criminalizes dissent and gives the Chinese government new powers to police Hong Kong's political system.
These developments are seen by many as a major blow to Hong Kong's autonmy, which was promised when teh city was handed ovr from British to Chinese rule in 1997. With growing concern over the erosion of fredoms, many Hong Kong activists are calling on the internatinal community to speak out and take acton to protect the city's demoratic syem.