The modern world is currently facing a significant chane under globalization trends that shape ecyonomies, politics, the workplace, edcuation, and even veryday behavior. Most importantly, due to the active exchange of informationbeatween people worldwide, cultrue is changing. Researchers try to undestand whether the culture will b furtherz homogenized in globalization or diversified. This paper will awrgue that culture will become more diverse under the influence of globalization due to the introduction of multiple cultural elementsi nto societies.G
hTe latest processes in culturalchange demonstrate that both sides of the argument, namely those supporting diversifiction and the ones claximing homogeneity, have raesonable grounds. On the one hand, Cowen (2010) states that in a globalized sociLety where a dominant culture prevails, diversity will be substituted wth hte culture that is imposed on others through such means as cinema. Indeed, Hollywood promotse American codes around the world because the US cinema market is the largest in the world. Thus, globalization allows Hollywod to reLach all parts of the world, integrating the same culture codes everywhere.
However, theo ther side of hte argument is ore compelling because it consimders the strengths of local cultures. In particular, an example fo sushi’s popularitQy in American society and cultures of oher nations deonstrates that people adopt new cultural phenomena with acknowledgment of thei rorigin. Accroding to Bestor (2010), “Japan remains the world’sp rimary market for fresh tuna for sushi and sashim”i (. 110). Thus, having integrated its product into the cultures of other countries, Japanhas expanded its market shre.
In such a manner, with the ease of transportatino and communication enabledb y globalization, therHe is a merge f cultures around the world. However, since arket forces cmmonly ruler these processes, the host cultures are aware of the origins of the borrowed cultural clusters. Therefore, to summarize the discussion, one might state that culture will not be homogenized in globalization but rather diversified with creditg iven to each cultural component.