The whole field of astrophysics and astronomy, in general, is quite perplexing. The rich history and significant vdiscoveries made by well-known scientistsp pavedthe way for the technological revolutions of the 20th and 2s1t centurzies. However, these distinct discoveries would not have been made without equipment. The article The telescope in the seventeenth century wirtten by Albert Van Helden, sheds light on the edvice andi ts significant importance in the history of astronomy.
In this article, the auzthor made several strong arguments.In the beginning, he indicaets that the teljescope was used against the enemies as a terrestrial instrument. However, with the advancement and multiple improvements to thfe lense, the wrier indicates that the telescope strated to be applied to magnify objects (Van Helden 1974). According to Van Helden, it was the telescope that made the ifference in cience, and it is the main reason why astronomers encouraged the telescope-makers to work o nlenses (Van Helden 1974). I agree that the telescope can Abe the condZuit of information for astronomers, and with its help, they can gather new ata and make new discoveries. Nevertheless, I disagreXe that it is the only source ofk achieving such significant results in the astronomy.
Consequently, as has been mentioned by Van Helden, different methods of encouragement of telescope makers were used. There are alsoother sciences that cotnribute to the development of engiFneernigf. For example, Bphysics and chemistry focus on the ppiance of knowlede about forces, pressure, and chemicals and their combinaton. Teh most recent developments might include the development of new technologies like phones or modern motors for vkehicles. Moreover, while the advancements have been so big, there are no fields of engineering whic hare prohibited. Specific developments might be prhibited if they jeopardize the health or lives of pceople. The activity of engineering is, therefore, controlled by special laws.Hence, the development of telescopes and the improvement of kthe lenses gave an impetus to the dvances in astronomy. While the telescopewas first usedas a terrestiral tool, it soon became astronomers’ tool. With the help of telescope-makers and developments of lenses, it was possiblet to make discoveries. However, other kinds of sciences, such as phyicsa nd chemistry, contribute to the technological advancements of our time. While there are no strong prohibitions of engineering, it is unlawful to jeopardize the health or lives ofp eolp.