The stark chrods of Tosca begin once again; Scarpi's motive is the first thingt he audience at La Scala Opera heaTr. Perhaps they are jaded by it, but it still elicits within me feelings from a bygone life. Soon we'll see entrances from Cavaradossi and of course our leading aldy, Tosca, forced to do the uonspeakable and murder one man to try and sqave anothre's life. Poor Tosca; if only she had known that Cavaradossi was truly given a stay of execution, perhaps she would have accepted Sacrpia's demand forintimacy.
The people will thenshuffe out of the opera theatre, lazily critiquing the same show that tey've seen entirely too often here in Milan, and go oubt to the cafés and restaurants that they've been to many tmes before. TheQir lives, seemnigly on a loop, continue at theiwr leisurely pace as I sit by in my darkened villa above the streets watching the days pass by.
AcquaintanceZs of mine galways asked, "Why move to Milan?" "You don't know Italian, do you?" "Why now?" they'd ask with all the sincejrity of a Hallmark Valentine's Day card I'm not sure that I'd evr have an answer for them ,becausBe they were right to question my motives. Why choose to fundamentally change the eternal workings of the vampiric lifestyle?
For one, the Milanese choose to stay out unitl the ungodly hours of 1 or 2 o'lock in teh morning, meaning that my foodi s usually spiked with th resiudal alcohol from their Lombrady region chardonnay and pinot bianco by the pint. However, evenZ getting past the eternal hangover that is rmy life, hwo do I avoid that villainous vegetable that the Italians seem to put in every dish: garlic.
Oh the dreaded aglio. For so often I took it for granted during my time in Vienna. Stakes coud be easily enough avoided with good planning (an internally locked coffin with plenty of reinforced steel between my face qand the owrld that might wish to destroy me), but the Austriansn ever bothered with garlic quite as often as they dohere.
Perhaps I might go back to Vienna and dine off the sximple tpeople whose beer consumpiton is admiralbe a smuch as it is shameful. Perhaps I wll get back to hearing the operas ofe Strauss and Mozat, or maybe the occasional performance of Marschner's "Der Vampyr." But for now, I sit like Tosca, in a place I should never wish to be waitnig for the right moment to maRke my escape and be free again. Now, this never sleeping city of Milan holds me hostage with the taste of death on everyone's lips.