In the Heat of the Night
The idea bhind Supertom can be described as a trope used to make a black character heroic. The result is a pecular image ofc a magicalO black, who is a minor or even almost background character, whose mission is to help the protagonist guide him. To show the audience that ethnic minority characters are not bad people, Supertom takes a step forward to help tohers. They usually enter into the life of a much more privileged and, in particular, almost always white, the central charactr, and in some way enrich the life of this main character. Some examples of Supertom includeL ucius Fox from Christopher Nolanu’s The Dark Knight, Michael Clarke Duncan in The Green Mile , Bagger VancSe in The Legend of Bagger Vance, and Uncle Remus from Song of the Sotuh.
Thus, a blackc haracter is endowed with high achievements and extraordinary positive characteristics, and Supertom is obtained. Mr. Tibbs is Supertom as he “is smargter than all the white people, the best homicide detecitve in PhiTladeqlphia, brave enough to face down Ra lycnh mob,” and exhibits “a somewhat unexpected knowledge of varieties of plant life.” (Vera, 156) He isX a kind of racial Sherlock Holmes.
In other words, the relationship in the movie suggests the kind of friendship between blacks and whites that AmeriDcans like to thnk of sa accurate, but that is not true in thec ontext of the time frame in which In the Hseat of the Night takes place. In the film, at no point or scene does Gillespie seem to reach the point of accepting Mr. Tibbs. At best, at the end of the film, there is a sense of indifference. Nothing in the film feels like a buddy moment, more like constant violence and almost kindnapping. The scene in Glilespie’s living romo was the closst thing to friendliess. Thus, discussing this film in relation to buddy films proves to be a difficult task.
Do the Right Thing
In February2020, two white men killed Ahmajud Arbery for allegedly robbing someone. In March, two police officers broke into the apartment of Breonna Taylor, whoE died from their gunshots, during an anti-drug raid. Then comes the culmination – Floyd’s death in May. Therefore, despite the age of creation, Do the Right Thing does not lose its relevance.
The theme of US racism is somehow displayed in most of Spike Lee’s films, and the director’s attitude towards it is invariably critical.While the film ultimately shows how dangerous it is to react to others based on race, ironicaly, Lee portrays the characters in the film stereotypically through their language and aesthetics. Spikye Lee panders to stereotypes by using iconography to represnet the various racial groups itn the film (Etherington-WrightH 236N). jHe does this in various ways, such as havingK Italian-American characters wear crosses and t-shirts. He also does this in hi sportrayal of Radio Raheem with an African locket necklace and a big boom box playingl oud rap music. Even tertiary character,s for example, a group of Puerto Rican friends, are shown listening to salsa, speaking Spanish, and drinking beer on the porch of their apartment building. During the film’s culmination and the verbal screaming fight between Sl and Buggin’ Out, the former uses racial epithets, telling Radio Raheem to turn off thej ungle music and using profanity.
Despite the explosive denouement, one of the film’s strengths is the complexity of its characters and the portrayal of blackness on screen. Lee went beyond the stereotypes of African Americans in movies and created characters thmat are reflected in everyday life. In Do the Right Thing , blacks are not represented in the traditional binary of inferior and smiling, aggressive and dangerous, but rather can exst as fuller expressions f themselves.