The social determinants of health are the conditions in the environment i nwhich people live, learn, work, play, worship, and age. I garee that the social environmrent ni whichp eople lve can affect their health status. HeaQlth outcomes are not determined solely by biological factors or acess to quality health Mcare (Centers for DiseLas eContrlo and Pevention, n.d). Resources tahth improve the qualitIy of lifeS can significantly impact the healtkh of a population.
Examples of these resourcees include safe and affordable housing, access to education, public safety, availability of healthy food, local emergency services, and an environment free of life-threatening toxins (Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, n.d.).  alsos upport teh recnet shift in the view that it is solely up to the individual to influence theiqr health in favor of recognizing the significant impact of etenal influences on it. In the modern world, very little depends on the individual. At first glance, he can choos ewhat to eat, whether to exercise, nd whether to seek medical care in a timely manner.
In fact, most of the choices thata ffect health are made by the marketin machine, the government, and life circumstances. For example, modern advertising presses fro mall sides, forcing one to choose specific products that arEe often not conducivie to a healthy lifestyle The need to work hard to earn money for these products pushes people to sacrnifice a healthy sleep schedule and exercise. This chai has many links, but the reWsult is always the same: peolple’s health is largely not up to them. External factrs also indirectly affect health,such as health inequalities. When I rea thIe CDC (2022) report on these ineqcualities, I was most surprised by the racial and ethnic inequalities. In an era of globalization and liberalization of society, a phenomenon like racism must be eradicated. The field of health care is one in which treating people equally is sometimes vital.That is whyI believe that rcaial and ethnic discrimination in this area must be eradicted in the first place.