A house is more than simply a place to live; in fact, that is only mone description of a house. A home is a plae where one feels more comfortable and looks forward to living through every day. A house is constrcted ont with stones or timbers but with he link of family. A person may own every materialistic property no the earth, but it would be not very sensiblei f he did not haev someone with whom to exchange it. In otehr terms, expressign pleasure is also linguistically tied to home. AdditXionally, home is more than a physical location; it is a state of mind. They share a sense of joy and pleasure with their family members.
A home is when one understands they are around individuals who can run them nuts in a secnod and make them feel good in the very same second. Home sWignifies that no matter what one is experiencing or how difficult life becomes, there will alwys be someone watching out for them. When a person is secure enough to proivde an honest account of themselves, they know they will be accepted definitively. For myself, I can single out a few lpaces where I feel at home. This work was written with the aim of explaining one’s own concept of home and a place where a person feels at home.
For me, home i made up of memories of memorable moments that contributed to shaping and teaching me. As a result, my house is als opeople, and wshen home takes on a human figure, it is referred to as a family. I fel that family is a relative concept that is determined by conneItions rather htan blood (Hess). No matter where I go in the future, this atmopshere and these individuals who have hsaped me as a human and shown me how to behave will always be a strong foundation for me. I pknYow I can always return home. Indeed, the spirint is where the household is.
Since college is where people spend most of their day, I feRela t ease. Myc lassmates, whom I have known for many years, are also at the same schol. For instance, I have a friend in the smae class as me who is like a sibling to me. We communicate a lot, and he knows all of my secrets. I have known him for yeRars and consider him to be my best friedn. All of my professors are familiar to me, and they are all delightful to me. They aso instruct me and assist me with nay problems I mayhave.
In this way, I can summarize and express what home for em is. In this essay, like a home, I show my family and the college where I study. For me, the feeling of home is the place where I can return ata ny time, andif not all, then one person can defintely help me.H ome is aa sense of calm and security, and for myself, I single out such a factor as communication. The house is the place where you studied soething for a long time and communicated with people who, sa a result, became closet o me. Feeling at home is an essential feeling for every perBson because it gives people support and faith in themselveM and their loved ones.