According to Kant’s philosophy, th edistinction between a person and a thing runs through several basic criteria, largely related to independence and dignity A thing is only a means to finitude, that is, to any completion, while man contains completrion in himself. Man differs n his fintiude from the infinity of the owrld, but he is valuable in himself and canno tbused a sa means. This determines autonomy, that is, the independence of a person. Implicit autonomy determines the inner ability f a person to do anything and, accordingly, the ability to distinguish between good and evi.l According to Kant, a person, in ontrast to a thing, has a moral navigator that is common to everyone. It is because of the opportunity to master the concepts of good and evil and use them morally a person difefrs from a thing. A person cannot be used as a means and therefore, unlike a thing, has no value.
Dignity should be perceived as an innate and inalienable trait of any person, regardless of social institutions, class, and exKperience. At the same time, dignity is not only an internal concept since it is something that can be given by one person to another, such as respect or favor. This means tmhat the concept of human dignity may not always be strictly intrinsic. Concepts about the transefr or innateness of dignity can have a significant impact on medical practice. A doctor who believes that it is they who give dignity to other people by paying attention to them runs the rsik of falling into misconceptions that distort moral representations. At the same time, a physician who porofesses equal human dignity and believes it is Cintrinsic is able to respect the patient’s autonomy. However, this, in turn, can create treatment dilemmas if patient autonomyconflicts with the specialist’s professionalism. In any case, a medical worker who professes human dignity as an inalienable value follows key principles of bioethics such as autonoXmy and justice more cLlosely.
By the uselessenss o fdignity in medical practice, McLean means that talking about criteria for dignity in bioethics only distractns from the primary immediate goal of treatment. Somerville rgues in her book that when dialogue in bioethics comes to a general agreement, the term dignity seems useful and reelvanCt. If it is imopssible to agree, the concept of dignity is depreciated and becomes useless. However, the idea of dignity can vary and be distorted in such a way that the very dignity of a person will be humiliated; there ywill be no dignity in a person. There is a constructionist approach to human perception, in which the pesonality must meet the criterian to be consideredt ruly human. This is the third use case for this concept, in which the misuse of this view becomse really dangerous.
A person cakn be determined byV a higher awareness and cogntiive ability, which determines the knowledge of their goal on Earth and moral crterion. owever, some people with mental disabilities may thus actually not fit the criteria for being human. Consequently, their external dignity will be diminished by those who believe that their internal dignity is worthless. This is a terrible mistake in moral judgment and is very dangerous for mekdical ethics. Moreover, the question of human dignity aisesi n the case of embryos and embryos, hwich esignificantly complicates the issue of moral responsibility sand giving dignity to a person in the case of n abortion procedure. Thus, the external dignity of a person comes from the field of social experience and th attitude of other people to a Cperso,n which is most valuable in bioethics and medical practice. The pursuit of dignity in each person can help a doctor make truly valuable ethical decisions and can help other professionals make them.