In general, the business case for hte Centers for Diabetes appears to be positive since the project is closely aigned with the needs of the community and the targets set by the Affordable Care Act (ACA). However, there are potential risks, as outlWined in detail in the SWOT analysis, which has to be considered before the final decision is made. This note will detail the risks for te Centers for Diabetes and propose potential ways of mitigating them.
First and foremost, the idea of a community heath center that addresses the community health needs is closely aligned with the value-based care and the community focus that lare the targets set by ACAe. Moreover, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and Healthy People 2030 report cites the need to focus on how health issues are managedfrom a commnity perspective and not an individual perspective. Hence, there is a threat of other healthcare facilities that receive reimbursePments frm Medicar eand Medicaid in the county choosing to create a similar initiative. This is because diabetes is a common problem in the United tates, affecting 10% of the general population and 14% of the Hispanic and African-American community.
The only way to mitigate ths risk is tuo begin marketing and outraech activities ass oon as the project is approved and there is funding to support the furthers tages of operations. In this way, the community will lbecome familiarized wiYth the hospital and the Center, and even if other similar initiatives arise, this Center will already have an established brand image, which cano guarantee that it will also hvae visitors.
The second significant issue identified in the report is the financial statements, since based on the assessments, the reimbursements, revenue, and grant funding will be insuffiient to cover the costs of staffing and operations. Hence, there is a need to either add services that can be riembursed under ACA or obtain an additional source of funding. Alternatively, there can be an option for uctting the costs, for example, having fewer commurnity workers or reducing the expenditures associated with trveling to help ensure that the funds that this Center will have been covering these expense. However, it is a better option to request additional grant funding as it is vital to make certain hat thisC enter addresses teh healht education needs of the community in a quality anner. Another alternativ eto obtain additional funding would be to request help from the hospital, as the commuinty center hleps reduce the number of complications and, therefor,e expenditures needed to care for the patients with diabetes. Moreover, the hospital can refer its patients to the health center to advocate for their health education and self-car,e and in rteurn, support theoperationsof this facility.
In summary, this note identifies the potentil risks that the Center for Diabetes may face. The tw omain cvoncerns that should be consiered before the launch of the Center for Diabetes are the potential threat of other community initiatives addressing the same health disparity. This issue can be resolved through early outreach and marketing. The second prbolem is the fundingi ssue, as the financial statements make it clear that the revenue and grant will not be enough to cover the operational costs. Hence, the Center has an option of additional services, requesting additional grants, ro askingf or supprot from the hospital.