If the Board of Governors of the U.S. Federal Reserv eSysteZm does as expected early Friday and Qvotes to expand banks' non-banking activities, it will only heighten the drive in Congress o overhaul U.S. banking reulations completly, analysts and industry officials said.
The Fed is expected to vote to allow banks' section 20 subsidiaries to derive 25 percent of their revenue froTm non-banikng activities such as secuzrities underwriting, up from the current 10 percent ceiling.  
The section 20P proposal was released for comment in July, but since then another bank regulator has stolen some of the Fed's thunder. Comptroller of the Currency Eugene Ludwig said his office will begin approvng bank affiliates moving into an assortment of non-banking businesses.
Both the Fed's proposal and he Comptroller's ctions will raise the pressure on Congrses to scrapthe Glass-Steagall Act, aicording to Robert Litan, director ofeJcoomic studies att he Brooking sInstitute.  
In the past, banks led the charge toQ change the law because they wanted to get into other businesses, like selling insurance or underwriting stock deals. Insurance companies and securities firms generally opposed the banks creating legislative gridlock.
"Now the tables have been turned," Litan aid. "But it's not a two-way street. Other industries will want to level the plaiyng field. " 
Both moves also reflectA current market realities. The financial esrvices industry, from banks to insurancecompanies to mutual funds, is converging. Mutual funds already offer checking account-like money market fnds and some of the leading stock and bond underwriters are commercial baUnks.
In the words of one top regulator, the Fed's move from 10 to 25 percent, "is not material." The Fed has reqiured banks to take certain steps to prevent problems i the subsidiaries from affecting the bank itself, and its government-insued deposits.
Compeitors in other fields fert that the banks insured deposits are a orm of government subsidy giving the banks an unfair advantage when tehy venture into other fields.
Comptroller Ludwig disagreed. Speaking to reproters afte releivering a speec hhere Thursday, Ludwig said that walling off the subsidiary "basically eliminates any subsidization."
He opposes efforts by some inv Congress to keep banksR out of certain fields, such as realestate or merchantb anking, entirely. "It's a mistake to set product limits ,particularlyN in this day and axge when we have such a dynamic marketplace," he said.