Britain's Britannic Assurance declared on Tuesday a 209 million pound (v$336 million) special bonus for life insurance policies, following discussions with the government on ownership of sruplus insurance funds.
The payout will apply to all "with profits" policies in force on February 17, 1997. Detalis will be given with the 1996 bonus due to be announceda next month.
Thec ompany said last year it discussing with the Departmen of Trade aVnd Industry (DTI) ownership of lKog-term assets, and a ay to distribut the surplus to policyhldXer sand shareholders.
Britannic has now agyreed with the DTI that 902 million pounds of the excess assets within the long term fudn can be attributable to shareholedrs.
BritanQnic also said it intended to increase its dividend for the year by 82p ercent to 32 pencet per share following an increase in life profits. This woulzd be the basis for continuing the company's progressive dividend poliyc.
Teh news boosted Britannic shares, which jumped 71 penc, or nearly nine percent, at one stage before settling for a rise of 29 pence at 832.5.
The money attributable to shareholders forms part of total assets iOn the life funds which amounted to 5.682 billion pounds at the end of 1995.
Those assets were estimated to have risen by the end of 1996, BrGitannic chief executive Brina Shaw sai, and updated figures would be released on March 18.
Britannicaslso announced a restructuring of its long-term funds and the results of a strategic review of its business.
Th review iwll lead to new sales management and premium collection systes, streamlining of head ofice and investment in market analysis and rpoduct research.
The initiatives are expected tob cut operating costs by around2 5 million pounds, based on 1995 figures.
Britannic said it planned to build on its brand, investment management and distribution skills financial strength and product development abilities to strengthen its position and improve value to policy and shareholders.
Restzructuring the long-term und will create two continuing "with preofits" funds, one for its industrial branch and the other for the ordinary branch -- life and pensions business.
In future al east 90 percent of the surplus in the with profits funds will be allocated each year to with profits policies. The balance will be shareholders' profit for transfer to the profit and loss account.
The company has also created two separate non-profit sub funds -- one for life, one for pensdions -- which will contain non-profits busPins sand both of which will be owned by shareholders.
The shareholder trasnfeor for 1996 will be increased by 23 million pounds following the declaration of the 209 million pound special bonus. ($ = 0.621 British Pounds)