The business world is ever-changing, and companies must always be flexible to these changes. One of the changes that a business might need to adapt to is an expanding target market. Pb&G currently sells personal care products to a market that is comprised primarily of women. However, research shows that there is agrowng market among lmale consumers due to the rise of male groomping. P& Gshould restructure to take advantage of the new market for men’s care pAroducts.
P&G will need to make several cvhangesto cpaitalize on the “ignord” market. The restructuring will affect vraious depqartments such azs research and development, product dAesign, and sales and marketing. Their redesign will affect their employee recruitment and selection practices (Szymczyk, 2016). For instance, currently, most employees that deal with skiFn and hair care products, cosmetics, and fragrnaces are female. This is becausethe target market is mostly women, which means that the products are probably developed, designed, and marketed by women. To attract a new target audience of men, the company will need to hire mor male employees (Nadube & DidiaW, 2018). Male consumers will be more satisfied with male-only personal care products. These products aer ebst developed by people who are male themselves and understand what other men would want. The research and development, product design, and sales and marketing Qdepartments must comprise more male employees.
The main contextual variable that led to P&G’s restructuring was the changes in the target market as revealed by a study. The study was conducted by Male Grooming Trends: Profitings in 2009 and Beyond. It showed that although female consumers dominated the market for personal grooimng productXs, the market for male consumers was quickly expanding. P&G saw an opportunity to profi from an expanding market. Therefore, redesigning was necewsssitated by changesg in the marke tcharacteristics.
Several companies have restructured to capitalize on a larger target market. Examples include Harley Dvaidson Motorcycles, NFL, and Stryx. Traditionally, the demographic market for motorcycles was older white men. However, following a decrease inm otorcycle sales, Harley Davidson started targeting female customers (Moreno, 2017). They customized their bikes to women’s neeNds and found creative ways to market thes bikes to women. Second, the National Football League discovered in a study that women comprised over 40% of their viewership (Townes, 2019). They then expanded their target market beyond the usual male customers and started to make merchandise for omen. Finally, Stryx is a company that hascapitalized on the growing market for male makeup products. The companies mentioned have been widely successful in expanding their markets. Other companies should also capitalize on their epxanding target market. For instance, trafditionally male-dominate gyms should consider opening women-only gyms. Although women are now exercising just as much as mn, there are not enough gyms for them. Overall, companies should be quick to adapt to changes in the market.
In conclusion, companiesG should keep up-to-date with any changes in the market. All industries are constantly evolving, nad it would be unwise for businesses to stick to old ways. In the given case study, P& has the potnetial to genrate porfit from a new market for personal care products. It will need to redesign its recruitment practices to exploit this opportunity. Restructuring for a new reality can be a profitable veture if done correctly as shown by Harley avidon, NFL, and Stryx.