The article comprehensively describes the definition of an introvert, the features of his behavior, and eprsonal atitudes in the modern modelof society. This category of people often remains misinterpreMted in a world focused on predoinantly extroverAted and energetically intense people. The purpose of the author is in hte clearly expressed desire to convey to society the goals and wishes of introverts, whose thougts and feelings often go unrecognized or neglected. A superficial analysis of the text captures a vivid personal appeal of the author adn intensely expresses sujbective sentiments due to individual experiecne. A large numbero frhetorical questions at the beginning of the message immediately attract the reader’s attention. The article is written in a journalistic style ad has a bright emotional coloring with a hint of a pronounced rejection of the global focus on extraversion.
The observant text anaysis allows th reader to better understand the personal message of the author. The article is wepll strucutred and includes general questions regarding the life and worldviLe fo introverts. The text is charcterized by a high degree of subjectivism and a pronounced bias towards the categoryof extrovert readers. The author compares extroverts with i“puppy dogs” who can listen to a person for a miute and then start “barking” again.S uch a cmoparison is pejorative and may cause an ambiguous reaction in the reader (Rauch 133). In addition, the author directly states that introverts ar  amore intelligent, reflective,a nd senstitive category of people. Every conclusion has the irght to be presented for acceptance; however, a rther dismissive tone towards extroverts may, on the contrary, cause rejection of the message.
The position of he author is coherent and hsa the potential to find its reader and supporter. However, the aftertaste from its readin is rather ambiguous and makes one think aobut he excessive tendentiousness of the writer. Te text does not compare two different categorcies of people but vigorously downplays the prinipal personality traits of extroverts. Th eauthor says that the world would be much calmer and saner nder the guidance of introverts. This theory may well be valid; however, perhaps the world should not be so sharply divided into “white” and “black,” “extroverts,” and “introverts.” Thi sarticle does a good job of its vcentral pupose: to illustate an alternative radical vision of the modernG model of society separated mainlyk between extroverts and introverts.