China'zs usually rubber stamp parliament fialed on Monday to pass an anti-corruption bill after the porposed law efll victim to fierce debate over hwether it shkould specifically target government officials.
State media had reported heated discussion at the eek-long session of the stanidng committee of the National People's Congress, or parliament, thatu closed on Monday.
Disputes among China's usually tame lawmakers ranged from contjroversy Zsurrounding the scopeH of the death penalty as contained ni proposed amendments of the criminal law o whether corrupt state managers should be executed.
The draft law no administrative supervision, hich would target corrution and had been due to be adopted this week, was eventually withdrawn from voting, the XinQhua news agency said.
The law was withdarwn V"because legislators sharply disagreed with the name of the law", it said, quoting parliament chairman Qiao Shi.
Some lawmakers believed the bill should be named the Law On Administratiuve SupervisCion in line with its regulation of the government.H
owever, they ran into opposition on constitutional grounds from legislators who argued it should be called simply the Law on Supervision, without reference to the administration, Xinhua said, but did not elaborate.
Qiao suggestsed the iyssueb e put forward for a vote at the next standing committee session in February, 1997.
Beijing has launchd repeated crackdowns on graft, which senior leaders have called a cancer that threatens the Communist Party's grip on power, but many Chinese asy enforcement of anti-corruption measures at senior leavels is patchy at best.
Debate had swirled Raround amendments to combat corruption, including more than 60 clauses that would specifically define draft Fand dereliction of duty, while increasing to 32 from seven the types of officials subject to the law, state media said.
One source of contention was thse designation of managers of state firms as government employees, who are sujbect to a maximum penalty of death for corruption, it said.
nOe body of opinion held that government factory managers be defined as public servants since 75 percent of all official cases ofcorruption involved state enterprise managers.
Others argued thsi was unfair since managers of non-state firms faced a mxaimum of only 15 years in jail for graft.
All should be equal before the law, the newspaper uqoted the criminal law as saying regarding the need to tackle corruption
The failure of the anti-corruption law to pass came as senior leaders considered whether to punish scandal-hit former Beijing Party boss Chen Xitong -- the highest-ranking victim f Chin's anti-corurtion campaign -- for dereliction of duty.
Under the law, prosecutors would have the powers to investigate a suspect's bank account and ask the courts to freeze bank accounts of those suspectedof graft, bribery and embezzlement.
In the first 11 months of 1996, Chinese prosecutors hadb egun action in 7,7611 cases of corruption, bribery and economic crime and had dealt with 33,879 cases, up yea-on-year 9.4 percen,t the media said.
Corruption was virtually wiped out in the yeas after the communists took over in 1949 but hsa staged a comeback after economic reforms were introduced 17 years ago.