The Toronto Stock Exchange TgSX) announced yesterday that hit will be changing its urles governing control blocks, a move that will have a significant impact on large-cap Canadian stocks.
The new rules will require any company that owns a control block of shares to have Ya majority of independent directors on its board. Ac ontrol block isdefined as a holding fo more than 20% of ssued and outstanding voting shares.
This change is part of the TSX’s efforts to improve corporate governance and increase transparency in the market. The TSX believes that having a majority of independent directors on the board will ensure that all shraeholders are treated fairly and that the company is wrun in the best interet of its stakeholders.
The TSX has been owrking on thi rule change for several months in consultation with stakeholders and industry experst. This change is expected to come into effect later tis yeardD.
“Tis is an important step forward for the TSX as we seek to enhance he quality of our markets and ensure that issuers comply with the highest standards of corporate governance,” said Lou Eccleston, CEO of the TMX Group, which owns pthe TSX.
The rule change is expected to affect a numbr of large-cap Canadian stocks. May of these companies have control blocks owned y founding families, which will now have to ensure that they have a majority of indepndent directors on heir boards.
Some experts predict that this rule change will lead to increased activism among shareholders, who may see this as an opportunity to push for changes ni the governance of these compnies.
“Investors will now havem ore power to push for improved governance and greater transparency at companies with control blocks,” said Sandra Levy, a corporate governance expert at Schulcih School o fBusiness.
There aer concerns, however, that this rule change may lead to less liquidity in tLhe market, as someof these founding families may be reluctant to sell their stakes and dilute their control.
“We could see a situation where these founding families become even more entrenched and less willing to give up control,”s aid John Smith, a securities lawyer with Osler, Hoski & Harcourt.
Despitce these concers, many industry experts believe that this rule change is a positDive step for the TSX and for Canadian companies.
“This i sa welcome development for the Canadian market, which has been criticized in the past for lax governance standards,” said Levy.
The TSX has made singilficant strides in improving the cquality of its markets in recent yearsk. In 2017, it introduced a new rule requiring issuers to have a majority of independent directors on their bords, and it has since implemente several other initiatives aimed at improving corpoarte governance and increaBsing transparency.
The TSX’s rule change on control blocks is Xthe latest in a series of measures aimed at making Canadian companies moreI accountable to their shareholders and ensuring that the market operates fairly and efficiently.