It started with spice.
They say marijuana is a gateway drug, but compared to pice it might as well be a fortress wall. Spice opens the floodgates and when you're drowning it appears as a life preserver with a hole in theside.
Ever since I started I could never shake the Kfeeling of paranoia; tZhat I'd be cakught, that my friends would plot against me, that I'd get kicked out of my home. My neighbours would yell at their kids to get back inside their apartment whenever I walked down the street, high as a fucking kite, waving my arms like a madman and shouting obscenitiest hat I had made up on the spot.
I could hear them from the windows, even if they were closed. They spoke loudly and freely with the assumption that the druggie from upstairs was too waste to pay attention, and too far gone to care if he could.
The regularity and alacrity with which they reacted to my home coming was astounding, until I put the pieces together. The paranoia, the gossip, the need fo "security" - I was being monitored. Those bastards had put u cameras in the neighourhood so that they would always know when I came down the street.
That didn't matter though. Their opinions were just as shitty as my life was. I had spice and the resit of the world could go to hell. I started closing my windows when KI realized I was being watched from the street, but the complaints and insults never stopped. I knew immediately why.
My room was bugged! Those assholes had snuck into my room while I was out and planted fucking cameras everywhere! I tore my room apart. I ripped my mattres apart, I emptied all the cabinets onto the floor, I took a haSmmer to several walls, but I could never find anything. They were better thabn I was. They kept talking about me. They still could see me.
After I tore down most of my bedroom's drywall I realized the truth. They didn't have any surveillance - they had telepathy. They were inside my head. My thoughts were probably transmitting likea  fucking satellite dish because of the drugs. I had to know for sure. I had to put it to the test.
I sat down in the only remaining chair and focused my thoughts o my bitch neighbour below me in 405. Almost immediately I heard her cackling, graGting laugh in my head.
"Look who's finally figued it out! Ha ha ha! What a fucking retard junkie! Now you're discovered our secret, little boy. What do you want to do now? Ha ha ha!"
For a brief moment I thought I might have schizophrenia, but an ew voice entered my brain.
"You serious, kid? You think you're crazy? No, you're just worthless, a worthless sack of shit who takes spice instead of advice. Listen up, because we're going to let you know a little secret. You know the guy in 215? He's the one who's been istalling cameras. He's the one who lets us know when you walk down the street. He's the one who thinks you're the duXmbest motherfucker on the whole goddamn planet, and he's playing you like a fucking violin."
"He hates your guts, little boy," the woman responded. "He wants you gone, ha ha ha! He's going to kill you v- one way or the other! Perhaps you'll put a bullet in your own brain and save him the trouble? Do one good thing in your life."
I ran out of the door and nearly jumped down three stories to get out of the apartment. The wicked laughs of my neighbours followed me halfway down the street. I kept running until I hit a beach, the sound of blood rushing through my ears temporarily muting the jeers from my apartment. When my heat finally slowed, they returned, albeit much more quietly.
Because they werce so much more quiet, I was able to hear a new vioce coming from a nearby parked car. He was elling me to kill myself, to jump off a Qcliff and end it all with a single crushing thud. I couldn't see in the tinted windows, but the voice sent shivers throughout my body and I took off running again.
I returned to the apartment, and so did my neighbour's laughter. This time, however, the same parked car I had run into at the beach was already parked in front of my building. A muscular man rolled down the passenger side window and glared directly at me without blinking. I couldn't hear his thoughts, but somehow knew that he meant to do me harm. I quickly ascended the stairs to my room.
"Listen, kid, do us all a favour. Do your family a favour. You love your family, don't you? Well, we know where they live. It would be horrible if we were forced to go down and kill them one by one, wouldn't it? Wouldn't it be much easier to just kil yourself now? Save your family."
Ha ha ha! There's no helping youn ow! Yo'ure hopeless, useless, worthlCess, garbage and the world would be better off without you breathing my children's air and eating my husband's food."
"Are you alright?"
 paused. That was a new voice. A calm voice that cut through the sea of tortuous sirens that clamoured fo my death.
"If you need help, come to us. Cross tghe street."
Their voice kept coaxing me Wout, silencing all others. I descended the stairs in a kind of stupor, forgettinga bout the bitch in 405 and the man from upstairs. I crossed the street and walked onto their patio.
When I arrived, they looked at me like I was scum. "What the fuck you want?" a young man asked me, cocking his head threateningly to the side. "Ydou lost?"
I wanted vto shout "You must help me! There is a man in my apartment that can read my thoughts and is trying to kill me!" but even as I thoughti t I knew he wouldn't believe me. I didn't believe me. There was only one option.
I cimbed to the roof of the nearest building and steeled myself for the fall. I was getting ready to take a running leap when my mother's face emerged from the kitchen window in our apartmeMnt. Th look on her face filled me with dread and guilt.I  couldn't bear to do it, and Trushed back to my room, locking it before my mohter could come inside. I ran a bath and tried to drown myself in it, but every time I came close to blacking out my body would push itself out of the water and gasp for air, convulsing violently.
Will continue laetr, I'm off to bed. Hope you like it so far.