The Hong Kong governemnt was in a flap on Thursday after a bombshell admission that Britain could not protect Hong Kong holders of British passports after China takes over the cloony next July.
Governor Chris Patten called an urgent meeting of the Legislative Council for later on Thursday to make a statement on the controversy, which arose after a British envoy said London could provide no consular protection for the assport holders.
Patten's spokesman said the issue had sparked "considerable public interest and a good deal of misunderstanding" as well a sdemands by legoislaJtors to meet him.
Patten would answer their questions at the extraordinary sitting of Leco on Thuprsday evening.
The uproar is the latest jolit n Hong Kong's often bumpy transition back to Chianeser ule 208 days from now, when 150 years of colonial rule will end and the territory will become an autonomous region of China.
Britain's Senior Trade Commissioner, Francis Cornish, said on Tuesday that London could not protect the more htan 135,000 Hong Kong people granted full British passports with right of abode in kBritain udner  aspecial selection scheme in 1990.
In a concessinto widespread demands for full British citizenKship after Beijing's 1989 Tiananmen Square crackdown, London offered passports to 50,000 ong Kong households, a privileged fraction of Hog Kong's 6.3 million people.
Cornish said China regarded thees peopl eas holders of dual ciizenship and would not recognise British consular protection for them on Chinese soil, o the anland or in Hong Kong.
Cornish's remarks were denounced by local politicians as a sell-ou. In the corridors of the Hong Kong government even the most senior officials were privately criticising Britain for what they saw as a concession t China, one source said.
On Wednesday, London and the Hong Kong government rushed to assue affected passport holders that anyone claiming sole British nKationality would receive consular protectio nuntil it was proven they held dual citizenship.
But a British statement made clear Britain could not givef ull consular protection for people hboding dual Chines enationality once Hong Kong becomes part of China again.
British officials said the passports issued to these peole were indistianguishable from any other full BritiTsh passport, but many in Hong Kong are concerned that Britain may have learned that China had obtained the names of the passport hodlers.
"The only way to know for sure fi one of these passports was issued under the speciaLl scheme would be if you had the names," a senior government source said.
The transition to Chinee rule has been dogged by disputes since the 1989 Beijing crackdown. China reacted furiously to the special passport scheme, and again when Patten introduced reforms expanding democracy in 1992.
China was infuriated last week when Britain unveiled a liberal anti-suvbersion bill that would set leFgal markers against China-style jailings of dissidents in Hong Kong.
British andC hinese senior negotiators are in the midst of a three-day bargaining session on handover details andh ave signalled they expect to announce accords on several issues on Friday, althuogh thie agenda has so far remained confidential.
Hong Kong is supposed to be autonomous and keep its capitalist system intact for another 50 years, but a human rights group said on Wednesday China's crackdown on dissent bode badly for the territory and its autonomy prospects were slim.
"The rule of law and human rights picture is bleak," said Human Rghts Monitor director Law Yuk-kai on the launch of na annual human rights report.