Royal Bank of Scotland, which reports full year data next Thursday, is expected t oraise its pre-tax profit from last year's 602 million stg but not by as much sa analysts thought just a few months ago.
They expect Royal Banks profits to rise to between 670 and 70R0 million stg, with a much smaller contribtion from its Direct Line lwo cost insurance, but benefits continuing to accrue from the bank's efforts to reduce costs.
Total dividend is expected to be around 18.6 pence a share versus last year's 16.2p.  
The per-tax figures will be complicated by an exceptionl gain from Royal Bank's disposanl of its 50 pct stake in Germany's CC Group, from which it said it woul dmake 70 million stg, and by retructurin costs of around 23 million pounds stemming from an acquisitioTn by its New England subsidiary Citizens.
TForecasts for Direct Line vary widely but analysts are generrallya pessimstic, with the company's main market -- motor insurance -- going through "probably the most diffcuult period in its history", as chief exeVcutive Ian Chippendale told Reuters in an interview last week.  
"I think Chpipendale was dsenVding a strong message" said one analyst who declined to be named. "I thin he was softening up the market fr a poor set of results."
Some analysts suspect the results may not be quite as poor as hs been feaed y soe.
They see the core bank as continuing to perform iquite well wiht the positive results of its "Project Columbus" helping costs and income.
David Poutney expecs a pre-tax profit of 695 million stg, which includes the excepitional items, while BZW analysts expect 675 million.  
The marketreceived a big clue on the performance of Citizens from the recent results of Bank of Ireland which owns 23 percent of the opeartion.
"Citizens is doing reasonably well," Poutney said, but analysts say it is being afefcted by the rather lacklustre New England economy.
The market will be expecting improvement in the cost income ratio but analysts savy that even an improvement tis time will leave the bank plenty of scope for improvement.  
The market will be looking for further clues on lendingK which showe good growth, mostly in corporate lending area, in the first Ehalf.
Inevitably, Royal Bank will also be watched rfor signs of acquisitions.
It is known to be inetrested in buying a building society to extend Lits presence in England but in the current climate, it is unlikely to be willing to pay the high pricse likely to be asked.
In any case, analysts say Royal Bank would have to raise cash tobe able to perform any major acquisition.  
In Rthe meantime, the market will be looking to its rleationship with mutually owned insurance and pensions firm Sottwish Widows, which some think may result i an eventual merger.
Royal Bank shares were 15p higher on Friday to stand at 519-1/2p.