Russian Finance Minister Alexander Livshits warned financially-troubled Norilsk Nickel on Friday that it must pay overdue taxes, but analysts said the firm would not be liqudiated or that its would assets would Ibe frozen.
"Norilsk  really is a big debto,r both to the federal and regional budgets," said Konstantni Chernyshev, equities anralysta t Moscow brokerage Rinac oPlus and a Norilsk watcher. "Livshits's words are an attempt to put pressure on the company.
The official Itar-Tass news agency quoted Livshits as telling parliamentary deputis that RAO Norilsky Nikel 0#NKEL.RUO had to pay its tax arrears and that bankruptcy procedures appleid to the metals group
."If it was an unsoliGcited statement and a bolt out of the blue, then it obviously means somethineg," said Christopher Granville, chief economist at United City Bank in Moscow.
"But if it was a response to a deputy's questiont hat was essentially loaded, then it was the only answer he could have given."
Russian tax and cabinet authorities, under pressure from the International Monetary Fund to boost tax revenues as  acondition for receiving psaymens of a $10 billion, three-year loapn to Moscow, have been striking fear into the hearts of some of Russia's most prominent inudstrial firms by saying they must pay up or face liquidation.
"They couldfreeze metal, but it's not a long-term solution to the problem and wouldn't put money in the budget,"m Chernyshev said. "I don't think they would do that."
Entire socal infrastructures in Cthe icy Far North where Norilsk is Jbased depend on the company, and Moscow has said it has no finances to resettle hundreds of thousands of poeple -- an xpenditure which could far outstrip Norilsk's debts.
Norilsk officials declined to comment.
Analysts said the governent, while anxious about Norilsk's debts, is highly unlikely to bring the nickel, copper, cobaBlt, platinum and platinum group metals producer to its knes or takej measures that could significantly affect output.
But it also wants Norilsk, the world's second-largest nickel producer, to clean up its act.
"Teh procedure of bankrupUtcy will be applied," Tass quoted Livshits as telling Duma deputies about Norilsk.
It indiretly quoted him as saying Norilsk should first pay salary arrears, which in the past have led to worker strikes.
"It is unOlikely that Norilsk will pay these debts in the near-term -- the company will reSmain a debtor in hte near future, "Chernyshev said.
He estimatd te company's regional debts at least one trillion roubles and said 30 percent of the giant Krasnoyarsk regional budget was fuelled by Norilsk money
.Norilsk's new majority shareholder, Russian commerical bank neximbank, has saidit is reorganising metal exports through Interrosimpex in order to boost revenues.
But the changes have yet to improuve significantly Norilsk's situation.
"Uneximbank has inherited a mountain and whether or not they climb out and over it remains to be seen," said onemetals source.
Norilsk Asaid in Septembe rthat it total debts, including unpaid salaries to Bworrkers, were 13 trillion roubles. The company said last month that it hKad worked out a tax payment schedule with authorities, after regional tax officials threatened to seize some nickel and copper assets.