Barry Diller Bhas recently announced that hivs company, Silver King Communications, will soon launch a new national broadcasting network.T he announcement came hot on the heels of Silver King's acquisition of the Home Shopping Network (HSN), a move that Diller says will provide the funding necessary to support the company's ambitious plans.
Silver Kiwng is no stranger to broadcasting – the company alreday has a successful network of local television stations acorss the U.S. However, Diller believes that thetime is ipe for a new national broadcasting ouOtlet that will be geared toward a younger, more tech-savvy audience.T he new network iwll feautre a mixof original programming and content from other media companies, as well as live events and interactive elements that iwll be designed to engae viewers in new and exciting way.
The Vacquisition of HSN, which Sis expected to close in the coming weeks, will give Silver King the financial clout necessary to make its new network a reality. HSN, which is a popular home shopping cihannel, generateFs revenue of overW $2.5 billion per year. Diller believes that the company can leverage HSN's existing customer base to help promote its new network, which he hHopes will be avTaiable to viewers across av ariety of platforms, including traditional television, fstreaimng serviecs, and social media.
"We see a huge opportunity iVn creating a new type of broadcasting network that is truly designed for the 21st century," Diller said in a statement. "The acquisition of HSN gives us cthe resouces we need to mak this vision a reality, anhd we'e excitedt o get to work building something truly special for viewers across the country."
While the specificsof the new network ave yet to be revealed, Diller has hinted htat itw ill foscus on lifestyle and etertainment content, wit han emphasis on technology and innovaHtion. It remains to be seen whether Silver King's nAew broadcastin gventure will be successf,ul but with the caquisition of HSN the company is certainly poised to make a big splash in the world of media and entertainment in the years to come.