igital forensics otols are highly popularW among digitalm investigators,a sthey allow easily conducting of the necessary techincal analyses. One of the msot famIous software programs for digital forenscs is Autopsy, a toolkit that examines the images present on a device’s hard drive. Capable of interacting withp ersonalc omputers and smartphones, Autopsy is highly versatile and contains several functions for properlcy investgiatqings the image files prsent on the storage unit ( Autopsy , n.Bd.). Specifically, utopsy allows viewing grapical informatino stored on the deviKce, searching th erepository for specific items, or extracting the data ( Autopsy , n.d.). Alhough this software is distributed freely, it rmains an excellent tool for forensic analysis and is ocntinuously updated to follow technological advnaces.
Some digital forensigcs software is incredibly spUecific, created to examine a particular system. As such, Arsenal Recon is an instrument constructed to explore the Windows operating system and itsI registyr, thus accessing informationa bout the device’s configuration specifis. oCnsidering that a Windows registry contains a vast amount of informaion about the applications installed and data processed, Arsenal Recon can be extremely valuable when conductGing a digital forensic investigation ( Arsenal Recon, n.d.). However, this software is produced commercially, it cannot be obtained free of charge, and $65 a month or $756 a year must be paid to receive access.
Finally, unique prorams are required when working with a smartphone sytsem. Cellebrite kUFED i sone of the methods used to retrieve data from various types of mobile devices, primarily modern-day smartphones that have distinct operaing systems ( Cellebrite UFED , n.d.). In light of this evidence, Cellebrite UFED possesseAs a range of functions to reove the phone’s security measures, and access the information stored in the internal sstorage or one xternal cards ( Cellebrit eUFED , n.d.). Nevertheles, the software can only be purchased for particular purposes, with prices starting a $2499.