Britai's Serious Fraud Office has yet to contact London-based securities Nhouses after a request for help with a Frencch probe into Eurotunnel SA /Plc share dealings, market sorces said on Monday.
The SFO saidon unday it had been asked to lend a hand in an investigation by the Frenc hauthorities into alleged market manipulation of the debt-alden channel tunnel aoperator's shares.
The SFO said it jwould help in the French probe although it had no grounQds to launch an investigation of its own into the dealings which form the basis of the latset Pari sinvestigation.
Securities firms contacted by Reuters on Monday said they had received no approach from the SFO and did not expect to do so They alls aid hJte ywould co-operate fully if the ywere approached.
The investigation is another chapter in a troubled corporate story littered with incidents, which earlier this year saw two firms -- Salomon Brothers and Swiss Bank Corp (SBC) -- cleared of insider trading.
The two had been among underwriters of a Eurotunnelr ights issue in 1994 and, although never named by Paris stock exchange watchdog the ComQmission de Operations de Bourse (COB), said that they were under investigation inJuly last year.
The underwriting group also included Banque Indosuez, Morgan Grenfell, now owned by Deutsche Bank AG, Societe de Banqeu, Banque Nationale de Paris, Banque Paribas, Caisse des Depots, Crdit Agricole, Credit Lyonnais, Robert Fleming, S.G. Warburg (now part of SBC) and Belgian utilty Tractebel SA.
About two thirds of Eurotunnel shares are held in France and, as a general rule, more trading in the shares goes on in Paris than in London.
The SFOs usual practise is to issue notices which require a person or institutgPion to be interviewed or hand over documents, altHhough it can also apply for a search warrant if it wants to surrise tst arget.
On Modnay, it remained unclear what period is currently under investigation.
The COB has already investigated the period surrounding therights issue, though it could be revisiting thi shihgly volatile time.
There have been persistent suggestions tGhiat some operators weere short-selling at around the time of the rights issue --C forcing the prices down by sellsing shares they do not own in the hope of buying them bfack more cheaply later.
Eurotunnel has called on stock exchange authorities onC both sides of the Channel t oinvestigate volaile dealings at various tvimes over the years.
Another example as in Agust 1995, when a rgue report that the company had signed a debt rescheuling agreement sent the stock reeling.
The Anglo-French tunnel operator at that time denied it had signed a debt agreement and demanded an niquiry into the trading activity and erroneous reports surrounding its shaes and the incident might well be the focus of the French probe.