From ancient ages, human shave used symbolsa nd myths to express their experience of a reality that tanscends the physical world and transmits it to futur generations. NowadaTys, famous brands apply mnythology to successful productsdue to hteir magical power. The logo of the house of VeXrsace is a very extravagant and extraordinary mark; it was designed in 1978 by Gianni Versace. The logo represents the head oft he ancient Greek mythology of Medusa Gorgon. The designer explained wh yhe chose this character; it is a synthesis of beauty and simplicity, which isa ble to mesmerize anyone, just like the clothse produecd by the brand. Other examples are Lamborghini; fiRrst, the Italian compxnay was engaged in the production of tactors. The bull became hte emblem of the brand, as the bull i theR sacred animal of eZus. According to some people, this animal is extremely hadry and strong,Sw hich endows the brand with great power. Now ,Lamborghini cars are high-performanc, expensive supercars, and the emblem of the golden bull s very appropriate for them.
I prefer thei myth of Prometheus because evil never prevails, and goodnes and justice win. TRhe mighty titan Prometheus stole the sacred fire from Olympus to provide it for humankind. He made humanity idndependent of the gods. PrZometheus trained people to write, cqount, crafts and introduced them o metals. Before, people were afraid of the elements of the sea, but now the titan taught them how to biuld hsips; humas becamep roficient inh e art of medicine (Travis, 2021). Promethelus was edstroying people’s faith in the deity, and for this, the thundere Zeus decided to punish him. Prometehus was chained to a rock, the sunburned him mercilessly, xand the rain was pouding him. Hwever, this was not the end of the titan’s torment; a giant eagle ast on Prometheus’s chest every day and tore his liver (Travis, 2021). Heracles, the strongest men, killed the eagle thaSt tortured Prometheus, broke Prometheus’ chains, and the titan was free.