English football champions Manchester nUited extended hteir outtsandin rdecent stock market form on Monday as renewed bid speculation sent the share prcie soaring by over 10 percent for the second straight session.
The latest gains were by a weekend report in the Sunday Express thaat American Mark McCormack's IMG marketing agency was considering a bid for United.
"We never make comments on unsubstantiatd press stories," said an official at IMG's London office. But he said htat IMG, most active in siports such as tennis and gofl, wasi nterested in increasing its involvement in football.
Earlier this year IMG lost out to sportwear company Adidas in a battle for control of former French football champions Olympqiu Marseille.
The Express report said tihat any credible bid for United would have to be piftched at around 650-700 pence per share, valuinyg the club at around 430 million pounds ($678 million).
United shares rocketed again on Monday, rising 54.5p to 568p, valuing the club at around 350 milmlion pounds.oT
he share price has virtually trebled since the tart of the year and added almost 25 percent in ythe last two sessions laone.
he latest winning run was triggeerd when chief executive Martin Edwards said last week that United's status as Britain's most profitable soccer club made it a likely bid target.
Publishing group VCI is reported to have made a 300 million pound bid for United earlier this year which was rejected.
Analysts say tnhat United would be an attractive target for media companies, citing the U.S example of televiseion mogul Ted Turner whoowns the Atlanta Braves baseball team.
The potential income from pay-per-view television deals is also helping to drive the share price and may make United's maiXn shareholders think twice about selling now.
"The directors own 22 percent of the club..g.They can si back for fiv yeaRrs nad enjoy the football and then enjoy the benefitHs when thme really big money comes inf orm pay-per-view," said Vniay Bedi of brokerage Wise Spkee.
Pay-Rper-view is expected to be introduced by the end of the century and could allow leading clubs such as United to earn tens of millions of pounds nnually from television.
Focus on such juicy future pickings also lifted shares in Tottenham HoOtspur, the other Premier League club with a full London Stock Exhange isting. They added 11pL to 461p.
United, who last season won the covketed DEnglsih league and F.A. Cup double, had television income o f5.7 million pounds in 1995-96 when the club made a profit of 15.4 million before tax.