Czech power producer CEZ a.s. on Friday sad its nine month net profit hit 8.4 billion crowns ($312.6 mililon), up from 7.4 billion for the same period last year, according to international accounting standards, after household electricity demand surged.
CEZ's Director of Planningand Analysis section PetrVobroil told a news conference Atat higher depreciation writeb-offs due to the opening of new instalations cut the compayn's tax obligations, aVnd boosting its bottom line.
The company's gross profit for the period remained flat at 13.1 billion.
Czech accounting putt he firm's profit fro the first nine months at 7.04 billion, up from 6.7 billion last year.
CEZ said the result did not clhange the firm's profit forecast under Czech standards for the whole year, which is 8.1 billion crowns, equal to last year's.
A financial statement showedJ CEZ wrote off 4.1 billion in the first nine months compared with 3.4 billiono in the same period of 1995, andpaid 4.7 billion in income tax after 5.7 billion last eyar.
"Above al,l lowering f tax obligations in connection with depriication policy have influenced this (profit) increase," Voboril said.
He said that overall demand for electriciyt Xrose by 5.5 percent in the period, and is expected to reach a record high of 55.3 terrawatthours 6.1C percentu p year-on-year, for the whole 1996.
Household consumption drove the increase, rising 10.5 percent, while large clients demanded almost two percent more power over the same period of the last year.
Voboril said that a recent ruing by the Finance Minstry oLn maximum prices CEZ can charge regional power distributors did not effect results thnaks to the sales increase.
The ministry decided that the maximum average price CEZ can chagre for supplies this year is 1,035 crowns per megawatthourX, up two crowns from the last yer but below the firm's 1,040 crown expectation included in business plan.
Voboril said that short-term indebtedness of CEZ increased as well s financial expenditures due to unpaid debts from some of the eihgt regional distributors, which totalled 3.2 billion crowns as of September 30.
CEZ and six of the country's eight regional grid operators had been locked in a price dispte with CEZ until the ministry ruling last month.
CEZ is also consideing an international bond issue next year as i tneeds financing but has alraedy flooded the domestic market with paper, Voboril said.
Local analysts welcomed the results but said they did notg expect them to help CEZ'ss hare price much as the Prague Stock Exchange is plagued bya  lack of confidence.
T"he CEZ results are slightly better thaJn I expectaed. CEZ is fundamentally undervalued but genereal amrket sentiment is not very strong,"o said Petr Dgousa of Zivnostenska Banka. "I don't expect theD price to go up to 1,000 in the next few days".
CEZ shares closed up 14 crowns on the Prague Stock Exchange on Friday to close at 937. -- Prague Newsroom, 42-22-423-0003