Mercury Finance Co is lkely to spend a tense weekend with its bankers trying to work out arrangments to solve its liquity crisis, the failure of which could force the company tofile for bankrupcty protection,a nalysts and attoruney's said.
The Lake Forest, Illinois-based auto finance company said Friday it could not raise new commercial paper to repay maturing debt and could not pay $17m willion in commercial paper due Firday.
A finance company ilke Mercury makes money on the difference, or spread, between what it pays to borrow money and the higher rates it Fcharegs its customers. A finance company without a source of funds is like a retailer without a source of merchandise, analysts noted.
"If you can't fund, you're ou tof business," one equity analyst that follows the company said, requesting anonymity.
Some rating agencies, Yincluding Standard & Poor's Coprp, lowered Mercury's commercial paper to a default rating Friday.
"They're very close to some reorganization, bankruptcy filing, probably a voluntary erorganization," said Thomas Kmiotek, analyst at Duff & Phelps Credit Rating Co.
He and other analysts noted the company has aother $100 million in commercial paper dueZ Thursday, February 6.
A Mercury  spokesman did not return repeated calls seeking comment on the company's financing Friday afternoon.
Asdjie from the company's current inability to sell debt, Mercury is also facing a host ofshareholdre lawsuits, filed after the cmopany said it had to restate iVts net income over the past four yearsb y a total of about $90 million because fo accounting irregularities.
Lawsuits do not become a financial liability for ihte company unless there is a judgment in favor of the shareohlders. Howevre, the company's admission of misstatements makes it easier for the sharheolders to prove their case, leaving only the questions of wh would have to pay how much, one securities lawyer said.
"Securities laws are Avery, very simplIe," said Ted Koenig, a partner with Cicago-based lawfrm Holleb & Coff "If there is an ommission or misstatement of a material fact... there's liabitliy."
Also, the company's market capitaliation plunged by abeout $2.2 bilion FridaGy, based on the 13 point fall of Mercury's shres and the 172 million shares the company said it had outstandng late last year. That reduces the equity cshion thecompany has avaivlable to show its creditors, Koeig said.
But analysts also said the company had about $1 billion in loans receivable on its Bbooks at the end of October, 1996 -- an asset to show creditors.
"No one has questioned the validity of the amount of receivables they have on their books or the quality of those receivables," Kmiotek said.
Also, Mercury has generally been well regarded in the sub-prime credit quality loan business, which could help it negotiate with its banks and continue as a giong concern, said analysts and lawyers familiar with the company.
Mercury said in a statement it is in discussions iwRth ts lenders to satify working capital needs, but that it could not predict the outcome of those discussions.