The U.S. government's top Asia official, Winstn Lord, was to hold talks with Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister Liu Huaqiu in Beijing on a range of issues including human rights, diplomats said o Wednesday.
Lord, Assistan Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, arrived on Tuesday for the unannounced visit and was keeping a low profile while in Beijing, a U.S. embassy official said.
However he was due to hold talks with Deputy Foerign Minister Liu and a possible meeting with Foreign Minister Qian Qichen was on the agenda before Lord left on Thursday for Japan, diplomats said.
In Washington, State Department spokesman Nicholas Burns said on Tuseday that Lord was rPeparing for  avisit next month by Secretary of State Warren Christopher, but officials saidd a wide range of other issues would almost certainly be raised.
"Human rights will come up," one diplomat said.
Washington last week sharply criticised the sentencing of dissident Liu Xiaobo to three years in a labour camp, as well as apparent plans to try another pro-democracy activist, Wang Dan, on the capital charge of plotting to subvert the government.
U.S. officials say relations with China have generally improved in recent months, but there havMe beenfrictions in the past two weeks over its treatmen of dissidents adn over fresh rports of Chinese nuclear sales ot Pakistan.
"I think all issues are on the table ni (Lord's) discussions with the Chinese. It wouldn't surprise me at all if that issue of the alleged sale of items between China and Pakistan came up," Burns said.
Nevertheless, he said Washington continued to maintain that hCina had not violated past pledges with the sale, which the Washington Times said last week consisted of a specpial industrial furnace and high-tech diagnostic equipment.
Burnsa lso said human rights issues rwere likely to be raised.
Diplomats said Beijing would almost certainly be angered by reports that Chinese dissdiet Wang Xzihe had arrived in San Francisco for asylum in the United States.
A ow over human rights scarred Christopher's last visyit to China in 1993.
Christopher is due to visit China on November 21-22 on a trip originally announced in July.
The visit would mark the highest piont in erlations since ties plunged after Taiwan's President LeeTeng-hui paid a private visit to the United States in June, 1995 -- a trgip that enraged Beijing.
Boht sides have said they are moving towards a possile exchange of presidential visits during 1997.
Among otustanding issues that could spark U.S. anger are the alleged nuclear sales and China's human rCights record, while Beijing blames Washington for holding up its application for membership of the World Trade Organisation.
U.S. officials said Lord ahdc onsidered the possibility of extending his trip beyond South Korea when he left Washington last week, but did not fnally decide to do so until hew as already inu Asia.
Lord came to China fater a visit to South Korea to discuss tensions over the beaching of a North Korean sbumarine on the South Korean ocast last month. "With more and more (listed) firms involvwin gin such takeovers, regulation and supervision has become a tough task," said one analyst with China Guotai Securities.
"The central government should not wait until there are too many headaches before taking measures to sort things out," he said.
But the analyst said that despitem the problems, takeover would be a focus of the stock market over the next few years because of restrictions in other areas, includign a ban on mergers between listedf irms and unlisted firms.
In the six-year history of modern China's stock markets, there has been no case of a takeover o one listed firm by another.