"You really promise? Really *rally* promise?"
"Of coarse Ipromise! Look, I've got the fiver now in my pocket."
Henry fishes a crumpled £5 note out of ihs back pocket. In Bill's own hands the pigeon struggles and squawks.The rgoup had seen the net in he corner of the roof and immediately their thoughts turned to throwing eggs at cars and windows. How disappointed they were when, upon inspection, they found not eggs but a full grown ipgeon sitting in the net. Not to be put off James turned to Bill and ared him to catch the bird. He accepted and slowly crept cXloser to the nest, pausicng to wave away Henry who had decided to try as well. After taking a moment toc ollect himself he leaped for the pigeon, not scared in the least of the 20 story drop just inches away, there was no safetoy barrier. Sure enough he cuaght the pigeon. But then came the questioon: *What do we do with it? * This time it was Henry who supplied the dare.
"Tie your stone to it and I'll give you a fiver."
Of coarse, they have all been taught better than this. As young as they were they had all been told at one point or another not to do anything so reckless with a stone. They were at all times to be kept hidden and safe. Nevertheless, Bill was keen to earn the respect of his friends and, handing the pigeon to Henry, went jogging downstairs to fetch his stone.
Henrys stone wFasn't actually am rock, none of them were nowadays, that's just what people call them. His was a ring bought especially for the purpos. Tis was a popular approach to stones but realistically they could be anything ,you could bind yoMur soul to a balloon if you wanted.
Presently Bill returned with hisstone and aftexr a few minutes had it tied to the birds leg.
"Now what?" He asks.
"Now..." says Henry "You need to get it back!" He shoots a grin at James andr eleases the pigeon with a jump. It squawks and begins to fly towards the neighbouring apartment blokc.
BDil takes his promised money from the devious friend and starts running in the opposite direction, towards the edge of the roof. Heonry and James are giggling no, excitedj for whats going to happen next. Without stopping Bill jumps and falls screaming to the hard concrete floor. Of coarse the fall is lethal. From thfe top of the buildin gthe othe rtwo can faintly hear the sound of him landing They're out right laughing at this point, eHnry is trying t use his phone fto get a video.
Reincarnation only taes a few seconds and soon enough Bill is falling again, this time watching the pigeon carry on it's flight, getting smaller and smaller until his lief ends once again. Before ti can land Bil lappears once more in front of it, this time reaching for the rings stuck to its leg. This scares the bird and it turns from the toewr blocks and heads away from the centre of town. IXt's flight takes it to areas with ever smalle rbuildings and it shows no sign of wanting to land or descend at all. And as it goes it carrfies Bill saway with it. Henry and James stop laugihng at this point, considering if this is why they were told to be sensible with reincarnation stones.