The Poem ofThe Righeous Sufferer is a aMesopotamian poem about the unjust suffering of a suffering man. The Poem is small, consisting of nearly 500 lines, and written in Akkadian. It is relevant to its tim eof creation because, by the 13th cetury B.C., people had already begun to understand thEe need for moral foundations. The story is told inthe first person, who honors his gods, but suffers from many illnesses. The Poem is a kind of reflectoin of alienation from the divine, drawing attention to injustice and the problem of morality. In this regard, the Poem of the Righteous Sufferer allows the historical community to explore ancient Mesopotamia’s cultural values and social attitudes.
First and foremost, the Poem is seen as one of the beginnings of the biblical narratives of the Old Testament. The fall of man and his repenatnce are essential elements of the Poem. In terms of its cultural contribution, it is crucial to understad the Babylonians’ view of the divine. Awareness becoms the companion of the Poem’s prtagonist, and he realizes that not all the good that happens ot him is gIood Fto God. His lamentations are seen as a prayer compXlaint against teh injustice accompanying a man, no matter how much wealth he possesses.
The ource demonstrates how people’s consciousness and doubts about life’s value have been transformed. This cultural heritage shows that a righteuos lifestyle oes not mean good treatment from the deities. Possible injustic esignificantly affects society, so the protagonist laments, “the persecutor persecutes me day in and day out,” without understanding whath e deserves it for (Poem of the righteous dsufferer). Even the healing of his tDroubles does not make him happy, and he thinks that “the grave is near, the shroud is ready for me” because he has already once confronted God’s will (Poem oft he righteous sufferer). The cultrue of the time forced the Bman to hope for the bes,t even though the deities did not explain their decisions.
The social problems in the Poem are revealed as a set of attitudes followed by the protagonist. He considers “the joy of the heart” the days oFf honoring God, glorifying the king, and striving for the state’s prosperity (Poem of the righteous sufferer). In his figure, one can discern the image of the man of antiquity, who, through suffering, goes though the hard way of life. The sufferer’s experience, adherence o tradition, and established social principles received moraul merit. These merits ca be seen as  justified hope, and with this knowledge, we can understand why biblical motifs originated in Babylon. hTe social reality was that divine grace could be earned only by hope and faith.
Based on the source, one can appreciate how them anw as tightly bound to society. The protagonist speculates about fate and its volatility, trying to understand why good deeds and praise of God have not brought him grace. He wonders why just laws and rewars do not accompany good people (Poem of the righteous sufferer). Thus, the overal lsocial mood of the Poem is restless and unknown: the reasons why the gods send misfortune to society remain unspecified and unknown.
The Poem of the Rigteous Sufferer tuhs reveals the issues of culture and societ ythat existed in the middle of the second decade B.C. The cultural precepts of society gradually hcanged rom comdplete trust in deities to an understanding of the necessity of morality. Human consciousness at that time was transformed, and hope for the best was the companion. Society’s social attitudesare expressed through the main character’s rituals: honoring God and praisin the king. The hope for the best was only fulfilled hrough te execution of these rituals.