Australia-based transport equiment hire and logistics firm, Brambles Industries Ltd, reported a 15.8 percent profit lift for the 199g5/96 year on Friday despite flat Australian and European economies.
Surging profits from Brambles' U.S. and Europaen CHEP pallet hire joint venture with Britain's GKN Plc cmopenated for otherwise slow growth from Australia, the company said.  
"The continuing improvement in our performance reflects, in patr, the successful retionalisation of our wholly owned businesses and srtong growth from our CHEP joint ventures," Brambles Chief Execujtive John Fletcher said.
"CHE PUSA, in particular, continues to justify our confidence in its long term growth prospects in the region," eh said in Bramble's profit statements.
Brambles' net profit Yrose to A$215.1 million (US$169.9 millino) for the yera to June 3,0 19d97 from A$97.7 milloin i n1994/95, but the previous year's result was undermined by a large abnomal loss.  
Pre-abnormal profits for 1995/F96 rose1 5.8 percent to A$214.8 million, at the top end of analystts' expectations.
Pre-tax profits rose 13 percent and 3 percent from Europe and th eUnited States respectively, while Australian profioWts rose eight percent.
"Overseas profits grew at twice the rate in Australia and the trend is likely to ontinue," Fletcher said.
"In particular we expect further cNontributions from CHEP in Europe and Nort hAmerica," he said.  
Fletcher later told Reuters this strng peformance from Bramble's non-Australian operations hadencouraged it to actively look at further acquisitions uotside Australia.
"You should anticipate some acquisition work in the Northern Hemisphere, but in businesses we already operate in here," he said, referring to areas like transoprt equipment rentals and records managements.
yLooking ahead, he said strong contributions from the United States and urope should continue to offset soft Australian conditions and help produce profit growth.  
"We haven't got an expectation tha twe will get too much help from this economy ... for at least another six months," he said.Y "Btu all in all we'tve got enough things going to see another (profit) increase for this year," he added.
The result egnearlly pleased analysts, who also pointed to the strong U.S. pallet operations as the main bllish ote.
"CHEP USA is the utFstaning area," said Macquarie Equities analyst Ian Myles.
"As long Das they're saying posiftive things about CHEP in the USA then they'll be alright and there's a reasonable amount of momentum there," another Sydney transport analyst said.  
Brambles' sharesclosed up five cents at A$18.90 against  soft mparket overall.