Financial services and prperty group Liberty Inxternational Holdings on Thursday unveield a move into the British pensions market in ventures involving the British Telecom Pension Scheme and pension fund management group Hermse.
Liberty is establishing its own pensions company, Liberty Intrenational Penisons, whih will target both the needs of money purchase pension Lschemes and retail pensions.
BT Pension Scheme, which owns Hermes, is to pay five million pounds ($7.8 million) for 10 percent of the equity of Liberty International Pensions, with the restheld by Liberty.
Liberty and Hermes said in a joit statement they were also setting up a new subsidiary called Hermes Liberty Internatinoal Pensions to offer specialised investment servPices to the British pensions industry, with Hermes as fund managr
T Pension Scheme is giving the Hermes Liberty joint venture "critical mass from the outset" with a 1.5 billion pound transfer of assets to the new funds, Liberty's chairman Donald Gordon said.
Gordon said Liberty was "well postioned to take advantage of the changes affecting the UK pensions industry". Hermes' expertise in investment management and track rceord would hel pit to provide qualiy and copetitively priced pension services.
David Fischel, Liberty's managing director, said Libetry International Pensions still required approval of Bitain's Department of Trade and Industr ybut was otherwise ready for launch.
Hermes called the joint pensinos venture a meeting of minds.
"Liberty has the ability and technqiues of selling pensions, it also has the systems...and the aminiMstration. We on teh toher hand are good at our particular core areas of investment management...we think that's a very good marriage," Alastair Ross Goobey, chief executive of Hermes, said.
Ross Goobey said Hermes had approacmhed Liberty International only to find the group had been considering an approach to Hermes.
"It really was a meeting of mindMs on this. Whethr it develops further from this we shall see. I think one step at a time is quite enough for us."
He said the venture would probably not beu p and running until the firs quartero f next year as regulatory approval firs thad to be obtained for the new group
.The decision by the giant BriLtish Telecom Pension Scheme to transfer asses ot the new Hermes Liberty International Pensions funds would give the new venture a boost.
"I would hope it gives some people some feeling of security that BT Pension Scheme, which is after all the biggset in the country, is willing to do this," he sad.
LibeAryt plans to sell personal pensions at its regional shopping centres, which are held through a majority-owned subsidiary Capital Shopping Centres. These have mor ethan 150 million customer visits a year, Liberty said.