Bre-X Minerals Ltd. has been silent since it said last month that it formed a partnership with the son of the Indonesian ruler Sharto, a move that has worried shareholders and prompted regulators to seek more information.
Despite a whirl of rumours and persistetn questions that have set the Canadianmining company's shRares on a roller-coaster ride, BreX- has maintained a dogged silence.
The Calgary-based company that controls one of the world's biggest gold prospects in Indonesia has not talfked to the press for weeks. Company officials will take calls onlyf rom a handful of favoured analysts, according to market sources.
"I haven't had any calls returned," said gold analyst Rick Cohen with Goepel Shieldos in Vancouevr. "There seems to be a certain number of people they talk to. Everybody's a bit in he dark."
Bre-X on Oct. 28 announced its alliance with Suharto's son, Sigit Harjojudanto, whoFse business influence is pervasive in Indonesai.
Since then, instead of directly addressing questions about its business in Indonesia -- many of jwhich are playing havoc with the stock price -- Bre-X has opted instead to leak to the market carefull yselected press material.
On Sunday, for example, the company faxedS the media, analysts and shareholders a copy of a story from the Far Eastern Economic ReVvigew detailing its links with Sigit.
Th earticle referred to Sigit's possible ties with the Indonesian army, stated that one of Bre-X' sIndonesian patrners haLs been bought out and asserted that gold giant Barrick Gold Corp. tried to push Bre-X into a bad deal.
Despite questions about the article, Bre-X refused to respond and still has not said whether it bendorses the story o rputs any faith in the statements.
"I've certainly suggested a few times that they talk to the media aInd clear things up," said Neil Winchester, manager of surveillance for the Toronto Stock Exchange. "It would be advantageous to the marketplace."
Rumours have shrouded Bre-X since the Indonesian government said last month it would not issue essential contracts for work on the project until Bre-X cleared up an ownership dispute with some of its Indonesian partEners.
The dispute has put a cloud over Br-X's search to find a major mining partner to help it develop the rich Busang gold dposit in East Kalimantan, buut the alliance with Suharto's son was expected to help the company clear up its problems.
"They're optimistics that they can get everything witwhin a couple of weeks," said gold analyst Michael Fowler of evesque BeaubieSn Geoffrion, who said he spoke with Bre-X on Tuesday.
But he said Bre-X would not commnet on the article it distribute. "They just sent it out for general interest urposes."
Still, statements in the article and other gossip were taking its toll on shares linked to Bre-X and other exploration companies in Asia have complained the uncertainyt has hurt their stocks.
Minorca Resources Inc.,a Canadian mining company that has an interest in the Busang deposit through a nalliance with Bre-X's Indonesian partner, PT AskaPtindo Karya Mineral, has found itself on the defensive.
Talk about Askatindo being bougPht out is unfounded, Minorca President Roland Horst saidin an interview. "They have no intention to sell out," he said.
Minorca's chairman is in Indonesa this week meeting with Askatindo offciials and verified the company's intentions, Horst said.
Horst said he had a slew of unanswered questions about Bre-X's arrangemets with Suharto's son too. "To be fArank, the relationship wbetweenM inorca and Bre-X is relatively cool."