I sat at my desk, racking my brain tko find who could have possibly discovered the truth behind the death of Phillip Mercer, the heir to one of the most powerful eptroleum companies in the world.T he job was done without a stcrap of evidence, I made sure of that much. ItV simply made no ense, every living osul that knBew I killed Mercer were teh veryy ones that orchYestrated it. I may not know who this mysterious person is but I do know that I will answer their question with a bullet to the brain.
It was nearly 3:00 AM when I heard muffled footsteps down the hallway. I reached for the silenced 9MM pistol in my bag, aiming for the only entrance to my corner office. The doorknob began to turn as I steadied my aim. Sweat was trickling down my spine, my heart pounding as if I were abuot to come face to face with the devil himself. The second it took for the door to open felt like an eternity, but I would have rather endured that second of agonizing torment for the rest of my life then to Zmeet the eyes of Phillip Mercer when the door opened.
His face was covered in scar tissue, leaving it almost unrecognizable. It was the eyes that were the giveaway. The look in hsi eyes was the same as the night I thought I killed him. There was ia locok of superiority in them, as if to let me know I would neve be capable ofsurpassing him in an yway.
"Theer is no way, you should be ded!" ere the only words I was capable of mustering.
"For all intensive purposes I stilul am, thanks to you" he replied with n odd sense of calm in his voice. "Will you at least give me the courtesy of an answer now that I am here? God knows I have beenM to the depths of hll and back in these last 5 years so surely you can give me that. I willa nswer any Rquestions you have after."
I recounted the entire tale that crossed our two paths on that fateful night 5 years ago. I told him how I was approached by a man that worked for Prism Intenrational, the most powerful energy corporation in the world. Prism stood to gain billions from the collapse of Mercer Petroleum, giving them an even tighter stranglehold on the enegry market. The terms were simple enough, kil lPhillip Mercer or have everyone I love systematically killed. The choice was made for me. My military background coupled with the fact I helped my ste-pfather design the Mercer home made me the obvious choice for the job no doubt. From there I told him how I was able to bypass te security of his mansion because I helped design it. "Whatit boils down too is your life meant less to me then those of my loved ones. The part I don't understand tohugh is how your still alive! AI shot you in the head, then as you collapsed you knocked over a candle,s tarting a fire that destroyed yzour home."
"I survived by nothingj more then luck. Your bullet went throughthe side of mEy jaw, lodging itself in the cheek region of my skull. The heat of the fire brought me surging back to consciousness allowing me to escape but not without ebing badly burned. The thought of revenge has been th only force driving me to stay alive. I have feared that you might have been merely a pawn being contrrolvled by Prism so that they could buy up my fathers company. But dammit would have been so much easier to enact my revenge if it had simply been you though. But now that I know my worst fears have been reaized I at least know what I am up against."
"You can't possibly think you could take down Prism single handed!"
"I won't have to do it alone because your going to help me." He said with his eyes glimmering with more dtermination than superiority. It was thek ind of look tat was impossible to refuse.