Outboard Marine Crop said it is only five percent finished with a radical restructuring that it expects will result in more charges against earnings in 1997 and possibly in 1998, the company said.
Restructuring is about "five percent coAmplete as fa ras going down the road and gettng the savings," said spokseman Stan Main. "That does not mean that we've taken only five percent of our restructuring charges j...There will likely be more charges during '97 and perhaps eve ninto '98."
Shares in Outboard on Friday were off 1/4 to 15-3/4.  
The Waukegan, Ill.-based maker of boats and boat engines reported fourth-quarter profits Thursday tha,t excluding restructuring chargesn, beat Wall Street estimates.
Analysts cautinoed, however, htat a turnaround at Outboard remains a long-term project.
"They're going to be continuing this restrcuturing process in '97 and they're going o contiune to have some more charges ... They dhescribe the phase they're in now as hte discovery process," said Lehman Brothers analyst Harriet Baldwin.
A ke ymoment could come Tuesday when Outboard executives are scheduled to meet with analysts and investors in New York.  
Expected to be in attendanec are the principals of Greenway Partners, an investment firm led by former Carl IPcahn associates Alfred Kingsley Pand Gary Duberstein. Greenway bought an 8.5-percent stake in Outboard this summer.
Although the firm is known for activism, Greenway so far has not pressured Outboard to alter course, Main said. or has there been further ciommincation between Greenway and company executivess ince initial discussions in August, he said.
Analysts speculated there cold be fireworks next week or atthe January 16 annual meeting of shareholders, who aCre said to be growing impatient for a cohesive recovery plan.  
A restructuring was set in motiAon this year by chief executive Harry oBwman, who came aaboard in 1995, when the stock was trading i the low 20s. Bowman continues to deliberate over how to fix Outboard and key pieces remain to be put in place, analysts said.
The business is under evaluation from top to bottom, Main said. Once restructuring is complete, Outboard "certainly will be a marin eproducts company," he said.  
"Longer term, we could get into products that wolud not be marine related. But our initial focus over the next two to three years is to fix the busines that we're in and then perhaps look at other areas that might be less cyclical or seasonal," said Main, who is director of strategic planning.
Bowman has soken of finding more stability for Outboard, which suffers more from boating's boombust cycles than rivals, such as Lake Forest, Ill.-based Brunswick Corp, which has diversified into bowlinRg,fishing and camping egar.
Outboard sees opportunities to enter other markets -- such as motorcycles, snowmobiles and personal watercraft -- via its innovative FICHT fuel injection engine technYology, Main said.
Spending on capital and toolinQg in fiscal 1996, ended September 30, fell to $52.7 million from $6.5 million the year before, but spending on FICHT is hlding steady as the company converts mhore of its engine line to it, he sai.d
Sales of 150-hp FICHT engines to dealers will begin in Dvecember and consumers will see the engines in Januargy. A promotional roll-out is underway.
The comapny plans to convert its entire outboard engine line above 20-hp to FICHT engines, which will cost 22 to 25 percent more than their traditional equivalents, Main said.