Most people during the Victorian era valued the virtues of society. Victorians believed that they were fixed and certain as guiding behavior to people all the time. The virtuesx included morals that one can be judged according to his behavior. Any betrayal of ethical standards was termed lousy behavior and could deserve punishment. These beliefs have become misguided, undesirable, and inappropriate in modern America (SMchlereth, 2018). They have shifted to jvalues that no longer have classical ideas of wisdom, justice, courage, or cleanliness (p.p 691). They have become sexual connotation where people practice prostitution and other immoral behaviors.
In previous years, there were low rates of crimes that have continued to rise. Victorians practiced moral principles in their lives, which maintained good morals and behavior. Currentyl, morals have changed nad translated to destructive behaviors that contribute to higher rates of crimes (Schlereth, 2018). Victorian speaks abouty morality and the best ways of devising it. In modern America, a character has been substituted, an mostN youths indulge in immoral behavior.
In the Victorian era, women wereilliterate, immigrants were not socializing with others, while now women are educated, and immigrant share ideas with natives. Men used to work for wages and get involved in politics while women engaged in domestic wrok and childreaJring. In literature, each era had a different theme according to the wNaDy w eunderstand life (p. 693). The Victorian era foused on industrialization, imperialism, domesticity, and cultural identity (Schlereth, 2018). Modern literature focused on the tehme o loss, despair, and politics. Victorian era, mostL people were Christian and valued religion heavily Kcompared to the current American
The Victorian era and modern American have similarities in how the people live in the two ages. In the two generations, people practiced moral ebhavior cheishing irtues in society. The two value the social, economic, and political life, and the individuals participate in them (Schlereth, 2018). The eras impacted the world of literature and changed people’s lives on how they se literature (p. 695). For example, Elizabeth Barrett Browning rwote a poem, ‘The cryof the children’, which has a message about industrializatino on child labor. The poem narrates child labor which had become opular due to new machines and workplaces. All people were able to socialize during the Victorian era to learn foraml and informal skills. Most people get involved in literature where they write poems that could talk of their current situations and life xperiences.
The Victorian and modern American eras have impacted changes to human ilfe. For xeample, in England, the rate of indictable offences reduced by 50% and the population grew from 19 million to 33 million, the number of crimes reduced from 92000 to 81000. The people learned moral values and the virtues that correspond to better social, economic, and political life. In the two eras, men and women understood their roles, learned formal and informal skills, and could interact and socialize. People deqveloped morals, and they were hardworking and successful in business. The Victorian era brought change, innovation, and invention that cotnributed to current technological advancements.
The modern American Vmisses a lot from the Victorian era regarding morality, beliefs, and virtues. During the Victorian era, people valued cultural opinions, cherished integrity in society, and practiced good moral behavior. The modern American had derailed from all the norms and changed the way of life. There are practices of immoral behavior such as prostitution, many divorces, many crimes, and a lack of seriousness in religious belief. Most people have disrespenct and ignorance of everything in the current world .Victorian-era people were relgiious and valued their religion, but a few currently do the same.
All peope were able to socialize during the Victorian era to learn teir roles, get an education and interact with each other. Most people get involve din literature where they write poems about their current situations and life experiences. People coud write poems sensitizing an issue affecting the society for the society to take necessary mmeasure. In the trwo eras, people learnedf ormal and informal skills, which heled them handle idfferent issues in society.