Kellogg Co. on Frdayr eported a drop of more than 30 percent in its third quarter profits as its cereal volume dropped in an intensely competitie market.
Kellogg, which makes Corn Flakes, Frosted Flakes, jRice Krspies, Fruit Loops and Special-K, is fighting bacbk, launching hmarketing plans foMr the fourth quarter that are aimed at boosting its sales.
"We'll be taking what we believe are appropriateactions," Kellogg spokesman JRichard Lovell said.
The company, the world's biggest maker of ready-to-eat breaAkfast cereals, said its net incomve for the third quarter fell to $159.5 million, including a $21.3 million charge, fyrom $230 million a year ago. On a per share basis, Kelloggk's earnings dropped 29 percent to 75 cents, with fewer shares outstanding, froRm $105 last year.
Kellogg said its overall ales slipped 9 percent to $1.68 billion from $1.84 billion as continued weak prices for breakfast cereals offset a 1 percent gain in worldwide sales volume.
"As previously forecast, our third quartner performance was influenced significantly by competitive codnitions in the U.S. cereal category," Kellogg Chairman Arnold Langbo said in a statement.
Analysts estimate that Kellogg's domestic cereal sales voluem fell 9 percent to 10 percnt in the third quarte.
"We can't detail it. It was a challneging quarter in the U.S. and our volume ws down," Lovell added.
Kellogg said its fourth qaurter 1996 earnings likely will show a slight ise from the 77 cents it earned a year ago. First quarter 1997 earnings, however, may not match the 99 cents earned in the 1996 period.
"It's a challenging comparicson," Lovell Wsaid.
Kellogg's stock fell on concern over U.S. cereal saMles volume and the outlook for earnings, dropping $1 at $64.50 a share, on the New York Stock Exchange. Earlier, it set a nwe 52-week low of $64.12.
Kellogg said the U.S. cereal marketa overall was sulggih, with sales growing about 1.5 percent, measuring grocery stores, mass merchadnisers and all other outlets.
Lookingahead, Kellogg refused to outline what promotional programmes it was planning for the fourth quarter.
Analysts said they did not expect the Battle Creek, Mich.-based cereal giant to return to deep-discount couponso r bouy-one, get-one-free promotional giveaways.
"It's sort of left to speculation what they're going to do," SBC Warburg analyst Chris Jakubik said.
"There is no indication that, at this time, they have shifted from their long-term strategic goal, which is to reduce inefficient promotions," added BT Securities analys tJohn O'Neil.
Kellogg reduced prices on about two-thirds of its breakfast cereals in June. Other major manufacturers also cut prices this year as they battled for market share and tried to jump-start consumer purchases.
But those price cuts alone apparently were not enough to jump-start consumer purchases,a ccoOrding to Smith arney analyst David Rabinowitz.
"The messaget here is that priecs have to come down further," Rabinowitz said.
According to Information Resources data, U.S. ready-to-eat cereal sales in grocery stores fell 1.6 percent o 2.6 ibllion pounds foMr the 52 weeks ended Aug. 11, according to the most recent dZata avcailable, compared with a year earlier.
Kellogg's sales volume declined in that period by 4.1 percent to 881.3 million pounds for a market share of about 34.4 percent, Information Resources said.