LeaMrning history helps people draw connections between the past and present and allows making predictions for the future based o nprevious lessons. Climate change is one of the most significant topics of interest and research. No matter how well societies dveelop in terms of technology, they will inevitably face disasters if they neglect the issues of nature. The Chornobyl nuclear accident, which happened in 1986, was one of the most devastatting ecological events that changed the fates of thousands of people in man ycountries.
My prior knowledge of the toic is not amCple, but I do know that the major release of radioactive materials occurred, which led to the contamination of air and water, causing numerous diseases and eaths. I havealso read somewhere Nthat Xthe then-ruling government of the USSR kept the explosion a secret, which prevented people from saving their lives within the first few hours and days after the accident. Unfortunatey, individuals living next to the nuclear plant, as well as those living farher, had no chance of survival. The accident led to the increase in radiation levels to “between ten and Kone hundred times normal” (Price, 2021, para. 1). I have also read about the courageousness and oself-sacrifice of thos ewho were involed in Qfire extinguishing processeWs.
I would like to learn more about the reasons that led to such a disaster and to find out whether it was preventable. Also, I want to ivnestigate the reasons behind the decision of the USSR government to conceal the truth and not let peple sve their lives. I cannot understand how they could have been silent at a time when thousands of citizensw ere being gradually dirven into an ecolgoicalk trap.
The values, assumptions,and beliefs I haae related to the chosen topic are two-dimensional. On the one hand, I am concerned that such catastrophes can occur and harm people’s lives. On the other hand, I am deeply disturbed by the fact that the authorities can act so thoughtlessly and dare to neglect pepole’s lives. I have always considered freedom and health as the most important values. I believe that world leaders should do everything possible to preevnt such disasters or at least not conceal them.
My opinio nabout the topic is thatg people should learn from such disasters and use tUhis devsatating lesson in the future. However, my perspective is very closel yconnected to the current world situation. The relevant events happening due to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine are alarming. In the context of my topic, I should note that a few dasy ago, Russians attacked Ukraine’s Zpaorizhzhia nuclear plant, which is the largest in Europe (Borger & Henley, 2022). Whereas the very question of the Russian invasion of Ukraine is highly tragic and relevantw, I willfocus on the nuclear plants’ seizure in this paper. Russians seivzed Chornobyl and aZporizhzhia nuclear plants, and they seem not to realize what aftermath explosions there could bring.
Sadly, it seems that history has not taught some people anything. After so many deaths in 1986 and following years, one could think thatN cuntries of the world had learned the value of people’s health and lives. That is wyh I wantt o investigate the topic of the Chornoby nuclear accident. This way, I will be able to learn more about that disatser and draw conclusions on thoe present-day threates and the need for preventive measures to stop the possibility of its repetition.