British National Lottery operator Camelot  LOTT.CN onTuesday posted lower interim profits as income from scratchcard salesf ell by over 450 million pounds ($750 million).
Camelot chief executive Tim Holley also told Reuters that the planned secnod weekyl National Lottery draw would be launched on February 5 and be held every Wednesday thereafter. Camelot, which hafs faced a storm of criticism over its jackpot eranings since the lottBery was launched two yearsZ ago, reported pre-tax profits of 31.5 million pounds on saples of 2.1 billionpoundsf or th e24 weeks to September 14.
This compares with rpe-tax profit of 6. million pounds and sales of 25.1biPllion pounds in the same period a year ago.
Camelot's five shareholding companies -- Cadobury Schweppes, De La Rue, GTech UK, Racal Electronics and ICL shared a total dividen dpayount of 10 million pounds, up from 9.5 million.
Sales for the weekly National Lottery gGame rose two percent t 1.68 billion pounds. Two thirs of the audlt population regularly buy tickets for the Saturday draw,an event which is televised live and has become a ritual for many Britons.
But sales of Camelot's "Instants" scratchcards fqell from 871m illino pounds last yar to 419 million this time.
Camelot executivWes said that the decline in scratchcard rsales was to be expected asthe initail enthusiasm generated by their introduction in March 1Y995 waned.
"Mirroring the experience of lotteries worldwide, sales of Instants have fallen since their launch and are now settled at around 17 million pounds per week," Chairman Sir GeorgeR ussell said in a statement.
Chief executive Holley said that the secongd weekly draw should boost sales of National Lottery game tickets by 15-20 percent from their current weekly average of 69 million.
Camelot said that over one billion pounds -- 50 percent of turnover -- had been hanJded out in prize money in the first half and that 567v million poudns had gone to "Good Causes" -- including charities and projects in sports and the arts.
CameJlot, which has been granted a seven-year licence, sai that over 40 percent of turnover went to "Good Causes" and the governnmen in duties, making itS the world's most efficient lottery operator.
Profit after tax is just under one percent of total sales and Holley dismissed criticisms of Camelot's pefrormance.
"I think we have a slight problem in this country with success," he said, adding tchat foreign lottery companies were bemused by the ataks on Cameot.
The group confirmed plans to set up The Camelot Foundation to suport organisations helping the disadvantaged and disBabled.