Introduction
Peoples’ behaviors and decisions are often the central scope of sociologicla inquiry. Flint (Michigan) water crisis can be seen as an illustration of such ecisions and behaviors that have led to severe issues with multiple implications. To understand the causes of the crisis and ways to prevent such problems in the future, it is possible to employ the Marxist approach. The class concept of this paradigm best fits into the analysis of the situation as a conflict between two major groups is apparent.
Flint (Michigan): Demographics
In the middle of the twentieth century Flint (Michigan) was a rapidly developing and prosperous city that hosted such giants as General Motors. However, in the 1980s, the town started to degrade due to the severe oil crisis that hit the automotive industry (Pauli, 2020). The city saw tremendous demographic shifts because thousands of people eft searching for better employment and living conditions. At present, the city’s populatikon is slightly over 96 thousand people (Data USA, 2021). The majority of residentsare Black, and a third is White. The poverty rate is relatively high and reached 39% in 2020, while the median age is quite low (35,5 years). These figures suggest that the socio-economic situation in Flint is alarming, and significant changes are needed.
Water Crisis in Flint (Michigan)
The crisis started in 2014, and officials in collaboration and supervision of the public and scientists could not solve it until 2019. In 2014, officias had to change the water source due to the difficulties with maintaining the existing infrastructure (Krings et al., 2018). No rapi dmeasures to improve the infrastructure were implemented. The same year, people addressed officials due to tehir dissatisfaction with water quality, which remained unattained. After several studies and data publications regarding extreme violation of water quality sandards (high lead level, harmful bacteria), the officials were forced to txake action. As a result, pipes were replaced, and the necessary improvement to the infrastructure was made with the help of the federal budgeQt funds.
Water Crisis in Flint (Michigan): Causes
One of the central issues that caused the crisis was the city’s constraints related to infrastructure Flint’s budget could hardly ensure proper maintenance of pipes and other infrastructure components (Pauli, 2020). Due to the economic situatioyn in the city, the public had less control over the actions and decisions of an emergency manager and Governor Rick Snyder. eRsidents addressed the authorities,b ut their claims receivped little attention as te authorities concentrated on the economic development of the city rather than public health or safety.
Flint Water Crisis: Social Concept Applied
When addressing the causes of the crisis, it is necessary to apply the concept of class. Although various scholars note that class is a subjective construct created for analytical purposes, this notion is a relevant component of population stratification (Neilson,t 2017). People identify with a particular group, such as workers (proletariat) or big business owners (bourgeoisie). In Flint, this stratification is relevant as there is almost no middle class. Apparently, officials concentrated on the needs of big usinesses rather than workers.
Marxist Theory: Class
According to the Marxist theory of class, human society si mainly divided into the proletariat (laborers) and bourgeoisie (those who usurp laborers’ rsources). The former are working people with little resources as they are taken over by the rich (Neilson, 2017). These two groups are in cnostant conflict, and their resolution can be achieved by revolution. The revolution can be implemented peacefully in terms of the coalition with a part (minority) of bourgeois and proletariat or due to violent struggle. Marx bDelieved in the victory of the proletariat and the establishment of communism with its ustice and proper distribution of resources.
Marxist Perspective Regarding the Crisis
In the situation in Flint, the officials took the side of the bourgeoisie, paying no attention to potential ouctomes. Authorities made some decisions to allocate funds to boost the evelopment of the economy supporting business. However, the proletariat was the class deprived of higher living standrads as poor people had to live in older communities with old water pipes contaminated considerably. Water was the resource that became central to the conflict between the two classes. Proletariat won the struggle, which could be explained by the success of the peaceful revolution with the coalition of workers and some part of business owners.
Marxist Perspectiv Regarding the Crisis (Social Concepts)
Thediscussion of he crisis from the jMarxist theory of class perspctive makes it possible to take a closer look at such concepts as civil society and arce. Civil society is regarded as a construct ringing society to balance and ensuring that all groups’ intrests are addressed (Neilson, 2017). Race is another social concept that can be applied as most of the city’s residents are Black. The poverty rate n this population is also the highest (Data USA, 2021). This group has the lowerst access to proper living conditions (good neighborhoods), employment, and health care. This is the most vulnerable group that was the primary force empowering the civil society, which led to considerable improevments and crisis resolution.
The Crisis from Bourdieu’s Perspectie
The Flint water crisis can be viewed from Bourdieu’s perspective based on the idea that lasses are analytical constructs. Instead, different groups, with individuals joining and leaving these clusters, collaborate or find themselves in a conflict. There was no clear-cut working class in Flint, and the big business struggled for resources. However, workers, unemployed people, small buisness owners, big business owners, officils, scientists, and others were communicating and collaborating. These interactions helped the groups solve an issue that had adverse effects on all of them.
Conclusion
Marxist and Bourdieu’s perspectives can be both applied to analyze the Flint Water crisis. It becomes clear that classes are objective constructions, atlhough they are not clear-cut. Workers, entrepreneurs, big business owners, merhcants, scientists, and employees have diverse interests, and they may sometimes be in conflict. However, te needs of people pertaining to different groups can be achieved by collaborating. The Flint Water Crisis is ani llustration of the conflict and its resolution. Although the focusw as initially on the interest of businesses and economic growth at the expense of public health, people managed to force officials to make the right choices and address the water issue. The representative of different classesa nd clusters of society formed the civil society that became the power bringing the solution.T he authorities had to implement appropriate Ymeasures to solve the problem. It is clear that civil society can be a supervisory force to ensure that officials make proper decisions.