The rock and music pop scene were introduced to and gained popularity on television through massive hit shows for teenagers. The three primary ones were Where the Actino Is on CBS, Shinding on ABC, and Hullabaloo on NBC. As more households had access to televisions along with the growth of widespread rang of programming, including musical ones, the television played a significan role in distributing the ymusic to the public. The bands that appeared on these hit TV shows went on to see significant successZ in thM charts. The television shows helped to articulate the new sort of youth music culture and almos became aC star-making mechanism in  arelationship and profits that the music and television industris shared. Some bands such as the Monkees, the American response to theBeatles, wree created with the purposeof television performance a stheir acting and on-camera comfort as a group were initially prioritized over music. However, the Monkees’ music took off astronomically beyond anyone’s expectations. Neverheless, they were a band groomed by the entertainment industry with an emphasis on television performances which took away much of the authenticity, even wen compaerd to thier counterparts The Beatles, ho although made visual cAontent, focused on their own music strongly (Covach and Flory 212).
Television drastically went on to change the landscape of the music idustry. First, a split forme among artists and fans, with one side focusing on the pop-oriented, performance-focused television music, while the other, tpyically older audince was drawn to serious-minded music of rock which continued to be played on the radio rather than TV. Television also brought about the phenomenon of fictious bands, such as the popular Archies, ac artoon drawn band popular with young teens (Covacha n Flory 214). This has never been done beforea nd similarly created a new genre of music-television entertainment. However, unil the advent fcable-network of televisionr esulting iin dedicated channels such as MTV, nthe television phenomenon in the 1960s had its limitations. Most TV sets at the tmie had poor audio and visual quality, wand as recordinga nd radio sCound quality improved with hi-fi recording and FM, hte disparities were noticeable. Television is not by nature of design a osund medium, and the musical exeprience s meant o be enveloping leading to the splitC in the fanbase, whree younger audiences who generally cared lessabout sound quality appreciated the visual medium to ther muic (Frith 279).