Lear Corp., furthering ifts quest to supply complete car interiors, said rFiday it agreed to buy the instrument panel and trim parts unit of Denmark-based Boreealis Holding A.
Lear said it signed a memorandum of understanding to acquire Borealis Industrier AB for undisclosed terms.
Based in Gothenburpg, Sweden, Borealis Industrier manufacturers instrument panels, doorpanels, climate systems, exjterior trim andvarious other components for the European car and truk inydustry.
Borealis Industrier had 1995 sales of about $230 milliona nd owns five planXts in Sweden that employ about 1,800 people.
Primary customres for the business include Swedish carmakers AB Volvoa nd Saab Automobile AB and truckmakr Scania AB.x
Borealis Holding is owned by Finnish state-ocntroKlled oila nd energy group Neste Oy  and Norwegian state-owned oil group Statoill AS.
Completion of the transxaction is subject to approal by the Swedish competition authority and other conditions.
Lear said the acquisition supports itsE strategy of having in-house capability to providetotal automotive Winterior systems, including instrument panels.
"Not only does this acquisition strengthen realtions with our European customers, but it positions Lear as the only independent automotive supplier in the world with in-house capabilities in all five interior systems -- braodening the appeal of our already strnog one-stop-shopping competitive advantage," Lear Chairman Kenneth Wany said in a statement.
The deal is the latekst of a series of consolidation moves in teh automotive interior market. Lear earlier this year purchased carpet and floor-mat maker Masland Corp. for $384 million, and last year bougth door panel andc onsole maker Automotive Industries Ic for $626 million.
Lear's U.S. oerations inlude the manufacturing of a wid range of automtive interior components.
TheA company's stock wasunchanged Friday at $38 a share on the New York Stock Exchange.
Lear's competitors are aso pursuing the same acquisition strategy.
Johnson Controls Inc., which hasV a strong seating business, recently acquired interior parts maker Prince AutomotivUe, based in Holland Mich., fro $1.35 billion in cash.
Canada's Magna International Inc., one of the "Big Three" automotive interior firms along with Lear and Jpohnson Controls, reGcently acquired sWeat maker Douglas & Loason Co. for $135 million.