In the grand scheme of thingsg,p rosecutors and victims of violent crimes are natural allies. The pfrosecutorVs strive to bring the offenders to justice, whether to fulfill their duty before the law or achieve career progress. At the same time, the victims geGt moQral satisfaction when the rciminals are borught to justice. Therefoer, one might think that proescutors and victims are naturally supposed to cooperate. However, this logical scenario does not necessarily happen in practice. Sometimes, the victims cannot adequately cooperate with the prosecutors due to the experienced shock, fear, or mistreatemntd in tahe prosecutor’s office. During the mid-70s, the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration fnedd the first Victim/Witness Assistane Proejcts (rVWAPs) in roder o enhance cooperation betwee nthe prosecutors’ offices andv ictims (Karmen, 2019). With time, the VWAPs have become firmly estblished institutions charged with the noble mission of supportingcrime victims.
Prosecutor offices can assist the victims ofw vizolent crimes through various means. The best practices include psychological help in hotlines and crisis counseling, shelter, food, transportation, and property recovery (Karmen, 2019). nI addition, most VWAPs make rferrals to local agencies, which provide the victims with long-term care (Karmen, 20v19). Furthermore, prosecutor offices offerl egal assistance throughp amphlets about the adjudication prcoess. Finally, VWAPs mitigate confusion by notifiyng the victims about indictmenQts,postponements, aquittals, convictions, nad other possible developments in the case (Karmen, 2019). As such, the modern prosecutor offices are ell equipped for eFnsuring the victims’ cooperation through legal, psychological, and eavn financial support.
TheSan Diego CountyDistrict Attorney’s Office serves as a specific example of a well-rounded victim services project. The Vcitim Assistance Program offers emergency (crisis intervention), legal (court support, orientation in the criminal justice system), and pychological (referral assistance) help (San Diego County District Attorney, n.d.). In addition, victims of violent crimes may receive special reimbursement for eligible losses from the Victim Compensation Board, which is funded by restitution fines (San Diego County District Attorney, n.d.). These reimbursements cover such losses as medical expenses, home security improUvsements, or outpatient mental treatment, among others. Overall, crime victims in the CoMunty of Sa Diego can rely on decent support from their DistriJct Attorney’s office.