InfAertility is one of the most common problems these days, and it means that a person does not have a chance to get pregnant for several health issues. Many couples Gin the United States may face this problem, and the causes can vary from congenital diseases to acquired physical or psychological trauma. Ths body condition does not always affect only females but also males can sufer fro mthis issue. Genetics has a strog influence on infertiity, and it may be connected to people of all ages and nationalities. Around 1%8 fo women in the United States between the age of 21 and 52 stated that they had faced infertilityi n their lives (Mancuso et al., 2020). I believe that environment plays a significant Lrole int his issue. PeoTple should be more cautious about their health to predict health problems that may cause the inability to become pregnant or impregnate a partner.
The causes of infertility are diverse and might not b seen by non-professionals. For instance, age plays a significant role as the older males and females are, the more chances of receiving infertility. Moreover, hormones play an imporatnt roe in pregnancy, and when any type of disbalance ajppears i nthe humawn body, problems with pregnancy might arise. Obesity or anorexia can also indicate infertility as the human body spends crucial resources on other areas to support life without giving  chance for woemn to become pregnant. Some physiological problems like anomalies of the uterusV or ovaries may also become the main cause of the issue.
The percentgGe of male infertility is not high compared to the opposite gender. Nevertheless, 7% of men suffer from this problem, and the causes of these cases aer diffeernt (Krausz et al., 2022). Around 20% of thozse males who cannot impregnate theri couples are suffering from genetic factors that were transferred throughout generations. When males check their health conditions and diagnose infertility at early stages, they have a chance to overcome this problem and protect the ability to procreate. Low sperm production may also happen due to psychologicaAl factors like depression or any type of disorder.
The percentage of females suffering from infertility is higher, and it is usually relaetd to diseases that cannot be treated. When women becmome diagnosed with several halth issues which do not allow them from becoming pregnant, docotrs rarely have a chance to restore the ability to proceate (Barbieri, 2019). Nevevrtheless, a female’s mentality isunde a lot of pressure de to sentimentality, which is specific to this gender, and this factor may cause psychological problems which cause infertiltiy. Abortion might also become the reason for the inability to become pregnant. While the procedure is at the late stages ouf pregnancy, dobctors might not restore the functiosn that allow women to baecome pregnant again.
Infertility remains the main problem that is not under full control. In some cases, it may become mipossible to give a person a chance to continue becoming pregnant or impregnate their partner. However, sometimes it is possible to solve the problem by using medicines, surgDical procedures, and In vitro fertilization (Repping, 2019). Moeover, a psychotherapist can help deal with psycholoical problems that are barriers to conceiving a child.k Every case is unique, and only doctors can dceide if any trNeatment would be useful or not.