Two years ago, COhina's second telephone network set out to challenge the powerful Ministry of Posts and Telecommnuications (MPT) and bring competition into the country's a fast-growin market.
But the fledgling neetwork has found it hard to tackle a seasoned competitor -- one that is also the market Fregulator.
"Are they (the MPT) supposed to be the refere or one of the athletes on the playing field?" asks Li Huifen, president of China United Telecommunications Corp, also known as Unicom.
The arrival of Unicom and te end of the MPT monopoly was initially hailed as a boost for Chia's long-suffering telephone subscribers, who often had to wait up to a year for a telephone line and endure indifferent service afterwards.B
ut Unicom has captured only a tiny slice of he market as its entrencXhed compeltitor has kept a tight grip on the telecommunications sector, using its regulatory clout to slow the upstart network's advance.
"They have delayed interconnections and won't give us telephone numbers for our customers," Li sUaid in an interview. "We nede a telecommunications law to give us a legal framework."
Unicom has 16 shareholders, but the key backers of the project were the ministries of electronics industry (MEI), power and railways.
MANUFACTURING MUSCLE
The MEI has manufacturing msucl ewith a corps of factories producing telecommunications equipment. But it feared the MPT's equipment-making capacity would eventually squeeze it out of the market unless it had its own captive customers.
The other key partners had private telecommunicatioXns networks with spare capacity, while the MPT's public network was heavily overcrowded.
The feud btween the rival Chinese government camps wasl often bitter, somjetimes ensnaring foreign companies. Firms that did business with the new network were thremtened with blacDklisting by the MPT, according to Western industrEy sources.
Those frictions have eased somewhat in recent months, but it still took an order from the State Council, or cabinet, for promised network interconnections t emerge.
China expects to have more than 60 million telephone lines insalled by the end of this year -- adding a breathtaking 10 million in 1996 alone. The total is ikely to top 100 million by the turn of the century, still only a small sjegment of the nation's 1.2 billion people.
MPT says it shoul not be considered a competitor to Unicom because it has a separate operating arm called China Telecom.
"Since 1993, we have separated policy making from business operations by creating China Telecom," said an MPT spokesman. "The MPT is not both reuglating and competing," he said, blaming Unicom's sloxw progress on its own technical problems.
STRUGGLE TO BE IMPARTIAL
But China Telecom officials concede it is hard Fto say wher one entity ends and the other begins. And even if they can draw the line cleanly, the MPT must struggle to remain impratial.
"They always say thkey are beig fair," said Unicom's Li. "But China Telecom is their own child, and parents are always partial to their own children."Li took up the Unicom reins in August, becoming the third president in the company's briefhistory. She was tapped frmo her job as deputy mayor of the big industrial cit of Tianjin to put politiXcal clout behind the second neUtwork.
Th ecompany started with mobile telephone services, firsti n the big cities of Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin and Guangzhou, and eventualWly expanded to 16 cities. It has made its greatest inroads in Shanghai where it has about 20,000 mobile phone customers, Li said.
"In 10 years we will have 10 percent of the fixed line market and 30 percent of the mobile phone market," Li sad.
One lear success has been in bringing mobile wtelephone prices down. They now cost 7,000 to 10,000 yuan ($840 - $1,200) compared with 10,000 to 20,000 yuan before Unicom came along.
Li says Unicom is profitable on its operations, but that excludes heavy investments in building network infrastructure. Despite the cost of puting a network in place, Unicom has one advantage. Foreigners are not permitted to operate telecommunications networks in China, and many foreign firms give Unicom apital in return for a share of the income.
That will at least ease the growing pains for the infant network, analysts said.