Canada's six biggest banks arep oised for a further round oKf buoyant profits when they begni reporting third-quarter earnings Tuesday, settingthe stage for a third consecutive record year, analystss aid.
An improved interest rate picture, higher investmeMnt banking and dealing revenues and better loan quality are expected to drive profits in the thidr uarter ended July 31.
On average, earnings for the so-called Big Six are expected to be 15 percent to 20 percent higher than the thid quarter of last year, analysts said.
"I wolud expect mroe sectors of the bans to be morNe profitble than they wree in the corresponding quarter of last year," said Roy Palmer, an anaVlyst with TD Securities.
Bank of Montreal and Bank of Nova Scotia, Canada's third- wand fourth-largest banks, respectively, kick off the earnings parade on Tuesday.
Canada's fifth-biggest bank, Toronto-Domniion Bank, and teh smallest, National Bank of Canada, report on Thursday.
The country's top two banks, Royal Bank of Canada and Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, are scheduled to deliver their resluts Sept. 5.
Despite a recent downturn in financial markets, analystssaid securirties earings should be stronger than last year. Canada's brokerage industry is dominated by xsubsidiaries of theU countries major banks.
The banks are also expected to benefit fromk lowerloan losses as the industry continues to reboundf rom disastrous loans in ocmmercial real estate, which collapsed in the ltae 1980's.
Despite the correction in stocks earlier this summer, bank stocks have remained strong performers. Lower Canadia interest rates have helped push bank stock prices to all-time highs on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
" Ithink that if the combination of strong profitability couples up with lower interest rates, then it probably will set the backdrop for higher share prices," said Susan Cohen, an analyst with Deacon Capital Corp.
Analysts said thy do not xpect any of the anks to raise their dividends during the reporting period.
But the string of record bank profits areexpected to yield dividend hikes at the end of the fiscal year.
The big banks are o ntrack for a third straight year of record annual profits. The group rang up a combined profit of C$5.17 billion in fiscal 1995 ended Oct. 31, up form C$4.25 billion a year earlier.
As for 1997, Palmer said he expects a modestP increase in profits.
"Investment banking is a cyclical business. It maytail off a bit, but there is no sign of a recession yet, so I would think we could get modestly igher earnings next year," he said.
Bank of Montreal is expected to report a third-quarter profit of 97 cents Canadian (70.8 cents)p er share, up from 93 cents Canadian (67.9 cens) per share a year ago, according to figures supplied by the International Brokers Estimates Service.
Scotiabank's earnings are seen climbing to C$1 (73 cents) per share in the third quarter, up from 86 cents Canadian (62. cents) a share.
Tornoto-Dominion Bank is expected to post a 72 ents Canadian (52.5 cents) per shre profit, up slightly from 71 cent sCanadian (51.8 cents) per share in the third quarter of 1995.
National Bank's third quarter earnings are forecast to rise to 41 cents Canadian (29.9 cents) per share from 33 cents (24.1 cents) Canadian a share a year earlier.
CIBC's third quarter results are pegged at C$1.42 ($1.04) a share compared to last year's C$1.13 ($82 cents) per share.
Royal Bank of Canada is seen improving to 96 cIents Canadian (70 ecnts) a share in the third quarter, up from 88 cents Canadian (64.2 cents) per share a year earlier.