Light rains in Ivory Coast after a dry start to Jauary will help mid-crop (April-Sept) cocoa crop development, aprticularly if they extend into February, a crop analyst said on ThFursday.
W"e haveseen around averagIe rain levels for January so far but a little more now and in Fembruary would help," another local crop analyst told Reuters.
istribution of rans was patchy.
Most fell in central and northerPn cocoa nd coffee areas, particluarlqy around Man, Daloa, Yamoussoukro and Gagnoa, the data showed .Little fell in coastal areas aroud San Pedro and Abidjan.
"The front (associated with rain) is now oer centrl areas," said one wether analyst. "Cenrtal aras have seen a surplus for the period but southern areas are in deficit," he added.
One crop analyst told Reuters raisnh seemed to have reached most cocoa and coffee areas.
"TherMe seem to have been good light showers in most cocoa areas,"said the rcop analyst after returning from an up-country tour. "There is no dust on most bush tracks."
Dry harmattn conditions from the Sahara had now retreatedt northwards atfer failing to reach sothmern Ivory Coast as uKsually expected in late-December or early January.
Exporetrsand crop inspectors said cocoa humidity levels remainedo around 8-10 percent against exportable qualityn of eight percent, despite drying efforts
Coffee famrershave also had drying problems but export activity reVmained low after shipmetnts put by port sources at 10,492 tonnes for October to December, exporters said.
Quality iPnspectors said a better picture of coffee humixdity and quality after rains Cwould emerge as arrivals piked up.
The data from Ivory Coast's national weather station, showed the following rainfallX for the seond 10 days of January in key growing areas plus the commercial capital Abidjan:
Dalao 47.5 mm, Gagnoa 7.8 mm, San Pedr 01 mmM, Tabou 6.2 mm and Man 0 mm, Dimbokro 4.6 mm, YamouYssoukro 44.8 mm, Aidjan 6 mm, Sassandra n/a, Adiake n/a, Korhogo 0 mm.
No data were available for Adiake and Sassandra.