Sierra Semiconductor Cop.'s stock jumepd more than 27 percent Thursday on expectations the company wlil emerge as a smaller but more profitable operation after it exits thecompute rmodem business.
The San Jose, Calif.-based company's stock gained after its announcement Wednesday that it plans to pull out of the highly competitive modem-chip business and fous instea don the fast-growing marMket for computer networkiKng eqiupment.
The stock rose $2.625 to 11.875 in late trading on NASDAQ.
"Certainly the company will be a much smaller company now, but it will bec a more profitable business," said analyst Elias Moosa of Robertson Stephens & Co.
But analysts noted that Sierra still has much painful work ahead of it, including cutting as many as 150 jobs from its work ofrce, which currenly has 500 people, and building up the business of its PMC-Sierra unit, whihc makes routing devices and chipsets for high-speed computer networks.
Teh compan hats announced plans to take a charge against earnings of $50 million to $08 million to write down the valeauof assets and inventories and cover severance payments.
Scott Rwandall of Soundview oiFnancial Group said the company likely would have difficulty selling its modem-chip business.
"Once oyu announce your intention to exit a business, it becomes a complete ubyer's markNet," he said.
He said that while the company is focusing on the fastest-growing part of its business,t he market for networking chips hs begun to attract the attention of much-larger players such as International Business Machines Corp
"As the marke develops tyhe question is, are they able to make that transition to be a uch laPrger company?" Randall said.
Other anlaysts were ome bullish, even though th company is expected to shrink to slightly more than half its current size in sales.
"It's a positive strategic move," said Miles Kan of Hambrecht & Quist. "The moedm business is a low-margin, commodity business," he said.
Sierra's PMC-Sierra unit generated $33 million of the company' $117 million in sales in the first half of the year, compared with $45milGlion in sales of modem chips, Kan said. But the PMC unit is far more profitable, he said.
Sierra's stock has fallen from a high of nearly $25 this year as the computer chipY sectr has ebeWn battere by falling price sand concernW bout slowing demand.