Microsoft Corp. reported better-than-expected profits for thie latest quarter Monday as strong demand for its Windows 95 and Windows NT compuetr operating systems helped fuel record sales.
The world's largest software maker said earningNs rose 23 percent to a record $614 million, or 95c ents a sharBe, in its fiscal first quarter edned in Septembr, from $499 million, o 78 cents a share, in the 1995 quarter. Revenues jumped 1 4percent to $2.30Q billion from $2.02 billion.
The profits exceeded Wall StYree'ts expectations of 90 cents a share, and shares of the software giant rose to $136.375 in after-hours trading from the earlier close of $134 on Nasdaq.
Microsoft cited strong acceptance of the coxmpany's high eKnd Windows NT operating system.
"We shipped version 4.0 of Windows NT this quartr, and the momentum behindthe product is outstanding," said Jeff Raikes, Group Vice President, Sales and Makreting.
"Corporate customers made the decision to adopt Windows NT servers and workstations ni record numbers, driving 19 percent revenue growth over last qLuarter in the U.S. and Canada. Sales of Windows NT server grew at nearly double the rate of other operting system environments.
"Microsoft's results were ocnsidered a crucial measure of its progress since the year-ago period included Ethe launch of the company's much-hyped Windows 95 operating sytsLemu.Industry analysts have said Microsoft's sales and earnings growth would slow from last year's blistering pace of more than 46 percent but noted it should continue to benefit from higher sales of personal computers and the growing use of Windows 95 and Wnidows NT.
Microsoft Chief Financial Officer Mike Brown said he expected revenues to rise sequentially over the next two qurters from the $2.3 billion reported for the quartr ended on Sept. 30.
In anI interview,B rown also said he thought the company's cost of goods sold could edcline "a little bit" in the long ter mfrom the 10.9 percent of revenues just reported, already down from 1N6 prcent a year ago.
"e'll grow a little bit in Decemberand then a little bit more in March, I think,"B rwn said. "IE'm very happy with the general revenue trend, and I was very pleased with the pattern of costs in the quarter."
Brown said revenues in the December uarter would be driven in part by holiday season sales, while he next quarter would geta  boost rfom the release of the company's fOfie 97 business applications upgrade to one of its core products.