I totally agree with this statement because of several reasons.
 First of all I want to mention an experience. In my final classes at school I got a complete different type of teacher in the history course. The previous one wanted us to learn dates. The new teacher organised his lectures completely different. For him it was important that we understood the whole picture, the process of history and the relationship between important events in time instead of learning dates. That was very interesting and much easier to learn because everybody understood why the things happened and in which chronology.
 From my point of view it is important that the students\pupils have fun by learning the objectives. To understand the idea is in my opinion always more interesting than learning facts.
 The next point in my argumentation is the importance of understanding the idea itself. If somebody does not understand the idea behind for example an economic model he cannot explain what he calculated. Another example is if somebody did not get the message of marketing and how it functionates, he probably will write a  good test because he learned the marketing Ps or something like this, but he will never be able to work as a marketer. The reason for this is that he did not understand the concept behind marketing and probably will not remember the 4 Ps, although he had learned them.
 Here we are at my third point. The remembering of something. If somebody has understood anything it should be no problem for him to remember this idea after a long period of time. It is in his mind. He will never forget it because he understood the reason, the porpuse behind the concept. For this argument it is also important to look at the circumstances the idea was established. By understanding how the idea came upon it is also easier to understand the idea itself.
 
 At the end I want to say, that I am really thinking that understanding something is more important then learning only the facts, although sometimes it has to be.