In order to compare the lives of young people and older ones, it seems necessay to start off with a brief description of that average young and the average older person. 
 
 Young people enjoy themselves in activities such as meeting friends, going out, doing sports or listening to music. On one hand, these activities are fun and help a young person to relax after an exhausting day at school or work. But on the other hand all these activities can not be enjoyed without a certain amount of money. Because of that, young people can easily get into a rush of working real hard, maybe even having a job while studying at a high school or university, and spending the money in the evenings and on their weekends. They keep switching directly from the status of making money into spending it and forget to just settle down for a moment and simply sit down and read a book or something like that. 
 Sometimes young people even start working almost nonstop so that they can just stop most of their work and have fun later in life, which is the worst of all cases.
 
 Older people are usually the opposite. Most of the retired people enjoy a slow day without getting in rushes or being stressed. They have no fear of sticking to everyday habits, which provides a basis for a settled and enjoyable life. They don`t feel like they miss out on things when they go to bed early every once in a while which is a problem a lot of young people share. 
 
 If people try to compare these two different types of enjoying life, a basic problem shows up immediately. If someone put a older person into a young persons position, he or she would think its unbelievably stressful. On the other hand, the young person would probably call the older persons life enitrely boring. The only difference is that most of the young people enjoy their lives at a way higher risk of becoming stressed and getting in a rush with things.
 
 So after all, a young person doen`t enjoy life more than an older person does, both enjoy life just in totally different ways. Still one should not forget the fact that we are discussing stereotypes here; there might still be a lot of people at all ages that don`t enjoy their lives.