Generally young people seem to enjoy life more than old people do, this is based on the amount of activities that young people perform with respect to older people and the enthusiasm and joviality that young people put on a given circumstance. 
 The amount of activities that an individual performs defines that individual's character. As it is known by far, young people are involved from scandals to all sorts of extreme sports. The behaviour that a young individual exhibits comes from body constitution. A younger individual produces a higher level of hormones such as adrenaline that estimulates the trend of being more active, hence enjoying life more. A clear example that shows the enthusiasm of a young person compared with an old person is holiday times. During holiday times young people are more likely to make plans about parties and things similar to it, while older individuals worry more about  what people might think of them, so they do not express fully their emotions and rather than going out like a young person, they cohibit themselves staying indoors no matter how bored they might be.
 Another important factor that shows that young people enjoy life more than older people do, is the number of activities that younger individuals perform with respect to older individuals. Younger individuals are more detached from their physical limitations, which is why it is more likely to find a young drunk person at work, than an older experienced person drunk at a work place, or it is more likely for a young person to be in a party for 24 hours without sleeping than an older person. Younger individuals enjoy life more than older people because they have less things that are part of their life experience, and they feel as if they had to try on many things to reach a satisfactory level of life development.
 Generally the factor that makes younger  people enjoy life more than older people do is society, since society portrays older people as examples of life that cannot do certain things because they would mislead young people and create a social conflict within a given state.