The most important thing in the life must be the success I think.
 I always believe that  if I have a job assigned to me, I have to do the best. This is not only about my reputation but also my company's reputation too. 
 I want to give a personal example, I have a senior project to finish until May, and I am the project manager of this project. There are three other members of our team. When this duty first assigned to us we were suprised because developing a new software is not easy and in addition to that we exactly know nothing about our subject. Our supervisor says: "I believe in each of you but the project is really hard, do not be upset, work hard you can handle with it."
 First thing we could do as a team is to divide the project into groups and discuss which one of us have handle with the subgroups. I choose the subject I exactly don't know what it is and what I should do. After that, I went to a software company and talk with the manager to help me about my research and become our sponsor. I also added that when the project finishes he can use it legally and he has the patent of the project. He says that he does not want to join us because if he takes that risk and if we do not success his reputation will get hurt. 
 After that I went to the company which I was having my internship there last year and my manager told me that he and the company want to supervise and support our project. He take a huge risk because we are not graduated from school and we don't have enough experience to finish the project.
 Now, we almost finish the project, there is only some tests left. The project is very successful until now. Our project has unique properties and will be the base for other projects in the software industry. 
 My manager told me that they are going  to buy the project after it is legally approved by patent instution and he also added that we did a good job. He has some questions in his mind and not sure from us at the beginning. But he is happy and he is proud of us now.
 This statement is absolutely true successful people are not afraid of to try new things and take risks.If people only do what they already know how to do well there is absolutely no progress in anywhere.