The issue at hand is about the type of studying. It is very important because this choice has a lot of consequencies for the future.
 I think that it is better to know many academic subjects than to specialize in only one specific subject. Although there are good reasons for both, I really think that the reasons supporting the statement are more than the others and more important.
 
 First of all, I think that the real life is never about only one specific topic. I think that people needs to know a lot of different things in different subjects not only in order to be appreciated from the others, but, for example,  to communicate with other people.
 
 Additionally, I think that there are not fixed boundaries between the different subjects. Those boundaries are made by the humans in order to classify and to organize the knowledge. But, as I have seen in my studies, all the "different" subjects are in reality connected.
 For example, Artificial Intelligence is not only about Computer Science, but it is connected with a lot of other subjects. It is connected to Biology (Biology Inspired Algorithms and Artificial Vision). to Electronics (for the robots), to Philosophy (different types of logic and problems in the different logics)...
 So, it is important, in order to understand well a subject, to know also other subjects.
 
 Another important consideration is about the capability of reasoning. I think that if students study different subjects, they are more likely to reason and to connect all the informations. On the other hand, if students study only one subject, they will not be able to reasoning. Their minds are closed only to specific informations.
 
 Finally, I think that it is more interesting for a student to learn something about different subjects rather than to learn only about one subject. I discussed this opinion with some friends and all of them agreed with me.
 
 In conclusion, as my essay explains, I think that it is better to know many different subjects (even not in depth) than specialize in one specific subject.