Is the enthusiasm of a person decrease proportional to time ? It is certain that this assertion depends on the personality or situation of the considered person. However, the people lose their hopes from life as they get old and live an ordinary and boring life. Therefore, I agree that life is more enjoyable for the youngs rather than olds since I believe in that the enthusiasm inside a person goes far away as days passed. 
 First of all, it is probably true for most of the people living on the earth, the experince of a young person is less compared to an old person. Think that, when you get a question, you will immediately want to learn the answer of this question. On the other hand, if you heard this question before, you would not get excited to hear the answer of the question. Thus, I claim that the life is composed of lots of questions which all of them have answers aroun the world. In fact, experience means that you learn the answers of most of these questions. Thus, this question lost its significance for your aspect. Besides, a younger person will have lots of questions related to life in many different areas. It is certain that not all of the questions will draw the attention but the attractive ones will lead to discovering the enjoyability of the life.
 On a different aspect, enjoying life risks your life in most of the activities and these activities require a definite energy level. It can not be denied that as the person gets older, the metabolism of the body decreases in a continuous manner. Let's consider the bungee jumping, it is very enjoyable, but not suitable for the olds since it may not be suitable for their health. In  fact, the body, itself, does not let the person do some enjoyable activities. Thus, sometimes it may not be related to lose of enthusaism due to age of person. It limits the activities that can be done. Moreover, as a person leaves out doing this type of exciting things, it results in a continuous cycle that leads to an ordinary life.
 To sum up, I think that enthusiasm makes life more enjoyable. Besides, sometimes due to some limitations such as health, the people may not perform exciting activities. Moreover, when the people learned the answers of the questions that are interesting for them, they  do not take part in enjoyment of the life. Although it may not be possible due to limitations of the life, the person should enjoy life.