Over the history, the life has evolved into what we call today the "modern life". Modern life has brought its problems with it. The one problem that has a great effect in our social lives is youngsters not helping their communities as they used to do in the past. Needless to say that this has its reasons too. Two main reasons why youngsters are more selfish and care less about their families and everyone around them today are their parents and lack of education given in this direction.
 
 While children grow up to be adults they just learn things from their parents. They immitate how their parents handle situations and they internalize most of the altitudes their parents exhibit under certain situations at a very young age. Therefore when a little girl, say Allice sees her mother being careless to other people around her, she just grows up to be that way. She becomes more self-centered, individualist and less helpful to others. That may be a person having a stroke on the street, or an elder who needs a seat on the bus. She will just choose of her comfort and well-being and care less about other people. 
 
 Even though most of the children grow up with the company of their parents, they also spend most of their time at schools they attend to. In schools they take the teacher as the model especially at the younger ages and their education has a great influence on what kind of a person they will be. In schools we can turn them into good people who are not indifferent to their society instead of boasting on the individual success and assessing them accord to it. Schools today produce rather self-centered, careless and selfish individuals. This is a main flaw in our education system today.
 
 In summary, it is an irrefutable fact that young people become more and more careless about the community they live in. The reasons behind these are lack of family education and a bad education system. These are the places to look at if we want more society-aware people. We should give stress on parental education and revise our education system to train individuals with values that teaches them society comes before a single person. This way we will have a healthy society in which people do care and help each other.