Is the best way to travel with a guided group? 
 
 For some people the answer to this question will be a loud "Yes". 
 It might feel like an atvantage, because it won't take much time for research. It is easy to go to a local travel agent, get a planed trip, getting picked up at a certain time, being guided through the differnent sites and coming back home on time. Sure, it does sound great and it will work for some people, but not for me.
 
 In my personal opinion the answer to the question, if the best travel would be within a guided tour, would be "No".
 Considering the background of my experience with traveling I have always enjoyed being with my family or partner rather than in a large group.
 The advantage of this is that you are totally able to concentrate the trip on your personal interests and abilities. You can visit different sites, museums and do all kinds of  acitivties that are enjoyable and doable for you. 
 On guided tours it is sometimes difficult to stop at places of interest and move on to other sites, if the shown is not enjoyable. Also the variety of interests and ideas is in a group much bigger.
 Sometimes it might also be hard for disabled, old, injured or sick people as well as children to keep up and to follow the given information.
 For those people it is desireable to have idividuale self guided tours, which can be accomplished with the help of travel books or prior reserach.
 Of corse you will need to inform yourself before hand and plan the details of your travel. But for me it always is an interesting part to collect information on the different opportunities at the places I travel to. It does not only help me to plan, but also to learn more about the country or place I want to visit. From time to time I even find out facts I have never heard of before and will find sites, buildings, parks and many more I have never thought of visiting. This will never happen if everything has been aranged through a guide.
 
 Overall I think people can get more advantages out of a self guided trip than a travle within a guided group.