To answer a question as multi-facetted as the one given above, it is absolutely necessary to review and evalute pro as well as con arguments! 
 
 One can say that a person who aquires a broad knowledge in many different fields of academic subjects is better able to understand certain developments. Why is that? 
 First, many developments concern more than only one subject! As an example only think about the process of Globalization: This phenomeneon concerns Economics, Industrial Engineering, Transportation as well as Education, or Politics. Someone who focused only on one of the fields could hardly manage to bring certain facts together and draw qualified conclusions.
 Second, many fields of studies have stron interdependencies meaning that one determant is influenced by different factors out of different academic branches.
 Thirdly, the generalist (as one can call the expert in many fields) is able to access a wider branch of tools out of different subjects which enable him or her to be a more efficient problem solver.
 
 Nevertheless there are obvious advantages of a specific knowledge as well: It is easier to totally understand a certain facet of a problem as one is able to focuse on that subject for a long time. this enables you to draw back to a variety of experiences.
 Picking up the example of the Globalization process it is easier to explain only the Economic aspect when you are an expert on that and have been able to collect deep experiences in that field of study! If you want to focus on the effects of Globalization on poverty in third world countries it is not necessary to be an expert on the development of transportation costs...
 
 Having the pro and con arguments presented in the above section in mind, I would say that it is more important to specialize in one subject than being a generalist. 
 Especially today in a world with a lot of research done it is necessary to specialize on a detailed field of study to bring up new knowledge. Experts can deliver more detailed problem solving plans.
 In my opinion it is nevertheless possible not to loose the overview and to know the roots your are coming from. 
 The best alternative to do research on a multi-facetted problem is a team made up of members having their origin in different fields. Doing this it is possible to draw from both advantages as everybody has his of her specific knowledge and contribute to a team uniting different qualities.
 
 Thank you for your attention!!