I agree with the statement that, in twenty years, there will be fewer cars in use than there are today. There are several reasons that I would like to present in support of my view.
 
 Firstly, cars pollute. Air pollution is increasing by the day and at alarming rates. Though there are strict laws that are being imposed on the automobile industry to make cars pollute less, these laws can't prohibit people from buying cars. More people will buy cars and more pollution will occur and this, supported by reasons I give after this one, will, in say decade's time, reverse the situation and people will stop using cars.
 
 At the present rate of air pollution, the day where the ecological balance is lost is not far ahead. Though it's being controlled by all governments, it can not be eliminated. Pollution will eventually lead to destruction of  trees and plants, direct of indirect deaths of animals on land and in water and people will realize what they are doing to the world.
 
 Secondly, oil prices are rising very fast. How much ever the government promises it's citizens not to raise taxes, it will have to raise taxes, because it's not in the government's hands to keep them down at the same level for ever. One day, gas will be so costly that people will stop driving cars and start using other modes of public transportation like buses and trains.
 
 Thirdly, the rate at which oil is being drilled and extracted out of the earth, is extremely large compared to the rate at which it is being produced. And the world has limited oil resources that can be made use of. It's possible that people might still use cars but use electricity instead of gas. But where will electricily come from? A large chunk of total electricity is produced from oil and natural gas products, and they are still a major source of electricuty compared to solar energy or nuclear energy.
 
 Lastly, road space is a big issue in most cities now. People buy cars without realizing they don't have anywhere to drive them. Huge increase in traffic congestion will only make people give up cars and take the train instead, because they know the train can't get stuck in a traffic jam.
 
 The car has long been a status symbol. There will be a stage when iFinally, I opine that there will be fewer cars in use in twenty years than there are today.