All over the world, the importance of the advertisement to convey the information about products is not negligible. The reason for this importance is stemmed from the fact that the advertisemetns givce the detailed information about the products of some companies. However, there is a discussion about whether these arguments make these products seem much better than they really are or people can trust in these advertisement about the information about the products. In my opinion, most advertisements demonstrate the products not as they really are because of the some reasons such as economical, social and political reasons. 
 One of the crucial reason in the unreliability of most advertisements in conveying information about the products is caused by the economical aspects. For instance, if there is a company who needs money and support to develop themselves, to trade with another companies in order to improve their skills in their own sector, they may show their own products much better than they really are. In addition to private companies, the public companies may desire to benefit from the people`s interest in their advertised products to make money from their sells to increase their prestige in a government. Consequently, the economical purpose of the producers of the advertisements about their products may result in illustrating these products much more better than they really are.
 Another significant reason in agreeing with the idea of not trusting most advertisements in representing the products can be proved by social reasons. The reason for this that generally people always believe in advertisements and they do not try to know more about the advertised products in order to collect more detailed daat about them, because this kind of people choose the easiest way to get information about new methods, new innovations and they try these product without any advices from professional people. Therefore, the existence of laziness in social life  in doing research in order to learn more information about products is a factor in the creation of unreliable advertisements.
 In addition to economical and social reasons in making the advertisement to show products much better than they are, the political reasons can be demonstrated as a proof. The reason for presenting political reasons to prove my argument is that in some countries, for example in Turkey, there are some distinct rules in making the product available to use for people; because these products shoud be reliable, tested in order to avoid the devastating results after using them. Therefore, most advertisements try to show the products much better at the beginning to have the goverment approval in distributing them. As a consequence of giving the situation in political side of the advertisements, it can be claimed that the desire to have approval from the political powers in order to introduce the products led to the increasing number of the advertisements which make the products much better than they really are.
 As a result of giving detailed information about the reasons in economical, social and political fields, it is ovious to see that most advertisement try to present the products in order to develop their economical structure, prestige in government and benefit from the the support of people, who are lazy and so not capable in doing research about the advertised products before using them.