When I was young, I used to think that "older" people who told me that "age is mental state", that "you are so young or so old as you feel yourself", or similar commonplaces, were either lying or at least looking for emotional justifications or excuses for the fact that, well, they were "older" and were not going to be any younger in the future. As I approach the symbolic "frontier" of 30 years, however, and even though I still do not believe that age is only mental, I must accept that I find more respect and understanding for those "older" people in my soul. Moreover, I find myself not only respecting those people but also their opinions, which imply that life does not end when youth ends and, maybe even more clearly, that you can enjoy life as long as your health allows you to and as long as you want to do it. 
 
 Right, young people discover everything for the first time, young people live intensively and have the strenght to try out more. There are no nights like the nights when you discover nightlife, and there certainly is no love like the very first love. The first travels are especially exciting, and the same could be said about the first serious intelectual enterprises, the first jobs, the first experiences as a financially independent being. 
 
 Still, older people who grant this but insist on the advantages of aging definitely have a point. For, in fact, young people do enjoy life, but they also suffer a lot (that is why the concept "teenage Angst" exists, as well as one of the possible explanation for the popularity of, say, punk music). While the very first love has -for better or worse- an extreme impact, life shows you after a while that suffering related to love only seldom kills people, and that one uses to find other persons to love after a breakup - which is a thing no younger person dealing with an unhappy love story, for example, would even begin to understand. 
 
 Besides, the levels of love you begin to feel and to perceive after some years on this Earth are simply incomprehensible to younger people who are still in the process of discovering love - and here I mean not only love between two persons as in a partnership or sexual relationship, but also fraternal love, family-love, friendship, and even love for certain aesthetic artifacts or for certain ideas. Experience brings a certain detachment with it, it usually involves distance and a decrease -however pronunciated- in passion, but it also implies deeper feelings - you only need to be old enough to notice that they are deeper.
 
 It would seem, thus, that both younger and older people enjoy life, or suffer it, more or less equally - only differently. The experiences in life are, indeed, so different and so potentially varieted, that it simply would not make sense to try to locate "joy" in any given age or life-period. Young people use to enjoy passionately and as if they were the only persons on Earth, while older people tend to be a little more mature about their own feelings and about their own position in the world. And this applies to suffering, as well.
 
 So maybe it would be best to forget categorizations based on "objective" facts like age and really try to make the best of one's life regardless of how old one is. Maybe it would be better to try to enjoy life and to try to make as much other people as possible to enjoy it without caring about people's age. Does this mean I am an "older" person who is looking for "justifications" or "excuses"? I certainly think this is not the case, but I would let any given younger person to judge, and in the end, I do not seriously care - which could also mean that I have already arrived at this distant maturity...  Which is OK with me! As long as it lasts...