Travel is an activity that could be traced as far as the beginnings of humanity. Thanks to travel remote lands were populated,  empires were built and civilizations were conquered. Over the centuries, travel has had a social connotation: an activity that it is usually done in group. However, that does not mean that it is a uniquely social activity. Many individuals often travel by themselves and enjoy individual travel.
 
 Travel is either a leassure or a business activity.  For the purpose of this essay, and due to the nature of the question, leassure travel will be addressed. Tourism is a multibillion dollar business that responds to a wide range of market demands. Over the years, it has become more and more refined. A person, or a family can find from vacation packages to the Caribbean to tours to the space.
 
 Travel in groups led by a tour guide are often well organized trips: the number of people is set, the destinations are well assesed, the timing for each activity is carefully structured and the tour guide is usually a tourist professional. People bond together when travelling in a group. In addition, and because of economies of scale, another potential benefit of group travel are the lower and more affordable costs for the tourist. Group travel is often cheaper than individual travel.
 
 However, group travels lead by a tour guide may also have disadvatages. People in tour groups are tied to the destinations, schedules and timing of the tour. If someone wants to visit a different place or stay longer in a stop, it is likely that such options are not available. Also, they are often tied to the meals and hotels offered by the tour. So, if a person does not like any of these, it would be very hard -or more costly- to change it.  In summary, people who travel in groups lead by a tour guide are more restricted than when travelling by themselves. 
 
 There is no right or wrong answer for advocating or rejecting group travel led by a tour guide. It depends on the individual or family's  preferences, as well as on the available budget, and ultimately the degree of privacy and restrictions that a person is comfortable with when travelling.