Young people today do not seems to care much about their community and do little to help them.
 The young generations seem to be too busy studying, working or relaxing to spend time for their community, but it is not only their fault. It is also the fast changing world that brought them to this stage, they do not seem to have time for anything but their own business. 
 This is also because of the technological development that changed our lives by making things quicker and filling our days with more and more tasks to accomplish instead of keeping their number constant and giving us more time for ourselves or our community. The result is that at the end of the day we are a lot more stressed and tired and only care of relaxing. A good example is mobile phones that make us reacheble for work matters even while taking a walk in the park after office hours, often there is no clear cut between work and private life. 
 Young people are normally those who take innovations more seriously and so they are the ones that always find something to do, no matter wheter it is useful or not, they are just not able to stop for a second.
 Society today is also more self-centered: people is aiming more at personal success and wealth and this of course brings people away from dedicating time to their community because in their mind every second of time is precious for themselves and somebody else can take care of the community.
 If this is the stereotype of the modern man, it is also going to be the model for young people and since they are smart and very quick at learning (thanks also the higher average level of education) they will lose no time and forget about the community.
 It is easy to find evidence of this as always less people volunteer to work for charities, hospitals and churches, but we can also notice it in the little things: so many people throw papers in the streets like they do not care because somebody will clean it sooner or later, this is a sign of missing respect to the community and it is jut like not dedicating time to it since the environment is also part of the community.
 Young people really do not know what it means to dedicate time to their community because they hardly ever do, they look at it has a waste of time and this is mainly because of the changing modern culture.