Though I cannot conclusively state whether there will be fewer cars in use 20 years from now or not, I can assert with some degree of confidence that people will opt for various other modes of transportation in their everyday lives.
 
 With the increase in the population and the average standard of living improving, we now see each family owning at least a car or two. This puts a lot of pressure on the roads. Traffic is usually a problem that one witnesses almost every day. To get to a place where I could have otherwise, some 5 years ago, reached in 10 minutes, it now takes me close to an hour. However, if the government does somehow manage to curb the aforementioned problems, then the situation could be different.
 
 Also due to better and more convenient modes of public transportation- railway, metro, buses etc,. The Government, having noticed the deteriorating conditions of traffic, has tried to do something to improve the congestion and road conditions leading to it. But our nation has seen a population boom far beyond its expectations. Roads cannot be broadened further and no more place for it can be alotted. I have noticed a shift in peoples choice of everyday transportation. Not only is it more convenient because it occludes problems of traffic, parking etc, but it also proves to be less expensive and more comfortable.
 
 Admittedly, one cannot deny the advantages of having and using a car. Some people are very passionate about cars, buying and using them. Also, at times of emergency such as a late night need to go to the hospital or a doctor, or even for other conveniences, a car does come in handy. Besides, certain people just hate public means of transportation.
 
 To conclude, due to an increase in the number of cars attributable to a huge population boom,  terrible road conditions and the improvement in public transportation, I do see a decline in the number of cars in use 20 years from now. Thus, in essence I do agree with the speakers assertion that in 20 years from now there will be fewer cars in use than there are today.