Today, we talk about the issue is about did the new generation really spend enough time for their communities activities or not. According to my opinion, i agree that they do not actually had enough time to help the communities that they involved. 
 When we talk about the main communities for the young people is the family and the school. And I will talk about how they didn't do them best in this two communities.
 Family Communities. As we know that, when the people growed up, they don't want to depends on parents more, all of them want to got another sky for themselves. But do it means that we don't need to spend more time for family? Do it means they should seperate from the family? I say no. Cause the family communities is actually the base for everyone, it's also a strong supporter for everyone. And how to build a successful relationship into family is really important.  From such reserch from teenages criminals, the percentage of teenages criminals are growth year by year, and there's nearly 60% of the teenages had bad relationship with family. So, we can know that those social problem occurs actually because the teenages didn't really spend time to build a good relationship with family. So, if they even don't spend time with them family, how can they say they helped out with the family communities.
 Shool Communities. Did u ever seen the report about school violence issues? Did u saw the pictures shows the student shooting their classmates? That's what had happened in this world now. School Communities, is the people spend most time when they was young. When we saw those bloody conflicts had happend in school, we could know that this is the evidence we say they don't give enough time to help their communities. They didn't spend time to talk to them classmates, they don't want to working with friends, They can spend more time in msn but not in class.They don't participate the school activities cause they are not interesting. That's why we say they didn't really help out the school communities.
 So, beside in this two reason, we know they didn't do them job,