Advertisements exploit people's curiosity and desires and  beguiles customers into spending money on worthless objects. Many advertisements contain untrustworthy informations that appear appealing to customers. Advertisements often make thing that "you have always wanted and need." By doing so, costumers are victims of these pleasing masks. 
 Advertisements always make diet machines seem to be the panacea of all stubborn fats and even social problem. "Lost 10kg in a month" repeatly appears on television. This repeation incalcates the customers' s minds and made them into believing that this diet machine is the best. Many diet machine advertisements also stress that their machine will work even the user does not cut down food input and that no other exercising is required. However, there is not such a "well-rounded" machine that would make the user loss weight while he or she is consumming thousands of calories. Therefore, they is no way such a diet machine is as good as it is presented in the advertisement. 
 Advertisement on tea stresses that tea is the panacea to all diseases. It cures high blood pressure, headache, depression, and even cancer. Any educated person know that there is no way that tea can cure cancer. However, advertisement grasps people's desire to living as long as possible and exploits this desire to increase their own profits. Although many people are aware that tea has no direct influence on cancer, they would still like to buy such tea just because they doubt about their own knowledge and that it is better believe that advertisement than their own knowledge. Therefore, advertisement benefits by controling the psychological effects on people.
 If everything is as good as it appears on advertisement, we would have lived in a perfect world without any suffering or death since every thing seems to be the panacea to sufferings or death. It is left to people's own judgements to be decieved or not to be decieved by advertisements and by their own doubts.