In our era, the value of everything is evaluated by its image created in the minds of humankind. The most popular technique of creating the desired image is using marketing methodologies. One of the most valid and prevailing marketing tactics is advertising. Some factions think that advertisements have the power to make products seem better than they are really, while the other factions assert that it is impossible to make a product seem better by making customers deceive thanks to lots of legal legislations and institutional controls. However, to me, both sides can be correct in different conditions.
 
 First, not all the countries have laws and legislations for broadcasting fair advertisement that reflects the product just like as it is. In that case, producer can make his product seem more qualified in the advertisements. To illustrate, the cream used for decoration located on top of cakes. In the advertisements, the manufacturer can use shaving cream instead of cake cream in order to benefit from shaving cream's durability and viscosity, are there not any regulations about the ethics that should be conducted in the advertisements. Because they have the same color, nobody can distinguish the shaving cream that is displayed in the advertisement as the cake cream from normal cake cream, and all advertisement viewers would probably think that it is a marvellous brand to buy comparing to others as no normal cake cream can seem of such good shape and durability. As a result, if there is no legal stimulus for advertisements, with the help of spurious counterparts, the product may be demonstrated as more qualified.
 
 
 However, if there is enough legislation for advertising procedures in a country, it is impossible to guile the customers by giving false information about product or using a counterfeit product, as the manufacturer is aware of the fact that he will be punished by the laws, if he even tempts to do it.  For instance, in the USA, if a producer wants an actor to give a testimony for his product, it is a must that the actor should use the product for 6 months before the advertisement.
 
 In summary, in the advertisements it is quite possible to make the product seem more qualified than it is if there are no laws about that. So more laws should be accepted in that issue.