I certainly agree with the statement that young people enjoy life more than older people do.  There are several reasons why I think that young people are making the most of their age while the older generation is gradually retiring from life except a selected few.
 
 According to me, the young generation is much active, able and resourceful to enjoy the life much better than the older generation. Today's youth has tremendous opportunity to make the most of life and they are grabbing this opportunity to make their life better each day. In contrast, the older people has much less resources and opportunities to enjoy life.
 
 Basically, the concept of life and enjoyment has changed totally since the past years. Nowadays enjoyment is considered to be a part of daily activities and some time is kept aside for that. But the older generation is not used to such modern ideas and life for them at an advanced age is full of miseries, complaints and troubles.
 
 Today, young people are healthy and they keep their fitness levels up by carrying out a well planned regime. As the age advances, the older people can not maintain a healthy lifestyle and ultimately face many health related problems which cause a hinderance for them to enjoy life. Imagine how a 60 or 70 year old female will travel to some hill station or let her hair down in a party when she cant even let her foot down from the bed due to age related diseases like osteoarthritis in her knees?   
 
 Nowadays, the younger generation are indulging in work and pleasure equally, thus, balancing all the necessary walks of life. They plan every weekend to a new destination either a movie or some exotic location after a long and tiring week. The disco and the party culture is a hype among the youth today which are not an older generation commodity.
 
 Finally, much depends on how you take life in general. Because as Norman Vincent Peale mentions in his book 'Power of Positive Thinking' that a positive outlook towards life is much important to lead an enjoyable and successful life and todays youth are walking on his foot steps leaving everything else far behind.