It is a very hard subject to bring up individuals that are so well developed by means of  academic acknowledement and will be able to discover things that may be milestones of the concerning science. The action can be more well defined by using `bring himself up` since the process goes on like this: Up to some point you take the hardware; namely education and consequently you define your route which goesto that `milestone`. Up to the second part the enviroment is so significant and if ever there are well opportunities to develop your skills it could be used so efficiently and this should be considered good luck since there are no equivalent chances everywhere.  
 As to close again to the subject some people are describing their tasks around scientific happenings and they have an hard job to deal since it is the most difficult part of the life to discover something. A few decades ago scientists had worked on wide topics and there are so many examples of them who make different associative studies and made products even in mathematics and chemistry which are so far topics. Furtherly there are much more examples who studied relatively close topics such as physics and mathematics. 
 In our century there are more available interdiciplinary areas namely the preliminaries are ready but further relations should be determined. It can be said that a sufficient theoretical base have been prepared and with the help of technological revolutions the practical aspects are being performed. But anomg these several interdiciplinary areas there is happening a more accelerated development compared to the technological development and there becomes much more work to handle. The codes of the nature is being simplified but the humanity is learning that the complexity- as described in physical sciences the enthropy- around us is more than we imagine.        
 As a coclusion; as the time passes we learn and get surprised about  the wideness of the universe but the days we are living is not that as in the 17 th century to sit at home and try to get some formulas about diferent sciences/