One will succeed in life only if something new and risky is experimented. Hard work is the key to success. Successful people try out new things and also take risks to know something or complete the task rather than doing what they already know how to do well. I agree with this statement. The following reasons and examples which i can give are as follows.
 
 Success depends on experimenting new things even though they are risky. When one know something about the task well before persuing the same, there is no need to concentrate much and put on hard work to finish the task. He can do things easily and with in no time. But when he/she is choosing a work based on risk it gives much interest and need lot of hard work to go on with it and succeed.
 
 For example, consider a poor citizen want to get in to the Indian Cricket team. He is capable of playing well and got much confidense. But, even though he know well that it is not easy to get in to the team as he cant effort huge amount for the coaching fees. He need lot of money and many recomendations to go through. After knowing all these things, when he still shows interest, and by taking risk he moves forward, he will definitely achieve his goal. This way when one is taking risk and put effort he will definitely move forward in life to know and to do things. 
 
 Consider another example of Bill Gates, the very famous well know person in the world. He is one of the successful person in the world as he developed the windows operating system which are being used by wide range of people. He dont know whether his discoveries or developments will succeed or not, but still he took risk and developed another operating system which is named user friendly one called (Windows XP) which is well developed and being used by many users in the present world.
 
 By the above examples and facts i agree with the statement. Successful people should take risk to go further and find new things. If they stand back, we would hav missed many new things and inventions till now.