In the current society, not having his drivers license means a none  access to differents things coming from places, foods and jobs. That shows the importance of cars in the society. Car consums fioul which emissions are the main cause of global warming. Therefore the tendancy is to limit the negative impact of our state of life on  environment including car. The aim of this esay will be to discuss about the evolution of car number for the next 30 years.
 
 Manufacturing car involves many different industries like steel, aluminium, flat glass and plastic production. Those massive industries take an important part in the economy of a country. Then, the decrease of production of car will have an important impact om it until new orientation are made. 
 
 Furthemore, mamy cars works with fioul which leads the economy of many contries too. It must be say that car using alternative energy are emerging but as petrol will lead the market, producers will not have sufficient help and concideration.  
 
 In addition to that, east countries like India and China faced to an important economic development. The demand of car will be very hight for the next few years. 
 
 Therefor I don,t think that the level of car will decrease. The solution is more to change the mind of drivers : they use car to often : money solution like driver tax entreing a city like in london sociological orientation better use of common transport bus train 
 
 Change in the process of car consumption   and so  were one of the most part in economy of the country In some countries, statistics have showed that there are more car than people. Lay off against car's manufactures like in california but no real impact 
 Delocalisation in eastern country, growth of hina and india so more car will be constructed in this areas. So the real question is not to know if there will be fewer car in use in the futur but if those car will be more against the environment. Policy regarding the ennvironment are becoming more and more present in European countries and so the industry has to suit to thise laws. N