Some people might say that leaning facts is important for students without understanding ideas and conceps because the way is more convince to ger some knowladge. However, I believe that understanding idears and concepts process is more important to learn something to students because of several reasons.
 First of all, understanding ideas makes students not losing the ideas easily. without understanding mean is students study not deeply because if they study to get more reasons and information, they wil be able to understand and not to forget it easily. For example, when i was high school students, I learned about my country's history. My teacher let we know about just the history's fact, and it was too difficult to understand. Athough i got a high score at the class, I cannot  now remember anything becasue I couldn't really get without understading. If my teacher and I had tried to ungerstand about my country's history, I would have explained about that fluentely.
 Another reason I believe students need to understandinf concept  the ideas is that knowing the studies' concopts help students to study the course comfortably. If you go some where without knowing direction, do you feel comfortable? I don't thing so because unknowing where we are going makes people's feeling frustrated and losing confidents. Accoding to the news I've watched, 45% students who know about the taking course's conceptby teacher's explainations show more higher acchievements from the coure in that they could know what the coure is going on. For instance, every class has instructions for knew students, and almost school hold orientation to show their eductions' concepts because they believe the process will help students keep for to study well. If the way had been helpful, they would have eliminated the process.
 In conclustion, I claims that understanding ideas and concepts needs to students in order not to losing their studies easily and in order to improve their achivements during taking the coures. If students need more time to understand, we have to wait them because it will really make good education.