Considering the population of the world today and distribution of income rates among countries, it is hard to give an immidiate answer to the question about the number of cars in use in twenty years` time. Let me brirefly state why I have chosen to emphasize an ambiguity instead of an exact answer. 
 
 First of all, the population of the world is growing rapidly which might create the impression that there would be more cars in use as there would be more people living on earth. It is true for the case of Turkey for example. I came to observe that automobile galleries in Turkey are the best profit makers and also the number of cars sold increases dramatically each year. But taken from another aspect, it could quite be the opposite. The rapid growth of population is observed more in underdeveloped or developing countries whose gross national product or income per capita is very low. Then it would be more likely for the citizens of such countries to tend to use buses or trains which would be a much cheaper way of transportation. In India for instance, one can easily notice this situation. 
 
 Secondly, the increase in the number of people living in a city might push its dwellers to make use of public transportation. Not because that these people cannot afford to buy cars but because that they don`t want to lose their valuable time on roads, stuck in the middle of a never-ending traffic jam. Let`s take the example of New York City. Even the mayor of this city is said to be using the subway in order to evade from the traffic and promote the use of subways. Yet there is also the case of California where we can see anyone at any age to own and drive a car. Because of its geographical characteristics, it is almost impossible to live one`s life without a car in Los Angeles. Not that the city is overcrowded such as New York. But because there are miles in between any two destinations.  
 
 As to my personal observations, there are a body of reasons both to agree and disagree with the statement. In the end, whatever the sings and predilictions are, we live in a world of unpredictibility and suprises. Who knows wheter a genious scientist would come up with a more time and energy saving invention than a car, or not?