The advent of cars added an entirely new dimension to travelling, an essential facet of man's eternal urge to explore. In the beginning, cars were affordable only by the wealthy and hence came to signify financial/social status. Soon, with advances in technology that aided bulk production, the concomitant evolution of production design and streamlining of factory production, the costs of cars dropped and came to appear in not so rich households. 
 In the present day, if not for cars, it is difficult to even imagine taking a peaceful and private family holiday. The degree of freedom cars provide can not be paralleled by today's public transportation. 
 Today, with more under-developed and developing countries than there are developed countries and assuming that living standards throughout the world only improve (of course precluding the possibility of another World War in the coming 20 years!) and since cars are considered an essential indication of a healthy income, it is perhaps not unreasonable to claim that the number of cars worldwide will only increase in the coming few years.
 From the above reasoning, one may be tempted to conclude that the number of cars will definitely increase with time had the environmentalist not interfered! Global warming has drawn more attention and concern than ever before in the history of the modern world. The ever deepening lament by environmental scientists that the world is heading for a doom unless we change our ways in a drastic manner, has now begun to feel the ears of world leaders. One of the steps that would be contemplated on is a drastic reduction in petroleum vehicles which, in today's world, translates to reduction in the total number of vehicles (as more than 90% of today's vehicles are powered by fossil fuels) which inturn translates to a reduction in the number of private vehicles, i.e. cars. There are already governments which are actively encouraging their civilians to take public transit.
 One may give yet another counter argument to the above logic. How about 'green vehicles' which run on natural gas which is proven to cause very little or no harmful emissions and also is cost effective? The government of Delhi, India, has recently enforced a legislation that requires all public vehicles to use natural gas. It will not be surprising if this extends to private vehicles soon. This seems to balance the decrease in the number of cars proposed in the previous passage. 
 Supposing that all of today's cars have been converted to use only natural gas, how about the ever increasing traffic congestion? This definitely is not alien to any Manhattan or a New Yorker! One possible solution is to literally force everybody to use public transit, ofcourse not without strengthening the existing facilities. In light of all the arguments we have seen till now, it is perhaps too naive to conclude either way. 
 Hence, I disagree with the statement: 'In twenty years there will be fewer cars in use than there are today'. The correct answer is 'One cannot predict'