The question before hand is that whether young people nowdays do not give enough time to helping their communites. I am in complete disagreement with the aforementioned statement. I belive that young generation actively participate in the functioning of the community. The youth now are more interested in community work then ever before. The following reasons will further buttressed my belief in the acitve involvement of the youth in community work.
 
 Firstly, nowdays young people are involved in many community works by associating themselves with various political parties which are dedecated towards community related works. These political parties/organisations require the youth to effectively raise there voice and the youth inturns gets involved in it  so as to make a mark for themselves. For example, there is a political party called shiv sena in India which is mostly comprises of young students. 
 
 Secondly, non-governmental organisations which are cheifly controlled by young students are established to allow the young people to raise there voice on community related issues. For example, an organisation called the Youth Parliament is controlled by some college going students who wants to educate the school going childrens by discussing all community related issues. it opens a discussion forum over all issues centering our community. 
 
 Thirdly, many students specifically take time out of there busy schedule to be a part of an old age homes or any protective homes for the special childrens. A survey conducted by a popular magzine, 'India Today' shows a inclination of the students towards community works. the survey rated the community work conducted by the young people more effective then conducted by the people of more mature ages.
 
 Finally, young people are also associated in raising there voices on community related issues by filling public interest litigations in the court. Recent studies shows that the slap suits filed in the court regarding community work are carried out by the youth. 
 
 To conclude i would like to quote Jacob Arnold a renowned author who once stated that, "the pillar stone of any community is not the work carried out in it, but it is the participation of the youth in carriying out the community work counts".