In different countries, we have different types of education, the question that must be highlighted is which kind of education ids the best or the most efficient. In my opinion, to have broad knowledge of many subjects is better. For that, I shall use how it affects social behavior and then how it is a simpler way for teenagers to get to know which job they really want to do.
 
 Firstly, acquiring a wide range of knowledges allows one to interact more easily in one's society. By having at the same time notions of maths, of geography, history or arts for examples allow communication to be wider. There are more subjects to discuss about; in other terms having more knowledges is possessing a larger culture.  I think that knowing facts about history, geography, philosophy, economics are important because they concern the humanhood and more specifically our daily life, so they are benficial to us, how would we know where are countries when mentionned at the television for example. The perfect image of this type of person who knows a bit  of everything is Sherlock Holmes who although being specialised in crimes, due to his occupation, we learn that he knows a variety of things : chemistry, self-defense are such examples. Throughout the different stories, we can see his easyness to get in a conversation with anyone on anything.
 
 Secondly, as a student I know that choosing a future job and thus selecting the corresponding courses is very difficult. As a fact, postponing such decisions are a way to be fully happy and totally aware of their meaning and consequences once the time has comed. Moreover, continuing or beginning academic subjects is important because as time passes you can progressively decide which you prefer and therefore making the right choice at the right time. However, making a professional choice does not imply letting all the other knowledges down, in the contrary one can get specialized once he is beginning to work but by no means forget what he has learnde beside.
 
 
 To sum up, I would say that it is necessary possessing a wide range of knowledges as it allows to be more social, and it helps to our comprehension of our environment. It helps also on the choice of the job one has to make has it gives him time to appreciate and to make the best decision for him.