A number of people have asserted that young people nowadays do not give enough time to help their communities. While the first reaction of some people may disagrees with this statement, there are some compelling reasons to explore this issue in more depth. Concering the status quo of today's society, I personally agree with this statement for the following two reasons.
 
 First, the atmosphere of competition is getting stronger in many fields, such as career or study. People treat educational degree with more seriousness, and consequently, people are required to persuit higher degree than past days. Nowadays, parents are aware of this change in the society. As a result, they expect their children pay exclusive attention to their studies, or specifically, to everything which is helpful to their education. Helping the communities simply turns to a waste-of-time behavior if it is not beneficial to the studies.
 
 
 In addition, the security problems also reduce people's willingness to help the communities. There are more crimes or robbery acts happened at the dark corner of the street all the time. Parents are worried about the children' safty, and as a consequence fewer and fewer parents or adults will encourage their children hang arount outside as long as  the neiborhood is alarme with a signal of unsafty.
 there is one true example happened to my mom. Last year she just walked home after the work, she unfortunally robbered by a young man. Her bags was gone as well as some amount of money. My mother was terrfying, and she started warning me that I have to come home no later then six o'clock under on circumstance, and tried my best not to hang around the community becasue it was very dangerous. All of the reasons have influenced my perspectives concering this issue.
 
 With no doubt, there is also an argument to be made for the opposing position on this matter. Nevertheless, with the reasons I have presented above, I believe my argument is built on a solid foundation.