i agree that students must understand ideas and concepts than it is for them to learn facts. Concepts and ideas are plays a major role in learn facts. By understanding the ideas and concepts we will get a more knowledge and to to get a good result in our examinations .To understand the concepts students are need to attend the classes regularly. If we miss the class we are unable to understand the concepts clearly.If we are study by using concepts and ideas we can remember for a longtime we can recall easily. By learning concepts and ideas we will be more thoroughly in that subject.By understanding concepts and ideas it makes me more intelligent and knowledgible person. It is very useful for our final examination. For the final examination we have to study more topics. It is difficult to remember all topics at a time. sometimes we forgotten. If wwe are studying all topics by understandin concepts and ideas we are able to remember easily. it enhances to recall very easy in final examination.
 Some students are learn facts without understand ideas and concepts. Its not benificial to them. they will be get bad results in future. concept and ideas are more important for students . By understanding these two factors students are achieve their goal. It will be useful in higher studies. In higher studies understanding the concept is more important . We need more practical knowledge. With out understanding concepts and ideas nobody cannot reach their goal. these are more important factors in student life. students have must done the projects in their life. For doing projects concept is more important. By thinking ideas makes me a knowledgable person . Students get more benificial by understanding concepts and ideas. They will be have good future in his future life. If we can understand the concept deeply we will be more perfect in that subject .Then you are able to get good results . To understand the concepts and ideas will more useful in our future life. In professional and good joba we must need to understand the ideas.We will apply the ideas. Finally i suggest that every bstudent must understand concepts and ideas.It will makes a to get good career life and bright future.