I strongly agree with the statement of "young people nowadays do not give enough time to helping their communities". Some may disagree with what i say that they (especially the young poeple) think they do help others in their communities. I do agree that young people do help, but the point is they did not give enough time on helping. Maybe they just spent a few minutes for donating some moneys or giving their seats to the elders in the train or bus. That is totally not sufficient. 
 Regarding to that issues, there are a few reasons that cuase this issue. First of all, young people are too busy. They need to face more challenges and difficulties in thier life compare to last time as the world are improving and developimg so fast. If they are students, they need to concentrate on their studies and get a very good results to get a place in a university or a position in the company. If they are workers, they may need to concertrate on their work so they could get more salaries or better positions in the company. Nowadays, people may need to know much more infomation compare to last time to sucess in the society. This includes computer skills, speaking skills, writting skills, and experts in more than one language. Thus, young people nowadays are busy for learning or working that they did not have time for other things. 
 Moreover, the parents did not encourage their children to pay more attention in helping others and their communities. Nowadays, parents mostly concern on the results and performance of their children in schools and jobs until they ignore the importance of teaching their children about the moral attitudes or behaviors. Therefore, the young people are mainly lack of the awareness of the importance of helping behaviors. They do not give enough time in helping their communities as they were not teach to do so since they were young.
 In conclusion, i agree with the statement of "young poeple nowadays do not give enough time to helping their communities" as they are too busy and their parents did not encourage moral attitudes and behaviors in their children.