I agree with this statement that sucessfull people try new things and take risks rather than only doing what they already know how to do well.
 consider scientist Einstein who had developed the power and light source for the world because he had done his experiment sixteen times and he saw the same result that is failure. But he never giveup himself and conducted the same experiment seventeenth time and at this moment he acheived a result and became one of the most recognizable person in the world . There are so many people in this way who try untill sucess meets them.
 
 Now we look at the present technology and the innovations that are happening in the world. Before the centuries if a person want to develop the power there is no way for obtaining it. But another scientist named as Edison who is famous for his wooden block model bladeless trubine which is used to develop the power from the water. He might not be a sucessfull person at the beginning of the era but he conducted many experiments and revealed the result form greater risks and won an international award which is given by the American society.
 
 I disagree with those people who will do the same things that they have already known. Because god had gifted the people with superficial knowledge and one has to aspire that knowledge and one should increase the potential skills to develop the new model. when the people do the things that were very known to them they will never obtain some thing different in their life and they are always seems to be in the same position.one should try for new things which involves risksand many huddles ,but when you pass through the risks there will be a result waiting for you. so every one should try for a new thing. Let us  consider an example  the person named as NEWTON , because he was unaware that he will be the most sucessfull person inthe world in the feild of science .He was just sitting down the tree and suddenly an apple fell on him and he question himself immedaiately that how it falls and then as a result he discovered the Newtons law of motion. so  i would like to conclude that when a person takes the risk and passes through the  difficulties and hurldes instead of doing the same thing that was well known  he will meet the sucess.