I agree with that idea that it is better to have broad knowledge of many academic subjects than to specialize just in one. As we live in a more complex  and competitive word today, people are expected to be more qualified day by day as we see this point in the work area. Also knowing just one subject very much is not enough. Through broader knowledge, one society can contain very improved individuals.
 
 Today, our world seems more competitive and difficult. Good jobs are really scarce. At this point, you have to improve yourself to have the best job. Then there comes the question, how can you do that?  If you are specialized in more than one subject, then it is obvious that you have a competitive advantage over a person who is specialized in just one subject. And this is well-reflected in your recruitment process of the job that you applied for. Also at this point, I want to give an example of myself that I am studying economics , but at the same time I had taken many classes from finance and marketing departments. In my opinion, I will make benefit of this situaton in the future.
 
 Apart from the career part, by specializing more, one society can go through a wider enrichment proces. It is obvious that knowing more cannot be considered ashaving a bad trait. If individuals in a specific society improve themselves through learning more subjects. Then this society turns out be a very high developed one. Just imagine that in a society, there is a great number of people who are very-well educated in terms of specializing in more than one subject. Then we can say that this society will accomplish many thing on their own. So knowing more is a very important aspect in our discussion.
 
 To sum up, the decision of having greater knowledge on academic subjects is a very important one for the sake of a society. I strongly believe that the general situaton of the world will be much more complex in the future and people who are specialized in various subjects will the ones who are going to survive more.