In the modren wold, it is a fashion to enjoy life. All of people have right to enjoy life.  The yong have lots methods to have a pleasant day. As well as the older people, they also have the methods. But the older peoole, have some limit. Among countless factors which influece my decision, theere are three conspicuous aspects as follows. 
 
 Certianliy no reason in my decision is more significant than the culture impact. The older people absorbs the thoughts  long time agoe, are olde and formal. They will have a futrher influence ,due to their experice. The young, appealing to the newest ideas in the world, they have no so much expericence to guide them. As an example , the Chinese people ,the modern  young people  like to enjoy some leisure. To travell,  with a appearace to the nature. No matter some things happended, no money , the funds and so on. Most of these are folloed the principler. As opposite , the older may be have a lot of money , and the rest have enough. Under the solution , they will have enoutgh save to futher developm for their familiy or children. 
 
 The another reason every  one can be seen is that the technological. Young people take the technology  quickly to help to enjoy life. But for the older , the technology , for him , is harder to manage. Like the newest mobile phone, the youngs advance with the rage. Their phones have too funcitons , with the advanced phoed, you can photo. in another use, yon should listen music no matter what time as you ever. For the older , the phone ,  the only funciton ,in some means, is a job , a project, a imper wich master call on him with the related to the jobs. It is essential to the job not a suppjlemtn to the enjoyable tools. 
 
 The next point is for my penchant is that the education. All of students have a appealing with the Internet. It helps students to learn futher knowledge, as the same time, the students gain the ideas all over the world. They are modren , in some extend, is self-centrated. They will not concrened the rest and the hurry.Like the credit card,  a b anks allow to additonal some money,, you may give them at a special time. The older may think , this is a troubel . They will worry about it. However, the yong wil not get trouble with it. 
 , 
 Directedl propefrly, the young people enjoy their life much more than the older people. Fore the older people ,they have theri own methods to enjoy theri life , like with the childeren, wihtout borrowed funds. Howener, in my  opinion, the young peopole enjoy life more atha older people do.