The issue whether there will be fewer cars in the near future is a question many are wondering about. It is important to maintain the amount of vehicles on the streets just to keep the balance more accurate. It is possible that humen will discover some other new transportation method than riding a car, but highly doubtable.Not to mention that we are living in a generation that is addicted to oil products, which is called Oil addiction. As a result of the oil discovery we have seen too many products perfectly made to be sold, cars is an example of that addiction. This essay will prove that we are not only addicted to oil but also in a "cars-addiction" generation.
 Firstly, many argued that we are going to discover some new kind of vehicle that flies, and we will be having streets over skies, now let us be more realistic here. Some would rather going back to the generation before to using horses, donkeys, or even camels for transportation. Moreover, I can see the fact that cars are a high risk for the the Ozone layer, while this layer is protecting us from many radio active waves which might get us deadly diseases. However, I know that cars are helping parents drive their kids to school, go to work, and even do their own business trips. Indeed, Cars are number one transportation method for people.
 Secondly, let us take Kuwait city, Miami city, CA, or even NY states examples for people who are in love to show off what they have. Some might claim that they have nothing to do with these kind of people and they would never be like that. However, they might be your cousins or brother and sisters, but what I am trying to say that we can not neglect the idea that these people exist. Infact, they do a big affect on whether there going to be an increase or decrease in cars numbers driven on the streets.
 Finally, many asserted the idea of our generation getting oil addicted. Some individuals might be living in farms, or even deserts with peace. However, we can not be ignoring the fact that we need to be more modern in our life. The human brain keeps improving its self so we keep improving our group, country and ,in a general way, the whole world. I believe there will be tons of new models for sale, which they already have how the structure of the vehicles will be.
 Thus, I highly think that millions of cars will be cruising on the streets within the next twenty years.According to humen addiction Guess what is going to happen if you do not have one?