I disagree with this statement. To my consideration, learning facts is of greater importance than simply understanding ideas. I'll illustrate this point in the following three aspects.
 
 First, 'understanding' ideas without learning facts doesn't mean people FULLY understand these ideas.  Only through connection to facts, could the students know where these idea came from, and how they formed.  For example, In our childhood, we all learn from teachers that there are 9 planets surrounding the sun.  But recently, scientists expelled Plato out of the solar system. And now, technically speaking, there are only 8 planet left.  Plato didn't change. What changed is our criteria of planets. If students don't understand the criteria, by simply remembering the structure of solar syustem will not help to understand the essence of solar system.
 
 Second, students may find it hard to implement theories into practice in this way.  Theory without practical outcome is of little use for people in their daily life.  By understanding ideas in the textbooks, students could score high in the exam.  But it could not benefit them when they graduate from school, and when they need to start to implement these ideas into their work, because they didn't learn the facts that these ideas are based on.  This kind of student won't be competent in modern society.
 
 Third, there's always some facts that could not be explained by simply illustrating ideas.  If a student is obssessed with understanding ideas too much, he might not be curious about numerous facts that could not be explained by these ideas.  Curiosity is what keeps innovation happens.  Fueled with it, a great amount of future innovation will take place.  For example, UFO is still inexplainable by current scientific theories.  However, a student may get interested in it by learning facts that this phenomenon could not be explained by scientific ideas.  The next great astronaut after Amstrong might probably starts here.
 
 In conclusion, learning facts is important in truly understanding scientific ideas, implementing theories, and keeping curiosity to spark innovation.  This is more important to students.