While I am 18 years old and still going to school  and will continue to do so for at least one more year, I agree with the statement. It is extremely important to achieve as high of a broad knowledge as possible.
 I think that knowing a lot in many different academic subjects will get me further. Basic knowledge is the key to success. I believe that this is the reason why several "Gymnasien" in Switzerland for instance focus on a broad knowledge. Eventhough no student will be able to use every subject he or she studied in school or university later on, the subjects are essential for doing a great job in the chosen profession. For example, if I will go study and specialize in business later on, I won`t get anywhere only with my knowledge about business or economics. In the business world you need a strong sense of language and communication skills. No matter what you choose to be, language is important, especially english. If a person has no knowledge in english, he or she won`t be able to contact someone in another country or work internationally. Also important, wherever you work or what you study, is math. A person will be confronted with math questions all his life and will need to apply math in specific situations. It is rough to get through life when one doesn`t have a broad knowledge.
 Nowadays it is even more important, since one can change his job or academic field of work more easily than before. In the olden days people chose their proffession and usually stuck with it for the rest of their lives, always doing the same thing. Today, one can easily switch to a totally different field and still do a great job. In this case one clearly needs to have a broad knowledge to accomplish such a change. In my opinion it is getting easier and easier to do so. In some cases you don`t even need to major in business anymore if you want to work as a manager. It`s simply important to study or work in the field you like to achieve high academic or work related success. Of course in this case, a sense of knowledge in every field of study is essential.
 It definitely is important and reasonable to get as much of a broad knowledge as possible. Specializing in any specific subject is not wrong either and also important, but it is way better to do so in addition to a broad knowledge.