It is rather frequent for people to buy a good or service, but find out that what they buy is not actually what they see and like in the advertisements. This is because, most advertisements make products seem much better than they really are. 
 
 The main reason for this situation is the companies that provide these goods or services. Sellers of products naturally always try their best to sell more, and thus increase their profit. In order to achieve this, advertisements are made use of as they are the most effective way to attract the attention of consumers and as a result increase the quantities sold. Mostly, the products are showed rather differently from the real products in advertisements, as many properties of the products are exagarated. The best example to this kind of advertisements are the products showed in the television and sold only by ordering using the telephone. The consumers do not actually have the chance to see, touch and investigate the products themselves. They can only decide to buy the product considering the properties described on the television. Nevertheless, frequently consumers become dissapointed upon seeing the thing they bought when it is delivered. This is because the real product is not as good and useful as it is described in the advertisements. 
 
 The reason why I reached to the conclusion that advertisements make products seem better than they really are is my personal experience. One day, while I was watching television with my mother, we saw an advertisement of a cream that helps people to lose weight. They showed many women that had used this product and were really satisfied with the result. Therefore, although the price was a bit high, we decided to order one and try as we both wanted to lose some weight. We started to use the cream regualry as soon as it was delivered. However, obviously we did not really lose weight. On the contrary, the cream made my skin rather unpleasent. Then, we both decided to be more careful in such things again.
 
 In conclusion, owing to my personal experinece, I can definitely say that most advertisements make products seem much better than they really are. Actually, a person can easily reach this conclusion with thinking the reasons behind as well. As a result, people should be very careful in buying products and not trust to the advertisements completely.