I fully agree with the captioned statement. As a member of young people generation, I believe that we should find much more time to dedicate to and help our communities.
 
 The society in which we currently live put al lot of pressure on young generations in order to push them to think about their studies and their carrers. The messages that young people receive from family, school, work are not oriented to develop a feeling of the community where  they live. On my opinion, our society is building selfish people concentrated on their own interest and goals.
 
 I am currently leaving in Milan, the business capital of Italy. In Milan the feeling of living in a community is quite disappeared. By this, I mean that we are all concentrated on our projects and we work so hard that we do not have time to think about ourselves. We all live as single people with amazingly working hours that do not allow to think or to find spare time for a community. 
 
 This mechanins is completly wrong because it destroys the sense of community and all the benefits that a community can bring.
 
 I remember, when I was living and studying in a small village where my parents currently live, before moving to Milan, that I always appreciated the existence of a community. We all knew eachother at that time, because the village was very small. If someone needed help, everone was willing to give their support. The families in the community were very closed to eachother. I personally grew up with many other children of other families of the communities and we were obliged to help people with some difficulties. I remember that I was teaching at that time Italian language to foreign little children, coming from Africa but living in our community, and I was so happy to be of help.
 
 In conclusion, I believe that communities are very important for our lives. They can greatly contribute to our needs. For this reason, young people should keep alive the sense of community and make a lot of effort in finding time to help their communities. I can affirm that helping your community can be very rewarding and that life is not only made by your personal goals and career.