I don't think that this statement is generally right. Of course, young people have other abilities than older people, and can thus enjoy different things. But I think that there are also very enjoyable aspects of being old, and this is why I do not agree with the statement.
 
 Being young is in our society often equaled with having fun or being without worries. I think though that this is a big myth. Of course, especially the physical abilities are much bigger when people are young: it is easier to stay up long and party without being totally sick the other day in your twenties than in your thirties. But on the other hand, being young goes also along with a lot of specific problems older poeple don't have like this anymore. 
 For example it is very difficult to learn and experience what it means to be adult, to learn to take responability, to learn what person you are, and so on. This is one main reason, why I don't wish to be twenty anymore. I think this can be extremely exhausting - the older you are, in contrast, the better you know yourself and the better you can enjoy that.
 
 Another example is the decisions young people have to make and the expectations they have to fullfill. They have to decide for a career, find their own specific way and place in the society. They have to study and they have to go through a lot of frustrations finding out what they want, on the one hand, and what options society provides for them, on the other. 
 Afterwards people often mystify school and studying times as times of openness, freedom and choice - forgetting how difficult these choices often are, and that this openness and freedom is also a lack of clarity on what life offers you and if you are able to succeed.
 
 In contrast, I can imagine that being old can be enjoyable, although I think that the physical problems most old people encounter may offer a challenge. Being old can mean that you can finally really enjoy your life after  you found out who you are, found your place in the world,  and made your way. I can thus imagine, that being old is actually, at least in some regards, much more enjoyable than being young.