Indunstries use advertisements to make their products well-known to the possible customers. They make seem products in the advertisements so perfect and usefull for people maybe more than they really are.
 Altough this, few people remain so attracted by some products that they really think they need them.
 This is caused by two main reason. First, the frequency present of advertisement in tv, newspapers and magazines.
 People who is reading a newspaper or is watching tv is quite forced to see and see again the same products where they are rappresented so perfectly.
 Second, the use of advertisement tricks to enphatize the products ' use.
 In my opinion nowadays there is too much advertisement everywhere, we can watch a movie and it is continually interrupted by advertisement spots, we can read a magazines and every two page there is one dedicated for advertisement only.
 Even if we walk around in our city; they are so full of advertisement signs.
 Everything we do, we are tormented by advertisement, we are forced to watch and watch again how products are:one cheaper than other,one the best of all and one whom we can have less.
 But is it really true? I don't think so, If a product is really good there is no need to be so advertised because the best way to make people willing to buy a product is showing them that it is really perfect in the reality and not just in spots or sign where some magnificient product seems to be so necessary for a people's life.
 For example nowadays mobile-phones are the most advertisements product because technology continues to envelope new models with new functions that are advertised like usefull for people.
 But I don't agree that we really need a mobile phone that can make videos or photos and it is so expensive while we already have maybe old cameras and videocameras that do the same function.
 Maybe it is better to buy a normal mobile phone, cheaper than the brand new models because it has the main functions that a phone should have and this is really what people need.