I think that the best way to travel is with someone who knows what they are talking about. When you travel, the main point is to learn from this new place and its culture. If one is to go by themselves then how is one learning, if the point of a trip is to learn and see? Of course, a guide may not be much fun at times but there are trips where you have time off to do your own thing and have fun. 
 When one goes on a trip, one does not know all the main things that are available. Since it is a new place one does not know where the best food is, or where the best stores are, or even where the most importand and beautiful places are. If this happens how will the trip be any fun at all? What if you go to the wrong place to eat. It may be an adventure but not a necessary sacrifice for what is supposed to be a fun travel.  A guide's job is to teach the turist about the place they are visiting and give them a brief description of the place. A tour guide is an expert in this which means that one will get the right information. 
 Traveling with a group of people is not only fun but beneficial since the discovering can be greater with more people putting their thoughts in the discovery. It is true that starting from scratch may give a more detailed and comprehensive idea of the place, but this is not something that is done in a short amount of time which is why having a tour guide is much easier. The group will learn together and the tour guide will teach what is necessary and in the free time offered one can ask the guide for places that are known are save and where one can make small personal impressions about the place being visited. 	
 Traveling with a group led by a tour guide is very beneficial. The tour guide is an expert who knows what he or she is talking about. The tour guide will give all the necessary and most important information about the place being visited. The group would make the trip a fun travel because one gets to meet people and have fun with learning at the same time. Basically, I do agree with the satatement that the best way to travel is to be in a group with a good tour guide.