I think that having a board knowledge of many academic subjects is not what our era necessitates. In our times, it seems to be more important, and more awaited to be a real expert on one specific subject. This thought of mine has many reasonings behind it.
 First of all, I don't think that a broad knowledge on many subjects could be useful, as long as with such a knowledge one cannot be really comfortable with all of those subjects, on which he claims to have a knowledge, and with knowing a little from everything, it is really easy to get confused when you study, or prepare a project. Actually, that is why teamwork is important in business life. Since a project cannot be prepared by one person, it is distributed among a group according to the specializations of members of that group. Thus specialization is favoured in industry.
 Secondly, I do not think that such a broad knowledge is needed in industry, though specialization in one field is necessary to have a succesful career. Since  at our level of technology everything is hidden in details, and thoughts that make differences are at minor scale, one should be able to observe the subject, and problem that he is working on with all aspects. According to my opinion, an understanding that through, and detailed is only possible with high level of specialisation. 
 Thirdly, a broad acedemic knowledge means that person works on very many, and irrelevant topics. Yes, with such a working style you are working on a wide range of subjects, and you are continuously changing your study topic, and you know some of everything, and you seem to be successful with a lot of work fields you have, but you lack one, and a very important thing: Experience. Experince is, maybe, the most wanted speciality of a person, that is to be in high levels of his career. It had become to this that, experience is the key to a succesful business life. And i do not think that a broad academic knowledge distracts one`s focus, thus gaining experience is harder with that kind of knowledge, than the case with a specialisation field.