Although I do agree on the fact that students shall understand ideas and concepts about their particular fields of study, I don't think that those ideas and concepts are more important that learning the facts about them.
 
 Much on the contrary, I think that learning about the facts of a particular field of study or subject is as important as understanding general or specific ideas or concepts. Actually, the use of appropiate information about certains facts can help the students to better understand the (sometimes very abstract) ideas, concepts or principles of their fields of study.
 
 For example, a professor can give a lecture about the common features of all human societies. He can talk about how different societies, both isolated from the other, can develop norms and customs that are strikingly similar. This is the main idea, or concept for an antrophology of sociology class. But by showing certain facts, the students can better undestand these ideas. The teacher can talk about the similarities between the myths and legends of Norse and Celtic peoples which, despite the geographical and chronological isolation between those two groups, developed forms of seeing the world around them that are quite similar.
 
 Another example that supports this could be found in biology. You can learn that all living organisms share common traits, like cells, DNA, proteins, and so on. But despite these similarities, life in Earth is so diverse that is actually hard to see how can plants and animals, for explample, be closely related to each other in any way. It is by the study of the facts that students can grasp the fundamental concepts and ideas and better understand them.
 
 One can better undestand how plants and animal are related to each other by, for example, watching samples of each under the microscope, or by perfoming chemichal analysis of their tissues. The facts relvealed by experimentation and observation can not only help understand abstract ideas or concepts, but it helps the student develop new ideas and concepts, which in turn will be nurtured by new facts. And that's how knowledge, wheter in the sciences or even the arts, grows over time.