In today's world it is a debate if knowing more is better or specializing in a subject is better. To specizlize in a subject may make you an expert about that subject but knowing little from every subject makes you only knowledgable to some degree. Therefore the decision may depend on which one you value most. 
 I would value to be an expert in my field. Knowing just a little about all subjects may give you the opportunity to talk about everything but when it comes to talking deeply, for example when somebody asks you about an important part that does not stand on surface, you may not be able to provide any answers. If you are specialized in the subject you will be able to give the answer. So having a broad knowledge of every subject may lead not knowing any subject fully. And if you have missing knowledge about that subject, I think if is better not to talk.  You may be able to talk about the subject but when it comes to academic speechs, where you should show your knowledge about the topic, you may fail to give enough information.
 In my opinion if a person talks about a specific question he must be knowledgable about all aspects of the question. To be able to give specific and not very known facts is more important than repeating the facts that are known by many people. I think repeating would be what the ones who are not specialized in a subject will do. 
 Moreover, today's society gives more credit to specialized knowledge in work environments. Firms usually prefer to hire people that completed the undergraduate level and also completed a graduate level which had given them the opportunity to specialize in their subject. The ones who successfully completed a graduate degree, who are knowledgable about all aspects of their field of study, become the ones who are most valued in the work place. They can find jobs more easily and they are paid more. For these reasons people try to specialize in a specific subject rather than having a broad knowledge of many academic skills.   
 I would like to enjoy better working environments with earning more money and I would like to be able to talk about every aspects of my subject. For these reasons I think specializing in one specific subject is better than having broad knowledge about many subjects.