It is very important for students, and also for other people to understand ideas and concepts rather than just learn facts without know what it is. There are three main reasons why it is important. They can remember the ideas easily and also last longer, able to get interested in subjects, and increase their self confidenses.
 Firstly, by understanding some ideas, it is much easier to memories and it also last longer than just learn without any understanding. Specially for students, they have to prepare for an unit test or provincial exam which is after the whole semester.They need to know the facts properly and remember it in the right way. To give an example of this, during students study, they will find unconvinced time if they do not understand the facts that they learned. But if they understood everything, they are able to remember longer and have confidence time to prepare for the test.
 Secondly, if a person understand about an idea, it is possible to get interested in. Because it is the only a hard time before he/she understands. After they know what it is, then it becomes a very interesting idea which can get the person very interested in. For example, if a student do not understand how to multiply, a teacher will teach the student. After the person knows how to do, math can becomes in a very interesting subject. 
 Lastly, self confidence is really important to students. By understanding ideas and concepts about some subjects, they enjoy the time to study which make them to know more and more. This make the students to increase their self confidences. For instance, if a students did not know anything about history, but finally he/she understood, the person think him/her self as a very smart person, so the student can teach or tutor other friends who does not know about histrory.
 To finish with, understanding ideas and concepts, specially about subjects the students learn from school takes vary important jobs for students. They are able to remember longer than not knowing and just study, they have chances to get interested in about some subjects, and it also increases self confidense strongly.