There are many new things surrounding us and waiting for us to take an adverture on them. Sometimes when I switched on the television, there are some programmes concerning about how do people success, or which ways they are going in order to become a successful person. I agree that successful people try new things and take risks rather than only doing what they already know how to do well. On the following paragraphs, I will explain the reasons for that.
 
 First, if you do not take any risks, you will not know what it will be after you have tried it. Though you may fail, you will gain some experience on that. For example, some successful people are very poor and do not have enough money to deal with business. But they still tried to use that small amount of money in a useful way. Though you have to bear a high risk, it is wealthy for you to do that.
 
 Second, accept others opinions. Sometimes we think that we already know how to deal with all the things and we just follow our own way to go, but actually we are not. We should accept more suggestions from the others and try to think over all the things that they mentioned but do not think I can do this well with just a little experience on that.
 
 Third, they always try new things and treat themselves as a new entrant. As a new entrant, you will eager to know more things and learn more from the others rather than become a senior on certain things. You may try new things and see whether you can handle this problem or not. There are so many stuff that you have never been encoutered before. And always trust and build up confident to yourself that you can do that. 
 
 Some people think that they can do well according to their "limited" knowledge. They never try to explore some useful and helpful information to help them. That is why they cannot become a successful person and still walking in the same square. Therefore, take risks and try more new things can help you  widen your sight and knowlege. At the same time, to become a successful person.