The human kind always need products for reach goodlife standarts therefore product is a very important aspect for the human's life. Everyone has a different point of views about the idea of advertisement of product. Some assume that most advertisements make products seem much better than they really are, in contrary to this some think that advertisements make products seem like they really are. I personnally agree with the first idea. These are my fallowing reasons:
 
 Firstly, advertisement is related with money. Advertisement is very important for firms, because with this, people can know their product very well. So, they buy their product. Firms need advertisement for make money. Moreover, for make a lot of money, they show their product much better then they really are. For example, they show them bigger or more confortable. They need this for sell a lot of products and for become rich. 
 
 In addition to this, advertisement is related with art. I think that advertisement is a kind of art. For an advertisement, person find a lot of ideas. For my point of views, they are artists. They create a lot of different of ideas. In addition, a product become something totaly different from the reality. For example, I watch an advertisement not for learn new products, but for see an art. I listen the music of the advertisement, I see new countries or new places, I learn what the young people dress. An advertisement is a culture for me: it helps me to improve myself.
 
 On the other hand, advertisement is related with the real product. The first claim of an advertisement  is to show product to people. It's necessary for person who don't know this. People watch them for learn new product or for understand differencies from the other same product. So, advertisements show us  the reality. Despite to this belief, I personnally agree that most advertisements make products seem much better than they really are.
 
 All in all, as I said before advertisement is not related with the reality. It is related with both money and art. It is a showbusiness, so they show us all they want. I can said that It is not a honest work, it is only for make money.