Nowadays, travel agencies are providing tourists with various kinds of traveling programs with a tour guide which are designed by agencies beforehand. These pragrams are quite conveninet because we do not have make efforts to make schedules on our own and we are led by a tour guide with a reserved tour bus. However, I do not agree with the statement that the best way to travel is in a group led by a tour guide for the following reasons.
 To begin with, we cannot have great fun and excitements which are felt while we make plans for a trip for ourselves if we use a traveling program with a guide. I realized the importance and fun of planning my trip by myself when I prepared for a trip to Europe in the last summer. I had the trip with two of my friends, so we met frequently to decide which place we are going to visit, what we will eat, what to buy as a souvenir, etc. I think that we had equally or even more interesting time or even more exciting time while we make our schedule and imagine our trip compared to actual traveling. A group traveling led by a tour guide is already planned by travel agencies, so we cannot make our unique and special choices and plans. 
 Additionally, we will be probably restricted to the group's decision and behaviors even if we have different ideas. For example,  we can have some chances to choose what to eat even though we travel in a group. However, in this case, we should follow a certain choice that many people selected. It is a really sad thing that we cannot eat exotic foods that we really want while traveling foreign countries. Furthermore, we cannot take public transportations because of a reserved tour bus. I found it very interesting and impressive to take other countries' subways, trains, buses and trams during my trip. I must have missed that precious experience if I had traveled in a group led by a tour guide.
 In conclusion, I am convinced that traveling in a group with a guide is not the best idea to travel. We can have really interesting and exciting moments while we make our original and free plan for our trip. We also can behave freely if we are not included in a group. We can eat whatever we want, go to wherever we want, and even decide to take risk or advantures when we travel by ourselves. Besides, we can experience minor things which are done by residents of a foreign country such as riding public transportations and walking along rivers and streets. These are great advantage of traveling by ourselves individually.