I agree the statement that "The best way to travel is in a group led by a tour guide" because generally people want to visit different places to relax themselves and wants to know more about different places. If they wont keep tour guide they takes much time to know about the place. At the same time if a person goes alone to visit the places, he doesnt get interest to watch the palces and he cant express his ideas,thoughts about the palce what he see. If it is the case, that he travels along the group and with tour guide, makes the peoples tour successful and happy because the tour guide can explains about the places briefly and interestingly providing a well knowledged tour guide. If the person travel along the group he can have a advantage to express his views and get other views about thr place they see.
 
 Generally tours are included with long time night and day journey. At this time tour guide can where to stop the vehicle for emergency and where should not. At the same time if anything happens to anyone,  others can help out in solving the problem they face. By travelling in a group along with tour guide they can help out each other and they can make thier most successful. 
 
 During journey, they face many problems like food, shelter for changing clothes etc .If the people go tour along group they can help out in providing shelter, food and other small and big problems. 
 If suddenly vehicle break down and if it takes few hours to repair then they can have nice time with thier mates. Simply they pass the time happily and unforgettable. Anyways thats all depends on the individuals but going along with group makes the individual to see the things happily and great scope to have good knowledge on place what they see. 
 
 If we take an example of industrial tour of engineering students like Tata motors in India etc. There i definately prefer to go along with group because they have to recollect their subject when they see the industry. At the same time your professor acts as tour guide. No one can recollect the information at that moment what they studied but if you go with a group they can share their own knowlege with other such that they can see the things more interstingly and gain more knowledge. Similarly if a office staff wants to improve thier industry , there it is need to visit higher industries and should make points what should improve in their industry. This is possible only when he goes along with teammates and guide. He can point out very good things if he discuss the things with his mates. At the same he need not to spend much time to know the unknown thing as guide is provided for them. 
 
 Thus i can strongly agree that The best way to travel is in group led by a tour guide.