It is usually common to hear young people say that older people are "booring" and do not know how to enjoy their life. They support this statement by arguing that older people do not go out just for fun. Instead, they say that older people usually go out because they are obligued to attend to certain events as part of their work but without really wanting to do so. This might be true for some cases, but young people usually do not understand that older people may enjoy what they do more than going out, and therefore, they enjoy life as much as young people do.
 
 Most older people have already lived what young people say is fun. As many old people would be able to still do those supposedly enjoyable things but do not do so, it is logical to infer that what old people are doing is more enjoyable to them. For example, a woman who spends most of her time taking care of her children is probably doing so because she loves her children and preferes to be with them than going anywhere else. This is specially true because that woman could pay a babysitter to take care of her children. Another important aspect to consider is that most adults have learned through experience to place value in the smal things life has to offer them and therefore they do not need to go out every Friday night in order to entertain themselves as young people claim to need.
 
 As well, young people usually give too much importance to having fun in parties that only last one night. Adults, in contrast, place value in more permanent happiness as that given by beeing with their family or by enjoying a tranquil life with no terrible problems ahead of them. This usually leads young people to think they are able to enjoy life more than adults do when, in fact, adults might be enjoying their life even more than most young people.
 
 In conclussion, I believe that even though adults may live a duller life that is not filled with the short-term fun nor the sudden surprises young people experience, adults are perfectly capable of enjoying their life just as much as any adolescent or child. In the end, what really makes someone enjoy his life is the way he looks at his life not the age he has.