Young people enjoy life more than the older genaration.In this advanced world,the level or the bench mark for enjoyment is totally changed. In the present day scenario there is more scope for the young blood to have fun and enjoy the liberties which perhaps his or her grand mother or grand father might not have enjoyed.
 
 The improved technology has lead to creativity and immense development of bravery and courage in people who now try to exploit the minute things which, may be a genaration ago, people might not have dreamt either.May be people were curious about the same,but they were not that courageous as this generation, taking nothing away from the reputation and developments the older generation have set up for the new generation though.
 
 Taking few instances, for that matter the pubs and discos which this generation experience.The older generation may not go to the modern day pubs and discos though they would be itching to get inside,but there are no limitations for the young blood. If you find a grand mother or grand father in the pub or a disco, people look at them weirdly and expect an explanation as to why he or she is in a disco or a pub instead of going to a Church or a temple and spending their time in holy places.Perhaps this is one way of enjoyment for the young people.
 
 The older genration wouldn't have ever thought of spending hours of time on telephones chatting and gossipping  like this genration people do. The girls and the boys chat to their beloved on phones for hours together unlike the past wherein phone was not invented, and after its invention was used only as a meare source of communication. The internet is used by kids to do their assignments these days by  surfing various things and gaining knowledge.Where is the scope of the older generation people for such facilities in their time.
 
 The old generation infact helped the young blood to experience all such advantages and utilities. They were the ones who sweated days and nights and underwent many brain storming queries and set up all solutions and comforts for this generation to enjoy their lifes in the way they are.So i conclude stating that the older genration experienced all the hardships and this generation is enjoying all the fruits of the seeds planted by their older generation.In this way younger people enjoy life comparitively more than the older people.