Difference makes a lot of opportunities. I clearly agree with the statement with a confidence. Successful people often try their best as possible with riskes. If you are doing absolutely same thing with others, you lose the chance to success.  Even in the history, people got thier power and wealth by being "strangers".
 First of all, successful people have great abilities to make great deals. For example, you have a speacial ability about making computers, which are the gratest ever, you will earn a lot of money for it and you are going to be considered as a successful person. Of course, since making computers cost money, you need to take risks to get money. You have possibility to lose your money.
 Second of all, there are many workers who graduated from ordinaly universities and got their jobs at companies. Let you think about you are one of them. Most of workers have same skills as you do, and many people want to get their jobs at your company. If so, you may be fired your job and not to be succcesful. The problem of it is you do not try new things. However, for example, oil cpmpanies get much money because they do different  kind of jobs from others. There are not many jobs of oil but people get wealth by selling oil. Then you see how important doing different is oneof the ways to success.
 Finally, in the history we learn, Franklin D. Roosevelt, a presidnt of the United States, did not follow the tradition of politics. People at that time used to think that a president should not do his job four times because of silent rule, not because of the constitution. But FDR was elected four times. Now many Americans love him because of his successful job. He is reall famous not only for his job but also the breaking tradition. Americans thought it is really cool. Since FDR was different from other presidents, he will never been forget as a successful president.
 In conclusion, successful people take risks for their opportunities. Without it, it is hard to say that people can success. Doing what poeple do is easy for us, but not for success. So I strongly believe that successful people do different things and try their best to success.