I disagree with the statement, that young people don't help their communities enough nowadays, although it is a difficult topic to decide on.
 I understand how someone would come to making such a statement, seeing young people rather spending time hanging around at bus stops or the like, or not offering their seat to elderly people in the bus, or listening to them talk about how they don't care about anything but themselves and their fun, or see them littering in parks or on the streets.
 However, I know a lot of people who are very devoted to helping others, to making the environment more comfortable for everyone to live in, or who are very considerate concerning their neighbours and other people.
 For example, the number of young people who decide to do a voluntary social service, helping and taking care of mentally and physically challenged people, or do an ecological service by fighting polution by putting information out or cleaning up the countryside, restoring national parks.
 Also, a lot of young people help out with communal events like elections, fairs. Sometimes they initiate such an event, or they simply help by counting votes, for example. And I've seen young people sit in the public library and read to children every week, thereby making the happy and maybe help out the parents by taking over, at least for a little while.
 Another aspect that I feel should be taken into consideration is the following: Talking about how people nowadays don't help their communities enough implies two things: firstly, that there was a time when young people were more devoted to their communities, and secondly, that there is a valid measure determining how much help, or how much time spent helping can be considered "enough".
 I don't think that young people of the previous generation devoted more time to their community, exept maybe for the fact that they spent a lot more time their, since they weren't as flexible travelling or choosing the location where to live as young people are today. Young people, especially when they are still preparing for later employment, often change location, when they start college or university, for example. And if one only spends a limited time in a community, there might not be enough time or opportunity to get properly envolved.
 As for the question how much involvement would be considered enough, I think that this is not a question with an absolute answer. Some people may think that helping out in a nursing home once a week for one or two hours would be enough, others would not even consider this amount of involvement worth mentioning.
 This last aspect alone, which boils down to a question of perspective, is why I cannot agree with the statement that young people don't spend enough time helping their communities - this and my own experiences with numerous individuals, some of which I have mentioned above, which prove the contrary.