The emprovement of the educational system is a current issue in every contries. We try to kow if it is better for the students to have broad knowledge of many academic subjects than to specialize in one specific subject. What would be the best solution in a world where employment safety is realy rare.
 In one side some studies require to be realy specialized in one specific subject, because some jobs are only made for specialized workers. That is the case of medical suties for example. When we have an heart disease we want to have the best specialist, somone who realy knows everything about the subject and tha will better be able to cure you.If you study one specific subject you will have more time to learn everything about the subject. Nothing will disturb you from your studies. You can concentrate on one thing and it is easier. You will be better on your future job if your knowledge is realy good on the subject you are working on.
 On the other side studiing only one specific subject can just fit to people who wants to be specialist and who realy knows what he wants to be later. There are a lot of students who are still uncertain of what they want to become. That is why, sometimes it can be better to have a broad knowledge of academic subjects. You can discover different subjects and see what realy fits you and what would be the better job you would like to do. Some studies are really general, for examle business. They teach you a lot of things in business schools : marketting, management, languages... and sometimes even history of religion. It is realy good on a personal point of view to have broad knowledge. For example when you learn economis you will be able to understand the news, the political problems and the everyday life better. You can make you a personal point of view of everything tha surrounds you. 
 Furthermore in the present economic situation, with all the unemployment problems, it is better to have studied different subjects. On the job market now quite every one has to be multifonctional, to be able to do everything. A lot of people now change jobs minimum once in theuir life. The more they know subjects, the easier it will be to find a job. You will have more choice.
 
 To conclude, specialization is necessary in certain jobs were you are required to have strong knowledge on your subject. But it is more and more usefull to have broad knowledge.