The tendency of the statement "Successful people try new things and take risks rather than only doing what they already know how to do well" is right.
 
 I think so because I am a person who acts risky and I had always success. But before you generalize you have to know what risk means in this context.
 
 Risk according to your carreer is to be brave to live and work or study in a foreign country for longer than 3 months.
 Risk in terms of success in my opinion is to apply for another job even you are happy and safe right now with your situation.
 
 My risk started after I have finished my apprentenceship at Neuss County Council as an IT-Specialist. Working for a government facility is quite secure. The chance that you lose your job is low.
 But I have thought that this cannot be everything in my life.
 I wanted to apply for a job in call center because I thought that talking to people might help my problem of communication.
 
 I applied for the best call center in my region and I worked for Microsoft. Even now I am writing my thesis to graduate at Microsoft Germany.
 I also worked and studied one semester in the United States. The time scale here is approximately 10 months.
 My exchange semester in South Korea and my internship at the Korean German Chamber of Commerce and Industry was also a great experience.
 
 If I review my journey right now and compare it to some friend who never left the city where we graduated high school I can definetaly say that I have an advanced status. The reason for this conclusion is because this friend of mine applyed for the same internship program. So the arguments are not only my thoughts but my experience.
 
 Additionally I my friend had to admit that I always have something to talk about. And we figured out that the more information you get the more opportunities you can turn into successful projects.
 
 Right now I am preparing to built up my own business because I have contacts worldwide. And not every person in the world likes to do business unpersonally with people through the internet.
 
 So my understanding of risk is to try new things. Even if you are secure in your present situation. Taking risks is not always dangerous. You only have to evaluate the k.o. criterias which could be essential to have or to lose.
 
 People who already have a family with wife and children are not flexibel because parents have to "feed" or take care for their family members.
 
 As long as I am young I always will set new milestones to achieve my long-term goal to have a great life with my future family. And I also think it is more efficient to "risk" something when you are young rather when you have responsibility towards others.
 
 I hope that this mind will have a great impact to my life.
 
 Good Luck!