I think it better to have broad knowledge of many academic subjects than to specialize in one specific subject.
 
 In my own experience, I have seen this all along my life and work. If you specialize in only one specific subject, you will always be limited to a very small field of action and will not be able to work or give opinions in other areas that could be related to yours if that were the case. 
 
 This tendency sytarted with Ford company in the assembly lines in the beginning of the century when Henry Ford launched his first mass produced car. every person in the assembly line had a specific task to carry out and that was all they did. Well, at the very beginning, this might have been good but after a while I do not think that those people like their jobs very much. It is boring and routinary and of course production levels decrease. And this does not only happen in an assembly line, it can be applied to every field of action.
 
 During the eighties this specialization had a terrible drawback General Motors Corporation fired a lot of workers and obviously these people were not prepared to find and do another job but what they had been doing for a long time. Those workers had to even go back to school in oreder to learn something else to do in todays world.
 
 This fact and other make me agree with the statement. When you know different subjects and have knowledge of them you are more prepared to survive in this everyday changing society, you can adapt more to those changes if you are used to manage something from different areas of knowledge.
 
 I am a teacher of English in my country but first of all I am a teacher who teaches values, habits, culture, etc. and then I teach English. In this country, the United States, I try to do the same. That is I am applying my experiences and adapting them to a totally new atmosphere were my culture and habits could be old fashioned or not accepted. Even, I have had to learn from other cultures in order to deliver my information better and more accurately.
 
 As an another example, I like to answer those questions about culture and all types of knowledge of the television contests, and of course I like it when my answer is the correct one. 
 
 Sometimes specialization is good but we never have to be so specialized on something we need to know about everything that is around us and that affect the way we live. I can not only drive my car not knowing that I am also depleting the ozone layer when I do it. We have to be more concious and in order to do so we need the most important thing these days KNOWLEDGE.