The number of cars people own is always cited in papers or articles when judging a nations economic and transportation development. From some scholars and economists' perspective, the more a society possesses, the better-off its citizens are. This is why some people predicts that there will be much more cars in use in twenty years than there are today because the global economy is booming prosperously. However, as far as I am concerned, there will be fewer cars in use than there are today. The reasons are as follows:
 For the first thing, as people are concentrating on economic development in differnt societies, almost everyone in the world are paying more and more attention to protecting the environment. Cars, which consume fuels and give off a lot of waste air, are then objected by a large number of environmentalists. The development in China is a typical example. Twenty years ago, heavy industries and factories mushroomed with no regard of what harm they might do to the environment. After experienced a serie of frustrations of the polluted water, contaminated ground and deforested plants, today Chinese people have come to know how to combine economic development and environment protection. As a result, people are encouraged to use cars as little as possible.
 For the second thing, fuel in the whole world is in short. It is reported just two days ago in CCTV news that the price of fuel in Chinese market has risen again because of the lack of fuel all around the world. As the natural resources are so limited, we have to consider what we can leave to our offsrings if we keep consuming them at such a high degree. So, if we limited the number of cars in use, we can make significant contribution to reserving the natural resources.
 Admittedly, to limited the number of cars in use may cause some inconvenience to some people. For example, those who working far from home everyday may feel worried. In order to solve this problem, I recommend that the government take measure to develop transport vehicles that do not consume fuel and thus do no harm to the environment such as undergrounds. For other peoples who don't have to go very far to work everyday, they can go by bicycle.
 In conclusion, as the natural resources are limted and as the environment needs to be procted by everyone, we should use cars less. Then in twenty years there will be fewer cars in used than there are today.