As the young generations of children and teeangers continue to display themselves as unique, wild, and crazy, people tend to think they do not contribute to the community or promote altruism. In fact, they tend to think young people do the opposite. This assumption is not entirely a fabrication. There are countless of children who are willing up to give up their time to help the community. These occurences can be observed anywhere, especially in school. Several schools offer a myriad of student activities that help their communities, which students volunteer generously.
 The most popular program among the students are orphanage or retirement home visits. Students voluntarily sacrifice their time afterschool to take the hike to an orphanage or retirement home nearby. During these visits, students play with the children, exchange conversations with the elderly, help clean up trash around the area, all in all, promoting warmth and happiness to the community. Undoubtedly, these generous acts promote a better environment.
 Another program includes Amnesty International, which takes helping communities to an international level. Students organize themselves into groups and become aware of social and political injustice around the world. With knowledge, they promote social awareness and facilitate active political participation to fellow students by writing letters to governments. Being future leaders of the world, not only are they aggregating interests to governments for the community, they are influencing others to become equally aware of the world around them.
 Undeniably, sometimes young people do become lazy and not help the community. They rather enjoy luxurious times in front of the television or playing video games. Sometimes young people just need their relaxation time and enjoy themselves as kids. A childhood must also be dominantly characterised by exuberance. Furthermore, there will always be other more responsible kids doing more helpful work for the community to counterbalance the laziness of others. 
 Benevolence and sacrifice is an indication of maturity. Countless of young people already help the community voluntarily as seen in the various successful school activities. However, young people are still growing and adapting. If they aren't, we shouldn't hinder the process and let them enjoy their childhood.