I agree with the statement that successful people try new things and take risks rather than doing what they already know well.
 
 
 In my opinion when people are open to take risks and new challanges , they will find more new things in achieving their goal. In this process they learn many new things and try to implement it in doing other things. When people take risks they will work hard to achieve that risk or that particular challange. In this way people will become more successful when they take risk and challanges.
 
 
 People who do not try new things and do what they are already expertise in will not  work hard to achieve the goal or challange. They will not get innnovative ideas , because the protocol already exists in which they are the expertise. The habit of laziness cultivates and by the confidence level they have, they will ignore some typical facts and will not achieve what they need. By over confidence they will ignore some important facts and will not work hard to achieve the goal and there by become unsuccessful.
 
 Take the example of the inventing the Aeroplane. If the wright brothers would have kept on trying the principles what they know and in what they are expertise, we could not have an aeroplane today. They went forward and took the risk of flying in the air with their model and while doing the experiment they got some new ideas and the ideas were implemented in the design of the aeropalne as a result they were able to design still higher model. If they would not have taken the risk, they would nothave been successful in inventing the aeroplane.
 
 
 Take another example of finding the pensulin medicine. If the scientist would not take a risk and would not have  worked hard and had implemented his old theories, he would   not have been successful in inventing the drug.
 
 In my opinion, people who try the same things in which they are expertise in, they will loose the enthusiasm and zeal in finding out  new things. People who take risks and challanges and try new things will do well and are more successful rather than people trying the same old things in which they are expertise.