In twenty years there will be fewer cars in use than there are today. To a lay man this statement might sound too optimistic. But as a visionary i completely believe in it and i whole heartedly  support the statement.
 
 I believe that twenty years down the line the infrastructural facilities would have improved so much that it would eliminate travel by car to a greater extent. To state the facts, most of the cars plying on the road today belong to the city dwellers, people who live in a city. In another twenty years almost all the cities of the world would boast of such an efficient system of public transport that not only it would be more convinient to travel by such modes but also it would be more economical. Naturally people will be discouraged to use cars not only because of the high running costs (we should not forget the rising fuel prices) but also the maintenance cost.
 
 Besides the development of public transport, nowadys a different concept is gaining popularity, 'Walk to Work'. It is mainly based on providing the employees home near their respective offices. Now facts suggest that most of the rush hour traffic is constituted of the people commuting between their offices and home. So if this need is eliminated then people wouldnt be forced to keep a car.
 
 Moreover, the technological advances made in other forms of transportation especially railways and airways would completely  eliminate the need of commuting between two different towns or cities by car. Railways and airways would present the people with means of transport that is not only faster, more comfortable but also cheaper as compared to a travel by car. 
 
 Finally, judging by the way technology is making advancements we can assume that twenty years later we may have the ability of transporting a person from one place to other by personal flying objects or transporting him through a virtual domain in no time. Now these statements might seem a little high flying right now but who knows that twenty years from now these may be the most popular means of travel. 
 
 It does not matter whether science advances so far as to transport a person from one point to other through virtual domain but science would have certainly progressed enough to discourage people from using cars by providing them with ample of other transportation facilities which would finally lead to a reduction in number of cars in use twenty years later then there are today.