To my mind, I think young and old people enjoy life from different ways.
 First of all, it is true that young people enjoy life because they are very optimist..they do not take care about problems of the world; they just only leave their life..
 For instance, at the age of 20, young people like me are very happy. We think that we are invincible and we think that in the future we will not have problems like our parents for example.
 Then, a lot of people and not only young people, think that having 20 is a good thing, this is the best periode..This is the age of love, sexual experience, jod experience, holidays experience without parents.... In fact, it is the age of discover... Everything is new and interesting.....So there is no way for young people to learn about life, only just by enjoy life.
 But if young people enjoy life, there is also old people who enjoy it.
 That`s true....When old people retired from their job, they have a lot of moments for them.... they can travel.... they are not obliged to wake up every morning in order to go to work....And most of the time, they enjoy life more than youger people.
 For example, my grand mother is very happy to be in the category of the old people..... When she was young, she could not travel because she had to work...and before, life was not the same as nowadays... But today, with her association of her subburb, she can travel where she wants.... In addition, since she`s retired from her job, she has travelled every where; Egypt, Spain, Italy, Turkey... and so on... She travels a lot... And a lot of retired people or old people are in this case...
 So we can say that to be old it is a sort of a second life where people discover again some things, where they learn again about technology, science, culture, and also about young people..
 So, in conclusion, we can say that there is not a lot of differences between young and old people and personnaly, I have never met  a personn who did not enjoy life.                                                                   I use is to say  LIFE IS BEAUTIFUL SO ENJOY IT....