The issue on hand is contentious and of great importance as it has its relevance to people in all ranks of any society. I think that the young people nowadays do not give enough time to helping their communities. There are many factors which support this view.
 
 Society is not static, it changes with time. The young people , the youth are an important part of the society as they are the future of the society. Their behaviour, actions and ideas define the future of the society. Compared to the old times, I think that youth are spending lesser and lesser time helping their communities these days. Couple of generations back, the young in a family too did some productive work for  the family. Helping ones family is helping his/her community indirectly. Nowadays the young are remaining unproductive for  longer periods and are starting to contibute anyting useful to family or communities very late. For instance, youth spend a lot of time playing computer games, or chatting over the internet, dicussing some tabloid article with a friend for hours.  Not may spend time on community activites, which could be as simple as conducting or participating in awareness programs, regulating traffic, helping the poor kids get education, etc.
 
 In the ester years the youth associated with their communities more,their community was an identity for them. With the media revolution, the youth of today associate themselves  more with the hollywood movies and football stars rather than their own community. This only means that there is motivation in the first place for the youth to spend time helping their community is missing.
 
 We cannot put all the balme on the youth for this change. With the increasing competetion for jobs, youth are made to work harder and harder just to make their ends meet. One really may not have any time to take off their busy schedule for helping their communities directly. The young people of olden days did not have to live in such a fast paced world. They had a lot of time for lesuire, some time of which they allocated for helping their communities.
 
 I conclude by saying that due to a variety of reasons explained above the young people nowadays do not give enouh time to helping their communities.