I agree entirely with the opinion that it is more vital for students to comprehend ideas and concepts than it is for them to learn mere facts.
 
 Why study facts, or even worse, learn them by heart to pass final examinations when you will forget most of them shortly afterwards, anyway?
 Therefore, it can be far more beneficial to focus on teaching the general understanding of ideas and concepts. Research in psychology has proven that you will remember far more easily anything you have understood instead of learning it by heart. And normally, you learn facts by heart because there is not much to understand.
 
 Moreover, in an increasingly dynamic environment, both in professional and private terms, the learning of facts could be in vain. 
 Circumstances change more and more rapidly. What was important to know now could be replaced by completely other facts who have to know in a couple of years. That is the case, for instance, if you have to change your profession as a result of structural change of the employment market. As a matter of fact, experts say that these kind of structural changes will occur more and more frequently, so many people actually will have to change their profession several times during their life.
 
 The understanding of ideas and concepts can also be helpful in any profession as it offers a larger flexibility. You cannot study all kind of solutions to a problem by learning facts. Because the problem is, that as a student you cannot possibly know what kind of concrete problems you will have to face later on in life. As a result, it is far more important that you learn and train a certain approach to solve problems, by concentrating on studying major ideas and general concepts instead of investing too much time into learning facts.
 
 In conclusion, I would like to state again that the understanding of ideas and concepts is more important because it is in every respect more beneficial to the preparation for a increasingly dynamic environment. It is easier to remember ideas and concepts than it is to remember facts and, last not least, ideas and concepts are more useful as they allow are larger flexibility to new challenges.