I agree with the statement, that most advertisements make products seem much better than they really are. The reason in doing so is rather obvious. By taking an example my point of view might be understandable. For instance let us look at an MP3 player.
 
 There are many MP3 players on the market. Why should I take a product from company A if I can have one from company B. So the marketing has to face this problem by creating something that may convince the customer to buy the product. That is why advertisements may want to convince the customers that there is a certain incentive that only this product has. Maybe an MP3 player has the function of a calendar, that no other MP3 player seems to have. So the marketing and the construction departement may be focussing on the calendar, but neglect the core function: playing music. It may happen that I am fascinated by the calendar and buy the MP3 player, but may be frustrated because the rest is not what I imagined.
 
 A second argument why products may seem better than they really are, can be that a customer can choose from a variety of things to spend the hard earned money. Should he buy the MP3 player or the DVD player, that maybe not transportable, but can also play MP3s. By making the product "larger than life" a customer may favor the MP3 player over the DVD player.
 
 Finally in this world of consumption everybody wants to have something special. So the advertising agencies create a certain sense of individuality with there advertisement. As I mentioned before: There are many different MP3 players. Why should a customer choose a certain one? Because the advertisement does not only create a sense of extra-value but also of individuality. The iPod for example costs more than other MP3 player without a certain incentive, that nobody else has. Still it has enormous sales figures because people think they get a special product that was made just for them.
 
 To put it in a nutshell: The question that every marketing agency has to deal with is: Why should a customer buy our products? They can achieve this goal by making the products seem much better than they really are.