It is often expressed either explicitly or implicitly that young people enjoy their life more than old people do. In my opinion, this is the wrong approach to this issue.
 Let me first collect several similarities between those two groups. Both young people and retired people do usually not work or at least they do not have to work to make a living (this if of course only valid for industrialized nations). Therefore, they are left with considerable amounts of leisure time at their disposal. Why should older people not be able to enjoy this time to the same extent as young people?
 They only choose to spend that time differently. Old people might not enjoy snowboarding, volleyball or going out as much as young people do. But old people might enjoy going to the theater, make a sea cruise or just meet with friends as much or even a lot more than young people do. Both groups enjoy their lives - but they tend to have differences concerning what they regard as enjoyable and worthwile.
 Also, such a holistic approach does not dignify a human being's existence as an individual. Saying that "young people" or "old people" as a whole enjoy their lives much or less than the other group would be a crude generalization. Of course, there are miserable, complaining old people who obviously do not enjoy their lives. But take a closer look and you will find that it is not hard to find very similar individuals among young people. The other way around: Of course, many young people like going out, having a good time with friends and enjoying themselves. But you will have no difficulty finding a real party animal among old people if you really try to. Judging people by their outer appearance, and age is part of that, does not take their personality, their preferences and their attitude into consideration. If you do so, you are ignoring an important part of a human being. Because of the given reasons, I disagree with the statement and I think older people can enjoy their life as much as old people do. Perhaps not in the same way, perhaps not always as visible (and sometimes offensive) as young people. But they certainly do.