I agree with the statement "Most advertisements make products seem much better than they really are".
 I think today the companies are spending a lot of resouces in order to have their products better showing, I think there is only one reason to spend so much money to achieve a goal that should be not important for the customers. In fact, I think that, if the people would think without any advertisment, they would choose the product that has the best quality, and so the companies that are not producing good quality products have only one solution, and the solution is to make the people think their products are better than they really are.
 I am very interesting in this issue; and so, in the last few years, I studied a lot of marketing tecniques in order to know what are the companies doing in this field; however, I am also interested in being a good customer, so I want to try to avoid being a customer of a company that has a bad policy regarding the marketing communication. I know that this is today quite difficult to achieve, but I feel that I really have to try it. 
 Another reason, I want to argue to support my idea, is linked with the quality of food we are eating today.In fact; today the people have and average of diseases much higher that it was several years ago. I think it is due to the quality of food we are eating, I am affraid that, despite this fact, the people are still spending no more interest in order to know what are they eating. I thing also the governement should take some decisions in order to clarify the situation.
 The last reason, I would like to point out, is linked with the agricoltural economic field. I know that today this field is not so important as it was some years ago, but many people are still working in this economic field. I hope the huge companies will not conquest the while market.
 I know that the progress can not be avoided, but I am still affraid of the future. I hope we could give to our sons a world better that the one we have.