The issue at hand is whether successful people should take risks or do what they already know how to do well. The issue is important because we are faced with a lot of daily "risks" in this manner.  I believe that one should try new things and explore all the oppurtunities around him/her. I believe this because' life is full of risks and if someone( a successful person) does not take any risks, then he/she will end up losing/missing a lot of good oppurtunities that the life brings in. 
 First of all, I believe that all the risks generally offer a great benefit in return. If one does not want to take any risk, he/she will receive no benefits. For example, a bank offers you a new type of bond which can bring you an additional income of 1000$ per year. That is great! Why not go get it, and go for a 100$ bringing ''safe type" because "you already know how to do it well". In my opinion, a person who goes for a 100$ is not aware of his/her abilities, and it is a shame to not to take a risk. In my view, a successful person would never miss it, and that is why they are called successful!
 Secondly, life is full of risks and one cannot be successful by choosing to stay conservative. Everyday, life brings in thousands of new oppurtunities to a lot of people and most of those oppurtunities can add beauties to your life (of course not everything is related to money). For example, take a risk and join a good club to meet new people: beauties can be in terms of friendships, why not? That is why, I  believe that a person who always goes for what he/she already knows can never discover new oppurtunities in life, but a successful person utilizes these oppurtunities in all the good ways.
 Finally, in my opinion, successful people do not lose oppurtunities. When one observes, I believe that one can infact detect successful people by detecting their risk-taking behaviours. Successful people are generally the ones who not only takem but "catch" more risks.  
 To summarize, I would like to say/and suggest that everyone should take more risks to be more successful. Taking risks will always bring them better things in many ways that will make them successful. If Napoleon Bonapart was alive, I believe he would say "risk, risk, risk, success, success, success" instead of "money, money, money".