The knowledge is something extremely important in our job, mostly in mine. I'm a marine biologist and of course in all the scientific matters is useful to have knowledge on different fields. So at first glance i would respond saying that it's better to gather informations and knowledges as much as we can in a widespreadly manner. But we have to do it in the right way, due to the fact that too much time spent on gathering informations could be time wasted. To give a good example that can back me up i want to talk about my personal experience. I'm actually working on sounds produced by dolphins. This particular field research is not completely based on exclusively biological knowledges. In fact i firstly had to understand some physical laws about sound waves and how they propagate in the water. Once i have been trained about these informations i started to work on signals. Ashes to ashes i have been remained focused on the bioacustic of dolphins, so it could seem that  i have been stuck on a specific subject. But it's not like that. Indeed most of the time the acoustical behaviour of an animal cannot been explained just with the simply studying of bioacustic and physics, but it have to be put together with ethological studyes that most of the time are based on several different fields of knowledge. Thus i really think that it's better to open our mind and study at 360 degree. But as i already mentioned we have to stay focused on what we are really searching for. The field of human knowledge is huge and sometimes even a good researcher can get lost in its vastity. This is the reason why most of the time i have to work with engineers and technicians that have the skill to use computer programs that can easily help us to analyze the signals that we recorded from dolphins. In a kind of way we both are important for each other, because, even if we seem to be specialized in doing something in particular, we help each other and we try to understand what is the job of the other. I think this is the best methode to share and gain knowledge of different subject. After all these years of working in this team i have gained knowledge on softwares and technical tools, and hydrophones. But i think that i couldn't take all these informations just working on my own, or at least it would required me a lot of time. So for these reasons i really believe that it's important to have a broad knowledge on different subjects, instead of being focused on just one, because sometime the answer that we are searching for, we can easily find it in a field that can seems not related to our purpose. To give another example, once the engineer i'm working with founded a vocalization very strange. The signal was totally different from others and he didn't know how to expalin. Then he came to me and for me it was easy to explain. The signal was emitted by a calf and certainly it was different from the other member of the herd. But this is something that a biologist know , not an engineer. But know he knows how to recognize this signal, because he had broad his knowledge.