Knowing ideas and concepts form techniques to understand a subject or topic. Facts are true statements about the subject or topic. When it comes to deciding which of these are better for indepth knowledge of a subject or topic, then I completely agree with the statement "It is more important for students to understand ideas and concepts than it is for them to learn facts." My opinion is influenced by certain factors which include; need to analyse a topic to learn better, better rememberance of facts and having a grip on the topic so that new facts can be easily understood.
 When we think of learning, the first thing that comes to mind is how to understand the contents. To understand the subject, we need to analyse its contents. For example, we are dealing with a fact that all matter is made up of atoms. Its very simple statement, but we must understand why it is so to appreciate the fact stated. Here comes the requirement for analysis. As we analyse the topic, we could also understand the need for stating this, which could be that we are studying the structure of some material say benzene. 
 Next we need to remember some facts of a subject. The example quoted earlier was a simple logical fact. But, some complex facts like the Einstein's theory of relativity is not very easy to remember. It needs understanding of the content to memorize the fact. Without a proper understanding of the concepts involved which made the scientist to propose the theory, it is just impossible to remember the fact propose as it is very complex.
 Lastly, when we are learning something, it should not be mere memorizing of the facts stated, but, it should be a concrete base for furthur developmental study. In simpler words, learning something should be like a foundation to a building. The building could be a research or knowing newer facts to be understood. Suppose, while experimenting, we make an observation, then without a understanding the idea of conducting the experiment and concepts included in the processes involved in it, we will not be able to conclude from the experiment. So, even to state a fact, understanding of ideas and concepts is imperative.
 In short, understanding of ideas and concepts will help us analyse the facts presented to us. Besides, it also enables us to memorize the facts and other contents of the subject. Finally and most important of all these is that, without a proper understanding of the ideas and concepts, we will neither be able to understand nor conclude anything. So, understanding enables better learning that mere knowing of facts.