I completely agree with this statment.
 In my opinion, education and learning has a great more impact on the student if the subject touches them emotionaly and personally. Learning facts and reciting things memorized form textbooks can achieve nothing for the student except from giving them a shallow concept of education. 
 As an example, I will present a personal experience of mine that has actually happened to me. In one lesson of personal study, we, as a class, touched upon the subject of animal rights. I never had any thoughts on this subject before and reading a essay written on the subject in a text book,i still had no idea and opinion on the subject. Reading from the textbook established by the school gave me no understanding of the subject. But later on in the week the teacher took us on a trip to a animal shelter called the BSPCA. There, i saw animals that were actually under a lot of stress and animals that have been abused in the past. From that experience i learned a real lesson and actually understood the idea and concept behind the subject and from that i realized that what really is important in a lesson, is the amount you understand rather than learning facts and getting an A* on a test.
 This is parly why i think that it is more important for students to understand ideas and concepts than it is for them to learn facts. Actually understanding a subject can help build character, history, personality and values in a character. On the other hand, learning facts from a textbook can only make a copy of an unoriginal being that believes in some one elses views (the person who wrote the facts, or a fact that has no personal appeal).
 The major reason that makes me believe that this statement is true is that the people around me and myself have many stories to tell, and the reason that people have stories to tell is because they have learnt, understood and experienced ideas and concepts that merily, definetly, didn't come from a textbook full of facts. 
 In conclusion, I absolutely agree with  with the following statement:
 
 "It is more important for students to understand ideas and concepts than it is for them to learn facts"
 
 because of the several reasons listed above.