I completely agree with the statement that it is better to have broad knowledge of many academic subjects than to specialize in one specific subject. In today's fast and constantly changing world, with globalization taking place at a furious pace, a person should be a Jack of all trades to excel in life.
 
 It is better to have a broad knowledge and know all the aspects involved than just to limit the scope. Take for example an Industrial  Engineering Graduate. Industrial Engineering being a generalized branch, the student has got a broad knowledge of all the industries be it Manufacturing, Software, Healthcare, Finance. After graduating from the college he can fit into any type of industry. Getting a job is not a problem for him because he has got a variety of options to choose from.
 Even if he wants to set up his own manufacturing firm, he has the knowledge of finance and manufacturing. He can put to use his knowledge and work effectively. He will not have to rely on people from other fields for advice. He can be his own boss. 
 
 Specialization limits the scope of individual. It restricts him. It makes learning monotonous. After an individual is done with his studies, it also becomes difficult for him to find a job, which suits his requirements and interests appropriately. Specialization also takes a lot of brooding of the subject matter. It may be that the subject matter in which an individual is interested to specialize, may not be good from the point of view of market. He may not get good returns. After investing in a lot of hardwork, one expects good returns and satisfaction to come his way. This may not be the case if an individual specializes in one specific subject.
 
 Thus having a broad knowledge of many subjects helps a person to have a broader view about the aspects involved in any industry or any event taking place. His scope is not confined. He has the ability to take a decision from the plethora of knowledge he has gained from the many academic subjects he has studied. Thus generalization is always better for the prospects of an individual.