The issue at hand is, whether students today give enough time to helping their communities. I believe that given the amount of other, mandatory activities that students are involved in, they are doing the best we can to give back more than our fair due to the society, by partaking in several unpaid volunteer tasks and taking small, yet meaningful measures to ease the day to day lives of the community's members. 
 Firstly, in terms of education, schooling is a form of giving back to the society, for it provides the knowledge we need in order to pursue effectively any community service we may wish. For example, if I wish to help renovate the community church's walls, I will need a proper eduactional basis with regards to acquiring the required funds, hiring the right people, training the laborers, etc. Despite the tremendous workload involved in today's schools, students are still taught the importance of societal welfare. After school programs help students take initiative to improving their neigborhood. 
 Moreover, students today volunteer for several unpaid tasks. I personally partake regularly in distributing the community newspaper, for more than the recognition I receive from others, I find pleasure in helping bring them the news they need to be aware of the community events today. Also, many students work many hours in local hospitals, daycare centers, etc. to give something back to their community. Although the initiative to do so may be to add plus-points to their resumes, at the end, every student feels satisfied and happy to have given back something to their community and asks his/her friends to volunteer as well. 
 Lastly, community service does not have to necessarily refer to drastic measures to renovate the society. Merely asking a friend or a total stranger to quit smoking, helping elderly citizens cross a street, helping a lost child find his way back home at night are day to day generous actions that go unrecognized, and often do not count as 'giving time' to help the community.
 In conclusion, helping the community that helped raise them is an aspect that young people recognize to be essential value. They give back to their community in every way they can, whether it be volunteering at a hospital, helping renovate the church, or simply, helping an elderly woman cross the street.