It is sometimes said that in twenty years there will be fewer cars in use than there are today. In the following I want to give some reasons why I personally don|t agree with this opinion.
 
 Firstly, for many people using their cars is the most convenient possibility to reach the destinations they want to go to. Of course, there is public transport. But when you travel by bus or by subway you nearly never reach your destination directly. Because most of the people like to have it as comfortable as possible they will continue using their cars. Furthermore, especially trains are a very expensive way to travel.
 
 Secondly, oil prices have just started to decline. This will probably lead to cheaper petrol prices, so the cost factor is also no immediate reason to use fewer cars. And there is no sign that this will changed rapidly. There are huge oil and gas resources, particularly in Russia. So, petrol will remain relatively cheap.
 
 Moreover the lobby of the carmakers is very powerful. There are important brands with much influence all over the world. That is because they employ hundreds of thousands of workers and a reduction of using cars would certainly lead to more unemployment. As far as I can see they would dramatically protest against any possible restrictions of using cars and do everything to attract new customers with interesting features of their products. 
 
 It is also worth mentioning that the state itself can not have any real interest to reduce the number of cars. Of course, the Greens are an important political party in many countries but finally the lobby of the environmentalists is not powerful enough. The state receives much money from car owners who have to pay tax on their cars and on the petrol they use. Nowadays, people are more interested in topics such as security and education than the protection of the environment. So, politicans of the people|s parties don|t see any necessity to campaign for fewer cars.
 
 Of course, riding your bike or just walking can be even greater fun than driving a car. If more people decided to change their habits and think more seriously about the pollution caused by too much car traffic, I would certainly be happy. However I do not think this will happen in the next twenty years.