The author's assertion that - " it is more important to understand the concepts and ideas rather than learn facts ", i partially agree with the saying. True understanding of any subject is to be said - when all  the ideas and the purpose should be clearly known but how one can imply  thes into  practicality ? For this to be done, an individual has to learn the facts supporting the ideas. They work as a pack and package to acheive completeness.
 
 An example which supports the notion that understanding gives the bases of any subject which can further be expanded to opt for the research in any particular field. For-example  one has learned all the dates and origin of any technology as well as how does it works but do not know any thing about the concept and logic regrding how it works ? Then this might not lead problem for the instance now but later when some drawbacks comes in the technology and need to be modified this time all knowledge would appear to be mere waste.
 
 Furthe, while watching a television one might not have information about what are the characteristics of a picture tube or how the quality can be improved because we are interested in learning only fact how to operate in order to fulfill our desire for entertainment but if we understands the funtionality then this might help in improving and getting more better picture quality.
 
 Furthermore, this can be clearly understood by the illustration that,   for a mathematics student it is necessary to understand the concepts and idea related to a topic but one cannot imply those concepts without learning the facts. Here the facts implied to the formulas which is mandatory to learn to get a solution. Concepts and idea sometimes sufficient to deal efficeiently with the problem but it might take longer time than employing  formula which is a short-cut method to reach the answer. But sometimes gap of formula can be filled from the concept but vice-versa is not true in order to make it empirical.
 
 To conclude, it is true that  in some ways concepts and ideas outways the facts but the their worth cannot be reduced to minimal because facts needed  to strengthen the concept and idea. It actually enhances and broden the knowledge of the subject. The two things are like our both hands. One cannot measure the significance of one over another.