The question here is that is it better to have broad knowledge of many academic subjects  or to specilaze in one subject. In my view it is better to specialize in one subject only. I have sufficient reasons and examples to support my claim.
 Firsltly, although it is better to have a broad knowledge about many academic subjects, but this is only useful upto a certain extent only.  It is always better to specialize in one specific subject because it gives you right confidence and Knowledge to make a substantial contribution to your field. Consider a nuclear scientist working on  a project, although it is necessary for him to have knowledge of thermodynamics, fluid sciences etc. but it is his specialization in the field of nuclear engineering that makes him suitable for the job. Moreover the reasearch projects are carried out in team where people who specialize in different fields come together and execute the project, so there is no need to have deep knowledge of all the fields.
 Secondly, in some cases having a broad knowledge of many subjects does not serve  the purpose. For instance in medical field, we have doctors who specialize in everything from  toe to ears.  This is really necessary as only a cardiologist  can do justice to a heart patient rather than a physician, who only knows a bit of everything but is incapable of providing doing proper prognosis and diagnosis.So this shows it makes sense to specialize only in one field.
 Finally, almost  every individual from his childhood has a field of interest , one subject which he likes the most. It is a known fact people perform the best when they work on the field which interests them.There is very high probabilty that individual will contribute favorably to the society.
 As the saying goes Jack of all trades, master of none, this era demands specialists and not jacks. So in my view it makes complete sense to specialize in the area of your interest and make a substantial contributions to that field so that future generations remember you.