ADVERTISEMENTS IN THE AGE OF GLOBALIZATION
 
 People today face with a stark choice: trusting in advertisements or not. I argue that most advertisements make products seem better than they really are. There are two reasons related to globalization : First, we live in the age of consumption culture and second, advertisement companies can earn money only if they make products seem better.
 
 First, we cannot deny the fact that globalization effects the whole world. A product goes through different stages before it arrives to the consumer. The owners of the means of production - the capitalists- do need subjects who would consume those products. The capitalists make some arrangements with the advertisement companies so that their products appeal people. To get an attractiveness, those companies make products seem better. For examle, if you want to buy a watch, you may look at the advertisements and decide accordingly. You would look at the shape and the color of the watch as represented in the advertisement, and then think about it. Later, you may come up with the idea that you want to buy this watch. However, if you go to a watch store, you may be very disappointed in the sense that the watch you saw on the advertisement may be very different than the one you saw in the store! The color or the quality may change. As I mentioned before, advertisements make products seem better so that people buy it.
 
 Second, since globalization ensures survival for the ones who have money, an advertisement company should earn money to continue to do business. I agree with this fact, so it makes sense if they make products seem better. The capitalists would choose a company which represents the product in the best possible way. So, the advertisements companies would try to do their best in order to get the job. Moreover, once people begin to buy items they see on the advertisement, the company would be famous and work with many other capitalists. To clarify, every capitalist would like to be in collaboration with the most popular advertisement company.
 
 To sum up, in the light of the factors I mentioned above, it can be said that advertisement companies do whatever the age of globalization requires. The fact that it works through the consumption culture and it allowes a company to survive only if it earns money, advertisements make products seem better. We should keep in mind that as long as we experience globalization, we have to accept the advertisements as they are.