The contemporary society requests people to be very focused on their own goals, and achieving better positions is possible only if you are available to find the best solution to your problems every day. In my opinion, I completely agree with the given statement, according to which if one wants to be successful, he or she should follow new ways to deal with his or her matters, and also being available to take risks. I can support my judgement with examples from my personal experience, expecially if I consider my studies and my work.
 Like my father and my uncle, I graduated in architecture, so I was expected to start working as a building architect, but I did not like that idea at all. In fact, as I have been fond of gardening since the age of fourteen, I wanted to became a landscape architect, in order to plan parks and gardens rather than civil buildings. Consequently, I attended two post-graduate courses in landscape architecture and now I have the right qualification to plan them. Moreover, I have started a PhD in that specific field, because I am very interested in pursuing an academic career at university. If I had followed my father and uncle's path, I would have lost my unique chance to do what I really prefer. But there is also another positive aspect.
 Considering that I knew lots of Roman students where I attended my masters, I decided that it was better for my career to open a new associated atelier in Rome to start working as a landscape architect. It was really risky, because it requested a considerable amount of money and we had not enough work at the beginning, but I was determined. Now, I can state that we are quite successful, and this fact makes me very happy. If I had continued to work at my father's studio, I would never have been able to achieve this success.
 All considered, I suppose that it can be easily understood why I think that successful people need to try new activities or ways to achieve their goals, even if they are risky, rather than following their previuos experiences. My aim to become a landscape architect has been reached only giving new directions to my life. In conclusion, I have no hesitation in recommending young people to keep this statement in their mind.