Travelling is one of the most exiting things in the world.  However, it is not possible to travel everyday in one's entire life because of both time and money constrains.  Therefore, in one of the rare occations that a person travels, it is important to plan the trip in the most enjoyable way.  While some people prefer to travel in a group led by a tour guide, I prefer to travel alone or with only family members or friends.  Below, I will discuss the reasons behind my preference.
 
 It is true that when you go to a new city or country, you need someone to take you around an show you what famous sceneries are in the city.  However, these may not be the places that I would want to look at.  Everyone is so unique in the world, so everyone has different interest.  What the tour guide shows me may represent the preferenc of the majority, but it may not  be my preference.  Therefore, when I travel, I would prefer to do my own research on the city, so that I will know what I like about the city or country and go visit these interested places.  Moreover, this way can make me know the visited city more. 
 
 On top of the different interests people may have, travelling time is another problem that may arise when you are travelling with a group led by a tour guide.  It is simple to illustrate this point.  To a tour guide, it is a job to take you around the city, so he will only work during his working hour which is usually from 8 am to 5 pm.  However, to me, travelling is one of the rare treats that I have , so I would like to make it as enjoyable and long as possible.  I would not like to go back to the hotel at 5 o'clock and go to bed.  Instead, I would like to explore how the city is like at night or after the tour guide's working hour, but I cannot just ask the tour guide to work overtime.  
 
 Besides different interests among people and difficult scheduling of travel time, privacy is another main reasons that I would like to travel without a tour guide.  In some occations, travelling is a chance to spend some private time with partner, family, or friends.  Therefore, it is not always comfortable to travel with a tour guide.
 
 Travelling is such a nice treat to any one, so making it interesting, flexable in scheduling and private is crucial.  Therefore, I would prefer not to travel in a group led by a tour guide.