In twenty years there will be fewer cars in use than there are today.  I disagree with this ides.  I will explain why I disagree with it providing two reasons.  These two reasons are a condition of car campanies and a condition of roads nowaday.
 
 Most of car campanies are creating new types of cars.  Every time I watch TV, I see many now comercials about new type of cars that are introduced by various campanies.  On the street, I see many advertisements of cars are hung on the walls.  In Japan, which is my home country, the two biggest car campanies are Toyota and Honda.  Two days ago, I heard on the news that these two campanies are fighting each other and trying to make new car to attract customers' attentions.  If car campanies make new model of car, people will be attracted to it and want to get it.  If people buy new car, they will ride it.  Nobody will keep it in their car parking.  Of course, all of people will want to show it how cool their cars are by rideing them.  If 100 people bought new cars, there would be 100 cars in use.  After people buy new cars, they would sell their old cars.  These old cars would be sold by cheap price in the used car shop.  People who have not enough money to buy new car would buy these used cars, then more and more cars would be on the road.  By these reasons, I think that the condition of car campanies has been increasing the number of cars in use today.  
 
 The second reason, which I suppose is a condition of roads.  New roads are made in everywhere and their qualities are quite good.  They are smooth and are connected to other roads.  Therefore, people are able to change their distination while they are riding car on the roads.  If they are on the way to their distination using train, they can't change their distination as immediately as they can by the road.  Even if they can change, they will have to buy new ticket to ride new train.  It will cause money problem.  In addition, roads are everywhere.  In Japan, roads are located even under the ocean.  Impressionable condition of the roads reduce the time to be spent to go to the distination and also save a lot of money.  These points make people want to by cars.
 
 From these two reasons that I explain above, I think that there will be a lot of cars in us