I agree that most advertisements make products seem much better than they really are. Moreover, I am convinced that this is the main purpose of a commercial.
 
 The grade of attraction that can be caused by an advertisment is immensive and can be stated by the example of gas water in Germanz. A lot of people drink it here, while other countries like France, England or Spain do not even offer it in restaurants. I am convinced that the reason for that is a series of very good commercials we have in Germany, Switzerland and Austria.
 
 Companies use their financial power to hire a lot of experts and provide the best and newest equipment to produce commercials, which content is often not even linked to the product itself.
 
 The example of "Jaegermeister", a really terrible German liquor shows, how you can promote a product just by giving him a trend image. Opponents might say that a reasonable consumer wouldn't be mislead after a while by such finesounding commercials and advertisements, but unfortunaltely it is not very easy to change a persons drinking custom. If a certain acceptence is achieved once and the product is available and therefore present in any place, it will be hard to change the consumers behaviour, who consideres convinience as a important matter.
 
 My opinion is also stated by the example of cloth bought by youngsters. They often spend great amonts of moneys on a t-shirt of a certain brand, although it does not fit or is of bad quality. 
 
 The last example illustrates the rudeness of such companies by producing their advertisment. It is even worse, to adress those advertisment to children who are often more unsecure and therefore willing to spend many to be "cool".
 
 I am very lucky that certain legal rules to prevent even greater damage are existing. The Europian Union inclines to sharpen them slowly but determined although their opponent lobby is powerful. Until standards will have enhanced recognizably we should read every advertisment with suspicion.