There has been a great change in an advancement of education, people have get opportunites to have their subjects with much better quality than in the past. 
 Some people say that it is better to have broad knowledge of many acamic subjects than to specialize in one specific subject, I totally agree with this given statement because by having broad knowledge of many academic subjects, people can develop thier 
 general knowlege and able to good oppotunities to find their potential ability in the future.
 
 To begin with, Taking broad knowlege of many academic subjects 
 can enrich our lives more constructive and improve our general knowledge which is essential living in our society.
 If people who are not have their broad knowledge of many academic subject, they would be bored and be limited to know about academic information. They don't know how much interesting to invest  money on stock market  and get won my shares or which way is the best decison making which in charge of a business class.
 In my expeirince, I took lots of various of subjects in my college such as investing money on stock market, at first time i spent on my money on stock market, I thought quite wasting my time and money.
 However, as time went by, I was taught from professor and had some profits which gave me self-achievement. 
 
 In addition, By  having broad knowledge of many academic subjects can be  good chance to develop the potential ability in a long run.
 Compared to taking specialized in one specific subject, people  don't have opportunity to think of their potential ability and just go for their jobs that are just suitable for them. But when it comes to taking
 a variety of many academic subjects, it will be helpful for people to develop what are the best jobs.
 From one of my friends who majored in English literature, when she was a freshman, she didn't take the elective classes which had lots of different academic classes becuase she thought that it was the best fitble for her. However, after being a sophomore, she started to take a business classes which seemed to be interesting to her,
 finally she realized that business class was the best for her becuase 
 she was fascinated with taking marketing courses.
 
 To conclude, even though there are some advantages of taking specialized in one specific subject, having  different types of academic subjecst can outweigh this specific subject since broad knoledge of many academic subjects can improve our lives better and develop the potential ability. I hope this will be the great leap forward future life.