I think that both understanding ideas and learning facts are equally important for a students, but if I were forced to choose between the options I would say that understanding ideas and concepts is more important than learning a list of facts.
 
 The comprehension of the idea that gives the meaning to a fact will enable the student to understand all the facts that are based on that same idea. 
 For example: teachers teach the children how to add numbers by explaining them how addition works, not by telling them that 2+2= 4, that 2+3=5 and so on. When a child has understood the idea and  the concept of addition he`ll be able to make all sorts of addition. 
 What i really mean to say is that the understanding of a concept will lead you to the full comprehension of several facts of the same kind. 
 
 On the other hand i cannot avoid to notice that we face a big risk in focusing too much on ideas and concepts: the risk of leaving out the reality. Reality is very important because it`s the point we tend to: all ideas and concepts are studied to give reasons on things we`ve seen in our experience, if we do not refer to reality  we would be just speaking about nothing, our talking would be only speculation which is not usefull to us. 
 
 I would say that we need a balance between the two things, because they are both important to the students: i think that a good method of making them understand a theory or a concept would be giving them examples, because talking about experience is effecive in making them realize what concept we are dealing with.
 
 On the other hand I think that when a teacher talks about a specific fact he should always say what is the idea that stays behind that fact so that he woul obtain two important results: fistly the student would fully understand the fact in its implications, causes, consequences (for example why a war was declared, what consequences it had..) and secondly the students would be able to understand many facts of the same kind because they may recognize the same ideas behind other facts.