I strongly agree with the statement that most advertisements make products seem much better than they really are. The companies which produce their products indeed want to profit more form advertising. Advertisements help the audience realize how the product function and what its advantages are. The people who watch TV are expecting the information which can entertain and release them from the burden of daily life. 
 Frankly speaking, companies are runing for profits, so it is abvious that they are inclined to make their products look better and seem to function better on the advertisements. As it is known to all, the invest of advertisements cost a huge mount of money, so one of the advertisements duties it to fit the investors' requests to make the advertisement more convincible.
 Advertisements are supposed to help audience know how the product function best and what its advantages are. There are scarce advertisements that would tell its audience what the product's disadvantages are. For example, a laptop computer advertisment would show its audience how small the laptop is and how convienent to be carried, but it seldom mention a word about the poor battery life expectance and the low-speed CPU. However, it is somehow unnecessary to tell these advantages because many people who are willing to buy such a laptop only use it to do some documents writing, which does not need a high-speed and shining CPU. 
 The people sitting in front of TV are expecting to see something entertaining, since they want to have a nice leisure time. A high-tech advertisement with many dazzling artificial effects or an interesting story is more than welcome for the audience to pay the petiance even after seeing it several times in one hour. 
 In conclusion, advertisements surely make products seem much better than they really are. While the companies enjoy the profits advertisements have brought, we will not feel it is a waste of time to watch such a entertaining advertisement with a seemingly great product.