While it could be tempting to specialize only on one particular academic subject, a broad academic backgroung is a key tool for one's personal and professional life.
 
 It can be easier, at first, to decide focusing on one particular academic subject. Indeed People who are done with their specific studies, feel comfortable in their subject. They can get a job pretty easily and can directly apply their knowledge. However during their education they missed many useful things.
 
 First of all, having a general academic bakcground is one of the main reasons of success in science and in reasearch in particular. The most famous scientists had an amazingly broad academic background and this led to the most important dicoveries that human kind has experienced. They were able to adapt proved techniques to new fields, leading to rapid improvements.
 
 A broad general background is not just a required tool for scientists but for any person. This helps you think outside the box because you learnt different approaches and techniques that can be used to solve a problem that seemed new at first. People with a broad academic background are therefore able to adapt and respond more quickly and effectively to new situations than the rest of the people. 
 
 A broad academic knowledge is also important because it gives you a strong cultural background. This is useful in many situations of your professional and professional life, because you will be able to understand these situations better. Hence you will be able to act in a clearer way than you would have if you did not have such a broad academic knowledge.
 
 Finally, a broad academic background is also important in society, to understand many different people with diverse jobs and cultures. This represents a key factor of adaptibility in society. In your job for instance, you will usually adapt faster that a person who studied a specific subject.
 
 In sum, knowledge of many academic sbjects is a powerful tool in both your professional and personal life, even though specialising on one particular subject could be an asset for your first job.