I strongly disagree with the quote. The quote seems to be a typical statment that elders make. The young people nowadays do give enough time to help out their communities. The amound of time that young people spend on their communities is small compared to the young people in the past. However, this does not mean that the young people nowadays spends little time to helping their communities, which can be their school communities or local town.
 Compared to the past, students are usually given relatively more work today, causing the indvidual student to have less time for their community services. The amount of homeworks and extracuricullums that the students do almost reaches the limit of some students. As a high school senior student, I can't break my weekly schedule because if time period of one of the activities that i am enganed changes, I can't afford to change my whole schedule. This is very common in my school. During the school days, I devote my free period to study and review the previous classes. After school, I have activities that i would like to do such as volleyball for every monday, wendseday and friday, math team for every thurseday and model united nation for every tuesday. On weekends, I rest and prepare for the following week. These activities are difficult to stop because they help the students to learn the skills that are essential in the real world such as time management, responsibility, team work and so on. Also, there are large number of homeworks and tests that i must complete and study. With a deluge of these important activities and academic works, students nowadays can not devote themselves to their communities as much as the young people did in the past. Today, the majority of the students spend equal proportion of their time such as weekends to be involed in their communities.
 In my school, we organize Habitat for humanity and visit construction sites in rural area of the city, Warsaw, in order to help the homeless people to build their house. We physically help them through laying and cutting bricks and digging ground. Also, as a treasurer of the high school, I organize a fundrasing event to send some money to the local hospitals; the turn outs are great, proving that the young people still care about their communities, and the only problem is that they don't have enough spare time to help the communities everyday. The students try to support their community physically and financially.
 The young people, students nowadays spend eneough time to helping their communities. Although the quantity of the time of helping is smaller than the past, the percentage of the helping time is equal.