While it might seem like, having a broad knowledge of many academic subjects is better than specializing in one specific subject, I, for myself, would choose the latter.
 
 On first glance, having ideas about lots of areas seems like a good thing. You can talk about everything and you can reflect your opinions about everything. However, you don't really knowing any of the areas you talk about. The knowledge on all these areas would be limited and don't  reflect what that acedemic subject is all about. As an industrial engineer I can give that as an example. When we graduate from college, we all have the basic ideas about supply chain, inventory management, production planning, quality management, scheduling etc. However, during our graduate work, we end up choosing one of the sub-topics that industrial engineers work on. While a student working on scheduling may still know all other sub-divisions, he has the most knowledge about his own topic thus he can talk the most certainly about his own topic as well.
 
 Considering that we expect people to take certain responsibilities in daily social life, and expect that to carry out these activties to masterhood, I would think the same is true for academic life as well. Since don't expect a butcher to do gardening, and a dentist to be an engineer, we shouldn't expect, say an industrial engineer, to be competant in both supply chain area and in quality management. A dentist is good at what he is doing beacuse he spent his time on mastering that, while an engineer spent his time on engineering subjects and so is good at that. Following with the same line of reasoning, an industrial engineer working on supply chain spents his time reading articles about that particular topic, writes his thesis on that particular topic and neglects the other parts of the discipline. 
 
 Time constaraints and social constraints limit one's opportunity to know everything about anything. People knowing a broad range of academic subjects tend to look and know the superficial stuff about them, while others focusing on a certain topic, by limiting their concentration, know that particular subject in depth and so are more valuable to the development of the particular subject.