Someone says that young people nowadays do not give enough time to helping their communities, well, I agree with this statement.
 Thinking about twenty years ago, for example, we can find out how young people really cared about their community and the society as a whole. The issues of homeless, poor families and enviroment had a central role in debacts and conferences, and parents thought their children how to be responsible for public goods and other people`s things. The fact that government decided the end of the compulsory navy service, giving young men the chance to choose wheter going in the navy or doing something useful for the community, clearly is an evidence of young people`s deeper social committment.
 Nowadays things have changed, if we made a survey we would find out that only few young people are engaged in social activities or take care of their communities. Have people became more selffish? Do persons ignore the problems affecting their communities, such poverty, violence and drugs? I don`t think things are following this pattern. 
 I think nowadays life take all our freetime and prevent us to take on social activities, actually because we lack the time to do it. I am speaking as a young person: I go to university, where  papers and assignments take me a great time to be done, moreover I need to work in order to pay the college`s fees. I have no time left in my days to help my community. The greatest thing I can do is to donate to the church part of my saving, and I think I feel compelled to do this because I haven`t the chance to do real activities, for the reasons I mentioned before. In my opinion all the students face the same difficulty I do, they are not selfish and they really would like to help other people, but their daily life makes it difficult. For example a friend of mine, who studies medical sciences and spends all his time at university, decided last Christmas, together with his girlfriend, to adopt a child living in the third world. The child isn`t living with them, they just provide him money for his education and growth, but this is an example of the existing committment on social problems.
 I think it is our society, our way of living, that prevent us from doing our best for the others, not the selfishness of our hearts.
 If young people had more freetime, if it wasn`t necessary to study hard and do their best at work to have just a little salary, people would be happy to help their communities. My grandfather sayed: ^Give a smile and you will be happyer, the smile will come back in your heart^ I think it is true, and in conclusion I think people are not more selfish than they were in the past, they only need to find a new way of li  
 
 
 nowadays young are usually self concerned and focuses their life on friend, school and amusement forgetting the importance of a social help. this is true ax