In today's world the younger generation is seen as careless and and lazy. Often we hear parents talking about how they don't understand the life their children live and how they do not have any ideology they strongly believe in, like the one they had in the sixties wich were all about respect and help.
 
 As a young person I believe that I have some prospective on the situation nowadays. It is true that in the past years young people were more interested in music and their friends, especially in the ninetees where music became more angry with groups like nirvana and metallica that had very negative images to show their audiences. This violent reaction was in part due to the fact that the image they had of past generations was not great. For example the hippie period in wich most of their parents lived in was long gone and all their ideals had been abandonned, therefore "peace and love" wasn't a reference any more because it had been a failure, so they had to find a new way of expressing themselves and tried the complete opposite.
 However today more and more teenagers are feeling responsible for the world they live in. They are now aware that they have a responsability towards the future and take more time to consider the possibilities offered to them. Of course some are still unconsiderate and uninterested but others are making changes. We see a lot more humanitarian organisation runned by young adults, for example in my school there are three projects that involve fundraising and the education of others on the issues of the world like poverty and global environment and all of them were founded and are runned by students.
 
 this shows teenagers help improve their surroundings and community because they become more respectful and involved. It is therefore a mistaken idea to think that the younger generation is becoming worse every day. It has over the years experienced different ways to portray itself and these changements have been essential for the future generations because it will give them an idea about the risks of going to the extremes and resulting from that will be a more balanced and helpful group of young people.