Learning process can not be separeted from understanding. That`s why, we can never compare understanding and comprehending processes with learning as they are already the parts of the learning itself.
 As an English teacher, having dealt with teaching and learning processes for years in the univercity, I can never think of an individual to divide these processes which are closely related, even tied strongly to each other.(comprehending and learning) I think, hereby, the description of the `learning facts` gains importance. Undoubtly, learning facts have vital importance for the students in practical means. But a reality has to be taken into consideration, even a ` learning fact` process is a part of understanding the ideas and comprehending concepts.
 Imagine that a teacher is trying to teach the student the vaporation characteristic of the liquids. It is an undeniable reality that you may make the student vapour a liquid. The teacher make him/her perform the vaporation action several times,again and again and the student may perform the action very well but if the student doesn't grasp why she/he is doing that, what is the importance of it or if he'she cannot make the necessary connections logically and cannot generalize the situation to an anvironmental reality' then what is the meaning of it?? Learning facts also have close and strong relations with the understanding and comprehending processes!
 You may teach facts to animals also, by repetition, they even learn  to sing or imitate people`s features which do not belong to their nature. An animal may learn a fact, but never can understand ideas because it has no thinking ability. On the other hand, if this repetition doesn`t become continually, they forget.. But people have logic, ability to think which is the main characteristic differing them from animals! You may teach everything to the students only making them understand, grasp or comprehend. That`s why' it is more important for students to understand ideas and concepts than it is for them to learn effects.