I disagree with the statement that in the next twenty years there would be fewer cars in use than what they are today. 
 
 The number of cars that are running today on roads are increasing every day. The reasons which are contributing to this increase are the high rate of population growth which increases the demand for increased modes of comuting.and this population growth is steadyly increasing. Also with the number of people having means to buy the new vehicles are increasing with the per capita income increase. So people are more willing to spend their money on buying cars which makes commuting much more easier for them as well as their families.And this increasing trend in increased incomes is here to stay so would be the increased in the number of cars that would be seen on the roads.
 
 Another important factor is the improving technology which introduces a new motor vehicle every month or thereof.And the rich and wealthy who have the money to splurge, in the drive to have the latest technology for their own use tend to buy these.The technology is still in development stage , so with further development and inventions of new cars this number would continuously rise sharply.
 
 I would like to substantiate my arguement with a few of my personal experiences. I was just off to US for my internship and I observed there that its only the major big cities that have a well developed transportation system with frequent public transport system plying on the roads or trains running inboud and outbound of the city.But the situation in the suburbs is dismal.The buses ran after an interval of about 45 minutes to an hours, which wastes the cruicial time of the commuters. So, most of the people prefer to have their own vehicle which make travelling under their accesiblity and control.
 Also in India safety is a major concern while travelling by public transport. With the crime situation worsening every year in the public modes people would prefer to use their own vehicle as they have the affordibitly to do so and it would enhance their safety as well. 
 
 So until the government takes step to improve the public transportation even in small cities and suburbs the volume of vehicular traffc would only see an upward trend in the years to follow. 
 
 Also,unless the crime rates are reduced and people are made comfortable in travelling  by public modes in the coming years the number of cars running would only be seeing a rise in numbers.
 
 Another important step to reduce the number of cars plying on roads is to keep a check on the population growth. Untill the populaton keeps to grow other factors accumulate with it henceforth increasing the vehicular volume over the next two decades.