I am agree with this statement that young people enjoy life more than older people. Young people are generally have great verve and energy. whereas, older people cannot enjoy the life with such attitude. Young people normally enjoy their life while doing their mundane jobs. But old people will do their jobs by creating unwanted stress around them. The health is wealth. If you are fit and fine then only you can live your life in most hilarious manner. But old people are often surrounded by such kind of ailments pertinent to age, which restrict them to enjoy. 
 I have great respect for my grand aunt who is inhabitant of our street. I am watching her since I was in 5th class. She was very  active and alert at that time. She had little problem because of diabetes, but she  had overcome any kind of stress and problem at that time. Now, the canditions had changed. Most of times, she is not even able to walk properly. She is suffering from such kind of ailments which are very painful. Whenever I watch her I can easily undestand the savour of young life. Young people readily overcome most of the ailments because of proper physiological function of their body. 
 The other factor which make the old people lethagic towads life is, "Pessimism". Old people do not prefer to work after age of 55 or 60 which causes these people sluggish and prone to various dreadful diseases. Young people always ambitious about their career and goals which motivate them to enjoy life rather then to take as a burden. 
 Young people prefer to socialize and make friends with whom they can go to dance bars, hotels etc. Old people like lonliness. My grand aunt previously was fond of parties and get togathers. But now, she disdain such kind of crowd and prefer to live in disgrunteled canditions. Young people emancipate themselves from all kind of bondages and live life with vivacious attitude.In short,  normal functioning of body and optimistic attitude of young people make them so that they can enjoy their life.