In my opinion it is true that teenagers and young adults do not provide enough time of their recreational time to contribute actively to their communities. There are three points to look at why this development has taken place in the last years.
 
 First of all, it is obvious that the young people are facing a overwhelming selection of acitivities and entertainment platforms. Whereas our parents had no other choice than helping their communities because it was traditionally and morally imposed by the society and also there was nothing else to do rather than this, young people have a great range of possibilties how to spend their recreational time. They can choose between a wide range of physical, artisitc and cultural activities. Most young people do not only limit themselves to only one activity, they even attend to several. Hence they do not have any time left to provide to their communities.
 
 Secondly, the society has been changing over the years and the development  tends to lean towards individualism rather than communalism. It is of utmost importance to be outstanding and perform extraordinary in order to stick out of the mass. It is not important to look after each other or to help each other, it is more important to ensure one's own life and well-being. You can find this phenomenal of indiviualism throughout different social classes. Since the young people grow up in this kind of enviroment where it is essential to perform indiviually, they do not experience the benefits of being part of a community which can back you up in any circumstances. For them, helping their community seems like a burden.Therefore, they are not willing anymore to contribute anything to the communities.
 
 Furthermore, there is another point which has to be considered why teenagers do not participate at their local communities anymore. Many communities are outdated and do not know how to promote themselves in a appealing way. If the communities would possibly agree on rejuvenate their image and improve their programs