Everyone has different opinion, it depends on different backgrounds. The one who agree that travel should let by a tour guide may think it will save more time, much cheaper, and effeicent. The others think travel by themselves maybe a better choice, they think they can travel by their own plan, do whatever they want. By comparing the pros and cons, i think the former one is better and more instriument to led by a tour guide. I will explian it and give some concrete examples.
 Firstly, led by a tour guide will save much more time. Let us image, we walk in a fablous city, we appreciate the amazing views, the lake is so beautiful, the weather is so nice, and we just walk and walk without stop, finally we can not even move a feet, after whole day walking, we just see the nature view of the city. The city is big, and we are small, it is impossible for us to reach every corner of the city, we do not know which place is famous, which way is a shortcut, which bus we should take. However if we have a tour guide, everything will become easy. The tour guide will lead us to the interesting places, some famous, but more importantly some others we will never have the chance to know or find them if we do not have a tour guide,the guide will aslo tell us how to get there, which bus should we take. Is not great feeling that you do not need think anything, but just have fun.
 Secondly, it  will save more money. The tour guide always have some discount from the majority hotels and suites, they can easily book a room with a lower price. They can give us many coupons when we buy something. 
 Thirdly, it consider more efficient. We can visit much more places than we do not have a guide. When we arrive at the airport, there is a bus just outside waiting for us; When we go to a resturant, the meal is ready for us; When we need to leave, someone is telling us. 
 Last but not least, we can share our experience with other group members, we can easily find some to take a picture for you.       
 In conclusion, to travel in a group led by a tour guide can save more time, save more money and help you arrange things more efficently.