For many people around the world, travelling is a very precious opportunity to widen their perspectives by seeing totally different sights and meeting different people people with various backgrouds. Thus, making effective and productive plans for travelling is actually one of the key procedures in travelling. In numerous cases, the travel agencis offer very effective travel plans with their years of know-how in the industry. Therefore, I personally believe that the best way to travel is in a group led by a tour guide from a travel agency. 
 First of all, when one travels to a foreign place, the safety issue becomes very important. Esapecially in famous tour sites such as Paris, Rome and Madrid, there are a great number of thieves who can easily rob a tourist. It can be protected to a great extent by travelling in a grooup led by a tour guide. There is high possibility that tour guide knows a great deal about the local situation. Thus, one can travel safely in a group with tour guide.
 Secondly, it is very hard for travellers to plan an effective schedule as he or she is not familiar with the visiting site. The tour guide can solve this problem. With more experiences and know-hows, the tour guide will show the tourists around the must-see sites with the most effective transportation options, helping the tourist not to waste their time wondering around the city. For tourists the time they stay in their visiting place is extremely precious. By using a tour guide system, one would be able to save much more time than travelling alone.
 Thirdly, by travelling in a group with a tour guide, one can meet with various travellers with the same interest in the visiting site. It is actually a great opportunity to meet a new group of people and share one's feelings and perspectives. Whether it is a beautiful scenerie or a renowned monuments, one can share his or her feelings about them with the people who had the same interest in that very place. Sharing feelings and opinions while travelling can really enrich one's mind and make that particular travel more worthwhile. Personally I've witnessed mamy cases that friends who met each other during their travelling often end up dearly cherishing their friendship and memories. 
 In conclusion, with these noticeable benefits of travelling in a group by a tour guide shown above, I strongly believe that the best way to travel is in a group led by a tour guide.