I firmly belive that, nowadays, young people do a lot to help their communities. I am afraid that the amount of help that young people provide is not enough, but after all, how can you say how much help is enough?
 
 First of all, in modern times young people have the oppoourtunity to help their communities while they do military service. It is true that this help might be obligatory, but it is help, nevertheless. Military service has evolved all around the world, and in several countries,  quite radically. For example, in my home country (Mexico) young people have the option to either enroll in the military or do their service for social causes. More than half the young people prefer to teach to the poor or build houses for the needed than marching and shooting fire guns. This same trend is currently spreading in all Latin America.
 
 Second, nowadays there are a lot more oportunities to help than in earlier times. There a numerous benefitial institutions recruiting young people. I had the opportunity to do voluntary work for UNICEF, and I was surprised with the amount of young people working there for free. I was even more surprised when I found out that they were  overstaffed, and that this overstaff was often sent to brand new goodwill institutions. Another example happened just two weeks ago, in Germany. A bunch of shool kids engaged in several events in order to earn money. All of the money was given to poor childer in Africa. The motto of the action was "Kids helping Kids". This innovative project was very popular, and it is being copied all around the country. I am sure that it will not take long for it to spread in all Europe.
 
 A third and final proof is Rock Concerts. If you watch MTV, you would realize that there are several Rock Concert events that donate their profits for good causes. One of them took place just a few years ago, in London. I don't remember the exact amount that they got toghether, but I do rememebr that it was in the millions of dollars. All of the artitst performed for free, and all of the profits were donated to the poorest countries in Africa. The event also made political pressure on rich countries, in order to make them forgive the national debt of the poorest african nations.
 
 For these reasons, I think young people do a lot to help, not only their communities, but the whole world. On the other hand, I do not belive that this help is enough. I belive that there is still a lot that can be done.