In my opinion it is better to specialize in a specific subject or area instead having a broad knowledge of many academic subjects, although it can be argued that a general education is also necessary.
 Most obviously the goal of all academic education is to ultimatly give us specific knowledge and educate us in a particular area or subject. It is the reason why we go to University after secondary school. Being a professional and knowing one subject thoroughly gives us many advantages on the job market by giving us appeal to customers, clients and future employers. After completing my undergraduate studies I plan to get a master's degree in law and study one specific area of the Law. In today's market, professionals are getting more and more specialized because there are so many changes, and so many topics and subjects to study. When a client is having a divorce they will not go to a surgeon or a a coporate lawyer, they will go to a lawyer who specializes in matrimonial action, because he is more likely to help him, after seing so many clients in the same situation.
 Further it is not time sensitive to cover many academic subjects and know them all. Some people have more than one degree and spend their life studying and going to one school after another. They know about economic, finance or banking but it is not possible to know them all very well. In addition it can cost a lot to study so many subjects and at the end not being able to compete with one person who spent less time in school but only knows one subject.
 Finally It is impossible to learn many subjects and know them all well. It is a sign of lack of stability and indecision. Some students spend their College years changing from one major to another and they can never decide which one to study. So they end up spending years in School and get discourage by the time to graduate and quit school
 In sum specializing in one subject is the best choice for me, although I would also like to learn about other complementary disciplines like languages sports and art and be able to exchange intelectually  with other people.