Each and every new inniovation in human history started to be used at first with a decreasing manner and then their usage has becomed more and more wide as they meet the new facility. Moreover, people has made interesting comment on their use among the common people. For instance, one of the owner of a Hollywood Studio in the first years of the television, he claimed that people would not spend a time in front of a box every night. However, in time it has become an inevitable element of one house. In fact, there are other several technologies that did not take any credit first and , afterwards, they are the important part of our living. One of them, that I would like to discuss, is the cars that we use everyday for different reasons. Thus it is not logical to think that they will decrease in use. As the examples in our daily lives show, their use is constantly increasing due to several reasons.
 Today, technology develops regularly and everyday we see different versions of the same car, which is supposed to be just a 2 and half tones of iron compounded by four wheels. For instance, there different marks in the market. When it is asked which car you would like to have, there can be various answers to this question ranging from the Mercedes to the Ford. These new versions and marks encourage people to purchase a newer car even if this person has already one. In addition to that, with the fast developing technology, the automobiles are produced more and more cheaper. Hence, the people having a little money spent can go and buy a car with respect to his or her budget. Indeed, there are consumers credit offered by banks in order to make this process more easier. As far as all these are concerned, it is possible that in the future, the number of cars will double instead of diminishing.
 Apart from the technology in producing automobiles and the bank credits, the governments continously improves the infrasturucture of  their countries. Although their primary concern is to increase the economic transaction wtihin the country and with the other countries, this helps to individualize the transportation. For instance, in my country, the public transportation is like a torture. The public buses are full of the people both standing and sitting. Also, it is not possible to go from one side of the city to other side by taking one bus. Moreover, the municipality of the city continously improves the roads of the city, rather increasing number of buses and making new combuination of routes. Consequently, when I see that driving my own car to my destination are relatively better than utilising the buses, I prefer to drive to the place that I wanto to reach. Thus, today in my city, there is an increase of cars serving for only one person.
 In conclusion thi