Yes, I think that is true. In twenty years later, the population of this planet will increase more and more. For example, focus on a country which has a big population and according to research, we ressume the Chinese people will increase even more in the future. Of course, I am not talking about just population of China but also how large China is. There are still number of places that not so many people live in China. When the population will increase in China, people will move to all over the China which does not have much population. Then they might live in forest, near by the river,anywhere could be possible to live in. Then what do we need to use for vehicles? I think we need more cars when it would happen in China. Then they start to offer more cars or they might produce more cars by theirself in China. If they have such a lond distance in a country, of course they want to have a vehicles. It takes too much time to ride a horse to go somewhere, it is too slow to ride a bike. Then what we want? Yes, that is a car. Of course, they want to ride something that do not waste their time. Time is very important in this society, if we do not want to waste the time in this moment, we will do anything makes our time more. 
 Brings back what I said, It is not only about China, also we Japanese, we have more and more population people use a car nowdays. I think there are another few reasons to think why people using so much cars nowdays. One, we have been creating so many technologics and electronics machines in this cenrtry. For example, we used to write something by a pen when they write letter. But now, we have such a smart computers and cell phones so we do not even try to write down on paper. That is what is happening with cars too. We have been relied on technology too much, therefore we have been lazy. We human, we do not do something by all ourself I think. But we can always go back to pass and think about how our ancients did make to live.  Now we rely on computers too much but in the future we will count on cars as well. I think we will forget how to walk and do exercise if we will use cars a lot.