Its often believed that young people now are less involved in their community as compared to the past but however  i do not agree with this notion. I believe that even today young people are as involved as they used to be before. They are as willing to give time to hepling their communties as they did before. 
 Taking an example from my personal experience, i would like to put light on my stance. Recently, a very unfair and unfortunate incident occured. Outside my school buliding a young poor boy was ruthlesly being beaten up by a man who claimed that the boy was leaning on the bonnet of his car and coming from such a low background he had  no right to do so. This  schocked and alarmed the students and teachers of our school. This called for some serious action because this one incident was just reflective of the unjust nature of our society. So a group of students and teachers decided to take action against this. This group of students and teachers made it a point to report the case to the police and made sure that effective action was taken against the man who had made this fatal mistake. Not only that the principal of my school (a young lady) went further to provide the young boy with admission in our school for free. This is just one arbitary example of an incident that took place on a small scale. But however, this example is symbolic of the sensitivity and willingness of young people to help their communtiy even if this requires them to go out of their way.
 I would like to point out an other fact that this is not only the situation in my country but also of the world in general. Many incidents of the past support my view. Whether it was the 9/11 or the Tsunami, the victims of both these incidents were given tremendous support by the young and the old alike. Therefore, i guess it would be wrong to say that young people seem less concerned about the situation of their communtiy only because they seeemed to be more involved in their own work.Being involved in your job doesn't necesserily imply that you are more selfish.  Despite the high demands of their work environment young people are still as supportive to their community. This is also proved by the fact that today more and more people are parts of NGO's that work towards the welfare of the people. Young people are still as spirited and as motivated to bring about an improvment to their communties and the  world in general.