It has been said that in twenty years there will be fewer cars in use than there are today. Some people agree with the statement because the oil which is essential substance to run a car is running out. But some people argue that more cars will be in use in the future than the present. It is more appropriate to say the latter because with the rapid developing technology, people can develop a new substance to run cars and the need for car will be increased. 
 First, a new kind of substance to run cars will be invented with the technology. Some people might say that the number of cars in use will reduce because the oil is running out fast. But with the technology of twentieth century, people can develop a brand new substance to run cars more efficiently. For example, in the U.S, there is a research going on to make an engine which runs with hydrogen. A solar-powered car is already produced by many countries in the world and trying to make them cost-effective. It is going to take a lot of money and time but in a long run, it will save the human kind from the lack of oil.
 Second, the need for transportation will increase exponentially. The population of the earth is increasing slowly. The increase in population will arouse the increase in demands to move to a place. For example, more people will travel to other countries and the most preferred method to travel is cars. If people need cars, the car factories will produce more cars and the production line cannot be stopped. Some people argue that airplanes and buses do the job but people who want to go to a private place always need car. 
 In a nutshell, the number of cars in use will not be fewer in the future than the present because people are trying to invent a new type of source to run cars and as the population increase, the demands to travel increases as well. People nowadays are too familiar with cars that they will not like changes in the transportation. Rather than make changes, they will develop a new method to continue the original transportation.