Well,  I have several reasons to believe that the amont of cars is even gonna increase.
 
 First reason for it's how important cars are for us nowadays. I think cars have really got in our way if life, (as TV did at its time or cell phones just did),modificating deeply transportations and the way humans are moving, so I really wonder what could  supply  cars. There are even families who have two or three! I think the end of all this will be one car per person, maybe smallers, but increasing in amonts in the cities, never decreasing.....
 
 Another fact that It's really important to take into account is the prices of cars. New markets, as the assian one, are offering good cars with lower and lower prices. To have a car is not anymore something that shows luxure , every family can really have at least one, and if prices keep going down, people are gonna bye more, and that once more means more cars in the future.
 
 Policies are also important. It's true that, some cities have started to restrict the amont of cars allowed to go by the city, but I don't think they are enought nor good. There is not a real restrinction for cars in cities, and in my opinion, non mayor would forbid them seriously because people woul'd vote him anymore, to forbid things is never really wellcome....
 
 Finally, I don't thing the lack of fuel will be a problem. MAybe, There will arrive a day where the fuel will be really expensive, right, but that's not mean that there will be less car driving in ours cities. I guess there will some other energy which will sustitute the fuel, so what will maybe change would be the way in which ours cars are working, but not cars themself. Besides, all experts say (if they are not lying) , that there is still fuel enough for sixty years over. 
 
 So in twenty years, cars are gonna keep being the main way to move for humans, and there will be even more, from my point of view. I would love to think the opposite (because I do not like cars at all), but I'm rerally pesimist in this field.