People  find that the traffic already become a terrible problem in those morden cities, those people who live in the cities and the countries spent a lot of time on the way between office and home. More and more cars bring the worse and worse traffic, so people try to find out the other way, like MRT or public bus, to solve the traffic problem.
 A group of people believe that in twenty years there will be fewer cars in use than there are today, because the MRT and public bus system will become more comfortable, and people will want to take MRT or bus but not driving by themselves. We can see every morden cities, like New York, Tokyo and Taipei, spent a lot of money to build MRT system to reduce the amount of driving people. Beside this reason, this group of people also believe that the higher price of gas will stop people to buy new cars but decide to take the public bus or MRT system.
 There are still the other group of people think in twenty years there will be more cars in use than there are today. Because people is getting richer and richer, and the price of a car is cheap enough to make almost every family want to have one. They  believe that the car is not only a tool for traffic, but also a important sign in their life. When you driving, you can have fun during the process and arrive any place at anytime. You don't have to wait the bus or walk to the MRT stations, it means you will have more time to get together with your family. In the other hand, the car coporation is develop the better cars that can use fewer gas or the other resource of energy, so people believe the higher and higher price of gas will not be the problem in the future.
 I believe in twenty years there will be more cars in use than there are today. The reasons are not only driving is so interesting that people will enjoy it forever, but also people will find out the other energy to replace gas we use today. I believe the car is not only a tool of traffic, but also a box full of great memory with friends and family that is unvalueable.