I strongly disagree that students to understand ideas and concepts than learn facts. Currently, A lot of people doesnt have a lot of time as much long time ago. Therefore, time become very important in our student life. Even some of people said" Time is more important than Gold. The student also doesn't have time to. As a result a lot of student just learned about only ideas and concepts.Actually these way to study is more easy and can save the time. it will be bad effect to student. When they learn about more hard thing. therefore we have to start to fix the way to study only understand ideas and concepts.
 The basic information made us thinking. Most students who just understand ideas and concepts doesnt life the thinking than student who learn facts. For example, During the test time few student just writing answer or Although take spend a lot of time few student spend the time for find answer with facts. After test if time is very limit, the student who write just answer will make better score than other group students. but Next time when they spned same time and take the more hard test than last time. The result it will be different. Because they few student dont know how to connect between new question. bue the other student know how to do that.
 Making easy to work the brain. The learn fact make student more thinking so make brain working more hard. If they keep do the study with same ways. As goest time by, Student braine more easy to circulate. For example. I saw the information through diagram of smart people,When some jounarlist asking question how did you study? Most person who made good scroe people said "I use to spend a lot of time for  thinking hard.
 In my conculsion, Through the our life, The time become best important to our social life.But currently student have hard choice between learn more specific information or just know the surface information. But time and grade is not at all of our life. If they spend time to think about themself future. They will know learn fact is more important than just understand ideas.