Have you ever hope that you want be 10 years younger or more? These days many people want to be young because when they think are too old, so they can not do many things. Consequently, I agree with the statement. young people enjoy life more than older people do.
 Making mistake does not acceptable to adults. For example, if a person spread water on the carpet. If the person was a young person, people will understand and say "you did this because you are young." However, if the person was adult, people will think the person in a bad way such as, weird or selfish. Consequently, to do something or go to somewhere is much careful to adults. And yet, mostly, people feel fun when they are in the different place or situation. Therefore, to adult it is difficult to plan out.
 For that reason adult have so much experience, it is easy to feel fear. When I was young my mother the rice cake was chuck in her throat. Accordingly, she can not eat any rice cake until now. Also she does not try to eat any rice cake even thought it tastes so good. However, when she sees any kinds of rice cakes, she said it reminds her the time. Consequently, to her it is really hard to try.
 On the account of older people are old, they have to think their health and it is really hard to be fine after they got an accident. My father went to golf last month and he felt down on the ground. Then all people thought it will be alright and did not think seriously about it. However, he felt pain too much and he is still have the pain now. Consequently, he could not go to golf for a month although he loves to golfing.
 In conclusion, the adult can enjoy their life, but the young people have more chances and for that reason they are young it is easier to do something without thinking.  Also, people have desire to be younger because they miss their past and regret what they did. This means they already did many thing and enjoyed it. Consequently, they would give advices to younger people rather than enjoy their life.