Today , most advertisements make products seem much better than they really are . The fact that there is almost not restrictions about some advertisement let big companies a lot of false and even impossible arguments to sell their product . Also ,  they know how to touch people's thought with their different analysts . The most dramatic of all is the use of peoples symbol which misleads people ' statements . 
 The restrictions on televisions commercial are very small or don't even exist . A company owner has simply to give the the money for the advertisement of the company . This advertisement will be accepted without any restrictions  because the only restriction that we have is The nudity scenes , but we don 't have to prove that what we said is true .We can take an advertisement which is about get slim .In this advertosement , you will see peoples saying that they have lost weight in 4 weeks .A man who will herd those talkings will be attracted to the products , but the people's talkings on the advertisement are false . 
 The other probable element wil be the use of analysts . Those analysts are very smart because they know what people want to hear .So , with only one speech written by them , they can make a product seem as fantastic when this product is not .As example , we take a man who wants a car . Now , this man watchs an advertisement on which they say that the car  make girl crazy ,and even shows you a woman who is persecuting a man because of the car . The man will like to have this car in the minute following these advertisements . However , is that statemement in the advertisement true ? These statement is not . So , a lot of peoples will be fooled . 
 The most dramatic thing about advertisement is the use of people's symbol or fan to sell product . Some studies have shown that children under a certain age are more to do what their stars think is right . In this way , we can imagine a basketball player who is saying that a certain product is good  . All the children who like this player will buy the products when they shall have an opportunity without any hesitation .Unfortunately , the product is not so so good as it is supposed to be 
 To finish , I would say that I agree with the fact that advertisement make product seem better than they really are .