Whether most advertisements make products seem much better than they really are? People differ greatly in their attitudes toward this problem not only because of their respective backgrounds, but also due to their alein understandings. According to my personality and fondness, if I were faced this issue, I would probably think that the advertisements don't make products much better than they really are. My viewpoint can be verified by the following considerations.
 
 To start with, the most crucial nowadays is the one that many advertisements are false. Facts witness and present many illustrates as bellow: How can you image that some superstars say some kinds of products are very comfortable or taste well in the advertisements, but they even have never used those products before? How can you image that some people feel a kind of vechile is large and safe, but they have never research any datas about the lagre and safe? Therefore, the examples quoted above demonstrate that some advertisements do not acctually make the products better than they really are, but just show by some people saying.
 
 What's more, the misleading in some advertisements is aonther and primary aspect that can be put here to defence my view. In order to see this point clearly, let me give you an instance: It is show in the advertisement that the price of a kind of product is very lower, however, the price does not contain some kinds of subsitutes. So if the cuntomers want to get the cheap price listed in the advertisement, the will not get the real good product finally. Hence, another equally improtant aspect is that the advertisements may mislead the customers rather than actually make the quality of the products enhance.
 
 Admittedly, it may be true that some advertisements introduce some high quality products. Nevertheless, this alone can not lend strong support to the view that the advertisements will make the qualities of the products be better. Obviously, as to me, the disadvantages of advertisements carry more weight than the advantages of advertisements, so the most striking conclusion is clear.
 
 In summary, taking into account all the reasons mentioned above, I can arrive an unshakeable that the advertisements do not make products much better than they really are.