Yes, personally I agree that successful people try new things and take risks rather than only doing what they already know how to do well. Thats mainly because we all know how to do a some stuff well. We are all special in something or another, it may be unique, but the fact that all of us are good at one thing is really - not unique. Hence, if everyone does what they are good at it, they will be reasonable successful, but more very successful or famous.
 
 People who like to try new stuff, who like to innovate or who try to take risks, are the ones who are daring enough to know that their ideas and plans might fail, but if they happen to go right - nothing stands between them and success.
 
 Here, I would like to state the example of the Wright brothers - the ones who are the mastermind behind us flying from any destination of the world to another such destination. Trains were common that day, travelling by ship and cars were also few of the more common and conventially traditional meens of transportation. However, the Wright brothers had an idea, which was outlandish at that point, but if it clicked, they would have success at their feet, and the entire world would know them for that. And thats precisely what they did. They put that idea into practise. Did their bit, and came out with a device that travels in air, and take u places in such short distances that were only dreamt of in that generation.
 
 Thats why people who take risks, who have the courage to think out of the box and are willing to try their ideas because they have confidence in them. By doing so, they take a chance of it failing or succeeding. Fail, and the critics simply say "we told you so..", succeed, and everyone is astonished, and hails you - quite rightly so.
 
 People only take risks because they have faith in their ideas and concepts. People who have faith in their ideas and concepts are generally very intelligent and smart people, innovative people. Hence they go ahead, take the risk, and bask in the glory if and when their ideas prevail and the entire world (as in this case) reaps the benefits of their courage, ideas and mainly - execution.
 
 Therefore,  I would like to conclude that yes, everyone can have a relative amount of success, but the ones who stand out for their success stories are the ones who take risks and try things which others do not dare dream off.