IDEAS  create  imagination, create creativity,create an independent perspective.The human mind is more likely adaptive to an idea than a fact.So, i agree with the statement"it is important for students to understand ideas and concepts than it is for them to learn facts"
 First of all, i would like to present a description of what ideas and facts are? Ideas are the outcomes of the human enthusiastic and exemplary brain processing, on the other hand facts are mere proved and universally accepted theories , led by the various and respected scientists, biologists, academicians, and  philosophers.
 Conceptualised thoughts and ideas present  an organised and extra ordinary image of the brain working with the human senses proving to be equally  creative. Ideas produce imaginations, which on a more groomed level arise creativity in an individual.Ideas create history,innovations. Concepts and ideas combined create new inventions while facts are confined to what they mean. Their is also liberality in extending an idea and concept. 
 For example the revolutuionaries and  celebrities like Mahatma gandhi, Martin luther king, Mother theresa, Nelson mandela and not to forget the great Adolf hitler,never relied on facts for getting a mass historical transformation and revolution, rather they all used their experienced and practical ideas to implement and bring changes at the global level.
 Ideas , though can be percieved in different ways.For a student, i think,, the most important way to relate to different aspects of his career is through his reasoning abilities and logical interpretations which are enhanced  outcomes of the basic idea he or she clings on to.Students , in the contemporary world like to be independent , practical and solution oriented. hence at times facts can help them by proving informative and a short cut to major solution but finally, its the ideas which help a student in his or her long term accomplishments.AN idea repetitively creates an ability to think beyond certain limits , imbibing certain aspirations in a student. To fulfill these creative and practical ideas and to implement them in his or her daily life , he or she can reach to greater heights of success.This mentioned success can be through an artistic idea, a technological idea, a philosophic idea, a mythical idea, or any creative instinct based idea.
 So, concuding i strongly believe that an idea or a concept brings out that extraordinary individual in a student which a proof dependent  fact cannot .