Almost everyone, from a seventeen years old teenager to an old man of 60, has the experience of trying new things and take risks. It seems to me, after 18 years of experience, that people who are successful are tend to challenge the traditional ideas and to take risks to obtain the success. And I'm going to approach my idea in the following three ways.
 
 First of all, new things bring a entirely different area to the businessmen which nobody ever entered before and therefore draw a lot of attention attention from people. The founder of Walmart, Sam Walton, is a good example of open a  new business area and made millons of money from it. Sam Walton created a lot of new ways to make his shops different. For example, he made the consumer be able to choose all the things they need first and pay for them together at the end of shopping. It is so convenient for constomers that people like Walton's way of seeling things and rush to his shops to shopping. Consequently, new ideas will give the businessman a new chance to exhibit its product in a different and attractive way.
 
 Equally important, new things can give people a drive. Since the idea never appears before, the person will be excited about it. This kind of emotion would motivates the boss as well as the staff. Compared to the old ways of accomplish a goal, taking a risk is more funning and amusing. In consequence, people may get more profits from doing a different way because they energetic and interested.
 
 Lastly, business people will be more and more difficult to get profits if they keep on doing it the same way. Since the old way is proved to be effective, more and more people will try to use the same way and as a result, they are not going to get a good profit. In contrast, challenging the old way of dealing with business will provide the person more chances to be profitable. Accordingly, people who wants to get an success should try to operate the business in a new way.
 
 There are several other reasons relevent to the problem under discussion while, unfortunately, I don't have enough time to explore them in detail. Neverthless, the above three points should in a large sense calrify my idea that successful people tend to try new ideas and challenge the old ways.