Understanding the ideas and concepts is exceptionally crucial when it comes to learning for it creates the foundations of learning. 
 Unlike facts, fully understood ideas and concepts are appliable and can possibly extend the knowledge. This is especially true when it comes to numerical fields of studies. Without understanding the basic concepts of countless laws of nature, it is impossible to modify or apply the concept and develop them into new ideas. For elementary example, kids generally learn multiplication by applying and expending their knowledge and concepts of addition. By adding same groups of numbers several times, the multiplication is understood and learned. Without understanding the basic concept and ideas of addition, the child may not follow the mere fact that three times two is equal to six. 
 Compared to understanding ideas and concepts, learning facts is a mere memorization. Facts has their beginning to the end. Facts can be specified to certain events that can be fully described. Facts are obtained to us by memorizing them. Ideas and concepts, however, cannot be fully described in words. They are understood through more sofisticated advanced features of our brain. If education was based largely based on learning facts, the students may not be able to develop and use their brains fully; rather, they would be trained to memorize than to understand and apply.
 Also, it is through understanding other various ideas and concepts that students learn to perceive different aspects and form their opinions. Through learning the different ideas of great thinkers such as Socrates or Confucious, which differ significantly, the students may see the broader view of the world of ideas. Learning facts however, cannot teach us or make us perceive various aspects of life or world as effectively as the variety of concepts does.
 It is not an exaggeration to say that understanding ideas and concepts form the most basic step to the education and knowledge. It is through fully understanding ideas and concepts that one may learn the different view of world and be able to modify their understandings to more advanced and developed concepts and ideas. Learning facts may be important in obtaining knowledges, however, it is understanding ideas that teaches you how to expand the knowledge.