When students study things which are new to them, students always at first to learn the facts, but what is more important for the students is to understand the ideas and concepts behind all the facts.
 First of all, if the students just only learn the facts, it is very easy for them to forget the facts after not long period of time. But if the the students can understand the ideas and concepts which lies down the facts, they will be easy to memorize most of the facts which they have learned. Or the students can also get some useful results themselves from the ideas and concepts which they totally understand, even if they maybe forget some  parts of the facts.
 Secondly, it is easier for the students to make applications to other areas when they grasp the deep ideas and concepts in one area. For example, the students learn the fact that air will flow from area with higher pressure to area with lower pressure, at the same time if they also understand that the ideas and concepts of this fact is the theory of air equilization. So they can easily make application to the car or train braking systems which are controlled by the high pressure air.
 Last but not least, if the students can understand the ideas and concepts lying down the facts  and they can sometimes also connect this ideas and concepts with other existing ideas and concepts, they will maybe make lots of spark on developing new ideas and concepts which is very useful for all the people. And actually, this is true for how our modern sciene and arts develop. Poeple always develop new ideas from old ideas and then applicate them into realities, then the process will make poeple understand our world more and more and make our life more and more splendid.
 Above to all the above, we can see that it is more important for students to understand ideas and concepts than it is for them to learn only the facts. This is because understanding the ideas and concepts not only let them easier remember the facts but also let them easier make applications of the ideas and concepts, even more, it will help students develop more new ideas and concepts.