Even if facts can change depending on the topic, it is very important for studens to learn them.In my opinion I would strongly desagree with this statement. Students always open their mind to learn no matter what is that they are learning. For a studen to make a good argument in a thesis or in a topic he or she will have to be able to have clear ideas and concepts, but at the same time learn some facts to support their answer. 
 
 As an example to identify whether or not a student is using his/her knowledge properly would be what happened on September 11. When the two planes crashed on the two commerce buildings in New York. Some ideas could give the student some understanding of what had occurred on that terrible moment, same as some concepts that most people would give to describe what happened. But, for a student to clearly analize this incident some facts will have to be given. 
 
 Facts are part of the history that we as human beings make everyday. No matter what happens around the world, facts will always be there to help us describe, understand and let us give our opinion. Not all the time students will have to learn facts as they will have to understand ideas and concepts, but in my opinion they might go together. 
 
 A good reason for these three things to be together is that; you can not understand and idea without having a good concept, you cannot describe a concept without having any facts that prof it and you won't be able to fully understand facts if you don't know how to develop ideas and use your concepts. Another example will be Leonardo Da Vinci. He had to support his ideas and concepts by having facts to understand. What would have happened if he put to much red colour in Mona Lizas's lips? There is a fact that deals with the consequences of our actions. Da Vinci would have had to think about scientist facts before starting his new inventions.
 
 The time will go by and we will all develop a new way of life. Our capacity to think will change for better and our way to study will have to change too. Until that time comes we must use our own resourses to learn and understand whatever it is that we are talking about. Always understand ideas and concepts and use your learned facts to make sure that what you are saying is right. Students always know what is the better way to learn.