Although travelling in a group led by a tour guide could have a great positive impact on the travellers experience and knowledge base, such perks are more that often diminished in comparison to the manifold problems and distractions that arise from such trips. It is true that tour guides, especially local ones, are more knowledgeable when it comes to their cities and provide deeper insights and plausible suggestions on what and where to see and do. Futhermore, in a group situation, being part of events and trips is usually more interesting and enjoyable and provides a great opportunity to meet other people and make new friends. However having a tour guide and being part of a group could hinder the overall experience of a city or place due to the numerous formalities and regulations they tend to emphasize. 
 With tour guides comes cast in concrete planning of every minute and hour of every day, week and month. Since tour guides are managing large groups of people it is very important to keep time and schedule for every aspect of the trip; from visiting monuments and tourist sites to dining and sleeping. Unfortunately, this would take away all the spontaneaity from the trip rendering it very systematic, dry and simply boring. Not knowing what you are going to do for the day, or sleeping in in another might be all that you need to rejuvenate yourself during your travels. 
 Paralleling such arguments and in response to the dynamics of group travelling, many other negative aspects usually arise. Having too many people would usually result in conflict; it is very hard to get consensus in the case of a decision making situation. Furthermore, it is the nature of a group to include people from diverse backgrounds and value systems. This would more than often surface at some point and cause some kind of disagreement that would result in a bigger complication that both parties would have to keep up with until the end of the trip. 
 Therefore, one can avoid such problems when travelling by choosing to travel with a couple of friends or family members instead of being part of large highly organized systematic group experirnce. Having a guide book or asking locals for suggestions would adequately substiture for a nagging tour guide. Now a person could be more spontaneas and not governed by rules and regulations on the only true break he/she might get per year. I believe I have strong convictions towards my opinions for the reason that I was part of a group trip that was led by a tour guide for too long period of time during one of my summer vacations and that certainly did not turn out to be a good experience.