I totally agree with the statement. Ads do "make products seem much better that they really are". That's the whole point, is it not? To entice customers, to lure them to buy something. To somehow convince the buying masses that life will be oh-so-much-better with such-and-such a product. To do that, advertisers and other assorted marketing types must make the product stand out from the plethora of goods out there in the market place. And what better way to do that than to try to convince Joe Q. Public that his life will be dramatically improved, in mysterious ways, if he buys widget A or gizmo B?
 
 Two examples that come to mind in that regard are car ads and cosmetics. Most car ads (there are exceptions, of course) do not focus on fuel economy or the quality of the seat belts. That would be factual. That would also be boring. Instead those ads show the car in a variety of dramatic settings -- the desert, rugged mountains, a curvy sea-side road -- going at high speed, and generally doing all kinds of things that a sane, normal, suburban driver would never do. And at the end of the commercial, in tiny letters at the bottom of the screen, you get the standard disclaimer: "Professional drivers on a closed course. Do not try this at home." If that is not 'making the product seem much better' than it really is, I don' t know what would be. But it makes the car look cool, and that's the whole point.
 
 The other, even more egregious example is provided by skin-cream ads. Specifically, those that claim, for instance, that one's skin will be "62% smoother" or "43% brighter" or somesuch nonsense. Of course, those ads never actually explain how one measures skin smoothness or brightness. Or what that "smoother" refers to. Smoother than sandpaper? Who knows. But using a number, and ideally featuring someone in a white coat, will give a serious, scentific aura to a product which would otherwise be yet another skin cream. Heck, if it makes my skin 62% smoother, it has got to be more than twice as good as the competing product that only claims a 30% improvement, right?