Advertisements are everywhere. On TV, in shopping malls and in the newspapers. And every brand and product seems to be the best in its category. But do the advertisors tell the truth or do they lie or exaggerate about their "perfect" products? This is exactly what the given statement is about.
 I agree with the statement, that most advertisements make products seem much better than they really are.
 For example: laundry detergents. 
 Every brand claims to be the best product, to make your clothes look like new, to remove every single stain. They compete in comparing their products to each other. And their product is always better than the one of the concurrents. But in my belief this is not true. Some advertisements say, that they don"t bleach your clothes, that they still look like new after 30 wash circles. But no detergent can hold this statement.
 Another example is shampoo. If you would trust the advertisements, every shampoo can make your hair shiny, strong and even not greasy anymore. But this is so untrue. Shampoos often don"t hold the consumer"s expectations. 
 My last example are cigarettes. In advertisements cigarettes seem to make you feel free, that they make you happy when you are sad. They even make you feel like in another world. But is this really true? Doesn"t it have any disadvantages or even dangers?
 Of course it does! Only a few years ago no cigarette advertisement said, that cigarettes affect your health and that they can cause cancer that sometimes ends in death.
 Today they warn their customers in advertisements and even on cigarette boxes, but it is usually written in a very little size and so often ignored or not seen by consumers. Some consumers take these warnings ironically.
 In conclusion, you always have to be aware that advertisors try to sell their product to earn a lot of money. That"s why they sometimes exaggerate or even lie what their products are able to do. The and if so, it makes  You should be careful and you should buy different products to compare them to each other and to think about how they can harm yourself or others. Only then, you will find out which products are the best for you or which products you shouldn"t even buy because of their harm.