The "understand" function is an asset when it comes to learn something. Learning without understanding can bring people to a simple repetition or reproduction of what they have learn. Robots, and apes used during experiments learn ths way.
 The Pavlov experiment when a dog learn to be prepared for food-time instinctively is a great example to show that learning do not require much effort. Human being have more faculty to develop by understandig, though they still have to learn.
 Understanding a concept developed in class help the student to relate this concept to similar situations where the concept was applied. The student, in ths case, is able to review the concept in any kind of situation and is free from his books theory for this part of the subject. For example if someone do not understand the concept of what is the natural purpose of having sex, this person might be interested by the fact that having sex just provide him a personal satisfaction. On the other hand, by understanding the concept, he would know that he is not the only one being pleased, that the sex can bring a child, and we can go further if we consider the psychological, and physical dimensions of a human.
 As for the example, the student might understand the concept, learn better the subject, be able to transmit the idea to others, and find more example for explanation of what he have learn. In addition without frequent repetition the student will be able to recall the concept and then the facts more faster than a simple fact learning (view as a repetitive exercise).
 It is difficult to visualize a fact that you have never learned, or experienced from a book. Because more academic books present concept first, then examples; It would be more easy for a student who understand the concept to create an example of his own and go further in the lesson that one who only lern the examples. At the test the one who learn is more likely to answer wrong a lot of question related to the concept he never understood.
 History has shown that researches are developed by people who understood the concepts left by others. They devevelop the concepts, and then use experiments and examples to support and verify their view. As students are supposed to study the matters they are faced to, it is more important for them to "understand ideas and concepts than it is for them to learn facts."