Yes most and many advertisements make products much better than they really are. I believe making advertisements it is what a company do to make money, to have success. There is many sports shoes company out in the market right now, but do you really think a pair Nike shoes coasts $110. But if you look into it, why a pair shoes coasts so much, because is a advertisment so Nike make their shoes look better than everyone else's. At the end of each day, what the company really want, they want to have success, they want to be on the top, that want to make money and they would do what ever they can to get to the top. Yes, I agree that most advertisements make products seen much better than they really are.
 A pair nike shoes don't really coast $110, they coast something like $5 to $10. On top of all the taxes, import, export. It come out somewhere around $80. And then, the bussiness wants to make money so, they add another $30 on there, it come out $110. What kind of advertisements Nike use there. They make the shoes very expensive, it make the shoes look longlasting, better, or can make you go faster or jump further. The price convience you is a pair good shoes. If a pair shoes come in $10, you would first think, wow it is cheap, but then you would question how long the shoes will last, and why they made it so cheap. You see what advertisements did there, because is so expensive that it convience you that is a pair of good shoes.
 There is lots competition out there between company and company. They all want one thing, and that is make money. Their products could be the same, but the differences is judge what kind or type of advertisements did the company made. A good advertisements can put you ahead of the game and a bad one might just screw you over. So that is why when you watach on TV, there is famous people advertis for the company, hope you would want to but them. They are all doing one thing, to beat their competition.
 You don't start a company and hope the company will faile. You want to have success. You want to be on the top. And I believe that is why companies focus on advertisements so much, because once you get to certain level, everyone's products are the same, they only differences will be who done the extra work. Advertisements is an extra work, and this extra work and bring your company to the top.
 I agree with advertisements make products seem much better than they really are. But company have to do advertisment, that is the only way they can beat their competitions and have success.