Althogh, some people think that students need only to learn the facts, I totally to agree with understanding the concept and the ideas. There are many reasons for which students need to understand the basic idea.
 
 One of the reasons is that the students will only use the concept and the ideas from which they have been taught.  Understanding the concept is more important than the facts in that the concept can be involved in any suitable application. For example, a student in a physics class will propably need to understand the formula before he or she wil be able to solve the problems. 
 
 
 Another reason is that when the students learn some facts, it is easy to forget them. This is beacuse they need to be memorized. Also, every information that is stored in the brain can be lost if it is not used repeatedly. Therefore, understanding is much easier than memorizing.
 
 An Aditional reason is that understanding is more effective in developing new thing than learning facts. To illustrate that, supposed a student in a physics college tried to memorize the content of the course without giving any care to understanding it. The student surely will find a lot of troubles in his life if he or she tries to prove a new theory realtive to the information that have been taught. Hence, If the student understood the courses without memorizing the content, the student will be able comperhend with the life challenges. 
 
 One final reason is that facts does not provide any thinking. It is either right or wrong. On the other hand, understanding the concept can be duplicated to obtain some other new concepts. For example, the conflict between the relativity and the laws of motions cannot be solved unless both of them are understood. Once the concept is understood, the solution for such a conflict can be solved. Which gave rise into a new concept called " The String Theory".
 
 In conclusion, understanding the ideas is much easier than just memorizing the facts that are concret and non-negotiable.