I agree with the statement of succussful people taking risks. I believe that not changing approaches from old ways is not always the best thing. It causes people not to open up their minds to new things, which leads to slower progression. One needs to try new things so that he or she could "evovle" to become better. Examples of individuals took in new things are Shingo Suetsugu and Ichiro Suzuki. Suetsugu became the first Japanese to medal in the sprinting at the world competition. He was able to do so beacuse he took a different approach to running. Another person is Ichiro Suzuki. Ichiro is one of the greatest baseball in the history. His approach to baseball has been very much different from the others. His batting style is very distinct, which shows his acceptance of new things. It was great for them for taking in new approach for running, otherwise they might not have been successful.
 Shingo Suetsugu became a world class sprinter after he took a different approach than in the past. At first, this new style of running did not show much improvements. Normally, people would doubt this new way because they do not see any benefit, but Suetsugu did not do that, he kept going with the new way. Through trainings with the new method and modifying it, his times slowly but surely started to improve. As a result, he was able to compete at a world class level and get the bronze medal.
 Another individual of a successful person is also an athlete, Ichiro Suzuki. Ichiro is now one of the greatest baseball player. How did he become such a great player? This is due to the fact that he tried new things; he did not just follow what others were doing. Normally, people bat with their dominant side when they are young, but Ichiro did not do that. He believed that left side, the non-dominate side for him, would be better because it was closer to first base. In addition, he started to move toward first base as he hit, which was also new. With these new approaches his hittings improved. Now he has become a successful player.
 People often do not want to take risks because they fear that it may cause harm to them. But in order to be successful, one must take risks. As in the examples stated previously, those that took risks became successful. It is the unkown that makes someone different and be successful.