It is often discussed in the media what factors are responsible for the success of an individual. Many people believe that successful people try new things and are more willing to take risks rather than only doing what they are already capable to do. In my opinion this point of view is correct because only people who take certain risks have the chance to excel in their career.
 To begin with, an individual can only grow personally by taking certain risks. For example, I did an internship in New York last year and could not have profited more from this experience. Before flying to the US I was feeling insecure because I did not know what was about to happen during my internship. I was worried because of the new language, the working environment and a possible culture clash. Indeed, the first time in the United States had been difficult for me but every week was easier that the one before. After completing my internship, I can wholeheartedly say that taking this risk has been the best decision of my life so far. I am much more confident now and have gained personal and intercultural skills that will help me in my future career.
 Furthermore I am convinced that every new experience has a definite impact on an individuals' development. Even if an experience seems to be negative at the beginning or a person does not succeed immediately, I am sure that these negative events only make a person stronger than before. By analyzing the reasons for failing a person is able to work on certain individual weaknesses. 
 In addition to that, I want to point to the concept of learning. For centuries it is widely accepted that people have to learn in order to become better in what they are doing. Not only in school, college or university classes but also by attending work-shops in the professional life people are constantly forced to make new experiences and learn additional aspects about different issues if they want to be successful in life.
 In conclusion, I absolutely agree that one characteristic of successful people is based on their willingness to try out new things rather than sticking to the things they already know. Taking risks is fundamental if you want to succeed in life. Only by facing challenges an individual will be able to grow as a person.