Did  you go the most famous market in Taiwan? Did you eat the best local food in Japan? I think that you might be asked these kind of questions after you travel somewhere. Many people like to travel around the world now. They want to have different experience of different countries. They also want to see and eat the special things in every country. However, some people like to travel by themselves; some people like to travel in a group led by a tour guide. I like to travel, and I have traveled many countries. In my opinion, I like to travel in a group led by a tour guide. The reasons why I like to travel in a group led by a tour guide are meeting new friends, saving time, and knowing more local things.
 First of all, I like to travel in a group led by a tour guide because I can meet new friends in my group. When we travel in the group, we can meet many people who we never have met before. We can get know each other during the trip. I have many good friends who I met during the trip. I still contact with them all the time. Some times we plan to travel somewher together. If I did not travel in the group, I could not meet them.
 Second of all, I like to travel in a group led by a tour guide because they can arrange the time for us. When we have trip, it usually take a week. We might not have enough time to look over everything in a week by ourselves. We might waste a lot of time on looking for place. However, if we can travel in the group led by a tour guide, they can arrange the time for us. We can visit as many place as we can. We will not waste our time on looking for the place.
 Last of all, I like to travel in a group led by a tour guide because they can interduce many local culture, food, building, and many things else for us. You might have some experience about when you visit some countries, you do not know what can eat and where you can go. I have this kind of experience, too. When the first time I went to Japan, I went alone. I did not know where I should go and what the good food I can eat. I wasted my time and money on eating fast food in Japan. However, when the nex time I went to Japan with the group led by a tour guide, I had a good time in Japan. I went to many famous places in Japan. I also ate a lot of goog food in Japan. All of them, I would not know if I did not go with the group led by tour guide.
 In the conclusion, I think every one wants to have fun when they travel somewhere. I think if we can travel in a groups led by a tour guide, we can have good time, and will not waste our time and money. We also can meet many new friends during the trip.