We are living in a modern world filled with advertisements. All advertisements try to show the magic of their products. However, I have little blief in what the advertisements have told me. I think most advertisements make products seem much better than they really are!
 
 The goal of advertisements determines their poor credit. All the advertisements are aiming to attract as many customers as they can. And how can they obtain this achivement? They give misleading and uncredible information of their products. For example, some healthy food will claim its body-building function in the advertisement. But few gives any convincing statistical state or trustworthy survey on how it makes effort on people who have used it. We may see a set of comparison between a fat girl and a thin girl. But how can we believe it's just the effection of the food? Since advertisements used for commercial use, most of them will not provide sientific proof.
 
 Another interesting phenomena is that famous actresses and actors often appear on the screen to advertise a product. Of course, the  actresses and actors are attractive and beautiful. By these kinds of advertisements, we attach the products to these beautiful imagines. But the truth is, how many celebrities really use the products they recomment? They are just invited to say a sentences, show a pose, and etc.. It misguides the costumer to some extent. Costumers will connect the products to the good imagines in their minds. Actually, the products are not so perfect as the advertisements said or the customer think.
 
 The reason why there exists such a huge gap between the products in the advertisements and in the facts is because there isn't effective norm to regulate advertisements. No specific policy has given to restrict the advertisements. In fact, exaggeration becomes one of the keywords in advertisements. I have already disappointed to find a real product in any advertisement. Only when our goverment and media realize the importance to supply the audiance unbiased and true facts instead of the beautiful lies in advertisements, can we choose the products without doult following the instruction of advertisements.
 
 So, when you choose something to buy, do not trust what the advertisements told you. Turn off the television when you see an unblievable product in an advertisement again. A clever customer should try to evaluate and judge a product by him/herself.