I believe that marketing and advertisement have started to play an interesting role in our lives.  The number of products available in the market today is increasing very fast, and therefore manufacturers are racing with each other to make their brand names and products known to people.  The question is why does a possible customer remember one product, on the other hand forgets the other?  The answer to this question is trivial, somehow the possible customer is convinced that (this can also be on the subconscious level) one of the products is better than the other, and therefore remembered only the better one.  This gives advertisers all around the world motivation to show the products better than they are, because they need to show that that particular product is the best.
 
 The first proof of this can be found in advertisements that present a setting that is not or cannot be real.  This could be a beach so amazing that it can only be a painting, or a photograph modified using software.  I think that the setting is the key to making people believe that what you are offering is something better than they have, because it is being displayed in an environment that is better than yours.  Another example of this might be the people in the advertisements, most of the women in it are very beautiful and most of the men in it are very handsome.  What an advertiser is trying to achieve by using nearly flawless characters is to convince us that we can be like them, all we need to do is to buy that new cellular phone.
 
 The worst case is of course when an advertiser claims that a product can do something that it cannot in the average.  Most of the advertisements only give information about the best cases, an extreme example could be that how a tooth paste made somone's teeth as white as pearls from the ocean, in a clinical experiment.  During the time interval, this information is being transmitted to our brains, a fast subtitle written in a tiny font size indicates that in this experiment some kind of chemical was also used to amplify the effects of the mentioned tooth paste.
 
 This situation will continue to become a bigger problem as long as new products are introduced to the global and local markets everyday, because this will increase the motivation for advertisers to do so.