I agree with understanding ideas and concerpts are more important for students because the ideas and concepts help us to understand the facts. 
 
 When we learn something in our class or on textbook, the first thing comes up is the theory or concerpt. Then professor will explain the concerpt. Later on, he gives students some examples to help us to understand it, Why professor or textbook always gives us a theory, then provides some facts to explain the theory?
 
 After we learn a concept, we need to totally undersatnd it. So we need an example, even some facts to explain the concept. It is a easy way for students to learn. 
 
 Second, after we understand the ideas, we always can use the concepts to expalin other things. We can use the ideas that we learn in diffrent ways. For example, when we use a camera to take some pictures. We understand the relationship between light and curve mirror. We can make a simple camera base on our knowledge. 
 
 Third, the fact can not reflect everything. Everyone gives a respones differently because people are different from their family background, education and friends. They have vary opinions about  a same fact. On the other hand, ideas and concepts are always the same, they never chnage.   
 
 Finally, facts can tell us what have happened in the world. But if we don't have some ideas or concepts, what can we deal with some problems? If we have some acknowledge, when some facts come up, we can explain how they happen. Likes, everydays news talks about the Federal Reserves raises the interest rate and a bloom of an expansion in US. We know the fact but we don't know why it happen, how it is going to be. Concepts help us to understand more about our surrounding.
 
 In my conclusion, I think understanding ideas and concepts is more important for students to learn. They can have basic concepts, then they have abilities to explain about things. Moreover, they can use their knowledge to becaome their skills. Then concepts vary not depend on different people. And ideas and concepts help to understand the facts.