It is true that nowadays, school gives out more work for students to do. And most of the students are packed with school work that they do not have spare time to do other things. Even though it is true, I still believe young people are putting enough time to help their communities. 
 As for my school, an average students spend about four to five hours on their homework, and it depends on the level of the difficulties of the courses they took. But, even though our homework takes up a great time, many students from my school still work for community services. My school ends at 3 pm everyday, but we have activities that is offer after school, such as community services. And most of the students are "forced" to do community services. There's no rules set on the minimum hours worked per year, but for those people who wish to get into good college, would do community service everyday. Because we know, colleges care about community services. 
 Of course, there are people who help out in their communities just because of their interest. You might ask, "why would people enjoy doing community services when there are better alternatives such as watching movies and chilling out with your friends?" The reason you would have asked the question is because you have not found a community service that you can enjoy doing. I have been persistantly going to Leprosy Home everyweek. I worked about seventy hours every year. College Application might be one of the reason I visit there, but the main reason that keeps me spending so much time there is because of the residents there. Even though most of the residents had never gone to school before, there're things that I can learn from them, such as, the way to live and look at your life. They are disabled, and they have been through all sorts of difficulties, and while chatting with them, they'll share their storys of how they'd gone through all the difficulties. And that's why there are people who enjoy helping out the communities - they learn many things that they don't usually learn from school.
 May be, around the world, young people do not give enough time helping their communities. But from the environment I live in, I see people doing communities almost everyday. Some of them might be forced by their parents or college application, but those people are still the same as those who do communities with interest. Either way, people are helping out the community. And I think putting an extra two hours everyday on top of the five hours homework is a decent amount of time to put into the community.