Advertisements are today parts of our life. We can see them everywhere, on television, in the street, on highways, in our mailboxes. It is the best way to make people know a new product and to sell it. But, in my opinion, most advertisements make products seem better than they really are.
 
 An advertisement is studied by a company in order to present a new product. The obvious goal of advertising is to make the product appear ideal and appropriate for the custumer. To sell shower gel, for instance, the advertisers will tell you that it smells like nature and that you will feel really relaxed by using it. In most cases, the customer will think that this product is appropriate for him through this completely subjective presentation. Advertisements are playing also with customers and making them dream. 
 
 On advertisements, only the qualities of the product are mentionned. This way, the customer cannot really imagine what the possible disadvantages are. For instance, in France, Suchard, a chocolate maker, made beautiful advertisements for its new product. They were so well done that you wanted to taste one immediately after having seen the advertisement. But the composition of this new kind of chocolate was not specified and this was the negative aspect of the product, after testing it. Natural sources were rare and the global taste was artificial and chemical. 
 
 Furthermore, on advertisements, the customer only see the product; he cannot take it in his hands and touch it. For clothes it is a great problem. When you look at pictures where a new dress is presented, you cannot touch the material and see the right color. Light plays a major role in clothes'advertising and it may give the customer a false impression on colors. It is also impossible to see if the global quality of the product is good or not. Because of this, the customer often imagine what he cannot see and touch. That is the major problem of advertising. We naturally imagine what the qualities could be, without having any evidence.
 
 In conclusion, I would say that advertising is made in order to sell a product. In this way, it only present the good aspects of the product. But, if these advertisements are making products seem better than they really are, cutomers are also responsible for it, because they use too much their imagination. As a consequence, they are often disappointed when they see the real product in front of them in the store.