Trying to do your best is what sociey asks you. So you could improve the knowledges and skills of the country. Therefore you have to imagine and to create new concept to be said succesful. Hence to know if it is useful to take risks and tr new things, you have to answer those questions. Firstly, if you do your job good but not improve it what would be the result? Secondly, if you refuse to take decisions because of risks that implie would you give a chance to your company to survive? And eventually, if you become successful, would you stop there without trying to do once more time your best?
 
 Improving your job, your knowlegde and trying to invent new processes, or new way to work  are manners to get a better job, to grow up the social scale. Thus is is required be becme a successful people to reach to top of this scale. For instance, Einstein become successful afer having develop his theory of relativity which was such a revolution, such a new things at the time.
 Then succesful people have to design new concepts in order to be recognized by the sociaty a successful.
 
 Improving knowledges is not the only way to be admitted among successful people. People such as Gustave Eiffel took risks. M.Eiffel had to accept to hear many criticises about his tower. Afterward, he was congratulate abou this construction which has become on of the more relievant French building.
 Therefore taking risks such as many architects have done seems a good way to succeded in his field.
 
 But what will you do once you are becm successful? u stop and leave of your patterns, not your ae encourage by your relatives and working staff to go on. Hence, you will take more risks and proving yourself you could be more innovating.
 
 To conclude, I believe that people have to be creative new,not to be afrad of danger if they want to develop their field of specialisation. However from my point of view, peple who manage in their work have to take care not to go to far, and to be awared that skills of every humans have limits.