It's the "eternal strife" between the seller and the customer.
 
 As we walk through the streets of a city today and just look around, if we just give a glance to a newspaper or a magazine, if we turn on the TV for a few seconds, what we see is that we live in a culture made for a great part of advertisements.
 What they are is easy to define: short, colourful, attracting and effective (or suppose to be so) messages, calling our attenction to product of the most various sort.
 What's behind their glittering surfaces?
 That's the question that amazes and sometimes confuses the customer and that he goes on wondering for some time.
 Unfortunately, the answer is that often what we find is not what we expected to handle and we have to conclude that teh single product is not such a good staff as it was supposed to be.
 For example, some years ago a famous industry had for some time its car advertised by a short movie, in which the car was running on the waters around Mount S. Michel, France. It was really impressive, but as the car came out in the market, it revealed to be inferior to the standard of the house.
 A field especially affected by misleading advertisement is that of food stuff: deli presented as prodigious or incredibly tasty have often not safe origin, or not good taste. 
 The reason that hides behind all of that, you can easily track out: marketing is one of the finest and most expensive business of our time. Marketing is going to look more and more like an art, whose task is not to inform the customer about real qualities of the product, but to make the best of it, to describe it in the most imaginative and intriguing way.
 It's also important to remember that a great amount of money is invested in trade by single or group sellers and the effort to have effective advertisements is normally equal to the productive effort.
 As it happens normally in human life, is possible to find a glance of good just adopting the right perspective: about advertisement, maybe ther will be a time when we should not ask if they are relieble or not, if they tell us the truth or an amount of lies. Just look or listen to the stories and enjoy the glittering tale!