Studying can be a great pain for many students, and it is true that many doubt the purpose of learning throughout the course. I believe learining is an important process in which I can incorporate more information and enrich myself, therefore I believe studying in general is important. However, I believe understanding the basic ideas has to come before learning facts, which is usually more simple and interesting.
 For instance, I have know many friends who do not have strong base for the mathematic: they have difficulties in solving basic calculation such as multiplication with fractions. Also, when a student has difficulty in understanding, it is likely to cause her to lose interest in study. Thus, lack of the basic knowledge may lead students to lose the will to study. When those who lack the basic knowledge learn facts, those facts may not seem so appealing because they are not familiar.
 However, learning facts can be more entertaining. And moreover, I believe its effect is the most apparent in the study of history. For example, I strongly believe that I would not be so interested in studying history, or World War II in particular, if it was not for the background knowledge I have gained throughout the life. Because I have seen a documentary about Anne Frank and Holocaust, the information provided in the classroom seem a lot more interesting and familiar, giving me a will to learn more about the subject.
 Although some people may not realize the great importance of the presence of interests, I believe students should persue strong base for each subjects through understanding the ideas step by step. I believe interests are greatest factor which would bring changes to the students' attitudes, and more importantly, their will to study. And I do enjoy knowing and persuing trivias. However, as a student and for my ability to study pleasantly, I believe it is more important to have a great understanding in the genral ideas rather than learning facts by bits, for collection of the facts is less likely to make sense. But I would like to stress that understanding of general ideas and learning facts can be interdependent for enjoyable study.