The answer to this question must take into consideration different complex matters. 
 
 First of all one need to clarify the concept of "their community". I would suggest that nowadays young people rightly consider a group of peers to be "their community". They consider themselves part of a group of people with similar aspirations, cultural interests, ways of acting and manners of speech. 
 
 The same sort of close community connection is of course part of the way of living in a modern society: People generally do not relate so much to the entire society or nation but have their preferred community chosen from a pluralisitic set of options. Once they have  joined their community of choice they tend to spend a lot of time advancing the interests of their community and fostering solidarity and friendship among the members of that particular community. From this point of view young people act in very similar ways: They feel attached to a group of friends or to a speficic life style. Once they are attached they equally spend a lot of time supporting and helping that particular community they are member of. In that sense I would be inclined to disagree with the statement. 
 
 The problem is thus not so much that young people do not give enough time to helping their community but rather that one might disagree on what should count as their community in the first place. It is often the case that adults do not like to see young people relate to their peers and would like to be an active part of a larger community that includes the adults. While this desire might be understandable from the point of view of the adults - even if only for the simple fact that this would probably give adults more power to control young people - I do not believe it to be in the best interest of young people. The best way for them to learn the meaning of community solidarity is by experiencing solidarity in a group they truly and almost naturally feel attached to. Helping the community is not something a young person should be forced to do but something he or she should come to see as providing mutual advantages. Eventually most people will realiye that the solidarity the y enjoy in their specific community can only have true value and meaning if the community of peers is part of a larger cmmunity called society which eventually will need some support from the members as well.