Is it important for students to understand ideas and concepts? of course it is we cannot deny that studying a subject and learning this subject does not necessary imply that you undestood the whole idea and the whole concept. Sometimes might be better to understand the whole sense of a lecture at your first read for example instead of reading it more and more times to learn every single word of it and being able to repeat it in front of the professors during an oral examination! I would rather look like a computer machine repeating binary codes without understanding why and what it is really doing! I think that to better comprehend this idea, comptures might be the perfect example. The whole concept is that scientist built the machines to help people perform their jobs easily simplifing complex procedures using software based products. The machine is able to perform all this complex operations in a very short time because somebody programmed it to reapeat a matrix of data and multiplexing it in different ways, the machine is able to reproduce always the same actions but is definitively not able to understand why is performing this action, is not able to learn from his errors, is not able to modify automatically his behaviour. That's mainly why I think any sort of attempt to learn facts for what they actually are whitout understanding what is the whole idea or concept behind them is totally unuseful for the student.
 Once again if the student doesn't understand the concept he might not be able to modify his beahviour has the example of the computer machine, because without understanding behaviour modification will not occur. You can learn from you errors and mistakes, a teacher can correct you if you are doing something wrong, people can learn from their own mistakes, but if they keep on replicating what everyonelse is doing and repeat what the manager or the boss says they will always be stucked in their original, let's say "behaviour" no behaviour modification will occur, thus preventing them to emerge and to become powerful or to express and sell their own ideas.