From the beginning of industrial revolution, producers always wanted to sell their products more and as the time passed they saw that one of the best way of doing this is advertising their products. Although, the goal of advertising should be demostrating the features a particular product, sellers use advertisements to increase their sales by exaggerating it and make people want that particular product. Therefore, I strongly believe that advertisements make products or services seem better than they really are.  
 Making people desire a product is a complicated issue but what advertisers realised about this is that the customer do not  have to know what the product exactly is.  Many people may be wrong about what they are buying because of advertisements or  they may have a very little idea about what they liked to buy because of advertisements. As an example of this, the advertisements of big companies can be given. In that type of advertisements, vey little information about the product is given whereas, the focus of the advertisement is mainly the trademark itself. Although, people do not understand anything about what the product is or for what purposes they can use it, because of the effectiveness of the advertisement, the customers may chose to buy the product. 
 Another point to note is that  the advertisements of certain products such as tobacco, alcohol or ,say, fast food make these  products seem not only a little better than what they really are. It is a well-known and proved fact that all these products may be tremendeausly harmful for humans (in excessive use) in long terms however by the help of advertisements, these products succeed to seem well to customers. 
 The use of famous characters in advertisements is also another way of producers to make their products seem well to the customers. This way is also a short-cut for producers because it helps them to convience people about the goodness of their products. As to prove my idea, consider the advertisements in which the characters are well remembered and the message is forgotten. This is only a small trick that advertisers use to persuade people about a non-existing state-of-the-art product. 
 Consequently, I am a strong fan of supervision on advertisements. This should not be understood as sensorship on free speech but the advertisements should be prepared in a way that people are not misleaded about the goodness of the product.  By this supervision, I will be able to change my idea about advertisements because right know I believe that advertisements channel people toward products in unfair ways.