In the following I'd like to explain my opinion to the statement: "It is better to have a broad knowledge of many academic subjects than to specialize in one specific subject."
 When you talk to people about famous personalities like e.g. about the german inventor Albert Einstein, you often get to hear that he was good in what he did, but he totally failed in other things. For instance he did develop a great theory in math, but he had difficulties in getting a diploma because he was really bad in all the other subjects when he went to school.
 This is one example for someone who did specialize in one specific subject and therefore did not have a broad knowledge of many other academic subjects. In my opinion the statement at the top is both, half right and half wrong. 
 On the one hand I think that the statement is right. For example it's much more interesting when you know a lot of things about a lot of different subjects. It's easier for you to have a conversation with other people or to be accepted in society. As you can see with most nobel-prize winners; they all are very clever in what they do, but since they are so specialized in what they do, they most of the time don't have a lot of friends to share their knowledge with (because it's way too difficult for "normal" people to understand what they are talking about) or even worse don't even have their own family. The specific knowledge of a subject makes them outsiders, and often outsiders are outlawed until they make a new invention or win any prizes.
 On the other hand I don't agree with the statement that it's better to have a broad knowledge of many academic subjects than to specialize in one specific one, because without persons who specialize in one specific subject there would not be progress in the world. We would still be living in caves and using stones to light a fire if there hadn't been someone who specialized in the subject of how to light a fire without first searching for firestones, and then hoping for good luck to make the firestones work properly to finally cook a meal. There also would not be any help for people with a dangerous disease if there hadn't been clever people who specialized in medicine and found out how to heal a bad disease like cancer. They would not have been as successful as they are if they hadn't just specialized in this one specific subject.