Some people might say sussessful people try new things and take risks rather than what they already know how to do well. As far as I am concerned,I agree with this opinion for the following reasons: successful thing is not coming from ordinary things. In addition, people who are ready to take the risks and dangerous things could grow up perfectly.
 
 First, In my opinion, there is no easy way to success  all over the world. In this regard, people have to work hard try to find something new in their daily lives. For example,  people who want to be successful should find extraordinary thing in everywhere. In contrast, people  who are want to go easy way and follow others could be just a normal person. Although meaning of success is depends on the person, but  all the successful thing our life is from hard work and process. For these reasons, I think successful people always try to do new things they didn't experienced and take risks. 
 
 Second, from my experience, people who are already success must have confident and leadership. In this society, they are all kinds of people in the real life. most of them are members, few others are    the leader of their companies or factories. For example, Mr. Lee, the CEO of well known company SAMSUNG, has tremendous thinking and vision. I don't know much about him, but I know he changed his way of made his company with the whole new progress being against the ordinary ways. At fist, before the time he was not a CEO, SAMSUNG was just a second group in the country, but after he promoted to CEO, he renovated hiring system, factory system, everything new to the people. Later then, SAMSUNG turned to successful group in the country, and even abroad. With this reasons, I stronly agree that successful people try to new things although it has follow with the risks.
 
 In conclusion, I stronly agree this opinion with successful people try new things and take all the risks rather than only doing what they alrealy know how to do well for the tease reasons: there is no way to success easily, and  people who are ready to face the risks can survive and live successfully. Thank you for reading.