To my mind the statement at hand is a very important issue to discuss. From my perspective, it seems reasonable to say that successful people try new things and take risks rather than doing what they already know how to do well.
 
 The first point to support my view is that only if new ideas are put into practice, new fields of studies and areas of business can start to exist and emerge. Suppose, Bill Gates had not taken the risk to start his business at the start of his career. If he had not taken the step to try a new thing and to take up a business risk, he now would not have been the famous and rich person that he actually is in the presence. Due to these circumstances (his status and the amount of money that he has earned), Bill Gates is now considered to be a very successful business person. Thus, he is a perfect example to show how trying new things can determine the success of a person.
 
 Another argument to support the statement is the fact that in today's highly competitive market it is not enough anymore to be good at what you are doing. Competitors who will offer the customers better and more innovative services will steal the customers from businesses which are only good at what they are doing but which are not improving and innovating their services. An example of this can be seen in the fast food industry. If Mc Donalds had not reacted to the customers' wish for healthier products, Mc Donalds would have lost its own customers to its competitors. Therefore, one can see that successful business people continously think how to excel and how to outcompete their competitors. This, though, they can often only do by offering new services and goods to the clients.
 
 When trying new things, the risk taken does not only include a downside but in particular an upside potential. Thus, when talking about riks of trying new things, one also talks about the great outcomes that a new idea can generate. As successful people are usually convinced that their new idea will be successful, the upside potential is very high in contrast to a low downside potential. Successful people, one can add, try new things and take risks considering the potential outcomes beforehand. 
 
 To sum it up, the above mentioned arguments support the statement that successful people try new things and take risks rather than doing what they are already good at doing. One could add to the statement that successful people consider the risk to be taken beforehand and thus decrease the downside potential of trying new things. This combination makes people successful.