It is a very common idea that there are two different ways of what can be called 'learning', for a student in a school. The first way is to learn about a subject by understanding how it works and the concepts that are below it. The other way is more mecanical and implies learning facts about this subject.
 I agree with the statement, that is I think that in most situations, when one has to choose, he had better to understand the ideas and concepts than just learn facts. There are lots of arguments in favor of it. 
 First, in most situations the facts are not repeatable. For example in scientific issues, the basic interest of general rules and equations is that they can be transposed and used in the most possible contexts. And to use these equations, one has to understand them. Learning facts in a scientific field, like for example the resulting speed of an object, does not give any clue about the result of an experiment in another context.
 Secondly, the process of learning is also important. Learning facts stimulates only memory and does not give a very secured way of learning. On the contrary, by trying to understand concepts and ideas, a student stimulates other parts of his mind, starts of process of real thinking. That kind of process is more likely to be memorized and to be useful to the student, as it is an active way of learning.
 Third, a student should not only care about immediate issues such as having a good mark at an exam. Indeed university and schools should be a place where students can develop their skills, their ability of thinking, analysing situations, etc. Eventhough focusing more on understanding than on learning facts can be less efficient in the short time, it should be more efficient in the long term. In addition it is also very useful in life to know how to analyse situations and understand them.
 Yet there are naturally exeptions. And the statement may not be true in every situation. For example, History or Geographic studies require mainly to learn facts and it is this learning which determines the level, the skills of someone in that field. Let us say that even though learning facts is sometimes very important, there is always the need to be able to use them, and to understand a specific situation.