I disagree with the statement that in twenty years there will be fewer cars in use than there are today for several reasons stated in the following. 
 
 One first of all has to find out reasons that could lead to a situation in which fewer cars are needed or allowed. Therefore, one has to imagine conditions, making the use of a car for a great percentage of people unnecessary or more expensive. In the next step one has to ask whether those conditions are likely to become reality in twenty years.
 
 The car is todays most used transportation verhicle. Nearly every person in the first world ones a car to get to work, go shopping or visit friends etc. what could make them not needing their cars anymore? 
 One reason could be that a more effecitve method of mass trasnportation is invented which offers the same kind of flexibility, comfort and security and which is cheaper. Such an invention and the necessary development of the transportation method would take years at least. At the moment no such invention is in sight. Therefore I do not believe that it can be accepted in twenty years.
 Another reason could be that pollution becomes unstandable so that Governemnts prohibit to use cars. As the automobile lobby is very powerful and has a great influence on politicts I cannot imageion such a prohibition either, although it may be desireable.
 Concluding, I cannot see conditions in twenty years under which an alternitave to the automobile will have been accepted.
 
 Furthermore, there are other reasons that make a decrease of cars even more improbable: the industries of India and especially of China as well as of some states in eastern Europe prosper. The explosion of new demands and the increasing wealth of the people opens a complete new group of clients to the automobile industry. During the last years the production entered a new stage as lots of chinese people bought cars. Millions of people of the chinese or indian society belonging to lower social classes will buy cars for the first time ever. Therefore, the number of cars will increase during the next years.
 At the same time, there is no reason I can recognize that could prevent the first world countries from producing cars. Especially the USA have a great need for automobiles as there are huge distances to overcome, especially in the inner country. The Germans will not stop buying and using cars either. Eventhough some more people might use mass transportation methods in the future.
 
 Because of the stated reasons I come to the conclusion that in twenty years there will be even more cars in use than there are today.