Cars in the modern world are one of the most essential objects in life.  Cars have given many benefits to the humanity, by allowing people to travel to places they would want to go in a very short time, or carrying heavy loads that cannot be carried by humans.  However, in twenty years, cars will not be as used as it is now, and its number will surely decline, due to the decreasing number of population, increasing pollution problems, and development of a new transport.
 In many advanced countries where cars are everyday life for people, the population is surely decreasing.  For example, In Korea, there were baby booms after the war in 1950.  Many families consisted of more than five children.  The families these days, however, tend to have only one child, maybe two at the maximum.  There will surely be a population decrease in twenty years time, automatically resulting in a decrease of car usage as well. 
 Cars, although very beneficial to people, did not prove beneficial to the environment.  The gases from the exhaust ports of the cars cause great damage to the environment.  Furthermore, the accumulation of this gas in the atmosphere is also harmful to people, especially to the elderly and the weak.  There has already been talks of reducing this car gas by reducing the number of cars and using public transport instead.  In twenty years time, this issue will be even worse, and the usage of cars will eventually decrease.
 Lastly, in twenty years time, there will be a new transport that will provide better services to human life than cars will.  In twenty years time, people could be attending work via a flying machine.  Or even use a small watercraft.  Cars will eventually fail to these other superior devices, and give way to some other wonderful transports.
 Cars have been in extensive use ever since it was made about a hundred years ago by Ford.  But since the technology continues to improve, cars will eventually give way to other wonderful inventions, just like the horses gave way to cars.  In twenty years, cars will stilll be in use, but surely as not as much as it is now.