I disagree with the statement, that, young people nowadays do not give enough time to helping their communities. The four reasons in support to my view, are discussed below.
 
 The first reason, is that young people, are spending more time on various fields of education like medicine and technology. It is with their persistent efforts in these fields that, latest inventions and developments like mobiles,internet,vehicles,vaccines,medicines etc. are being made possible. This, in turn makes the life of the communities more comfortable and happier.  
 
 The second reason, being the involvement of youth in charity programmes and protests. Young people, are have the energy and potent, and thus using it to do some part time activities like stage shows, marketing exhibitions etc. The money that would be collected in these activities, is being diverted to the poor and the needy people in the community. This way the young people are utilizing their leisure time for helping the community. Also, the youth are involving in protests, against unjust laws of the government, like reservations for backward classes, improper municipality conditions etc. This way they are representing the problems in the community and protesting for its amelioration.
 
 The third, is that the young people organize several get togethers and public functions like new year function, christmas,anniversaries etc , which helps bring the people of a community together. This, not only helps in improving social contacts, but also improves cordial relations among people of the community, so that each of them can help the others, in time of need. 
 
 The fourth, is that the young people play many kinds of sports. The talented palyers from a particular community, are selected, and they represent the community, in inter-community sports competetions. This way they represent the community and hold up the prestige of their community by playing well and leading the team towards success.
 Thus, the youth do spend time to help their commmunities.