I agree that it is important for students to understand ideas and concepts than to learn facts. Ideas and Concepts are qualities which are inbuilt in ones mind but everyone don't know the better use of it. Once the student understands how to frame ideas and how to understand a particular concept he is dealing with than it will help him easy to get his other works done. On the other hand learning facts is something which the student is going to learn because facts are facts and it won't gets changed with time. But here it is more important for students to understand ideas and concepts rather to learn facts.
 
 This can be best illustrated with an example. Let us take it for granted that operating a computer or i can say computer knowledge  has become a compulsion in todays competitive world. But to operate computer is not an easy job. To operate it one should undergo proper coaching regarding the structure & systems in computer. This is only possible if one has access to understand the concepts regarding various computer programmes. Once the student learn the concept to create his own ideas and thus use the computer programmes in a better way. To run a programme is not a fact but it is to be understood with various concepts to be cleared and than to introduce the idea.
 
 Knowledge is Gods gift to all but only few know the better use of it. For students it is very easy to create new ideas in their mind but until and unless they understand the proper concept behind the idea it is useless. This cannot be learnt by learning facts. It becomes important for an individual to plan, understand ant than onlt to implement an idea if and only if the concepts are clear. But the facts will only lead to what was going on in tha past. Facts are important but at times they hinder the growth and development by blocking new ideas.
 
 Once the ideas and concepts are cleared in one's mind than it becomes very easy for a person to learn facts. On the contrary it proves to be a blessing for the individual because he may create a new marvelous product or design using the facts ant than modifying with new ideas and concepts. Facts comes from history and will remain till future but new ideas in present will improve one's future if implemented through studied concepts and visionary ideas. Thus once again i will say to support the point that it is more importaant for students to understand ideas and concepts than to learn facts.