Recently, there is a heat debate on whether there will be fewer cars in use than there are today in twenty years. Some people hold the believe that the number of cars that we will use definitely will  not decrease in light of the more competitive world that we will live in. They argue that cars are indispensable for our daily life if we want to be high efficient. However, as for me, it is no doubt that there will be fewer cars in use than there are today in the next twenty years. I uphold the opinion for the following reasons.
 
 First of all, I think that people's awareness on protecting the environment is improving. Through the mass medium, we can see the negative impacts brought about by our inappropriate  treatment to the environment, for example, excessive car emission, which has a profound impact on the envrionment by polluting the air. I am convinced that people will gradually cultivate the sense of promoting the environment as long as they see the scence that animals are dying out due to the poisioning fumes.
 
 Secondly, with the progress of the scientific technologies, I firmly believe that new means of transportation will be invented to replace the cars that we are currently using. Owing to the fact that you can never predict what things might come into being, a tool that is emission-free and envrionment-friendly may be tapped in the next few seconds. From that moment, the number of cars in use will sharply decrease.
 
 Thirdly,  in view of economic perspective, there have been already too many cars in use currently. According to a survey conducted by the Statistic Bureau of Shanghai, there will be only 1.2% of the whole population who want to purchase cars in the next 5 years, which means the demand for cars almost achieves a saturation. People do not need cars any longer. Instead, they may long for having a plane for themselves.
 
 Up to a point, though some people insist that the there should be more cars in use than ther are today in the next twenty years, I consider the number of cars to be used will experience a decrease due to the improving awareness of people, new tool that might be brought by scientific technologies and the shrinking car demand.