Concepts are generally defined as general ideas whereas facts are linked with events that happened, things which are less abstractive. So, saying that it is more important for students to understand ideas and concepts than it is for them to learn facts is quite restrictive. It is clear to me that students need both.
 
 I think indeed that learning facts on which you can lay yourself to understand concepts is essential. For a student in history for example, facts and dates are the basis to think about a larger period. The concept of power for instance often need to be illustrated by behaviors of kings or presidents in Europe for centuries. In this case, knowing accurate facts feeds your thoughts.
 
 On the other hand, one could argue that for a student in philosophy, ideas and concepts are much more important than facts. Or for a student in mathematics too. All this leads me to believe that facts sometimes can be put apart. Yet, when you can help you with facts, I think concepts are easier to understand. In scientific subjects especially. Likewise, in a physic course about gravity, showing an apple falling onto the floor is a good way to start the lesson. What I mean is that the application of the principle, under the shape of a fact (the apple is attracted by the Earth), is as well important as the general idea.
 
 Yet, it is also interesting to think twice about the question : what is the most important for a student, to understand or to learn ? This is a complex issue. Normally, as I said, learning should lead and help to the understanding. But why not only understand things ? Why not only applicate a pattern of thinking that you got when you understood one system ? Because I think that people should make profit of their capacity to learn things and then to make links with others in order to understand new things that nobody taught them. 
 
 As a conclusion, I would say that learning facts is as important as understanding ideas and concepts, even if it can depends on the subjects (history, philosophy, geography...). I think that they are complementary. Understanding grammar rules and learning vocabulary aren't they both necessary to express oneself in a foreign language ?