I believe that succesful people try new things and take risks rather than only doing what they already know how to do well. In fact, there are only few people who can be considered truely successful in the world, in spite the fact that many people do what they already know how to do well. Besides, it is hard for a person that does what he or she already knows how to do well to be recognized for that reason and, thus, to succeed in the middle of a crowd. Finally, some of the most famous successful people in the world clearly illustrate that successful people try new things and take risks. 
 
 On the one hand, if it only took doing what one already knows how to do well to be successful, many people in the world would be successful, and this is not the case. In fact, many people in the world dedicate their entire lives to doing what they learnt through formal education or experience how to do well. However, there are only very few truely successful people in the world. Furthermore, there are many people who, in spite of having always done what they knew what to do well, have never become successful. For that reason, one may conclude that it takes much more than doing what one knows how to do well in order to be successful. 
 
 On the other hand, given that most people do what they already know how to do well, it is hard for them to succeed in doing so, since they have to compete with so many other people for recognition and success. Indeed, it is very difficult to obtain recognition in the middle of a crowd. For instance, only very few workers of a corporation are able to obtain such a high degree of recognition from their employers that may allow them to succeed in the corporation. In fact, in a corporation, success means being constantly promoted until obtaining a high -or the highest- post. Thus, only very kew of the workers of a corporation succeed. And this happens although it is very likely that most of them do what they already know how to do well. 
 
 Finally, some of the most famous examples of succesful people show us that they have become successful by trying new things and taking risks. Contemporarily speaking, this is especially the case of people who have created and developed new technologies of information and communication. The cases of the creators of Microsoft, Apple computers and Google are clear examples of this. 
 
 In conclusion, I believe that successful people try new thing and take risks rather than only doing what they already know how to do well. This explains that there are only few truely successful people and that most of the famous successful people I know have become successfu