Many scientist are thinking of  the earth future and they are imagining many new things that human can have. Nowadays cars are having important job for human, but there are a new thoughts that in twenty years there will be fewer cars in use than there are today. In opinion, I disagree with the following statement. There are three reasons that proves  my idea. First reason, cars will develop more because of clever inventors and later cars can be drived on the sky. Second reason is that cars can drived without gas or oil therefore many people can just drive without thinking of costing gas or oil.
 The first reason is that the cars will more develop by many clever inventors, therefore people can drive the cars on the highway and also on the sky. Yesterda, I watched a document about our future and it was explaining the mystery of movies of future. For example, in the movie Starwars the cars are flying and the sky is full of cars. The professor was answering about this movie and he said that it is 70 percent possible, that car can fly. Therefore when cars can fly people will more buy the cars to have fast transportation. 
 	The second reason is that cars can moved withour gas or oil. Nowadays many poor people doesn't buy cars, because of costs. But last week, the world news war reporting that the cost of oil and gas is increasing all the time. That's why a car making company is trying to make cars that they doesn't need oil or gas. They started to make this car for five years and they expect that it will take more about ten years. The experiment of new making cars are going very successfully and the reporter said we can expect the future of our cars with oil or gas. 
 As a conclusion, in twenty years there will be more cars not fewer cars in use than there are today. These three reasons are proving why this statement is incorrect. First reason is that the car can fly therefore the cars will have more space to drive and many people will buy cars to have faster transportation. Second reason is that cars will not need to fill gas or oil to drive. The cost of gas and oil are troubling people's money therefore a car company is trying to make car with out these things and it is running pretty successful. In the future, human can use cars much in easier way.