Many people consider that learning facts is more important for students than understand ideas and concepts. I totally disagree with their idea because just getting the facts will eventually give the students trouble when they meet the question that need deeper and creative thinking, also it will weakene the student's ability to solve question, and give them a idea of studying is boring.
 
 The first reason that I agree with the statement is that it is going to let the stuents to think deeper and have more creative thoughts. For example, Republic of Korea, where I was born, forces the students to learn the facts rather than understanding the ideas and concepts. That actually makes the students smart because they know the way they have to solve the questions. However, when they confront the question that demands the creative thinking or deeper thought, they just do not know what to do and panic becuase they have no idea about solving the question that they did not deal with in the past.That is a really big problem in Korea now, so that I certainly do not like the idea of just learn the facts.
 
 Another reason that I agree with the statement is that it really weakenes the student's capacity of solving questions. Learning the facts probably help the students to solve the questions that they handled before, but when they confronts with the problem that they never dealed with, they got confused and do not know what to do and how to solve it. Therefore, it might seem like a good way to learn in the fist stage, because they can get a good mark by this way, but eventually, when they need to think themselves and find methods to solve the question, they will not know what they have to do.
 
 Final reason that I think it is more important for students to understand ideas and concepts is they can actually get interests about what they study and find his talents in some subjects. For example, nowdays many school teach children in the same way, even though every single of them is different. Thus, force them to jsut memorize the facts is not the right way to teach them. That make them think study is boring and killign their ability. They should understand the ideas and concepts abouut what the question is asking for. In that way, students get interested in the lesson and might find a gifts that they have in some areas of study.
 
 To sum up, I don't like the idea of just learn facts. In my opinion, understands ideas and concepts is much better way of study becuae it will give them a creative thinking, better ability to solve questions, and interests of what they study. Because I am the person who experieced it