As far as I am concerned, it is better to have broad knoledge of many academic subjects than to specialize in one specific subject.
 A student, in general, even if he has the idea of what to do in his working future, not always his dreams match with the real life.
 It can happen that the economic situation at the beginning of his studies can be very different from the one at th end of his studies.
 This can happen for several reasons, such as polical, economic, and so on.
 If a student starts to concentrate only on a specific subject, that can be for example, leterature, at the end of his studies I will be very well educated on that subject, but in a world that is requiring people that have technological skills.
 It is important to say that a student that is involved in many academic subjects will be able to mange all of it, but he will have always the possibility to specilize in one of them.
 I want to say that the best choise to do is to study many academic subjects because it is always possible to specialize in one specific subject during the study period. On the other hand it is always more difficult to change its own study plan from a specific subject to many academic subjects.
 Only if a student has the change to study different academic subjects can also have the opportunity to discover his talent in subjects that he did not know that he was able to do.
 Sometimes talent is hidden and only a good teacher can help students to reveal it. Students, if they decide to study only a specific academic subject, will not give the chance to any professor to discover their talent.
 The Italian University educational approach is based on many academic subjects that can give students the opportunity to learn different topics also not linked from each one. Only after the University, they can choose to specialize in one specific subject.
 I can see that Italian students, in the end, are more prepared from USA students, these latter too specialized in only one subject and unable to face the real life so different and changable.