Today we face a world where millions of products are competing for the attention of paying customers around the world. Competition increases as new products and technologies enter the marketplace on a daily basis. These products must stand out from the rest in order to catch the eye of the consumer, extra value must be added to differentiate one from the millions of similar products available. 
 The marketing and advertisement industry has grown significantly thanks to our consumerist culture. They are in charge of a product's promotion and recognition strategies , and often they are responsible for its success or failure as well. In this battlefield, advertising agencies must make use of every possible weapon they can find in order to appeal to their customer's wants and needs. This is where false claims of greatness and exaggerated qualities are attached to average products. I think most advertisements and marketing campaigns make products and services seem better than what they really are, they must do this in order to stay in business. 
 
 Customers are easily fooled by false claims of great quality,  marketing strategies transform "wants" into "needs", driving the consumer into a buying frenzy. Fashion is also a key element when it comes to consumption patterns worldwide. People are made to believe they need something "never seen before" in order to make them happy or successful or popular. Once again, products are made to seem as something extraordinary everybody wants to have. At the end, it's just as good (or bad) as the next product on the shelve.
 
 Often, a little "extra" is added to a product in order to satisfy the customer. Good promotion and marketing strategies are sometimes defficient when there is great offer and not much demand for a specific object or service in the market. Lying and exaggeration come again into place when trying to make a sell, you have to give the customer what he's asking for, even if it is not true. Sometimes people just like to read or hear or see what they want to, if you can be the one to provide it to them you might have a chance to stay on top for a day or two util the competition catches up.