Nowadays, people are getting busier and busier with their own bussiness, especially the young people who are fighting hard for their future. As a result, there comes the criticism that the young people do not give enough time to helping their communities. In my opinion, this statement is groundless and the youngsters today do contribute to their communities to a great extent.
 To begin with, we will first look at the community service organised by various schools. Taking Singapore as an example, it is compulsory for each student to accomplish a minumum time of 10 to 30 hours of community service each year, depending on different schools and different level of education. The service includes helping out in old folks' home, organizing charity events and so on. It has greated contributed to the communities considering the size of student population. And not only Singapore, schools in other countries have similiar policies as well to make the students contributed within their ability.
 Secondly, many working young people today are voltunteers in various organizaitions such as hospitals and kindergartens. Besiding donating their money, they also spend a lot of  time in taking care of the patients or children and gain a deeper understanding of their needs. In fact, from my experience of being a volunteer, some institutions actually depend on these young people as an effective human resources. And each volunteer spends about 3 to 5 hours per week in these voluntary jobs.
 Lastly, there are many other minor areas that the young peole make contributions on. For instance, to help the neighbouring children with their school work is a form of contribution. And everyone may have attended some performces for charity purposes, and that is helping his community too. 
 Therefore, I believe that it is unfair to say that the young people do not give enough time to helping their communities. The helps in various forms can be easily seen in every aspect of our life. Actually, I think the young people have done a great job in helping out their communities.