I believe that in twenty years there will be fewer cars in use than there are today. The essay will demonstrate the reasons for this
 First, fuel sources available to us are limited. Petroleum takes millions of years to be produced from natural sources. The rate at which fuel is being consumed across the world will soon result in a shortage of petroleum. The low supply vis-a-vis increased demand will result in higher fuel prices, making it unaffordable for the common man.
 Second, there is an increased environment consciousness among the people. Petroleum drilling can cause many accidents, like burst pipelines, leakages etc., that have many side effects on the environment. Also, in countries where pollution norms are not strict, there is a danger of global warming as a result of pollution. Awareness of environment factors might make people rethink about modes of transport.
 Third, public transport is very developed in some parts of the world, and being increasingly invested in in other regions. There is hardly any city in the world where efficient and well-planned public transport does not encourage people to use it. Therefore, when public transport is fully developed, many people will use it to save themselves the hassle of a daily commute in cars.
 Fourth, trends in the workplace are changing. Many organizations are encouraging their employees to work from home. This changed pattern in the workplace will automatically reduce the number of cars on the road.
 Lastly, though many alternative fuel sources have been developed, none of them have proved to be viable or successful. Take the example of hybrid cars that use electricity- despite the government tax subsidies, the cars do not have enough sales. The reason for this is that the cost of development is so high it does not offset government subsidies.
 Therefore, the reasons why there might be fewer cars in use twenty years later are unaffordability of fuel, increased environment consciousness, development of public transport, changing trends in the workplace and failure of alternative sources of fuel.