People in general tend to do either one of these: enjoy or not enjoy life. It doesnt matter if the person is young or old, enjoying life is a matter of personal decision. Comparing who enjoys life more, old people or young people, is a matter of opinion ,because they can't be comparable. Comparing a young life with an old one is like comparing green grapes and purple greapes, eventhough they are from the same species, their taste is totally different. Young people enjoy activities that old people don't enjoy anymore and viceversa, a young person wont enjoy some activties as much as an old person will, eventhough they are both human.
 Old people tend to enjoy life in different ways. Some of the activities that are common for old people to do and enjoy include reading, listening to music, eating, sharing time with the family, learing, watching T.V etc. There are some activities that old people are not able to accomplish anymore, but they enjoy to watch it. The man next door,Carlos,  used to play soccer. Now he is too old to play soccer but still he enjoys watching it, and believe it or not, he screams to the TV and cries if his team loses. Carlos, as many other old men, enjoy more watching the soccer than playing it because his physical habilities are now limited by his age. Many young people belive that old people cant enjoy their lives because they cant do certain activities that they do and enjoy. This is an erroeus thought. Old people enjoy their life just as young people enjoy thiers. That someone young likes more to play soccer than to watch it doesnt mean that watching soccer should be boring. Old people, like my grandfather, love to tell stories and bring back memories of things he did when he was young. He likes to go through his life and tell us, the grandchildren, about it. Eventhough he cant do those activities or trips anymore, he still enjoys to share them. 
 Young people enjoy their life just as old people enjoy thiers, but again, differently. Someone around 17 years old might enjoy going to parties, dancing, playing sports and hanging out with friends. While someone about 70 years old wouldnt enjoy that at all. Martha, a friend of mine, used to enjoy going to parties, hang ingout and dancing. Today she is 65 years old, and she doesnt enjoy that anymore because she gets tired and she usually believes that the music volume is too high. She now enjoys cooking, talking and reading. 
 A young person can not judge who enjoys life more because they havent lived that old to comment on that. They dont know the perspective of an old person because they havent been there yet. Meanwhile, old people are more likley to know by their personal experiences wheather they enjoyed life more as a young person or as an old one and it is all matter of opinion.	
 Enjoying life is a matter of decision. One might decide to live a happy life while others might decide not to. It doesnt matter if one is young or old, enjoying life is a matter of personal decision. Old people and young people, both can enjoy life to the same level only that by doing certain things that one, either the old or the young, might think that is not something he or she would enjoy. So who enjoys life more, the old or the young people, is up to them, to us. It is up to every individual on how they decide to live their life.