TO KNOW AND HOW MUCH TO KNOW, THAT IS THE QUESTION
 
 I always define my generation as based on the lyrics of a Brazilian pop song of the 80s which said, " I know a little about almost everything, and almost everything I know badly". On my day and age, a popular teenager would have to know about a vast array of topics, ranging from Boy George to The Cure, not leaving aside Shakespeare. Of course, these are not exactly academic subjects, so an academic knowledge of Boy George would not be necessary, but we would have to at least have heard of him. Shakespeare, however, is not only part of the academy, but also of a canon. Would it be better, then, to know everything about the Bard and all of his forty plays, or to know a few vital facts about him and still have time to study Orwell, Huxley, Nabokov, Salinger, Woolf, Twain and Steinbeck, not to mention less canonical authors? 
 It's hard to say, since there are advantages and disadvantages to each approach. One obvious con to having a broad knowledge of several subjects is that this knowlegde will eventually become superficial. Lack of time will make it impossible to dedicate too much attention to one subject, and its treatment might be shallow and futile. On the other hand, knowing many subjects will surely enhance our conversational skills in social gatherings. Let's just say that knowing Macbeth superficially won't be enough to write a thesis on the play, but it might impress some friends at a party. It depends on the situation. 
 Although I don't have a fixed opinion on this subject, I'm more inclined to having broad knowledge about many topics than merely knowing one topic exhaustively. In school at least, we have to be introduced to many academic subjects, for how will we know where to choose from and what interests to pursue if we only, say, know Algebra? As we go deeper and deeper into our studies, however, we will inevitably have to narrow down our interests, and dedicate more time to fewer subjects, even running the "risk" of becoming specialists. Nevetheless, as much as I love Shakespeare, dedicating all my academic existence to him and him only would give me the impression of missing something.