I belive that there will be more cars in twenty years. What forms my oppinion are different points.
 The first is caused by the individal need for transportation. This meas that every one of us wants to reach a destination at every time in the shortest possible way. This means, probably the cars will not be like the cars we have today, but there will always be automobiles for an individual journey form one place to another. A transportation in a train or bus can never replace this, just because a train or a bus needs to be profitable, so it needs to transport as many people at once and this leads us to a scedule for a department. This means it is no more a leaving a place at one time I wish and it will not bring me exactly to the place i wish.
 Our needs for a resting time more and more needs that we work in a place far away from the place we work. I can say this of my own, that I prefer to live in an little town away from the city where I work. It means that when I come home to my little town the world is not as busy and stressful. This daily journey leads me to a drive of some kilometers I am doing every day by car. My wife does the same just in the other direction. So this leads us to have two cars and when I compare this to my parents they just only had one car, what was enough for them. For us, compared to my parents is has become normal to work and live in different cities. This automatically leads to more cars in a family. Of course we could use a train or a bus, but in my case it would be cheaper just about a fifth of the costs I pay for going by car and the other aspect, the far more important, is, that it would take me about half an hour more every day, what means that this is an hour I can spend less with my family. So all in all I belive that it will be normal in twenty years that every adult person will own a car just for the daily movements. It will be less and less that you work and live in the same city. I hope I am wrong because my wife allways tells me how long or short the oil recources will be availablz