If you were to ask me whether young people nowaday give enough time to helping their communities, my answer would be definitely be a solid "No".  At least it is the case for the young people of my country Taiwan.  
 There are two reasons why I feel that young people in Taiwan are not spending enough time in helping communities.  First,  times have changed, the environment and the behavior of people have changed. In comparison with the times when there are many children in a family,  most families now have only one child. His or her parents spend a lot of money and a lot of time providing his or her needs. Most of the young people in Taiwan are being spoiled by their parents. The young people, therefore, are selfish and inconsiderate. They don't feel it's necessary to help the needy in their communities because they don't think there are people that need to be helped. It's quite pathetic and sad, but it's true. How would they spend time helping in the communities when they don't think there's a need to it?
 The second reason why I don't think young people give enough time to helping their communities is because there simply isn't time for them to do it ! Even if they want to help out, they don't have time to do it! Nowadays, young students have to learn a variety of things in school. Aside from basic subjects like math, history and English, they have to perform well in other subjects like music and arts. Students often go cram schools to learn their art and music skills after school. When they get home, it's usually around nine or ten o'clock. Some teens even have to go to cram school on the weekends in order to get into better high school or universities. Their schedules are already filled with subjects they need to handle in school, how can they have time to help out in the communities?
 The two reasons I mentioned why young people don't spend enough time helping their communities are fair and true. It is really a sad thing to point out, and I truly hope this situation will change in the near future.  Young people helping in communities is something that's  important and meaningful; it would be a pity if no one helps out in the community.