The commencement of the twenty first century, see's a shot up in prices of oils , which wasn't the case in the late 1990's which oil prices were reasonable low in compared with the stunning unpridictable price increase. The problem is very recent and reports suggest that the demand of oil is more then the supply, which is the obvious reason for the shooting up in oil price.
 
 Cars might be tempted to vanish. Cars need petrolum, and with out this ingrident the car cannot run. Therefore if the prices are shooting up then the consumer might be tempted to leave or sell his car behind and start his day with a pop on the bus, or undergrounds to secure his/her arrival to his desired distination. 
 
 The increase in usage of public transport will become more and more efficient over the coming years. The public transport provide a cheeper and more time is saved then having to wait for the traffic.
 
 Furthermore lets not forget the usage of technology. Techology velocity have increased very rapidly over the commencement of the twenty first century. New developd transporting cabines might well be the case in the next two decades. 
 
 Hense now that the oil is being decreased, and is forcasted to vanish in the next two or three decades. Scientist as well as techology industries will be looking for new efficient replacement.
 
 However we can't just rule out the vanishing of cars just like that in two decades. There are more then 30 cars industries and brands all over the world, and they wouldn't want to see there businesses currupted in less then half a centrury. 
 
 Althouh it has been argued more the once about the enviromental conserns regarding cars, Cars emite alot of gas pollutions resulting in an unhealthy enviromental spot. These constraints might have had a good effects on the car industry as they may set to launch a new and improved enviromental-freinldy cars, which could run by solar energy for instance, that are very efficient and healthy and the same time.
 
 Therefore i would have to disagree with this statement, I just can't see cars just vanishing like that in two decades, Twentry years is not a long time, however i agree with the fact the cars will be less efficient then wut the were in the twenith centurary