We should first agree on the definition of " young people".
 Young people are those people who aged more than 15 years and below adult hood. In fact this represive a good percentage of our sociaties. That's why it is important to analyze such phenomenon.
 
 Let us start with the first step, what are the problems they faced and  may hinder their participation in communities development?
 
 I think they have some major problems. First, their feeling of irresponsibliites and accountabliity. Second, the cost of living these days. Third, the initiativity level they have. Four, governmental suport if available. Five, thier self esteem and self identity.
 however, I think developing a questionnaire will be more helpful.
 
 Do not foreget tp take into consideration the differances between various cultures. I mean, the differance between east and west and susequent religion.
 
 Why this? Becasue both, clutrue and reliogn, has an important impact  on the indiviual personalities and initiativity.
 
 Here is an examples. When I was in Jordan university, and in the  tree day, the students council asked each faculty students' to clean the area beneath trees. All students responseded. the area was cleaned, the university director has a round to have alook. He was impressed a bout our work. This is done because the sudent council connect this matter to Islamic religion, which encourage every one to clean his working area, his house and his community. Take into consideration the support that we have from the university director. 
 
 Finally, how we can imporve youngs' particpation in these matters?
 1- Create the initiativity. We should encourage them to participate.
 2- Ask other leader to be part of such activities.
 3- Connect such participation with various incintives.
 4- Learn and teach our sons and daugthers the importance of helping communities, and asked them, as a parents, to do that. We also should follow up them. Our particpation will be very helpful. 
 5- This should be part of our education.