I agree with the statement. In twenty years, major changes in technology will take place in our lives, those changes would make transportation so easy that people won't have to use cars anymore.
 
 Since the human being was born, he's looking forward to learn more about the world around him, therefore, he invented ways to transport from one place to another. He started with a horse and carriage. However, he wanted to transport faster, so he kept learning and learning until he made cars.
 
 Cars are very useful nowadays and in my opinion a person can't live without a car. The human's life depends on transportation with cars. However, there are disadvantages for cars such as, pollution.
 Pollution is a big problem in societies now so they are trying to find ways to reduce the number of cars to reduce pollution. In addition, if cars are still produced from today until twenty years and people kept buying, there won't be enough land to move our cars on, it'll be always crowded and uncomfortable. So it'll be inconveniant to buy a car.
 
 As I said before, the human being can't stop developing himself. He'll try to find an alternative.As a result, recent studies have shown examples of air-crafts, personal air-crafts for one or two people in it. They cost more ofcourse, but in the long run i think it will take over the car industry. Because people will arrive to their destination faster, less frustrated. And eventually the prices will be reasonable for everybody.
 
 In ten to fifteen years, those personal air-crafts will spread out magically. But not everybody could afford it. Therefore, it will take about another five years until people get accustomed to the idea of driving a plane, and prices become reasonable for all levels of people. As a result, the number of cars will decrease.
 
 In conclusion, the technology in our world moves so quickly that nothing can ever remain forever. A great invention will take place and help the world. But using too much of it will cause problems and have disadvantages. As a result, a new technology will take place.