Knowledge of any kind is always good. I believe if one has the opportunity and intellectual capacity to acquire vast amounts of knowledge from different fields he or she should not let the opportunity pass.
 
 On the other hand, if an individual tries to engage in the study of too many subjects at once, he or she might not get to achieve the level of specialisation needed to fully grasp the overall concept of an academic subject.
 
 The usefulness of having a knowledge expanding through different academic fields is that one can rely on other fields to backup its arguments in a more effective manner. Noone can argue that politics is not linked to the study of law, economics and even sociology. And moreover, many of the great thinkers and most of the great inventors in history have had a broad knowledge on different subjects. People like Leonardo Da Vinci applied their knowledge in different fields to bring about new and original proposals to our world.
 
 However, it is also true that at earlier times humanity was still discovering the most basic knowledge and technology and therefore to be a knowledgeable person on a field was not as complicated as it is today. Today, media, think tanks and many other institutions are providing us with immense ammounts of information in thousand of different fields and with a level of specialisation never seen before. Before a Bachelor of Arts was enough to enter a succesful career in academia, even business. Today Masters programmes, further education degrees, seminars, etc. mushroom around the academic world promoting the new mantra, specialisation. Universities, colleges and the business community expects the best of the best in the field they are recruiting in. I believe there is a very romanticised view of knowledge in the academic world today that I share but that I believe to be outdated in the realities of the professional world today.
 
 As a form of a conclusion I would like to say that it is also worrying the lack of out-of-business interest people have. Not many professionals today have intellectual hobbies they devote their time to after work. Neither do they pass that intellectual curiosity to their children. A Humanist culture, a love for general knowldege, from music to literature, makes better citizens and more sensible people. I am not going to claim in this paper that general knowledge is better for a career oriented person but it is definitely an essential complement to a nation's life, in social interaction as much as in a more personal level.