I agree to the statement that there will be fewer cars in use than there are today. Although car is a very comfortable means of conveyance but it has got many drawbacks vis-a-vis present conditions. The competition in the car industry has heated up. Besides, some of the serious health problems have surfaced due to increase in the number of motor driven vehicles over a period of years. Even many governments are trying their best to tackle this problem.
 
 The most severe threat posed by the use of this vehicle is health related problem. The environment is polluted and this is giving rise to Global Warming which is a phenomena of increasing temperature at a constant rate across the globe. Besides, people who rely more on use of car face some health problems like obesity, slip disc, etc. In these cases a doctor also recommends a walk or evening stroll. This indicates that the number of cars in use today is sure to decline.
 
 Apart from health related issues, the phenomenal increase in number of cars on roads have lead to traffic conjestions in many countries because of lack of proper infrastructure. One has to really start early to reach one's destination. So, plans to dump the cars are also under consideration at many places which would mean the reduction in number of cars in use.
 
 In addition to these points, the car industry has seen a market saturation in many countries as well. The market is really flooded with car and there is a significant decline in the number of potential customers across the globe. So, the decline in production of cars would also reduce the number of cars in use.
 
 Moreover, as we know that the technology is on a surge in the present century, so we can expect the car to be obsolete and it might be replaced by some other vehicle which outshines it in a number of ways.
 
 Finally, we can say that there are many goods to say that there will be a decline in the cars in use because of health related issues or lack of infrastructure or market saturation, etc. The future of cars is not safe in the end.