I do not support the idea expressed in the statement. I cannot think of any clear or evident reason to think that fewer cars will be in use on the near future. However, I can present three reason why I think car use will, at least, state as it is in the present time. The reasons are directly related with the car industry and car customers.
 
 To have less cars in use, less cars should be sold, and that trend cannot be seen happening in the near future. Nowadays it is common to have at least two cars at each household, and even more if there are young adults in the house. Young adults see cars as providers of independence and social prestige, so it will be hard to change their buying need. 
 
 In addition, young adults are not the only ones that think that cars and independece go together, adults think that way too. Workers are used to commute and travel short distances by car. Improvements at public transportation by city administrations are not changing the behavioural pattern of city commuters. By my experience in Spain, I think that most of the people that use cars, drive them to go to work or to the city, and this behaviour just seems to increase, not decrease.
 
 Environmental pollution and gas price could be two other reasons to decrease car use. However, none of those reasons seem to affect the market. The car industry is focusing its efforts on research to apply "green energies" to cars. Electric cars or hybrids are starting to be common on Nordic countries and some regions of the United States. I also hope that this type of cars will be more common when their price decrease. 
 
 In relation to last statement it is the problem of the oil price. Experts and ecologists thought that the actual rising trend in oil price will make people more sensitive to car use and especially in the moment of buying a new automobile, but this is not happening nowadays.
 
 I think that the reasons I have presented support the idea that car use is not going to decrease in the near future. If oil price have not helped to change the car use pattern, I think it is ver hard that any other thing would do it, especially in twenty years.