I think that young people enjoy life more than older people do. Being young and full of life is the main reason. Young people can also learn and adapt to the technological improvements very quickly. 
 
 To begin with being young, obviously most of the young people are much more healthier that  older people. Moreoever, they are also more energetic than  older people. Therefore, young people have a willingness to enjoy the life. They can travel and see different places and meet new friends easily. You can go to movies, play sport games and talk about the dreams about the future. All these activities let young people to enjoy life more than the older people. By being young, young people are hopeful about the future and they do not worry about the bad things that might happen due to the aging or loss of health. Having these ideas in mind will create a positive enviroment and young people can easily enjoy life more than older people.
 
 In addition to being young, young people can learn and adapt to the technological improvements very easily. For example, in the last ten years, our society meet the computer and the cell phone. However older people  can not use these devices and more importantly it is very difficult for them to learn how to use these devices. These devices are so helpful that you can reach information that you liked the most all around the world.  You can communicate, chat  with your friends and you do not have to worry about being lonely. By this way you enjoy life more that the older people do. Because they have a limitted ways of communication, and being lonely will prevent them to enjoy the life.Moreover, the technological improvements will increase the quality of life that young people have and living a high quality life will definitely let the young people to enjoy life more. 
 
 In summary, young people enjoy life more than older people. Being young and feeling healthier is the most important factor. Moreover, being able to learn new technologies and using these technological devices will improve the  quality of life. Therefore young people will enjoy life more than older people do.