In my opinion enjoyment in life has lot to do with age.It not only requires a source and time to enjoy but alse the spirit and energy required to spend in enjoyment. Young people enjoy alot than the older people does because of various reasons. Reasons like enery, experiance,spirits  and time.
 Young people are completely satiated  with energy.As their muscles are in a growing stage or in an already developed stage, young people find it very easy to enjoy.Whether it is a matter of sports,parties or discos or the matter of learning.Some sports like the baseball, football, basket ball and many other require an energetic  body and  grown muscles like in boxing or wresling.Older people lack this source required for enjoyement.
 Due to lack of experiance many young people takin many difficulties as challenge and strive hard to overcome it. This in turn excites them ,thrills them and provides a means for enjoyment.For example when a boy for the first time approaches a pet animal like a dog, he has no knowledge about how the dog may react.But when he finds the animal very kind he enjoys in spending time with it.
 Another reason is the confidence and the spirit which the young people have than the older ones.When we feel more confident we try to undertake even the most difficult task.Getting some tuff time in completing that task surely enjoys us.Spirit is an essential requirement to begin and even give an end to something.Old people having faced many difficulties in through out there life, lack spirit to do the similar job.They find it boring to do the samething which thay have been doing since many years.On the other hand young people finds it really exciting to start a task to which they had never been before.
 Older people especially those who has a family and a job to take care of , work lot of hours in their offices. These people can hardly find few hours from their busy schedule to even watch a cricket match.They spend almost ten hours in their factories, offices or other working places for their earning.And the young ones they readily find time for enjoyment.As soon as their homeworks got finished and preparations were made, young kids they just go outside their homes to spend a pleasant time playing with their friends or dancing in a party.   
 In summary, I will only say that young people with no responsibilty of anyone enjoy alot than the elder people.Whereas the elders didnt get a chance to enjoy as they have many responsibilait. howevwer they enjoyed when they wenwere young.