I agree with this statement. The reasons behind this is that as time progresses cities and populations are growing larger. As the population growth is happening cities are becoming far more over crowded then before. This already Causes many traffic issues and road problems because of such a large number of cars on the streat. With the increasing population their is no way for this problem to be solved except for reducing the amount of cars on the streats. Evidence of this has already started as cheap public transportation is starting to rise. For example the mass transport systems in London, they have the underground, and the busses, which eliminate the need for many people to own, ride, or drive in a car. Thousands of people are able to move around without having the need to use a car. The mass transport system alone has taken care of a bit of the problem that is being faced at the moment. Even the city of Dubai has started taking measures to reduce the number of cars on the street by begining the construction of the sky rail, which is to become the new mass transport there. Global warming and polution is also an other reason why cars should be lowerd in number. The prevention of polution and the slowing of global warming would be aided greatly by the reduction of cars on the streets. In the next twenty years many governments around the world will most likely take measures, just as London has, and Dubai has started, In order to reduce the amount of cars that are being driven. This would be resolving two separately unrelated problems with one solution. Th eproblem of over crowded streets would be solved by the provision of effective mass transport systems. And the Global warming, polution issue that cars create would be solved by this reduction as well. With those two global problems, measures will be taken to reduce the number of cars on the streets in the near future. So in twenty years it is very likely that their will be far less cars on the streets then their are during this time.