Knowledge is like an ocean the more deeper u go the more jewels you find. we cannot say that at this particular point we know everything about a particular subject. Learning is a continuous process. The more we learn about one subject the more we discover about it. I think its better to specialize in one specific subject.
 
 In this rapid globalisation period everyone is required to be up to date. The people who have surface knowledge about all the subjects find it difficult to survive in this competitive world.  Now a days every company require their employess to be specialized. They need efficient work force which can solve specific problems and should also be flexible. They should be able to deal with variety of situations but intially they are expected to deal with particular problem. If we have broad knowledge about many acedemic subjects but if we do not know the subject which best suits our academic and job life then it will become quite difficult for us to have a bright career.
 
 For example, let us suppose a case in which student does not know which subject he want to select for his major then he might keep on switching over the subjects. He will not be able to concerntrate over any of the subject which will only waste his time. Lastly when he will be called for interview, companies will not find him suitable for any specific postion. After all a student who have studied computer science continously for two years will become a better programmer than a student who have studied many subjects like history, biology etc along with computer science.
 
 Its not like that a student who has specialisation in any field will not be able to switch over other subject because a specialized person will be more effecient in learning things. Its true that the person who have knowledge of every subjects will be more flexible but that does not mean underestimating the talent of specialized people. Specialized people learn the things more accurately and fastly.  If in case they wants to switch over other career they can. May be not easily as a person who already have knowledge about that field but will certainly learn it.  
 
 So, people should have broad knowledge of every subjects but they should also get specialization in one specific subject.  It will increase their caliber to work in crucial work situations and enhance their intellectual level. After all the world is shrinking in a small room and is available on the single click of mouse then it requires both general as well as Specialised people for its development