My parents always tell me that I am a "next generation" young, concentrated on having a good education, dreaming about an  appreciable carrier, with which I will be able to earn lot's of money. They are probably true. I agree with the fact that young people nowadays do not give enough time in order to help their communities.
 One of the main reasons why young people are not involved so much in helping the community now, is that there is not such a service now imposed by the community they are living in. However, in the past there was such an mandatory service to be done to be able to graduate from high schools or colleges. Youngs were explained the importance of such a service for the community and were expected to be willing to do it.  For instance my mother went to help for the elderly every sunday, to obtain her degree from the college she was attending. There were even an office to help students find places for doing community services. Today, no person is asked to do such service and there may be people who do not know what is community service and what may be its advantages. All that people willing to serve the community can do is generally to help people in their close enviroment.
 There is also another major explaination to why today's youngs do not give time to help the community: This is due to the fact that they actually do not have that much time. In my country, children not only go to school, but they also go to other preparatory classes offered outside school to be able to enter better schools or universities obtainning higher scores. A day of a last year high school student is plenty hours of courses and works to finish for the next day. How could someone expect them to give time to the community service?
 Unfortunately,  this will sound like a joke.
 In conclusion, people in the past were raised in the conscience of the presence of  community service and its importances and they were not required to create an extra time for doing their service. That time was already given to them. However, today's young people do not give enough time to community service because either they are not aware of such a service or they really do not have time to be spent in such an luxury occasion.