I agree that most of the advertiesements are used to make products seem much netter than they really are. We can see many exaples of this phenomenon in our daily lives. Ads have been an inevitable component of the daily media, such as TVs, newspapers, radio, even along the wall of the subways we use to go work every day. the advertisments are continously trying to make us believe that some products are worth buying. By without even we got influenced by them, we by tons of equipment that we do not even need at all. A serious problem I see with the advertisements that they lack honesty most of the time. generally, those who prepare tyhe ads resort to tricks and misleading statements that show their products  better that they actually are. In the following, I will give my obsrevations on this issue.
 
 Firstly, I think that most ads try to show  a product different than what it actually is because there are many similar products of the same kind in the market. Therefore, advertisements use some lies to make their products distinguished among all its competitors. recently, I needed some cutting equipment forthe kitchen. In one of the examples, i saw a set of equipment which is told to be able decrease the time spent in the kitchen to half. The knife kit was shown to be able to form varuious structures to cut different vegetables. It was said to hae a mode for potatoe kneeling anothe mode for peeling carrots. having influenced by this, I ordered the specific set of knives. However, the result shocked me. What I bought turned out to be a simle set of knives bundled with some simpel plasic boxes. Obviously, I felt cheated.  this is an example how advertisements can be effective in showing things different than they truly are.
 
 Moreover, I think the technique of distorting the truth has become the unofficial definition of the advertisement. There are many examples to convince me to think so. Today, the advertisers use various techniques to show the products brighter than they are. They use television shows to `prove` the usefullness of the product. However, all those shows are set up previously. They consist of people just playing their roles to convince us on the merits of a product. Today, there are even some Tv channels just for this purpose. Advertising relies on exxagerating the positie sides of a product while suppressing the negative sides. An example is thebrochures of holiday resorts. Theyu always show high storey buildings with a big swimming poo in front. the scene is always bright with a smiing face in teh background. Once I have been decepted by the beauty of such a brochure to buya holiday program on seaside. however, what I ended up when I arrived the holiday resort was a disaster. thre was a pool, but it was not functioning. the picture on the brochure did not belong to the actual building. This was a very bad experince, which strenghtens my belief on the fact that advertiesements are used to make products seem much netter than they really are.
 
 As a conclusion, I agree that advertiemnts are used to sho the products better than they are. I think this is done in order to make a specific product distinguishable among other similar ones. Moreover, I believe that this approach has been the norm among the advertisers. Therefore, one should be very careful when making results based on ads. The results can be very disappointing, as it was the case for my kitchen tool or my disastrous summer holiday.