I believe that young people nowdays do not give enough time to helping their communites. This, i believe is caused by the environment we live in. However, this is not a problem that is only limited to the young developing generation. I think that the adults that are living right now are also guilty of this problem. It is our whole population that is causing this problem. By " our" i mean to refer to the people who live in developed countries and have a high standard of living compared to the developing nations.
 In war times, we did not have enough food supplies, not enough houses, not enough water, not anything od any abundace then the surrounding fear and death. People needed to share each others goods and had to help each other just to live on. This what built the sense of community and why people helped each other out. However, the war times has passed and there is less who remember or have lived through those conditions and the hardships of life. Now with some people having more money than they actually need there is no strong need of helping each other out. 
 Most of us also live in small apartments, where only the father, mother and the childrent live. In old times, people used to live in big houses that was occupied by a whole family, including the grandmother, the grand father and even close relatives. However, now we express and treasure and privacies, even to our own relatives, just greeting them with a christmas card.
 There is no sense of unity because there are no central goals to a nation. We now induce Individualism and capitalism where each person protects and flourished in each own ways. Also because of the globalization age we have now, we are able to travel, live in wherever we want. So in countries there are mixed, races, cultures, and even language. That disrupts the sense of unity. 
 So although i fell that young people nowdays do not give enought time to helping other communites, this is not limited to yoiung people and it is not solely their fault. This is because none of us have any sense of a strong community in the first place. T