As the technology advanced, society has learned to train people in certain fields for its development. It has been an issue to all, whether people should go for understanding in numerous courses or go for professionalism in certain course for deeper understanding. And being a student myself, I believe that it is more beneficial to go for understanding in numerous courses, because it is my belief that it is important for students to be informed of variety of subject areas. 
 
 First, it is becaus it makes students to be more aware of many opportunities that may come in their future. A student can not even think of being a psychologist, when he does not know that certain field exists. And by doing so, diversity of jobs in the society can be achieved.
 
 Second, individual performs better at work, when they are aware of many other facts or mechanisms in different fields. For example, an architect who is profound in the principles of physics works better than who does not simply because of more knowlege in different fields. Therefore, we can now conclude that people are more competitive at work by learning about different fields of education.
 
 Of course, some may argue that people have to promote professionalism for the advancement of technology. It is very true indeed. No one can disregard the fact that more informations about the chemistry can help an individual to mix the chemicals, but this professionalism can come after education, where people are actually being trained for their work. 
 
 To conclude the reasons above, I believe in the importance of education on variety of fields, becaues it alerts students on possible future career, and it provides people of the skills to integrate for the better understanding of the subject he would like to pursue. And although it is true that an individual can work better with specialization in the field, I still believe that this can wait until the day we are going to be trained as professional, but till then we should promote to understand variety subjects to help us more.