I agree with the statement that successful people try new things and take risks rather than only doing what they already know how to do well. If one were to analyse the traits of successful people in the area of business, entertainment, sports or even politics, the one common trait to emerge will be their ability to take intelligent and thoughtful risks and keep pushing the boundaries of their area of expertise. Human beings are loath to change and do not like to get out of their "comfort zone". The average person would rather continue to do what they know very well because of the overall disruptive nature of "change". Trying new things is generally viewed as too risky to compromise a steady state of existence and established livelihood. But over time it becomes necessary to change, adapt and try new things because there are always others who would be willing to do the same thing in a better, efficient way or for a lower price. The only way to combat becoming redundant and remain successful is to embrace change,  experiement with new things and take calculated risks. As an example, if you look at the traditional telephone companies or the media business, they have not changed in their behaviour or in their business processes in the past century. The business owners believed in their own perpetual existence and were continuing to do what they had been doing all along. But, with the advent of new technology and the internet, their world has been rudely shaken. The number of adults who read a newspaper has been steadily falling. Most new telephone connections are now of the "wireless" variety. Unless these traditional companies shake up their business and take a few risks on their own , they are doomed. Infact, the cycle of change and innovation has significantly crashed over the past few years. Even the internet companies and wireless telephone companies have to constantly reinvent their business and continually try out new things to stay relevant in todays world.
 The concept of trying new things and taking risks is also important from an overall "evolution" standpoint. Imagine if Bill Gates or Michael Dell had not continued to experiment in their garages, or had given up on their dreams and ideas, we would still have been using the abacus for adding numbers.  All successful businesses and ideas are based on the bedrock of "new ideas" and "new concepts" and it takes brave, committed and passionate individuals to keep taking such risks and expanding the boundaries of knowledge. While the rewards for taking risks are typically huge, the rewards are not quite obvious till such time a risk is taken. 
 In conclusion, the appetite for risk and trying new things are the defining traits for successful individuals in this world.