In my oppinion, I agree young people nowadays do not have enough time to helping their communities. There are two reasons of my oppinion. First, most of young people have a lot of homework and afterschooh programs. Besides, most of their parant do not care about their children if have pacience to help their communities. Therefore they maybe not educate them to help people when they were kids. Secondly, there are many attractive thing catch young peple's eyes. 
 In these days, most of young people have a lot of homework and afterschool programs must to do, especially in Taiwan. Young people want to enter the prestige schools and to achieve their parants' expection " entering the famous school and have a good job." They spent a lot of time studying and getting good grades. In the school, teacher will not actively encourage young people joint helping or servicing group to help and service other people. In addition, the young people will affaird of lose than other students as they spend time helping poor people. The homework and the pressure of entering the famous school make stusdents do not help people and the community actively. Moreover, most of their parants thinks helping people and the communities will make their children not concentrate on the point- entering the famous school and have a good job. Therefore, when they were kids the parants did not actively encourage them to connect with the communities and help someone. The parants' views directly affect young people's view. 
 Finally, the most important is that young children are attracted by the newest and funny things, for example, the song of hip pop , the famous singers ect.  Most of the young people think I do not use my time to help others, tracing the famous singers is most intersting. Above of all, there are few people care about encouraging their children to connect with their communities and help each other. It makes young people use their time to do another things which are meaningful to them. So i think young people do not share thier liesure time to the communities.