In the morden society, lots of people use the spare time to travel around. And someone would like to travel in a group led by a tour guide, others apparently opposite, they want to trip alone or just with families, friends. It's an universal argument in the long term. To my extend, I prefer to agree that the best way is to travel in a group led by a tour guide.
 
 In the first place, the consipicuous reason is that the tour guide is the one who is professional on  tripping, and they familiar with the resorts or parks we traveling to.  So he/she will give everyone in the group the introduction of the place they visiting, like the background, history, meaning and so on. Take the Great Wall in China for the instance, if there is no tour guide foreigners can not get the original of it and can not understand it's functions. In their eyes, the wall is same with common, combined with bricks. 
 
 In the second place, why I consider travel in a group led by a tour guide is neccessary is that the tour guide always to be there, so they are familar with the places' tickets or some other expendings. They will tell the travellers which one is cheap or which one is not worth to buy. It's really an effective way to save money, also, seldom be cheated.
 
 Furthermore, tour guide will arrange the schedule of all the trip. They will list the time sheet resonablely to show the travellers. Then travellers could make clear sense their sequence and will not waste any time of the vacation. As far as I concerned, this is very important factor we should considered before we begin the trip, because of our limited time.  
 
 Admittedly, travel in a group have some disadvantages, such as, we constrict by the schedule of the tour guide; it's so tired to visite so many places, some of them we didn't want to, in a tight time; it's not comfortable to travel with many stranges. Albeit, everything could not be perfect, some time we have to sacrifice a little suitables.
 
 To sum up, take into all factors I outlined above, we can draw the conclusion that even though there are some uncomfortable things if we travel in a group led by a tour guide, we can get a lot from the trip under the led by tour guide. So again, I want to restate my inclination that I deem travel in a group led by a tour guide is the best way.