In a world developing faster than many people are capable of, it  becomes more and more important to be well prepared as soon as possible and to be ready when it's up to one's abilities to react on the world's needs and demands waiting.
 Therefore I understand, why it is recommended to gain as much knowledge as possible in all different kinds of fields, if you want to prevent yourself being limited to only one academic subject. Life might demand a lot more.
 On the one hand, I have to admit, this might be very true. Especially when you are attending college or university to become educated for any kind of job, it might be the right thing to gain as much knowledge and abilities as possible. Employers will prefer applicants who are flexible and able to manage all different kinds of tasks they may be assigned to. Also, a broader range of abilities will of course allow to apply for a broader range of jobs and will increase possibilities of being employed.
 On the other hand certain fields of study and research would and probably will very soon seriously lack of intensity and depth. Especially philosophical and philological subjects which don't necessarily prepare the one or any certain job benefit from their students' and scholars' commitment and focus. Intellectual development and insight of these subjects, which, no matter what demands the job market will have within the next years, never stopped being important,  would very soon come to an end in case of mere superficial and commercial interests left to this subject.
 Secondly, the student's personal preferations would have to be given up chosing a broad, nothing but job related field of interest. She or he would not be allowed and able to concentrate on a field of study they personally and idealistically are interested in. Idetification with a nothing but useful education and possible job afterwards won't help them in this case to enjoy the greater part of their everyday lives, which will be workdays.
 For these reasons I recommend to listen to one's own preferation and to follow only what seems to be important to oneself.