In life there are many events that people do to enoy themselves. Some people go to vacations while some without that much money could go to theme parks and ride on roller coasters. To me, I think young people do actually enjoy life more than older people do because they have the energy that could be used to enjoy life better. Young people would go to places like amusement parks, watch a movie with friends, hang out with friends and much more while older people mostly stay home. Young people tend to go out more to have a good time with their friends.
 When young people go to amusement parks, they have a great time. Many go on the roller coasters and have a nice time screaming their lungs out or they go and ride on the regular rides like the carousel. But to older people, roller coasters are very scary and sometimes caused them to have nausea. Older people would shy away from the amusement park at much as they could. At one time, my aunt came with me, her son and daughter to the amusement park. Her son and I went to ride on the roller coaster while my aunt and her daughter just sat there and waited for us. She did not have much fun. We asked her to go on the slower rides like the carousel with us but she refused so, we just gave up on her and went on some more rides at the amusement park. At the end of the day, my aunt's son and I enjoyed the amusement park more than my aunt and her daughter.
 To a young person, going to watch a movie with friends is a very enjoyable hobby. When watching with friends, they could laugh together about funny science in the movie and cry together when there was a sad scene. But to an older person, they seldomly go to movies. Like my parents, they do not go to movies. I remembered when my sister, me and my mother when to the movies, she got bored and fell asleep. She did not enjoy the movie and just slept through it. My and my sister was kind of depressed because she slept through the movie.
 Young people enjoy more in parties than older people. Young people in parties could dance, eat, socialize, and have more fun than older people. Older people could dance, eat, and socialize but they would not enjoy as much because they do not have as much energy. At a party at my friend's house, we had lots of fun. We ate, watched television, sang karaoke, and danced. Some of the people danced and sang very funny so, we laughed really hard and had a great time. We spent almost all of out energy and enjoyed every bit of it. In an adult party, the part that was most fun was eating food. There were not many entertainment and most of the adults just stood in their own corner and socialized.
 Young people do have more fun and enjoy themselves than older people. Most of the older people would get away from all the places the young people tend to like. The older people would want to mostly stay home and relax while the young people would go outside and have a great time with their friends.They do not have as much energy as the young people to enjoy life like us.