I agree with the statement that successful people try new things rather than repeating conventional methods. Generally, a success is considered as a victory of any kind of competitions that achieve certain goals that people would regard highly. Thus, in order to win a competition or achieve a goal by any way, people need to have more strength of any kind. Thus, I think exploring a new area or new things would give people a better method to achieve a goal that would be highly competitive against other people, while the exploration might have risks to fail.
 Bill Gates, a founder of Microsoft, is usually considered as one of the most successful people. His achievment started from a new idea: to produce a personal computer. It was obviously challenging and risky for him to do the business, since a computer back then costed enormous money while taking huge spaces. It was not really possible to be owned by a normal individual. However, he succeeded it, and now, he is one of the most successful business men in the world.
 Another example of a success based on risks would be Gabriel Garcia Marquez's new style of writing literature. His magical realism attempted to overcome the limit of a novel by utilizing a totally different way of writing. His extremely descriptive and flowing writing style was first not very well-regarded; however, he is not considered as one of the best writers in Latin America, and numerous writers actually imitate his writing style that a new style of writing called "magical realism" finally was created.
 Even in science, it is necessary to attempt to be creative and try new things than others to be successful. For example, German army in the Second World War had confronted a problem that their missiles could not reach America. Their effort to improve the range of missiles was great, but it kept failing due to lack of accuracy as the range was increasing. However, a scientist thought of a new idea to solve the problem. He thought that it was not necessary to launch missiles from Europe; if it was too far, they can launch the missile from closer place. Thus, the scientist invented a missile launcher that can be installed on a submarine, which apparently could attack the main land of America with extreme accuracy.
 In general, a new method that creativity provides grants people to be more competitive. As if an armed person fights with an unarmed person, it is certainly beneficial for people to try new things. Even though it usually has a high possibility of failure, it is worth to try to explore new ideas, and generally successful people are people who have obtained a solution by new things without failing. It can be said that although there is a risk for a new thing, if it does not fail, it will be a base of a success. Therefore, it is worth trying new things.