During his or her education period everybody has to decide wether to base on broad knowledge or to focuss on a specific subject and specialize. 
 The choice is difficult and both choices, of course, have different advantages and disadvantages which should be carefully explained in the following.
 
 At first I would like to make the point that all "high-end-economies" in generall base on share of works. 
 For example in the western world, for instance in the U.S. or in Germany nobody lives only from the crops of his or her own garden. Everybody focusses on what he or she can do best and tries to get his own advantages from this behavior. Advantage in this context means to earn money. This specialization is one core factor of wealth of our nations.
 Therefore specialization can be called the key to acces in todays societies.
 
 As shown above our todays societies are very based on share of works, but I would like to state another important point.
 In my oppinion broad knowledge means mostly few knowledge.
 This might sound strange at first, but let me explain it in a more detailed way:
 If someone, for instance, studies many subjects simular he or she does not have enough time to get into the deepness of every single subject. As result the quality of what he or she learned about a single subject is lower than what somebody would have learned who focussed on the one subject.
 
 Lastly I think that that you should not forget that the education time is usually to short to reach a broad knowledge.
 A "normal" student in Germany has for example about 4 years to finish his or her education and to start earning money. This is very few time to study two subjects simultanously for instace. I have a friend for example who studies economics and engineering and he always claims about to less leisure time.
 
 Because of the above mentioned reasons I have come to the conclusion that it is better to specialize in one specific subject. By specializing myself on ecomomics and wihin this subject especially on taxes and tax law I am very sure to have made the right choice.