Think of a quantum physics professor who joins a reception and is in a conversation with people from very different fields. He could be the best in his field, he might have won countless prizes on his theories about quantum computers, but he might look like a complete fool when the conversation is about the ideas brought on by Franz Kafka in his book "Metamorphosis". That is, if our professor has focused only on his own subject and left out all the other ones, failing to create himself a general culture.
 
 As I tried to give an idea of a man who has focused only on a specific subject with my example above, I think that one has to have certain knowledge on all fields if he/she wants to gain some reputation among people of the same standard, even if he/she might be the best in his/her own field. Although you have to spend most of your time on the subject you are specialized in, in order to be succesfull, the requirements are much higher in today's world. You can't just give up on all other aspects of life and isolate yourself from other academic subjects, being a stranger to what the majority of the world is talking about. 
 
 This is why students are constantly being tested on topics they might not be interested in, nowadays. Although cries of anguish like "When will a person like me who's trying to become a computer engineer will ever use the characteristic of sonnets' in Shakespeare's poems?" are constantly being heard in school corridors, it is essential that one learns certain knowledge about every topic he/she can, even if it may seem trivial at first. 
 
 This time, think of a quantum physics professor who knows a lot more than only quantum computers. Think of a well dressed professor who has something to say, even if it is very brief, on any topic that is brought on. Think of how much more he'll be respected than the ingorant one I talked about at the beginning of my essay. Think how much better a society could be even if half of its population consisted of people who tried to learn more on every topic. They would communicate in a much complex and in a much more humanistic way than the majority of the world does today, wouldn't they?