Advertisements are everywhere you look. You can find them in the newspapers, on the television screen, in magazines, and on big posters. These advertisements may be inevitable, but one question remains, do most advertisements make products seem much better than they really are?
 When hearing that question, Axe advertisements may instantly pop into ones head. An advertisements, which has been on television for a while, show women running after a man who used Axe deodorant. When thinking about that, it is probably hard to remember ever seeing a man run away from thousands of women chasing him because he uses axe. In this case on would probably have to say that they make false advertisement, or simply use an exageration to show that their product smells good.
 A product that definitely had false advertisement to it was the Nike Shox sneaker. In commercials for this sneaker it was said that the shoe makes the person who wears it jump higher, and that it was proven by experts. Later studies actually showed that the shoes merely took less pressure off of the back and joints, but did not really make the person jump higher. One has to say that despite it being a good shoe that supports the back and joints, such as knees, it is definitely not what it is made out to be, and therefore also a worse shoe.
 Another advertisements that make its product seem better that it really is, is the Powerade sports drink. Who has not seen the commercials of a quarterback in football throwing the ball to a receiver who then falls a couple of yards? With much guarantee, this did not happen in reality, but was advanced by computers, therefore the advertisement makes this product seem much better than it really is.
 One could definitely make a strong statement for businesses advertising its products much better than they actually are. As shown through Axe, Nike, and Powerade commercials, these brands often try to convince the costumers through exageration. One should not always take the advertisements completely serious, for some are clearly exagerating to bring a point across.