There are, indeed, a vast number of ways to succeed in life. Some may make attempts to immitate what the previous heros have done in order to be as successful as they were, and some may do only what they already know how to do well. However, there may be some others who try new things and take risks in their actions. Although all the ways of becoming successful in life mentioned previously may seem reasonable, I believe that  the genuine successful people try new, unique things that no one else has ever done in history, and this can be supported by using the example of some sports, and how some new ideas can influence the success of the team in its entirety. 
 Firstly, doing what people already know how to do well means that it lacks in originality and uniquness. This implies that what people are doing is not only familiar to the people who are using the method, but also to the people around them. It is possible to enhance the understanding of this point of view with an example of a soccer game and strategies that the coach uses in order to win a game. If the coach decides to use the strategy that he or she knows well, it implies that the other soccer teams would know how the players are going to approach the game, meaning that it would make the players on the opponent team easier to predict the actions that the players are going to take. This proposes that there is less chance of succeeding for the team that is using the familiar strategy to win.
 
 Secondly, trying new things can make not only the people themselves confident and content with their own actions, but also, the people who are watching them. In my opinion, the act of trying new things is truly able to cause a greater inspiration on the audience. 
 
 Although the act of trying new things may be perceived as being too adventurous and experimental, I sincerely believe that successful people try new things and take risks rather than only doing what they already know how to do well, based on my own experiences in the real-life situations.