I do not agree with the statement that it is better to have broad knowledge of many academic subjects than to specialize in one specific subject. In my opinion, we should concentrate our limited time and energy to one specific field and become the expert in it.
 
 First and formost, it is impossible to learn knowledge of various subjects well at the same time. We human race has accumulated so much knowledge throughout history that it is even impoosible for an individual to know all the names of every subject, needless to say to master a broad knowledge of many academic subjects. Even if the person is really talented at learning and can achieve this goal, he will find out that he has waste a lot of precious time which he can otherwise spend on entertainment or things which he is interested in.
 
 Secondly, it is unnecessary to understand the knowledge of some subjects which you may never has the chance to use in your lifetime. For example, if you are an mechanical engineer who specialize in auto-mobile designing, what is the point of learning how to design a nuclear bomb? Or suppose you are a student majoring in English Literature, what can you do with the knowledge of oil detection? 
 
 The most imporant reason is that, in today's fierce competition, one has to become special and indispensable in one field order to win the game. This requires the individual masters a skill which he can perform better than anyone else. We are living in a time when the knowledge is increasing in an unpreceding speed and there are numerous academic fields. It is well known that modern  competition is increasingly based on techonology and innovation. However, it is impossible to create new knowledge or devices without mastering the current existing knowledge well and knowing the subject perfectly. Those who are superficial is likely to lose the game, although they might know a lot of knowldge with other subjects.
 
 I have to admit that it is vital for a person to master the basic knowledge of some disciplines. For instance, the knowledge of dealing with a fire emergency is necessary for everyone. But we have to find the balance between specialization and universatilzation. 
 
 based on the former discuI strongly agree with the view that it is more important to specialize in one filed rather than get a broad knowledge with irrelevant fields.