I disagree with the statement that young people do not give enough time to helping their communities.
 First of all it indicates that young people in general are indifferent to their communities. This is not true. There is a huge amount of people who are engaged in social work and the number is not decreasing at all. Quite the reverse is happening. Perhaps due to the increasing anonymity in urban life and the decline of social security in Germany there are many people who do not want to watch this situation without doing something about it. Additionally young people might consider social engagement as a good opportunity to find new contacts, make friends and acquire a sensible task in their life, which especially young people often are still in search of. 
 In spite of the generalization made in the statement, I do agree that there is indeed a large amount of young people who do not care about helping their communities. This has to my mind several reasons.  First of all, growing up nowadays of during the past 20 years, the role of the communities in everyday life has decreased more and more. Many young people do not see the importance or necessity of communities. Their aim in society is obtaining a good education and achieving a successful career. Making this possible requires a lot of working and studying, which inevitably leads to the neclection of such things as voluntary work for the community. However, applying to a prestigiuos university or a well paid job requires more than having good grades. It is also extremely important to have an impressive CV, which proves that the person applying has also spend his or her spare time on helping other people or the community. Therefore I think that even the young people who care more about their own benefits and career join in helping their communities.
 
 To sum up the arguments it can be stated that although young people nowadays have an increasing pressure concerning their career, many still take their time to help in ther communities. However it cannot be denied, that there are some black sheep being indifferent to these kind of social events.