Giving enough time to help communities is an issue that has being of interest lately, specially in what regards to young people. It is believed that young people nowadays do not spend enough time in this activity as they should. Even though many youth organizations have been borned in the few couple of years many others have mostly dissapeared. Moreover, there has been an important change in life style during the last decades which has modified the availability of time for this activities.
 On one hand, there is evidence that this statement is not true. We have observed over the last couple of years an important increase in the number of youth organizations which try to cover this necesities and perform this tasks. Many young people get enrolled in them and try to help others, mostly in an anonymous way. In what regards to my country, I can think of several different organizations that try to encourage succesfully young people to get involved in their communities.
 On the other hand, it is true that organizations encharged of this type of activities excisted before, mainly related to churches or to religous beliefs. During the last decade, the sentiment of religious involvement has fallen drastically and young people nowadays do not usually relate to this groups. Therefore, while it is true that many youth groups which try to cover this neccesity have arised during the last couple of years, they are mostly covering the empty space left by religous groups. In the same sence, young people nowadays have less time to devote to this type of activities, since personal careers have becomed more demanding. For instance, in many countries fifty years ago women did not use to work or study and while they were young they usually took care of helping their communities. Nowadays, young women have a professional career as busy as man do.
 As a conclusion, I believe that even though it is true that young people spend less time helping their communities compared to what young people devoted to this activities fifty years ago did, is also true that young people's life has changed drastically and there has been an important reduction in the amount of available free time to perform them. Therefore, I do not agree to the statement, since the word enough is not proper for this context. Young people devote less hours but it may be enough given the amount of free hours they have left after taking care of all their responsabilities.