It is widely said that young people do not consider their communities and tend to do whatever they want to without thinking how people are annoyed by them. If you watch some programs for middle ages on television, you may hear this kind of comments frequently. However, I disagree with the opinion. Young people, especially  univer sity students have enough time and, in fact, help thier communities. University students are encouraged to help thier communities in and out of classes.
 
 First of all, university students tend to have much more time to use thier time for helping thier communities. It may be true that young people like highschool students do not have much time to use freely because of the entrance examination of universities. In some societies, especially in Korea and Japan, young people are stressed to go to better universities and be employed by walthy companies. However, students in universities less worry about examinations any more though, ofcourse, there still be term examinations.  
 
 Second of all, some universities even encourage students to help thier communities. In fact, some universities have service learning courses which let students to do volunteer work and learn its importance and difficulties. Some students may prefer to go to work for communities which is far from their own, the others do for their own, which is much easier than going to futher areas.
 
 Finally, some students do help thier communities as an off campus activity. talking about my own experience, I was a member of the musical club which held mussicals or other thiatrical perfomances for small children and elder people at kindergartens and community centers as volunteers. The off campus activities cannot be limited on thaeatrical performaces but be varied. Students can enjoy thier activities and, at the same time, help thier communities.
 
 University students have enough time than others and do help thier communities in class and also out of class as activities. In conclusion, I further disagree with the opinion that young people do not help people because of  no time to do.