Nowdays, books contain a lot of information which we know or we might not know and it is a very good tool for us to improve our knowledge by understanding the ideas or concepts from books, so most people think that understanding idear or concepts are more important than learning facts; however, i totally disagree with that due to the source of book and knowledge which is outside of the books.
 Obviously, the reason for understanding ideas from book is important  is that book contains a lot of information which are believable and reliable, but have you think about how does those book come from?. usually the all the knowledge is from the outside of the book and book is just a collection for those idea or concepts which were found by practice. Take the example of the shape of earth, long time ago, people learn that the shape of earth is square from the book and they understood this information without doubt. However, the true is not the same as the concepts that earth is square but round. Thus, could you say that understanding the concepts is more significant than learning facts? of course not, people usually take many practice in order to indicate the concepts and learning from the fact is more memeroable and more trustable.
 Moreover, there are abundant of knowledge which are outside of the concepts. To be more precise, our knowledge is changing every miumit every secand, so if you just understand the concepts, that is not enough. In addition, if you learning facts, you will not only know the concept which is from the real life but also it will be unforgetable for you. In particular, when i learn table tennis by myself, i always take many practice in order to reach the correct positure or action. After my practice, i realize how can i do it right and how can i change some movement in order to confuse my partner and win the games. briefly, the ideas are from the real life and if you just understanding the concepts without experience, you will be useless.
 In conclusion, understanding the idea or concepts is very important and very useful for our future, yet if you ignore the value of learning from the facts, you can not be successfull in the future. After all, all the concepts are from the real life and they are changing by the experience of fact as time passes.