I agree with the claim that young people nowaday do not give enough time to helping their communities. There are many reasons visible in this world of today to say so.
 
 First of all in todays compititive world all youngsters are running behind their dreams. This makes them less available to contribute towards their community. They dont get enough time from their schools, classes and extra training sessions, which may be regarding sport or education. Younsters think that if they dont take their field of study or sport seriously and instead give more time to thier community they may fall way behind in terms of other in the compitition. In short in todays world they dont have any time other then for their carieer.
 
 With the higher sophistication in todays life. Everybody especially youngsters spend more time in discoses and pubbs, movies theaters and partying. They give a great deal of importance to such things then contributing to community. As they why to waste time in contributing their community as they can enjoy their life for a more amount of time.
 
 Also the point of view of thinking of todays youngsters is totally different . They think how will they be benifited by doing something for the community. for instance, what will they get, if they spread the message of keeping their surrounding gardens, beaches, etc. cleen by sending fliers and bills. they always expect something in exchange to do something. 
 
 The lack of awareness about their duties and responsibilities towards their community have made them to avoid their obligations towards their community. What we lear in our schools and colleges is not enough for an individual especially an youngster to implement totally. Even the parents have to chip in some advices and thought in their growing child by introducing and making him or her know what part of the commuinty do he belong and how can he contribute in the welfare of their commuinty.
 
 Thus due to lack of awareness, no time for activity other then their carriers, and sophistication of life style  youngster are not giving enough time to their communities.