The statement that there would be fewer cars in use in the next twenty years compared to today seems a far fetched and over ambitious thought.  The reasons why I seriously doubt the authenticity of this claim are as follows.
 The cars have been for the past century been considered one of the most reliable form of transport . It has been employeed by people living in all sorts of geographic locations across the globe.These mechanical wonders are known to be convenient, and are durable enough to sustain a life time of10- 15 years at a bare minimum. The skilled labour which is used for car maintenance is also present in abundance.Thereby, Its never a big problem if the car develops some flaws.So far,no such alternative has come up which can actually substitute the cars.
 Agreed there have been a few problems in terms of the pollution caused by the car engines which is leading to a sharp increase in global warming.But this doesn't really means we need to discard the cars altogether.All that is needed is some form of modification in the type of engines employeed in the cars.For instance, Gas engines could lead way to electic engines. Also the recent developments in the discovey and application of Biodiesel could go a long way in ensuring that the cars are in use for the decades to come.This sorts out the much hyped problem of diminshing fossil fuels which had been used so far for operating the cars.
 Assuming that we do get a breakthrough technology today, which provides  a more efficient and economically viable option to the cars, I seriously doubt whether that transition from cars to the newer option could be even half complete in a limited time span of 20 years.There are a number of practical and financial aspects involved which would impede such transition at a rapid pace.The powerful car manufacturers cant be expected to go out of business that soon.They employ millions of skilled labour all over the world.And for the benefit of the global economy, increased usage and number of cars is the required symptom.
 Car manufacturing companies will try their level best to ensure that cars still remain a lucrative option for people by introducing modifiactions in the present cars from time to time.The amount of money poured into researches in improving the car is likely to make the cars better, attractive and far more efficient. The much awaited use of artificial intelligence interfaced with cars is already anticipated to create quite a stir.These next generation cars can not be easily supplanted by any other form of transport, and if at all, then certainly not in next 20 years.
 It would be safe to say that cars will continue to stay an integral part of our lives in the coming decades and continue to enchant us.