Either from news articles of a magazine or stories told by close friends and relatives, you'll get many chances to hear about travels. In fact, travel is a common topic in conversation and an important part of our experiences. But, if you actually think about persuing a trip to a place you've never been before, you'll have to make a crucial decision on the method of traveling: travel in a group led by a tour guide or travel without a tour guide. But, considering the many pleasures you'll miss by choosing a travel led by a tour guide, the former method cannot be the best way of travel. 
 
 People, who support the idea of traveling in a group led by a tour guide, maintains that this method can reduce mistakes and accidents involved in confronting a new culture and place. For example, if you travel to Thailand and touch a person in the head by your left hand, you'll find a irate person without really knowing the reason. Of course, travel with a tour guide will prevent these mistakes. But, as mistakes lead to better understanding of a different culture and make the travel itself more memorable, mistakes itself constitute a valuable part of your travel. People supporting travel with a tour guide is overlooking this essential part of travel. 
 
 There are also disadvantages involved in travel in a group led by a tour guide itself. First, this kind of traveling leaves you with no opportunities to meet local people. As a great traveler and novelist in Korea once pointed out, three essential elements of travel are nature, food, and people. By traveling with a tour guide, you have to follow the rules in the group and are always busy following the group's schedules. This leaves you no time to have a nice conversation with the local people and no chance to make a friend. This shows that travel with a tour guide is lacking one the essential elements of traveling.
 
 Second, travel led by a tour guide leaves no room for you to obtain a better understanding of the region. Of course, traveling in a group led by a tour guide will lead you to see the monuments that represent that region in a more efficient way. If you travel Rome, the capital of Italy, in this way, you will be very impressed with the old monuments such as the Colosseum and will want to visit again. But, you will miss the golden opportunity to see the various streets of Rome and better understand the current situation of Italy, which would've led to a better understanding of the culture of Italy.
 
 In conclusion, travelling in a group led by a tour guide prevents you from meeting the people of the local region and gaining a better understanding of the local culture. Even mistakes made by travelling without a guide will enrich your travelling experience and make it more memorable. Hence, the argument that the best way of travel is in a group led by a tour guide cannot be justified.