Enjoyment is the basic ingredient of Life. Enjoyment basically needs time, mood and the passion for it. Enjoyment should not be trapped within the boundaries of age. An old person can also enjoy just like a young person does and sometime can do even more than youngsters so, I do not agree with the statement. 
 
 Older people have more time to enjoy the life peacefully and comfortablly. Most of them are retired and are over with their responsibilities. They can always utilize this time in doing the thing they like and enjoy most. Fo instance i have a friend whose grand parent remain free all the time and mostly  they stay out of the house. They have joined so many clubs and societies. They visit some new tourist place every year for the sake of outing. They are living life much better than there son who is always busy with the loads of work. 
 
 Old person does not have any responsibility on him so by that he can always enjoy his work, his trips better, regardless of what is happening back at home. They can concentrate only on present without thinking about risks of future because of the major responsibilities like kids , business has been covered or being tranfered to the kids. 
 
 The enjoyment does not always means  freaking out with the friends, dancing, clubing etc. Every person has its own way to enjoy the life.Some person do not do any evident thing but still they enjoy their life For example my aunty enjoys sitting home, listening and reading mythological topics. She enjoys viewing her grand childrens activities a lot and these kind of things can only be tasted at the older age.
 
 On the contrary older people are mostly the victims of some major health problems. They fail to enjoy the time because of their disabilities. They are not aware of the modern ways to enjoy and hence limit themselves to the  limited sphere of influence. They also have limited amount of money to finance their trips  mandatory for the enjoyment.
 
 Finally i would epitomize it by saying that enjoyment does not sees the age, it just goes after your passion for it. However old you may be, however scarce you can be , you can always learn the ways to enjoy your life according to the circumstances