In the last hundred years the world communities are changing a lot. The behavior of the younger people is caused by these changings and I think there are helping much more than the most elder people belief. 
 First of all we think about the values the younger people are judged with beeing less usefull than other generations. The most importent argument for a wide range of people is the behavior in face of the families. Families changed a lot, especialy in the western part of the world. In past times every generation of the family was living at one place, for poorer people could be not even a place maybe it was a room. There were not any social system to help them. There for the family members cared for each other much more than the state could do. Nowertimes the question of caring for each other is conected with the society as stongly as it is conected to family. The number of the family members dimishes strongly. There are today less young people and more old people than in earlier times, because of medical inventions. In Germany for example the pension system is working between generation. The working people are paying the pension for the older people. The problem of pension in future is based on the demogafic relation of young and old parts of the society.
 The younger people mabe do not care for there parents themselfs, mayne they pay other people, who care for them. But acctually they pay a lot for the pensions of people they not even know. Additionally young people in Germany are helping their communities much more than another generation ha ever done, becaus they are paying a system that will not benefit themself, so they have to care for their own future as well. Finally youngre people are less secure in the development of the society as the older generations are and that for there have to care for themself and other people too. Maybe that is the reason, why some people think nowerdays young people are not helping their communities, but they do it as much as they can.