Somebody might say, that as people grow richer, more people can afford cars, while others might argue, that as fossil fuels grow scarce, people will abondan cars for more energy saving means of transport such as busses and trains. In this topic I will represent both of these opinions, and give my personal opinion on it, too.
 
 When the car was invented, in the late 19th century, no one would have expected this invention to become as big as it is now. A long time after the invention had been done, only the very rich could afford a car, and the advantages of having one were very limited. There were not enough paved roads, the cars were slow and unreliable, and there were plenty of other forms of transportation around, that seemed a lot more promising for the future. However, due to mass production the prices for cars dwindled, highways got built and thanks to the world wide economic recovery in the fifties and sixties most people in the industrialized world were able to purchase motor vehicles. While the market for cars in the developed world might have been saturated years ago,  third world countries have been able to increase the number of cars in use there dramatically over the last decade or so. And as many of these countries seem to boom at an insane pace, who knows just how many cars will circulate on this planet in 20 years time. It might seem like there is no limit to it.
 
 However, I personally do not agree with that. This is mainly due to two current developments that have been taken place for quite a while now: The energy source, that most cars run on is gas. However oil reserves are being used up and some experts claim that within some decades from now, all of the earth's oil will have been depleted. So unless a new way of making cars run is discovered, fewer and fewer cars will be able to run.  The other development, unfavorable to a gro is global warming: People all over the globe have realized, that CO2 emission caused by cars (and many other things as factories,powerplants and so on) is damaging the ozon layer, which is needed to keep the earth's temperature stable. By using public transportation instead of one's personal vehicle a lot of these CO2 emission could be reduced. It might also be possible that governments, will interfere puting a quota on how much each person can drive his car. So my personal opinion is that cars will be less used by the year 2026 than now.
 
 If, however, alternative power sources for cars like hydrogen or solar energy, became cheaper, I personally cannot tell whether more or less cars will be in use in 20 years time.