Do you like lying on the long long beaches in Harwaii? Do you prefer to stay at home to work or go shopping without suffering from the traffic jam or the serious weather? The answer of course is yes. Those, to some extent, demonstrate kinds of life styles of the current young people. Therefore, I definitely agree that young people enjoy life more than older one do. 
 
 Why do young people are more likely to enjoy life than old ones? In my opinion, a large number of factors contribute to this phenomenon such as economic level, science and technolgy development, culture factor, or some social conditions. 
 
 Economic condition is the basic root that provides the basis for young people that they can enjoy life since it is not necessary for young people to work as hard as their parents did because survival is never an issue for them. As a result, they do not spend more time meeting  physiology and safety needs which are first two basic personal requirements proposed by Maslow. Therefore, unlike their parents or grandparents, young people logically spend more time to continue to purse some higher level of personal needs such as love and self-achievement requirements. This process is just one of young people to enjoy life. 
 
 Thanks for  the advancement of science and technology, the young people have hardwares to support them to enjoy life more than old ones.  Due to the Internet development, an increasing number of SOHO(small office home office, that means people can work at home) appears among young people. They can comfortably sit in front of computer to work or study without travelling to the offices or univerisities. In addition, they can go shopping, see the doctor or communicate with others through networks. Of course, they  can organize their own time efficiently so they can do what they want to do in a flexible timetalbe. Comparing with the old ones, who have to suffer from dirty air or noisy work environment,  young people can not only finish their work, but also in a comfortable way. 
 
 To sum up, it is reasonable to conclude that young people have more opportunities than the old ones to enjoy life due to the advanced science and technology, improved economic level as well as some changed culture ideas.