No one can escape the absorbing experience offered by traveling. There are lots of ways for people to travel around, such as traveling in a group or going on one's own. Some people may like to travel on their own; however, as far as I am concerned, not only obtaining better information about the places one vist can a travel in a group offers, but it will allow people know more friends.
 First, the more likely one visits a place with a group, the more information he will konw as to this places, the better he will enjoy his journey. To acquire a full appreciation of what this means, we can turn to a common example. When a girl travals to Beijing, the capital of China, she will want to know the backgrouds of Beijing as much as possible. If she joins a group, she can ask the guide and then she will be acquainted with, for example, the history, the culture, the food and even the economy of Beijing. In addition, when she goes to the well-known place-The Great Wall, she also can enjoy so many funny stories about this place form the guide. Obviously, it is the guide that can permit a colorful trip.
 What is more, traveling with many people can also provide a potential function, that is, one can make more friends. For instance, in a trip to America, a chinese girl may share a lot of time with a boy from Japan. During the precious time, they will talk a lot concerning the beautiful sceneries they visit, and moreover they can communicate with each other about their own countries. After the journey, they may become good friends. In addition, with a group, one also can receive help easily when he encounters some troubles, including diseases.
 However, there are still other people who will maintian the advantages of traveling alone. The reason given by them reats on a belief that they will safe more time when a group of people discuss where to visit. Towards this opinion, I must say they will regret when facing difficulties which they could not handle by themselves.
 From what has been discussed above, a concrete conclusion can been drawn that although much more time will be saved when traveling on one's own, when it comes to better understanding the places one visit and more friends to enjoy the journey together, traveling in a group will carry more weight. With so mand benefits, why shouldn't people travel with a group?