To me this statement seems reasonable because ideas and concepts are necessary to understand why something is as it is and how it developed. Concepts and ideas connect facts, describe and explain their relationship to each other and make processes understandable. Furthermore they enable students to think beyond what is observable, to cast a light on related issues, analyse facts and developments or to make predictions or suggestions for the future. Thus, concepts and ideas are theoretical approaches to the observable world and the basic element of what we would generally regard as science. Learning and understanding ideas and concepts is therefore necessary to study seriously and eventually to be a good scientist.
 A further step is developing your own ideas and concepts on what you know empirically. This shows that you not only understand the relationship of facts and what is behind them but that you are also able to be productive and creative in finding new explanations and forms of analysing something. Although it is certainly not required to develop an own theory in order to be a good student, having individual ideas is fundamental for your personal development and an intellectual necessarity at any university.
 So, I would say that the statement is correct although one should keep an important aspect in mind: in order to understand ideas and concepts you have to know the facts at first. And this means that you really have to know as much as possible about a special topic because facts are the unavoidable basis of concepts and ideas or theories. Lacking important information may not only result in complete disability to understand concepts but can also cause misinterpretations that change the meaning of an idea, theory or concept totally and thus lead the student into a completely wrong direction which might have serious consequences. So, in the end, it is important to stress that learning facts is definitely necessary. But they still are only the basis. Real understanding of a topic also means that you have to understand the concepts and ideas behind the pure facts. That is what makes ideas and theoretical approaches so important.