Today, the major means for transportation is automobile. Especially in Europe and America, a family may own up to 4 cars for a household of four people. When added together, it makes a whole lot of cars out there. But the main reason behind this is that owning a car is the most convenient way to get around, and since it is private property, you can use it anytime you want. I believe that the number of cars may decrease in twenty years' time for some reasons.
 
 The first reason is more like sci-fi. As we are introduced to a new technology everyday, it is plausible enough to dream of a different means of transportation as convenient and private as a car, such as private helicopters. I have to admit twenty years may not be long enough for scientists to invent small enough helicopters that would fit the roofs of suburban houses. But as I said, it is plausible, at least to me.
 
 The more solid reasons why I believe that there will be fewer cars in near future concern ecological, demographic and environmental issues. It is already obvious that the world is becoming over-populated, especially at city centers. At such places, the traffic is jammed more than anywhere else. Dangerous gases that cars produce not only pollute the air, they also affect the course of climates, changing . They also harm the health of people. It could be argued that we can get rid of the pollution by using fuels other than gas, but the problem of traffic would still remain, hence it would not be a complete solution.Concerned scientists and engineers are already thinking about ways to lessen the number of cars. One good way to do that is to establish better means of public transportation: wide enough to reach anywhere a person may want to go at all hours of the day. Such a solution would avoid traffic jams and cause less air pollution.
 
 With a good public transportation, especially if it costs cheaper than gas, people would be encouraged to use it instead of cars. Hence, the number of cars would decrease in near future. I believe this change will take place in near future and we will hopefully see less cars on the roads.