Life is so diverse, that as much as a person learns throughout his/her life, there is always more. There does not exist a limit for learning, and new discoveries and creations pop up daily in our everyday news, growing in a parallel mode with the ever imrpoving technology. As a matter of fact, a successful person is not one who knows a lot, but one who knows how, when and where to apply his/her knowledge in the best way available.
 
 A person who has mastered something (X) he/she does, is automatically better qualified to do and improve (X) than someone who has never seen or heard about it. Each human being has specific characteristics and environmental cultures that bound his/her ability of the things he/she has learned. Sometimes, these limits are highly disadvantageous, yet they would not make this person specifically unsuccessful, because with the right knowledge at one specific task, he/she can sublime in a way even the best educated person on the globe could not. 
 
 On the other hand, trying new things and taking new risks are very important in today's world, but it does not yet make it more successful a person who does it than one who does not. In fact, innovations and risks should always be tried for newly developed ideas and for the person to improve his/her skills and learn about most things a little.
 
 This concept is very well illustrated when compared to how the agricultural revolution evolved as an example. Imagine if a farmer would have to plant all types of fruits and vegetable, that at the end would barely be sufficient for his family survival in contrast to every one farmer specializing in a specific fruit or vegetable and than barter and trade with the others. Like that, each one farmer would definitely profit more with the specialization, and as a result also consume the best quality goods altogether. This shows that sometimes it is also benefitial to specialize in a specific ability to have the best results, because if everyone would like to do everything by himself the world would not go on. Now again, this does not mean that having some overall knowledge would be harmful.
 
 In conclusion, a successful person is a rather  relative term. Because success can be attained with hard-work and loyalty to a goal. No matter the amount of risks and innovations taken, specializing yourself can be equally granted. Have you ever imagined if professional athletes stopped playing basketball, football, or baseball, would they still be successful?