In my opinion, people who are trying try new things and taking risk are more successful than people who are keeping on doing what they know well.
 
 First, I will use my own experience to illustrate my opinion, I like to make birthday parties for friends.That means called people, book the restaurant, etc. A month ago, I made a birthday party for a friend of mine, since i'm not a risky person with my friends,I didn't choose to make something completely new like strip club or something like that. I made a regular party like I do every year, restaurant and then clubbing. It was supposed to be a suprise but I noticed that my friend guessed my plan before. On the birthday, he wasn't suprised at all. I guess if I would have done something different by changing my initial plan, my friend would be more enthousiast. I didn't take the risk of disappointing him. He would be more suprised by something new instead of that I kept on doing the same thing. 
 
 In the worklife, I'm quite different than I'm in my private life since I like to take risks, discover new things and improve myself in order to evolve in the company. By taking risk, I avoid being boring and unproductive at work. For example, my boss asked me to do a new software with some specifications. I made all of that with the team, but I wanted to add some improvements that make the software more easier to use for a new user. Some of the team members didn't agree with my thought because they wanted to focused on the specifications and nothing else. I took the risk by myself, I didn't tell anyone of my will of adding new features for the software.I added something that wasn't asked, I could be fired for that but in the other hand I could get consideration thanks to that. 
 
 
 To conclude if you want to evolve in your worklife or even in your social life, I think you have to take risks in order to first, evolve in your company, prevent your life from being boring and discover new possibilities of life. 
 People who are always doing the same thing, do that thing well but they stay at the same level of accomplishment, they can upgrade their skills but not that much if you take risks.