Yes. I do agree that most of the advertisements make products seem much better than they really are.
 
 Advertisements infact in today's world do not only mean the disposition of the product's essential features and its looks. 
 Instead they are supposed to be a glorified dispay of the product with the fake promise that it is and will prove out to be a very valuable product, which will indeed provide enough customer satisfaction. In some cases  the promise may turn out to be true as it totally depends on the the company and the "product", the real one.
 Advertisements are supposed to be in some cases only heart winners ! I say only because the products of that same field, competitive products are all but equal in terms of quality or quantity they provide. Its only upon the marketing and advertising faculties of the organization if it can make it look "much better than it really is". And only when it makes a place in the customers' heart would it be sold and the profitsfor the company flourish. 
 
 In a world of competition, the manufacturer is compelled to make the product percieved as the best it can be. And indeed as supported by the studies of the current markets, the products that are well advertised are the most sought after by the particular segment customers. Indeed if you add a bit of sheen to your product or make it look bigger, better, "tasty" or tempting to the public on the T.V, magazines or any other means of the media, chances are that the customers in and except your clientele would be atleast somewaht lured the product. And though they might buy it only after careful examination of the product and considerable reviews from there friends, they are atleast ushered to go to the markets and check out how and what it really is. Now the actual sales of a product would obviously depend partially on how well it really resembles the advertisement "glorification" and partially on the competition it faces.  
 So in my opinion the advertisement in todays world is a neccessary part of the marketing process. As real it can be kept, it should be. But i would consider it compulsory to give a bit of weight to the product adn its features.