There are two ways of travelling. One is travelling in a group led by a tour guide and the other is travelling by our own. There are advantages and disadvantages in each ways and people have different views of choosing which one is superior than the other. My opinion is that travelling with a tour guide is not better than travelling myself. There are several reasons of my opinion.
 
 Firstly, many people choose to travel in a group in order to save money. It is certainly true. However sometimes a tour guide take travellers to shopping and makes people to spend more money than they expected to. This issue has been pointed out many times in the news. 
 
 Secondly, the time for a travel is limited when travelling in a group. Usually, tour guides has planned their schedule for each day. For example, when we are going to a museum, tour guides give certain time for staying in that museum because they have to move to another place. In this case traveller can not go through the place carefully because they have to hurry.
 
 Thirdly, the reason I prefer travelling by myself is that I can visit anywhere I want to. I do not have to move within the group.  For example, if I visit the foreign country, I always go to the market first. It is because market is the place that I can feel their culture and meet people originally living in that place. However, usually, tour guide do not take travellers to the local market. Instead, they take people to department store where they can spend money. 
 
 Lastly, several disagreement can occur when travelling in a group. When I was travelling China with some Chinese, we have to argue for the food that we want to eat. Therefore we had to travel rest of the days without talking to each other. People travelling in a group have to consider characteristics of people in the group. Otherwise they have to travel in a uncomfortable conditions. 
 
 In colclusion, the reason I prefer travelling by my own is that travelling in a group can cost more money, the time and places for travel is limited and dispute can take place. I love travelling therefore i travel a lot, these points are based on my experiences.