The belief that successful people attempt to take new risks rather than to continue in the way they have been doing is quite absurd. The fact that times change is very true but that doesn't indicate procedures changing in parallel with time. Many people might disagree in moving with the pragmatic manner that  successful people have been doing in so far as they've been successful. Nevertheless, venturing in new things and taking risks is for the short term idea of accomplishment whereas following the steady route in conducting behavior is for the long term method of success.
 In most cases, the new up and coming businessmen aim to to get rich and do it fast. In response to such a demeanor, history shows that almost all successful people have followed a certain method of procedure which has led them to success. Those who do ventrue in risky business might hit the jackpot and prosper tremendously but due to their volatile methods, they almost always plummet back down to starting from scratch. 
 It is known that as the world becomes more modern it's the people's responsibility to change and adapt to the contemporary world in order to succeed. It's irrational to oppose such a statement. However, adaptation and taking risks by trying new things are two distinct concepts. One should never risk all the fruits of their labor for higher success because it may backlash. Successful people that have remained wealthy have usually started off from scratch to earn money in abundance over the years by hard and disciplined work. So, it's very difficult for a successful person to take risks to throw away what he or she has worked a life time for.
 People who have inherited money or simply won the lottery don't have as much trouble as successful ones in taking risks. This is simply because they haven't shown the fortitude that another has shown in working all their life. The harmony in acknowledging the idea that success comes from strict and disciplined method of procedure might not be unanimous. However, history has shown that a steady and pragmatic manner of leading a life is the route for long term success.