As a student myself, the question of whether it is necessary to acquire the knowledge or to merely learn the fact about it has been pounding quite often through my experience of learning. Obviously, it takes far more time and efforts to entirely understand the knowledge whereas sometimes it is mandatory for students to roughly learn the facts according to the requirement of their curriculum. In my opinion, I completely agree with the point of view in the statement that it is far more important for students to understand the ideas and concepts.
 
 First of all, to be able to understand the ideas is to master the knowledge, which requires students to be quite familiar with the fields of knowledge where a great deal of researches have to be done before one could reach such level of understanding. Through the way of reseaching, students can not only learn the history and origin of such concepts but also gain a deep impression of the knowledge itself. The knowledge that is totally understood will last a long time and thus becomes the life-time fortune for students.
 
 Secondly, a rough knowledge of facts wouldn't help students to learn further. Some education systems ask their students to remember a certain facts on the textbook as a way to learn knowledge. In this way, students might pass their exams with impressive marks by staying up late to cram through the textbook but there wouldn't be much knowledge left for them after the test, which to many of them is a massive loss as well as a waste of efforts. If students have a better understanding of the knowledge, they are able to apply their knowledge to real life and solve problems easily. 
 
 Last but not the least, having a good understanding of ideas and knowledges inspires students to go further beyond. It helps the students to foster a great interest of the knowledge and drives them to "dig a deeper hole". "Interests is the best teacher." The mission of learning is to carry on the experience and wisdom of the past and walk farther in civilization. The inspiration students gain from their understanding of ideas and concepts helps to broaden their horizons, to see the world in a multi-dimension perspect, and eventually to foster noble values and beliefs.
 
 Learning, as we all know, is a life-time experience. Therefore, it is quite crusial to find the best way to learn. Apparently, "burning the mid-night oil" is not the perfect method that many educators approve. Teachers should encourage their students to understand thoroughly the ideas and concepts rather than to just learn the facts. Be a smart learner, not a facts-collector!