In my opinion, it would be better to have broad knowledge of many academic subjects than to specialize in a particular subject. Two main reasons can be given to support my opinion.
 Firstly, having knowledge about a broad range of subjects widens a person's perspective. In today's world, we are confronted with many different situations each of which requires a unique way of handling. A project about the construction of a bridge can be given as an example to this situation. A construction engineer deals with just the calculations required to make the bridge resistant to the pressures of cars and trucks that will pass on it. However, there are many complementary aspects of this issue that should be taken into account. The financial availability of the project, the environmental consequences of building the bridge there, the possible resistance of people living at that neighbourhood should all be considered. If that engineer took courses regarding those issues, he would surely approach the issue in a more comprehensive way which is necessary.
 Second, having broad knowledge of many subjects gives a person the flexibility to specialize in whatever field he wishes to. Unfortunately, the best example showing the importance of this includes me. I was entitled to register to the computer engineering department as a result of the university entrance exam. In the beginning, things went well but soon afterwards the nightmare began. I understood that I would not want to be a computer engineer and I had to reenter the exam in order to change my department. I had no other choice. I was lucky to be able to change my department afterwards but many people in my country can not find this opportunity and this forces them to have a job they don't like for all their lives. Obviously, if students were given the opportunity to gain knowledge about a variety of subjects in their first year in the university and then choose what they want, the problem would be eliminated.
 As a result, acquiring knowledge about various subjects seems better because of providing people with a deeper outlook on events and giving them the opportunity to choose the career that is best suited to them.