By looking at the people around me and the society, I could see that young people tent to enjoy life more than older people do. I think it is true that the young people enjoy their life than most older people do as the young people think more positively than older people do and as the young people try to do everything in enjoyable ways. 
 First of all, young people have positive minds that they try to accept things in good way even though they are not in a fondable situation. But in contrast, old people worry first and afraid to put in actions before they start. In  my opinion, this is because the young people believe that they still have a lot of years to live so that they always try to carry out experimental things and try new things. On the other hand, older people think that they do not have long lives left. they always try to be care and think more before they carry out any things. For example, when I and my father goes to a restaurant, we often choose different meals. My father always choose the same menu that he had last time but I always choose different meals and sometimes try new ones if the restaurant invented one. Like this, older people do not like change their normal routine and get out of tract when young people like to change and try new more. 
 Secondly, young people tend to enjoy life more than older people do as the young people take things easy and try to enjoy everything they do. I think it is true that young people seek out for something that is interesting and fun while older people find everything seems to be same. For example, I went to a market with my grandmother and when we got to there,  my grandmother only went straight to the section where it has things that she has to buy. However, when I entered, I walked around the most sections and saw things that are displayed and read notes on it. Like this, young people find interesting facts for themselves even from boring things when the older people only look for what they want. 
 Overall, I agree on the statement that young people enjoy life more than older people do as young people are always open-minded and make thing enjoyable for themselves in their ways.