In a world filled with knowledge and a variety of educational lines, one has a great number of subjects to choose from. It is better to have a broad knowledge of many academic subjects than to specialize in one particular subject.
 A prospective student may want to pursue his career learning only the subjects he requires. An architect, for example, would want to study Physics and Mathematics, as subjects like these help him in his field. Though English literature and environmental sciences are not required in his field, they pass on some principles that would help him through life's race. A look into the environment may help him to select different types of material to be used in construction, so as to keep the environment safe. After his education, he would come out more knowledgable.
 During one's schooling, one is exposed to a variety of subjects like History and Geography. Did you ever come across this time when you wonder - "Why? What use is this going to be to me in the future? Will the knowledge of what happened to my country a thousand years ago help me in the future? 20 years later, will anyone ask me how high Mt.Everest is?". Though this information may seem useless at that age, after progressing through life's obstacles, one realizes that the knowledge one had gained by studying such subjects is very precious and valuable. We now remember that Mt. Everest is 8997 Metres high and is going higher every year. It gives us a sense of superiority and pleasure that we, after so many years, remember such tiny details.
 Specializing in one specific subject may give the student more time to understand the subject and achieve perfection. Specializing may give one an edge over others. But when we emerge into society, ready to make a difference to our lives, the lives of others, or the world as a whole, we realize that a broader knowledge of subjects is better than specializing in one subject. With knowledge comes power, and with power comes responsibility. It is our responsibility to make this world a better place.