The question of whether young people enjoy life more than older people do is a very important question, epsecially when considering that with modern medicine people are continously enabled to grow older and older. Even though I would in general agree with the statement, several aspects should be kept in mind when answering this question as well.
 The first question that comes to mind when reading the statement is what can be understood under "enjoying life". Personally, I believe this includes things such as travelling and exploring new cultures, interacting with friends, having fun etc. When considering that older people generally tend to have a worse health than younger people, I would thus say that younger people do enjoy life more, simply because they are more able to. For example, my grandmothers back continously hurts. Thus, she is impeded from taking long walks, traveling or any other enjoyable activity which implies a substantial amount of physical activity. In that sense, I am able to enjoy life more than she is, because I am in better health and do not continously suffer from pain. 
 Furthermore, I would say that young people enjoy life more than older people because we have more opportunities to do so. For example, there are vasts amounts of activites for younger people to do in their free time, such as going to the disco or cinema, doing sports with friends, etc. Of course, older people attend or participate in these activities as well, but I believe that it is more common for younger people to do so, as younger people tend to have more free time than older people. Additionally, when in school or studying, young people see and have the possibility to hang out with their friends every day. Older people, however, are more confined to their jobs, and tend to have their friends outside of their job area. Furthermore, older people are often confronted with the death of their friends, which often results in older people growing more and more lonely. Young people on the other hand still have their whole life ahead of them and thus constantly explore new ways of living and enjoying life. 
 Of course, it must be kept in mind that my perspective on older people results from the fact that I am still young. There are many reasons for why older people may enjoy life more than young people as well, one of which would for example be that they have already achieved a lot in life and are not anymore "lost" and trying to find out what to do with their future. Thus, even though I agree with the statement, I would say it`s more a matter of young people being ABLE to enjoy life more, not a matter of people naturally becoming grumpy or discontented over time. All in all, I would thus say enjoying life comes down to a matter of health and free time to a large extent, both of which young people tend to have more of.