I do not think that the best way to travel is with a group led by a tour guide. First, If you limit yourself to the movements and decision of one group, say of people from your own country, you may not be able to know the locals and learn from their worldviews and traditions. How many time have you seen a packed group of tourists interacting only among themselves and thinking that the guide's opinions and beliefs represent the opinion and feelings of all the community? When visiting another country or place, I like melting with the locals, meeting as many people as I can and learning directly from their everyday actitivies and their own ideas. Second, you may think that tour guiding visits are more informative or convinient in terms of time and money. However, truth is that many times guided-tours are more expensive and time consuming than individual, self-informed visits. Tour guides in Costa Rica for example usually charge excessive amounts of money to tourists for activities that would not be so expensive if done alone or with the help of a local friend. Depending on the site you are visiting, in a guided-tour you will only get the information that has been included in the guide's "menu" and, sometimes, this information may not be as accurate as you think. For examples, in Costa Rica many times tour guides are brought from a different place just because they know the language of the tourists or because they have more education than locals. They were not born in the place or city where they work and, therefore, they frequently do not know all the particular details of the place or its hidden history. Guided-tours are usually only offered in certain schedules that may not be the most suitable for your interests. Besides, you may fall into the trap of overplanning your trip, and end up stressed by the pressures of getting up early to catch the shuttle or having to comply with time-limited breaks for breakfast, lunch or going to the bathroom. Finally, in guided-tours you have to follow the pace of the group when walking around the halls of a museum or an old church. If alone, you can stop whenever you want, skip what you considere unimportant or just going somewhere else. Definitely, guided-tours and traveling in a group is not as fascinating as traveling on your own, having the time to interact with locals, taking certain risks that will definitely enrich your experience abroad and will give you enough material to entertain your friends and family back at home.