There are conflicting views whether young people enjoy life more than older people do. It depends on the location the person lives or the background situation the person underwent. Nevertheless, in my opinion, yound people enjoy life more as they have not encounted much, thus everything will be novel and exciting for them, plus, they have healthy bodies that permit them to enjoy life and young people tend to be less stressed, thus enjoy life more.
 
 Generally, the younger the person is, the less experiences s/he had gone through. Therefore, everything they do, it will be exicting for them as it would be a novel experience  for them. To exemplify this idea, a young person who travels by air will be enthusiastic, as for them, plane travel could be something extraordinary and novel, contrary to an older person who has already had abounding number of air travels. For that older person, it would be tiring and unenjoyable. 
 
 More importantly, it is no exaggeration to say that the state of one's health determines whether a person can enjoy life more than others. It is a known fact that the younger the person is, the healthier s/he is. 
 To many, climbing the Himalaya mountains could mean enjoying life, seeing the natural beauty of the planent. Trekking for a month to climb the ever-lasting ranges of mountains until reaching the apex requires healthy body. Thus in other words, the younger the person is, more it is possible to enjoy life.
 
 Lastly, I am sure that many people will agree with me, as older we get, we tend to get more stressed out. When we are young, we only have to worry about school reports or doing well at school. Therefore we can freely enjoy life. Go clubbing and dancing all night without any worry. However, older people have many things to worry and care about. Parents have to worry about money. Enjoying life by going on a holiday, they worry if they can afford it or can they take a leave from work or more commonly, who will look after the children?
 
 To conclude, young people tend to enjoy life as they have the health capacity to do so, the mind and the passion. They don't get headaches like older people about money or children. Therefore, it is actually depressing to point out the fact that when people age and reach their retirement age, they cannot enjoy life as much as young people can.