In today's highly competitive job market, an employee is very likely to have to work in many different areas during his career. The question is to know whwether having a wide range of academic knowledge will help him  succeed in his professional life. As far as I am concerned, I think it is a great advantage to possess knowledge in many different fields. Indeed,the broader your knowledge is, the more interesting your job and the higher your responsibilities will be.
 
 First of all, knowing things in many different areas brings me some kind of satisfaction. Indeed, even if my study is mainly focused on chemistry for example, I am still interested in mathematical, physical, or economical knowledge, because they all help me to understand how the world which surrounds me works. This is all the more true as far as foreign languages are concerned. I do think they can be a very important factor when a company has to chose between two candidates who have the same level in their specialization field.
 
 Besides, I think that the wider your knowledge, the more opportunities you will have in your career. As a matter of fact, when you are emplyed in a big company, you are very unlikely to work all the time in the same area. I think it is worth thaving broad knowledge of many academic subjects, since it l allows you to be chosen for many interesting and very different jobs. Furthermore, as far as team work is concerned, it is much easier to work with other people when you are not completely ignorant about the field they are specialized in.
 
 Thirdly, I think that it is much easier to climb the ladder in a company if you are able to use your knowledge in many different areas. If you are able to show that your education and experience allows you to work on very different projects, you are much more likely to be chosen for an interesting job with high responsibilities. That is something I have been told to for a long time in my engineering school. Your field of specialization determines your first job, but if you are successful in your profesional life depends mainly on your ability to adapt to many different kinds of jobs. I do think that having a wide range of knowledge is very important towards achieving this goal.
 
 As a conclusion, even if any worker should be particularly competent in his specialization area, I think it is much better to have knowledge of many academic subjects, since it offers more interesting jobs and better opportunities.