This is a controversial issue to define the important factor for sutudents. Someone priotized knowledge of ideas and concepts that student gain is a most important factor of education, however others may say that experiences from fact is an important factor for sutudents. These priorities would depend on life everyone's previous life experience. In my case, I was grown up in a school that gave me mixed educational method,and that the method was equally balanced.
 
 Since I recognise mixed educational policy, both factors are key to obtain better concepts, and at least I can say is both factors were needed and just one of those would not bring the significant result.
 
 When I was elementary  school student, I learned concept of insect. That was a first time that someone told me concept. I engrossed in the ideas and bought many books about insect. This easy introduction of concept brought me a significant knowledge even I spent my time and funds to have more knowledge of insect. This experience realised me the importance of understanding ideas brings me more knowledge. In contrast with this experience, I learned concept from fact that I faced earthquake when I was 10 years old. At that time, I did not know what earthquake is. First trembling was come, and everybody went down stairs or desks to protect one's life. Although I never knew such actions had to did however learned imediately amd so did I. This actions kept me from potential damages by earthquake. After the earthquake passed, my teacher gave us a concept. In this case, having to learn facts gave me a concrete concept and ideas of what earthquake is.
 
 I say both factors are equally influenced and valued for better education and each is more or less has value for better education. 
 
 As I experienced both factor brought me a rational and educational value for my study even if each of those is different experience. Since the purpose of student is to have best education, no matter what the method is, both method can bring value for students.