In general i agree with the statement made, that there will be fewer cars in use, in twenty years than there are today... It is hard to imagine, that the amount of cars will be reduced, especially in the moment that a car is not only a way to travel but also a symbol of wealth and status. 
 But there are to many reasons which are against the fact, that this progress will continue much longer. 
 For example the prices for petrol: It's the first time since a year, that the price for one litre petrol in germany is under 1,50euro. If the prices for oil rise further (due to the conflict in the middle east), the prices for petrol will rise automatically. So, apart from the money you have to pay for taxes and the insurance for your car anyway, you also have to take in account the amount of money you spend on petrol every month. 
 I'm doing my driver licence in the moment and i must honestly say that i'm not really keane about it. Of course it's nice to have and very comfortable, but i live in berlin and the public transport is excellent-so why taking the car if i'd be in town much quicker with the train or a bus?!
 Further, the prices for flights and trains have decreased enormously during the last few years. Why should you take a car to get to another city, if you could probably even fly nearly as cheap if not cheaper?! With the car, you would probably take much longer due to traffic yam or bad streets, while you could book a cheap flight and get to your destination much more relaxed and comfortable. Or the trains nowadays...I took a train the other day going from Berlin to Frankfurt and back in one day, for an interview. All in all, it took me eight hours, which is still a long time but i was driving in on of those new ICEs. I could have never made this trip in one day in a car. While i was driving over 250km/h i could read my book, prepare my interview and just sleep without worring about anything other than getting out at the right stop. And by the time i got back to Berlin i didn't even feel like i've just been on a little germany-trip-i was relaxed and happy. 
 All those reasons mentioned above are only a small number of reasons why the number of cars will decrease during the next twenty years.
 Our world is changing. It's becoming faster and faster and the car won't be able to keep up with the pace. In future it will be to slow and far to expensive for everyone to have one and use it in his daily-life.