I lost my mother in the stampede. For a few moments I was lifted off my feet between three fat ladies and dragged around in kind of a sadistic tango, like those people on dancing with the stars. She was torn from my grasp and carried away in the flow of sweaty, mindless humanity. My nine year old mind could not process this and when I screamed my voice was drowned out by the mashing of feet and the grinding of flesh. I was carried to the toy isle and spun around in a three sixty then dropped to the floor. There was a sickening crackle as I saw my wrist bend in a way It never had before. A large boot crunched over my hand. For a few more moments, there was no pain. Until I got kicked in the shins, by a skinny teenager with brown baggy pants. I pulled my arm to myself and looked in horror at my limp wrist and dangly fingers. The consumers rushed right on by. He looked down with his glazed eyes that narrowed for a second as he stumbled around me. He mumbled something under his breath and then was gone in the sea of shoppers. Lost in the underwear isle. My wrist bent backwards and my whole arm was slashed with pain. I tried to stand up by pushing up from the floor. Now my wrist and my ribs hurt, pain flared through my body and I screamed, it was all I could do. Santa's face knocked me backward a few steps, but luckily I caught my balance at the last moment on an elderly man who was holding up better than I was, and I tried to fight the crowd towards the exit. I couldn't fight it, I had no control of where I went, and the crowd carried me closer to the accident. Through the chaos I heard screams of agony and saw flashes of several people pinned under the large shelving units. I used my legs and popped up, just in time to get bounced by a large belly with a shirt that said santa I've been good. A huge rufus erupted a few yards away, and a display with racks of pants and shoes was tipped over. Shelves were being ripped clean. Suddenly a shotgun blast echoed across the store. Being pushed and prodded and severely injured, and too short to see over the foaming masses, I somehow ended up deeper in the store. A T.V. There was blood on the floor and a twitching black man's arm swatted my leg from under a massive beam-like shelf. Thankfully, I was whisked away from the scene, and actually spotted a small break in the crowd, I ran through the opening, headed toward the big red exit sign that is only about thirty yards away, but suddenly my progress was halted by the closing in of human bodies. The crowd was quieter for a moment, and the swarming buzzing slowed down and everything seemed almost still. Then another. I'm stuck. Then the screaming started. People were stepping on both of us running for the exit, running for the back, running into each other in chaos. being carried smashed into my wrist and I was suddenly in tears from the pain, confusion and hysteria. I was pushed to the ground and a woman fell on top of me. For about half a second. My wrist screamed in pain, my ribs were probably broken, and I was pinned under this woman who was now unconscious. The last thing I saw was a boot coming down on my face.