He was the most feared of us all. Without Death there can be no reckoning upon the sinful mortals." War scratched his thinning beard. "Who can replace Death? No others had dared to take up such a heavy burden. While War was no stranger to the horrors of, he shuddered to think about the atrocities that Death had committed. Who else better to don the burden of Death then a man himself?" He was running out of options. hissed Famine. "But there is someone." Was there any being in the 7 realms to take up the Cloak and Scythe? "Brothers you are aware that all the atrocities we have committed were dealt by Man. These were all Man's undoing. Conquest was quick to challenge. Famine's ragged hood covered his face, only showing his decaying mouth twisted in a sick smile. "Man, donning the very bane of his existence? Giving one this much power will only result in abuse." War, death, famine and conquest. Why did he leave his duties behind? Brother, your imprudence will be the end of us all. A mortal man is hideous creature. "Conquest, you are as foolish as ever. He was the wisest of us all, he-"
"If Death was so wise, explain his abrupt departure. He is greedy, selfish and cruel. It is who we are. War slammed into Conquest, knocking him down to the brimstone. Death was a fool for leaving." Have you learnt nothing from Death? When the Horn of the Heavens sounds we will charge and strike fear into the hearts of sinners. We are the horsemen of the apocalypse; both terrible and glorious. "ENOUGH!" "I will not take this insolence. Death was the best of us. He unleashed an onslaught of blows onto his golden armor until it was dented beyond recognition. Breathless, War stood up towering over his foe and boomed. War's stone face softened for a second. I loved him as a brother and a mentor." "Should you be stupid enough to blaspheme our brother again, I will end you." He was not used to the bitter taste of defeat. Conquest nodded in shame. "Famine. You say that a mortal can replace Death. He silently vowed that War would pay for the humiliation he suffered. "As you wish brother." Bring him to me."