"Thing is, Nolan, criminals shouldn't feel offended at being called roaches." The reporter raised an eyebrow at me from across the coffee table. We were in a Starbucks on a Friday night, full of chatty teenagers. Sometimes, either one of us would need to raise our voices to be heard. I sipped my coffee. Clay?" "Why is that, Mr. When the light comes on, we run." "Yet earlier, you said you're different." "See, we got one thing in common with those dirty sons of bitches. "Not really. "Tell me, do you trust the government?" "I don't think my opinion—"
"Answer the damned question." Even as a journalist, I don't always get to—"
"So if you ordinary folk don't trust the government, what makes you think criminals will? Nolan shrugged. Come forth and let your sins be washed away, as long as you committed them in this or that year, arbitrarily chosen by your man in that big white house?" I mean, everyone knows they're spying on us. I scoffed. Far as I know, only one fella can pardon you. Humans ain't so forgiving or forgetful." Nolan's expression became thoughtful. "Was brought up Christian, you know. "Last year, the government chose 2012. Fifty-six people came forward with confessions." "Really? One woman ate six of her neighbors' cats. Eighty murders in total, along with a bunch of petty crimes. "I saw the newspapers. Hilarious." I don't see what's funny about that." I laughed. "The cats? I'm talking about the math. There are several times that number of homicides alone in New York City, let alone the state or the country. Who cares about the cats? Doesn't that prove what I've been saying? How many of those fifty-six ended up being re-arrested for other crimes in other un-pardoned years?" Before I could interrupt, he said, "Let's revisit my earlier question. Criminals don't want a spotlight on them. Eighty murders? "More than half." Why, then, are you keen on publicity?" Or so you confessed." "You're making me blush. "1978. You murdered seven people. She was looking for her mom and dad, and wouldn't stop crying." I don't know what you're talking about." "Eight, actually. "1996. Nolan blanched, but turned a page on his notebook. A shooting in Central Park. I shrugged. Fifteen dead, including two police officers." Everyone accused my organization of being responsible. "I wanted to clear the air. The Russian mob was making their move; I was only defending myself. "I understand you were arrested for that." I leaned forward and motioned for him to come closer. But that's nothing compared to the bus bomb bank robbery in December." "Released two years later when the government decided to pardon that year." "Listen, you wanna know what I think? "I think the government just wanted a way to pardon their own people. His eyes gained a hungry look. "Yes, you can write this down." The real reason behind these pardons?" You know, the assassinations and the espionage and the sabotage and spying, on Americans by Americans. Why else would they pardon crimes from 1999 to 2001?" Nolan licked his lips and didn't answer, jotting furiously. Smirking, I leaned back. "Besides, when you confess, you get a reputation. No, not from local shrimps. Those guys in suits, working for all those three-acronym agencies, they do a lot more shit than us. Respect. "You didn't confess that," Nolan said. 2001 was a pretty great year for me. The big players. Sold a lot of intel to foreign players." I drained my cup of coffee and looked at my watch. "Off the record, please." "Well, the biggest one was still 2012, of course. I believe you wrote the article. 'Crime lord comes clean; biggest theft of the century'." It's the information age! Security first; efficiency and whatnot second. "Man, those banks and financial institutions just don't get it, do they? Twenty billion. "Let's move to the big question, shall we? Twenty and frickin' loads of zeroes. Nolan nodded and flipped a page. That's what they get for underestimating Chinese tech." I grinned. Fourteen train carriages. You're making a confession tomorrow for 2015; care to give me the scoop?" "How about a riddle? The Vietnamese ambassador. You a journalist, do some research. "I...I guess I have some reading to do." Texan governor. Can't be giving you everything, right? The four judges. Nolan gulped. The Syrian massacre." Well, I think we'll be seeing each other in court tomorrow." "Sure you do. We stood and shook hands. "You Mr. As I turned to leave, a young man whose face was full of piercings came up to me. I nodded. He pushed a gun into my chest and opened fire. Clay?" There was screaming, and a lot of people running, but I couldn't turn my head much from the floor. The boy backed away as Nolan crouched beside me. "Because, eventually, all pests meet the same end. "There's a reason why roaches don't show themselves," he said softly. You're a big man, Mr. Clay, but too arrogant for your own good. Just because the government wouldn't touch you, doesn't mean we won't." He took the gun from the young man's hand and held it against my temple. "And guess what?" ***
*Thanks for reading! Do check out [The Nonsense Locker] (http: //reddit.com/r/nonsenselocker) for more stories! * "Next year, when the government decides 2016 was a great year, they wouldn't even hold this against me."