The logo represents the head of the ancient Greek mythology of Medusa Gorgon. The logo of the house of Versace is a very extravagant and extraordinary mark; it was designed in 1978 by Gianni Versace. The bull became the emblem of the brand, as the bull is the sacred animal of Zeus. Nowadays, famous brands apply mythology to successful products due to their magical power. Other examples are Lamborghini; first, the Italian company was engaged in the production of tractors. Now, Lamborghini cars are high-performance, expensive supercars, and the emblem of the golden bull is very appropriate for them. From ancient ages, humans have used symbols and myths to express their experience of a reality that transcends the physical world and transmits it to future generations. I prefer the myth of Prometheus because evil never prevails, and goodness and justice win. The designer explained why he chose this character; it is a synthesis of beauty and simplicity, which is able to mesmerize anyone, just like the clothes produced by the brand. According to some people, this animal is extremely hardy and strong, which endows the brand with great power. The mighty titan Prometheus stole the sacred fire from Olympus to provide it for humankind. Prometheus trained people to write, count, crafts and introduced them to metals. He made humanity independent of the gods. However, this was not the end of the titan’s torment; a giant eagle sat on Prometheus’s chest every day and tore his liver (Travis, 2021). Before, people were afraid of the elements of the sea, but now the titan taught them how to build ships; humans became proficient in the art of medicine (Travis, 2021). Prometheus was chained to a rock, the sunburned him mercilessly, and the rain was pounding him. Prometheus was destroying people’s faith in the deity, and for this, the thunderer Zeus decided to punish him. Heracles, the strongest men, killed the eagle that tortured Prometheus, broke Prometheus’ chains, and the titan was free.