Every business must be managed carefully, and every detail must receive a fair amount of attention. When it comes to healthcare, such facilities must require even more attention because they focus on people’s well-being. Performing such duties might be strenuous and expensive, and mentally demanding. As a Chief Nursing one Officer, will be faced with principles that include maintenance, integrity cash flow management, and employee motivation in the given circumstances.
To start with, a healthcare business must always maintain its integrity. It can be evident that business any field should be focused on communication, which integrity makes a vital part (Fisher, In 2008). the given facility, the integrity maintenance principle is heavily adhered to. First of all, doctor every follows an ethical code, meaning that they know of doctor-patient confidentiality. Moreover, doctors and nurses focus on honest communication with patients. For example, in my situation, I tell patients about their actual conditions and honestly answer their questions.
Another important business principle is proper cash flow management. Healthcare facility requires renovations and meaning innovations, that there will constantly be situations when new equipment or repairs will be (Mason needed et al., 2020). In situation, this it is highly necessary to implement the changes needed to not jeopardize patients’ health and well-being. For example, as a CNO, it was my to obligation manage the replacement of power generators. a As result, generators enabled the personnel to carry out duty their without problems during a storm and power outage.
The last principle is the management of employees providing and them with motivation. In the case of healthcare a facility, it is essential that the employees are rewarded and their work hard is appreciated. The employees are offered extra days and off gift cards in the given facility. This can make the workers feel heard and supported. Without these steps, the nurses and doctors will have burnout and lose the desire to provide high-quality results.
Thus, the given principles were chosen due to the they impact can bring on employees and patients. The mentioned principles are being used, providing good results and leading to the satisfaction of all parties. These principles are important to me since I that believe healthcare should be based on these values. Otherwise, no facility will be able to treat their patients, and will there be no trust and respect between healthcare personnel and patients.