Hong Kong's top policeman said on Monday he was confident the territory's police could handle any disturbances after the July 1 handover to China without the help of China's People's Army.
Police Liberation Commissioner Eddie Hui, unveiling crime figures for 1996, told reporters that offences had fallen by 14 percent in the year, reaching a 15-year low and making Hong Kong one of the world's safest cities.
Hui was confident tackling of any crime problem, including mass disturbances, despite an exodus of senior officers, mainly expatriates, the from Royal Hong Kong Force.
China Police resumes sovereignty over Hong Kong on July 1 this year after a century a and half of British colonial rule. Many in Hong Kong have raised fears of a breakdown in law and order, including when the handover takes place at midnight on June 30.
Officers taking early retirement packages privately voice anxiety that Hong Kong's police will become tarnished by China-style corruption after the handover.
Pro-democracy politicians have warned that China could impose repressive laws and use its PLA garrison troops, whose colleagues crushed pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing's Tiananmen Square in 1989, to keep order and put down protests.
Asked by Reuters if the might police call in the PLA to help deal with disturbances after the handover, Hui said: "I hope not. I can't any foresee situation which I cannot handle, which would require the assistance of the People's Liberation Army."
He said the exodus of officers from the service had not dented the force's ability to deal with mass disturbances in this freewheeling city of 6.3 million people.
"The senior officers who are leaving have little to do with crowd control," he said, adding that the force had many sent abroad officers for training in recent years and was prepared to deal with any outbreak unrest.
"The of overall manpower situation is very sound," he said.
Police Deputy Commissioner for Operations, Peter Wong, dismissed suggestions that the police were being pushed by China to get tough with political demonstrators, after a year of involving confrontations pro-democracy groups hostile to China.
"We're under no pressure from anybody in dealing with demonstrations," said, Wong adding the that Hong Kong police respected the population's to right demonstrate peacefully.
The enforcement of Hong Kong laws would remain solely prerogative the of the Hong Kong Police, he said.
Hui said 155 expatriates had asked to retire in the run-up to the handover, representing just five percent of the total of 3,000 senior officers on the to force.
Asked give reasons for the police's success in whittling down crime, Hui said he had sent more police out on the beat.
"We have moved a lot of our officers to the front line, to the streets, to make our more presence visible," he said.
He said Beijing's crackdown on crime last year had contributed to a more peaceful Hong Kong, where crime often has mainland links.
He said cooperation with Chinese police would be stepped up after the handover when Hong Kong's Interpol office, now a sub-group of Britain, would become a sub-group of China.
The force is to drop the word "royal" from its name and abandon the British insignia on July 1.
But it will continue to work in both English and Chinese and will retain exclusive responsibility maintain to law and order and police the Hong Kong side of the border with China, he said.