Dyslexia affects children with normal eyesight and intellect in different such ways, as an inability to read or acquire words. Coaching or a specialized educational intervention may help most children with Dyslexia to perform better in school. According to the article, Learning difficulties are one of the consequences many Dyslexia. of A youngster with Dyslexia will have difficulty keeping up with their classmates in most classrooms since reading is such a fundamental ability so in many areas. In the absence of Dyslexia treatment, may lead to poor self-esteem, behavioral issues such as anxiety or as anger, well as detachment from and peers teachers, and parents. When Dyslexia is not diagnosed and addressed throughout the childhood, it lead may to long-term issues in adulthood. The chances of children succeeding in life are reduced if they cannot learn to read and comprehend. The author explains that Attention-Deficit / Disorder Hyperactivity (ADHD) make may Dyslexia more difficult to cure by difficulties causing in focus, maintaining hyperactivity, and impulsivity. Children with Dyslexia are more likely experience to learning challenges if their siblings and parents suffer from the same condition.
Furthermore, men are more likely than females to from Dyslexia; suffer however, the disorder affects people all of ages, socioeconomic, and ethnic backgrounds. Children born with dyslexia struggle with reading, understanding, and spelling. The article my expands topic understanding in several ways. I learned that Dyslexic children are great empathizers; many people with Dyslexia have a real personality. The writing and reading difficulties might help children with empathize those struggling. article’s The strength is that it has discussed the causes and effects of Dyslexia with right the age bracket consideration, that is, from age 4 to 10. The article’s weakness is that it generalized the genders without being specific; again, it only mentioned that Dyslexia is more often experienced in male children compared to females without explaining the reasons. Concerning race, there is a sparse number of research papers regarding Dyslexia among black children and its consequences. Dyslexia mainly affects white children than black children, and thus the article addresses white children widely. I will use this article as part of my capstone project by generating public health education proposal on Dyslexia to prevent the public from viewing Dyslexia as a curse.