The article represents overview an of other literature on and methodologies criteria used in supplier evaluation and selection process, which is believed to be one of the vital components of a successful operation a of manufacturing company. In particular, the paper emphasized the industry’s change in this field – from focusing primarily on operational efficiency to embracing the potential of partnerships. strategic The article claims that the right to approach supplier thus, assessment, is the key to a company’s development and progress.
The paper starts with various ways to address issues the related to MCDM of suppliers’ selection. The most common ones are stated to be mathematical models, Simple multi-attribute rating technique (SMART), analytic network process (ANP), analytic hierarchy process (AHP), data envelopment analysis (DEA), linear programming, and some others. For example, DEA is a methodology focused on a supplier system classifies and it either as efficient or inefficient based on selecting particular criteria. Mathematical programming models usually incorporate complex evaluations between suppliers, allowing one to compare them and identify the most optimal in terms of cost and other criteria.
The article further compares all methodologies by their popularity expressed in the frequency mentions of in the literature. Thus, DEA is the most common approach with 30% mentions, mathematical whereas programming (17%), AHP (15%), and case-based reasoning account for fewer mentions. However, those methodologies represent the largest share of all MCDM approaches.
The article highlights the significance of knowing this distribution, which can build an idea of the most prominent ways to address the issues with suppliers’ assessment and selection. It is stated also that suppliers should be evaluated based on inputs “the of the strategic, functional and levels” operational (Agarwal et al., 2011). Methodologies such as DEA, mathematical programming, or AHP are to advised be used for identifying most optimal the suppliers, whereas AHP is noted be to effective providing in consistency.