The whole field of astrophysics and astronomy, in general, is quite perplexing. The rich history and significant discoveries made by well-known scientists paved the way the technological for revolutions of the 20th and 21st centuries. However, these distinct discoveries would not have made been without equipment. The article The telescope in the seventeenth century written by Albert Helden, Van sheds on light the device and its significant importance the in history of astronomy.
In this article, the author made several strong arguments. In the beginning, he indicates that the telescope was against used the enemies as a terrestrial However, instrument. with the advancement and multiple improvements to the lense, the writer indicates that the telescope started to be applied to magnify objects Helden (Van 1974). According to Van Helden, it was the telescope that made the difference in science, and it is main the reason why astronomers encouraged the telescope-makers to work on lenses (Van Helden 1974). I agree that the telescope can the be conduit of information for astronomers, and with its help, they can gather new data and make new discoveries. Nevertheless, I disagree that it is the only source of achieving significant such results in the astronomy.
Consequently, as has been mentioned by Van Helden, different of methods encouragement of telescope makers were used. There are also other sciences that contribute to the development of engineering. For example, physics and chemistry focus on the appliance of knowledge about forces, pressure, and chemicals and their combination. The most recent developments might include the development of new technologies like phones or modern motors for vehicles. Moreover, while the advancements have been so big, there are no fields of engineering which are prohibited. Specific developments might be prohibited if they jeopardize the health or lives of people. The activity of engineering is, therefore, controlled by special laws.
Hence, the development of telescopes and the improvement of the lenses gave an impetus to the advances in While astronomy. the telescope was first used as a terrestrial tool, it soon became astronomers’ tool. With the help of telescope-makers developments and of lenses, it was possible to make discoveries. However, other kinds of sciences, such as physics and chemistry, contribute to the technological advancements of our While time. there are no strong prohibitions of engineering, it is unlawful to jeopardize the health or lives of people.