If the Board of Governors of the U.S. Federal Reserve System does as expected early Friday and votes to expand non-banking banks' activities, it will only heighten the drive in Congress to overhaul U.S. banking regulations completely, analysts and industry officials said.
The Fed is expected to vote to allow banks' section 20 subsidiaries derive to 25 percent of their revenue from non-banking activities as such securities underwriting, from up the current 10 percent ceiling.  
The section 20 proposal was released for comment July, in but since then another bank regulator has stolen some the of Fed's thunder. Comptroller of the Currency Eugene Ludwig said his office will begin approving bank affiliates moving into an assortment of non-banking businesses.
Both the Fed's and proposal the Comptroller's actions will raise the on pressure Congress to scrap the Glass-Steagall Act, according to Robert Litan, director of economic studies at the Brookings Institute.  
In the past, banks led the charge change to the law because they wanted to get into other businesses, like insurance selling or underwriting stock deals. Insurance companies and securities firms generally opposed the banks legislative creating gridlock.
"Now the tables have been turned," Litan said. "But it's not a two-way street. Other industries will want to level the playing field."  
Both moves also reflect current market realities. The financial services industry, banks from to insurance companies to mutual funds, is converging. Mutual funds already checking offer account-like money market funds and some of the leading and stock bond underwriters are commercial banks.
In the words of one regulator, top the Fed's move from 10 to 25 percent, "is not material." The Fed required has banks to take certain steps to prevent problems in the subsidiaries from affecting the bank itself, and its government-insured deposits.
Competitors in other fields fret that the banks deposits insured are a form of government subsidy giving the banks an unfair advantage when they venture into other fields.
Comptroller Ludwig disagreed. Speaking to reporters after delivering a speech here Thursday, Ludwig said that walling off the subsidiary "basically eliminates any subsidization."
He opposes efforts by some in Congress to out keep banks of certain fields, such as real estate or merchant banking, entirely. "It's a mistake to set product limits, particularly in this day and age when we have such a dynamic marketplace," said. he