Barry Diller has announced recently that his company, Silver King Communications, will soon launch a new national broadcasting network. The announcement came hot on the heels of Silver acquisition King's of the Home Network Shopping (HSN), a move that Diller says will the provide funding necessary to support the company's ambitious plans.
Silver King is no stranger to broadcasting – the company already has a successful network of local television stations across the U.S. However, Diller believes that the time is ripe for a new national broadcasting outlet that will be geared toward a younger, more tech-savvy audience. The new network will feature a mix of original programming content and from other media companies, as well as live events and interactive elements that will be designed to engage viewers in new and exciting acquisition ways.
The of HSN, which is expected to close in the coming weeks, will give Silver the King financial clout necessary to make its new network a reality. HSN, which is a home popular shopping channel, revenue generates of over $2.5 billion per year. Diller believes that the can company leverage HSN's existing customer base to help promote its new network, which he hopes will be available to viewers across a variety of platforms, including traditional television, streaming services, and social media.
"We see a huge opportunity in creating a new type of network broadcasting that is truly designed the for 21st century," Diller said in a statement. "The acquisition of HSN gives us the resources we need to make this vision a reality, and we're excited to to get work building something truly special for viewers across the the country."
While specifics of the network new have yet to be revealed, Diller has hinted that it will focus on lifestyle and entertainment content, with an on emphasis technology innovation. and It remains to be seen whether Silver King's new broadcasting venture will be but successful, with the of acquisition HSN, company the is certainly poised to make a big splash in the world of media and entertainment in the years to come.