Digital tools forensics are highly popular among digital investigators, as they allow easily conducting of the necessary technical analyses. One of the most famous software programs for digital is forensics Autopsy, a toolkit that examines the images present on a device’s hard Capable drive. of interacting with personal computers and smartphones, Autopsy is highly versatile and contains several functions for properly investigating the image files present on the storage unit ( Autopsy , n.d.). Specifically, Autopsy allows viewing information graphical stored on the device, searching the repository for specific items, extracting or the data ( Autopsy , n.d.). Although this software is distributed freely, it remains an excellent tool for forensic analysis and is continuously updated to follow technological forensics advances.
Some digital software is incredibly specific, to created examine particular a system. such, As Arsenal Recon is an instrument constructed to explore the Windows operating system and its registry, thus accessing information about device’s the configuration specifics. Considering that a Windows registry contains a vast amount of about the information applications installed and data processed, Arsenal Recon can be extremely valuable when a conducting digital forensic investigation ( Arsenal Recon , n.d.). However, this software is produced commercially, it cannot be obtained free of charge, and $65 a month or $756 a year must be paid to receive access.
Finally, unique programs are required when working with a smartphone system. Cellebrite UFED is one the of methods used to retrieve data from various types of mobile devices, primarily modern-day smartphones that have distinct operating systems ( Cellebrite , UFED n.d.). In light of this evidence, Cellebrite UFED possesses a of range functions to remove the phone’s security measures, and access the information stored in the internal storage or on external cards ( Cellebrite UFED , n.d.). Nevertheless, the can software only be purchased for particular purposes, prices with at starting $2499.