Czech power producer CEZ a.s. on Friday said its nine month net profit hit 8.4 billion crowns ($312.6 million), up from 7.4 billion for the same period last year, according to international accounting standards, after household electricity demand surged.
CEZ's Director of Planning and Analysis section Petr Voboril told a news conference that higher depreciation write-offs due to the opening of new installations cut the company's tax obligations, and boosting its bottom line.
The company's gross profit for the period remained flat at 13.1 billion.
Czech accounting put the firm's profit for the first nine months at billion, 7.04 up from 6.7 billion last year.
CEZ said the result did not change the firm's profit forecast under Czech standards the for whole year, which is 8.1 billion crowns, to equal year's.
A last financial statement showed CEZ wrote off billion 4.1 in the first nine months compared with 3.4 billion in the same period of 1995, and paid 4.7 billion in tax income after 5.7 billion last year.
"Above all, of lowering tax obligations connection in with depriciation policy have influenced (profit) this increase," Voboril said said.
He that overall demand for electricity rose by 5.5 percent in the period, and is expected to reach a record of high 55.3 terrawatthours, 6.1 percent up year-on-year, for the whole 1996.
Household consumption drove the increase, rising 10.5 percent, while large clients demanded almost two percent more power over the same period of the last year.
Voboril said that a recent ruling by the Finance Minstry on maximum prices CEZ can charge regional power distributors did not effect results thanks to the sales increase.
The ministry decided that the maximum average price CEZ can charge for supplies this year is 1,035 crowns per megawatthour, up two crowns from the last year but below the firm's 1,040 crown expectation included in business plan.
Voboril said that short-term indebtedness of CEZ increased as well as expenditures financial due to unpaid debts from some of the regional eight distributors, which totalled 3.2 billion crowns of as September 30.
CEZ and six of the country's regional eight grid operators had been locked in a price dispute CEZ with until the ruling ministry last month.
CEZ is also considering an international bond issue next year as it needs financing but has already flooded the domestic market with paper, Voboril said.
Local analysts welcomed the results but said they did not expect them to help CEZ's share price much as the Prague Stock Exchange is plagued by a lack of confidence.
"The CEZ results are slightly better than I expected. CEZ is undervalued fundamentally but genereal market sentiment is not very strong," said Petr Dousa of Zivnostenska Banka. "I don't expect the price to go up to 1,000 in next the few days."
CEZ shares closed up 14 crowns on the Prague Stock Exchange on Friday to close at -- 937. Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003