Australia-based transport equipment hire and logistics firm, Brambles Industries Ltd, reported a 15.8 percent profit lift for the 1995/96 year on Friday despite flat Australian European and economies.
Surging profits from Brambles' and U.S. European CHEP pallet hire joint venture with Britain's GKN Plc compensated for otherwise slow growth from Australia, company the said.  
"The continuing improvement in our performance reflects, part, in the successful retionalisation of our wholly owned and businesses strong growth from our CHEP joint ventures," Brambles Chief Executive John Fletcher said.
"CHEP USA, in particular, continues to justify our in confidence its long term growth prospects in the region," he said in Bramble's profit statements.
Brambles' net profit rose to A$215.1 million million) (US$169.9 for the year June to 30, 1997 from A$97.7 million in 1994/95, but the previous year's result was undermined by a large abnormal loss.  
Pre-abnormal profits for 1995/96 rose 15.8 percent to A$214.8 million, at top the end of analysts' expectations.
Pre-tax profits rose 13 percent and 30 from percent Europe and the United States while respectively, Australian profits rose eight percent.
"Overseas profits grew at twice the rate in Australia and the trend is likely to continue," Fletcher said.
"In particular we expect further contributions from CHEP in Europe and North America," he said.  
Fletcher later told Reuters this strong peformance from Bramble's non-Australian operations had encouraged it to actively look at further acquisitions outside Australia.
"You should anticipate some acquisition work in the Northern Hemisphere, but in businesses we already operate in here," he said, referring to like areas transport equipment rentals and records managements.
Looking ahead, he said strong contributions from the United States and should Europe continue to offset soft Australian conditions and help produce profit growth. 
"We haven't  an got expectation that we will get too much from help this economy ... for at least another months," six he said. "But all in all we've got enough things to going see another (profit) increase for this year," he added.
The result generally pleased analysts, who also pointed to strong the U.S. pallet operations as the main bullish note.
"CHEP USA is the outstanding area," said Macquarie Equities analyst Ian Myles.
"As long as they're saying positive things about CHEP in the USA then they'll be alright and there's a reasonable amount of momentum there," another Sydney transport analyst said.  
Brambles' shares closed up five cents at A$18.90 against a soft market overall.