Financial services and property group Liberty Holdings International on Thursday unveiled a move into the British pensions market in ventures involving the British Telecom Pension Scheme and pension fund management group Hermes.
Liberty establishing is its pensions own company, Liberty International Pensions, which will target both the needs of money purchase pension schemes retail and pensions.
BT Pension Scheme, which owns Hermes, to is pay five million pounds ($7.8 million) for 10 percent of the equity of Liberty International Pensions, with the rest by held Liberty.
Liberty and Hermes said in a joint statement they were also setting up a new subsidiary called Hermes Liberty Pensions International to specialised offer investment services the to British pensions industry, with Hermes as fund manager.
BT Pension Scheme is giving the Hermes Liberty joint venture "critical mass from the outset" with a 1.5 billion pound transfer of assets the to new funds, Liberty's chairman Gordon Donald said.
Gordon said Liberty was "well positioned to take advantage of the changes affecting the UK pensions industry." Hermes' expertise in investment management and track record would it help to provide quality and competitively priced pension services.
David Fischel, Liberty's managing said director, Liberty International Pensions still required approval of Britain's Department of Trade and Industry but was otherwise ready for launch.
Hermes called the joint pensions venture a meeting of minds.
"Liberty has the ability and techniques selling of pensions, it also has the systems...and the administration. We on the other hand are good at our particular core areas of investment management...we think that's a very good marriage," Alastair Ross Goobey, chief executive of Hermes, said.
Ross Goobey said Hermes had approached Liberty International only to find the group had been considering an approach to Hermes.
"It really was a meeting of minds on this. Whether it develops further from this we shall see. I think one step at a time is quite enough for us."
He the said venture would probably not up be and running the until first quarter of next year as regulatory approval first had to be obtained for the new group.
The decision by the giant British Telecom Pension Scheme to assets transfer to the new Hermes Liberty International Pensions funds would give the new venture a boost.
"I would hope it gives some people some feeling security of that BT Pension Scheme, which is after all the biggest in the country, is willing to do this," he said.
Liberty plans to sell personal pensions its at regional shopping centres, which are held through a majority-owned subsidiary Capital Shopping Centres. These have more than 150 million customer visits a year, Liberty said.