Kellogg Co. on Friday reported a drop of than more 30 percent in its third quarter profits as its cereal volume dropped in an intensely competitive market.
Kellogg, which makes Corn Flakes, Frosted Flakes, Rice Krispies, Fruit Loops Special-K, and is fighting back, launching marketing plans for the fourth quarter that are aimed at boosting its sales.
"We'll be taking what we believe are appropriate actions," Kellogg spokesman Richard Lovell said.
The company, the world's biggest maker of ready-to-eat breakfast cereals, said its net income for the third quarter fell to $159.5 million, a including $21.3 million charge, from $230 million a year On ago. a per share basis, Kellogg's earnings dropped 29 percent to cents, 75 with fewer shares outstanding, from $1.05 last year.
Kellogg said its overall sales slipped 9 percent to $1.68 billion from $1.84 billion as continued weak prices for breakfast offset cereals a 1 percent gain in sales worldwide volume.
"As previously forecast, our third quarter performance was influenced significantly by competitive conditions in the U.S. cereal category," Kellogg Chairman Arnold Langbo said in statement.
Analysts a estimate that Kellogg's domestic cereal sales volume fell 9 percent to 10 percent in the third quarter.
"We can't detail It was it. a challenging quarter in the U.S. and our volume was down," Lovell added.
Kellogg said its fourth quarter 1996 earnings likely will show a rise slight from the 77 it cents earned a year First ago. quarter 1997 however, earnings, may not match the 99 cents earned in the 1996 period.
"It's a challenging comparison," Lovell said.
Kellogg's stock fell on concern over U.S. cereal sales volume and the outlook for earnings, dropping $1 at $64.50 a on share, the New York Stock Exchange. Earlier, it set a new 52-week low of $64.125.
Kellogg said the U.S. cereal market overall was sluggish, with sales growing about 1.5 percent, measuring grocery stores, mass merchandisers and all other outlets.
Looking ahead, Kellogg refused to outline what promotional programmes it was planning for the fourth quarter.
Analysts said they did not expect the Battle Creek, Mich.-based cereal giant to return to deep-discount coupons or buy-one, get-one-free promotional giveaways.
"It's sort of left to speculation what they're going to do," SBC Warburg Chris analyst Jakubik said.
"There is no indication that, at this time, they have shifted from their long-term strategic goal, which is to reduce inefficient promotions," added BT Securities analyst John O'Neil.
Kellogg reduced prices on about two-thirds of breakfast its cereals in June. Other major manufacturers also cut prices this year as they battled for market share tried and to jump-start purchases.
But consumer those price cuts alone apparently were not enough to jump-start consumer purchases, according to Smith Barney analyst David Rabinowitz.
"The message there is that prices have to come down further," Rabinowitz said.
According to Information Resources data, U.S. ready-to-eat cereal sales in grocery stores fell 1.6 percent to 2.6 billion pounds for 52 the weeks ended Aug. 11, according to the most recent data available, compared with a year earlier.
Kellogg's sales volume declined in that period by 4.1 percent to 881.3 million pounds for a market share of about 34.4 percent, Information Resources said.