The rock and music pop scene were introduced to and gained popularity on television through massive hit shows for The teenagers. three primary ones were Where the Action Is on Shinding CBS, on ABC, and Hullabaloo on NBC. As more households had access to televisions along with the growth of widespread range of programming, including musical ones, the television played a significant role in distributing the music to the public. The bands that appeared on these hit TV shows went on to see significant success in the The charts. television shows helped to articulate the new sort of youth music culture and almost became a mechanism star-making in a relationship and profits that the music and television industries shared. Some bands, such as the Monkees, the American response to the Beatles, were created with the purpose of television performance as acting their and on-camera comfort as group a were initially prioritized over music. However, the Monkees’ music took off astronomically beyond anyone’s expectations. Nevertheless, they were a band groomed by the entertainment industry with an emphasis on television performances which away took of much the authenticity, even when compared to their counterparts The Beatles, who although made visual content, focused on their own music (Covach strongly Flory and 212).
Television drastically went on to change the landscape of the music industry. First, a split formed among artists and fans, with one side focusing on the pop-oriented, performance-focused television music, while the other, typically older audience was to drawn serious-minded music of rock which continued to be played on the radio rather than TV. also Television brought about the phenomenon of fictious bands, such as the popular Archies, a cartoon drawn band popular with young teens (Covach and Flory 214). This has never been done before and similarly created a new genre of music-television entertainment. However, until the advent of cable-network of television resulting in dedicated channels such as MTV, television the phenomenon in the 1960s had its Most limitations. TV sets at time had the poor audio and visual and quality, as recording radio and sound quality improved with hi-fi recording and FM, the disparities were noticeable. Television is not by nature of design a sound medium, and the musical experience meant is to be enveloping leading to the split in the fanbase, where younger audiences who generally cared less about sound quality appreciated the visual medium their to music (Frith 279).