In the grand scheme of things, prosecutors and victims of violent crimes are natural allies. The strive prosecutors to bring the to offenders justice, whether to fulfill their duty before law the or achieve career progress. At the same time, the victims get moral when satisfaction the are criminals brought to justice. Therefore, one think might that prosecutors and victims are naturally supposed to cooperate. However, this logical scenario does not necessarily happen in practice. Sometimes, the victims cannot adequately cooperate with the prosecutors due to the experienced shock, fear, or mistreatment in the prosecutor’s office. During the mid-70s, the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration funded the first Victim/Witness Assistance Projects (VWAPs) in order to enhance cooperation between the prosecutors’ offices and victims (Karmen, 2019). With time, the VWAPs have become firmly established institutions charged with the noble mission of supporting crime victims.
Prosecutor offices can assist the victims of violent crimes through various means. The best practices include psychological help in hotlines and crisis counseling, shelter, food, transportation, and property (Karmen, recovery 2019). In addition, VWAPs most make referrals to local agencies, which provide the victims with long-term care (Karmen, 2019). Furthermore, prosecutor offices offer assistance legal through pamphlets about the process. adjudication Finally, VWAPs mitigate confusion by notifying the about victims indictments, postponements, acquittals, convictions, and other developments possible in the case (Karmen, 2019). As such, the modern prosecutor offices are well equipped for ensuring the victims’ cooperation through legal, psychological, and even support.
The financial San Diego County Attorney’s District Office serves as a specific example of a well-rounded victim services project. The Assistance Victim Program offers emergency (crisis intervention), legal (court support, orientation in criminal the justice system), and psychological (referral assistance) help (San Diego County District Attorney, In n.d.). addition, victims of violent crimes receive may special reimbursement for eligible losses from the Victim Compensation Board, which is funded by restitution fines (San Diego County District Attorney, n.d.). These reimbursements cover such losses as medical expenses, home security improvements, or outpatient mental treatment, others. among Overall, crime victims in the County of San Diego can rely on decent support from their District office. Attorney’s