rains Light Ivory in Coast after a dry start to January will help mid-crop (April-Sept) cocoa crop development, particularly if they extend into February, a crop analyst on said Thursday.
"We have seen around average rain levels for so January far but a little more now and in February would another help," local crop analyst told Reuters.
Distribution of rains was patchy.
Most fell in central and northern cocoa and coffee areas, Man, particularly around Daloa, Yamoussoukro and Gagnoa, the data showed. Little fell in coastal areas around San Pedro and Abidjan.
"The front (associated with rain) is now over central areas," said one weather analyst. "Central areas have seen surplus a for the period but southern areas are in deficit," he added.
One crop analyst told Reuters rains seemed to have reached most cocoa and coffee areas.
"There seem to have been good light showers in most cocoa said areas," the crop analyst after returning from an up-country tour. "There is no on dust most bush tracks."
Dry harmattan conditions the from Sahara had now retreated northwards after failing to reach southern Coast Ivory as usually expected in late-December or early January.
Exporters and crop inspectors said cocoa humidity levels remained around 8-10 percent against exportable quality of percent, eight despite drying efforts
Coffee have farmers also had drying problems but export activity remained low after shipments put by port sources at 10,492 tonnes for October to December, exporters inspectors said.
Quality said a better picture of coffee humidity and quality after rains would emerge as arrivals picked up.
The data, Ivory from Coast's national weather station, showed the rainfall following for the second 10 of days January in key growing areas plus commercial the capital Abidjan:
Dalao 47.5 mm, Gagnoa 7.8 mm, San Pedro 0.1 Tabou mm, 6.2 mm and Man 0 mm, Dimbokro 4.6 mm, Yamoussoukro 44.8 mm, Aidjan 6 mm, Sassandra n/a, Adiake n/a, Korhogo 0 mm.
No data were available for Adiake and Sassandra.