"Who can replace Death? Without Death there can be no reckoning upon the sinful mortals." He was the most feared of us all. War scratched his thinning beard. He was running out of options. No others had dared to take up such a heavy burden. While War was no stranger to the horrors of, he shuddered to think about the atrocities that Death had committed. hissed Famine. "But there is someone." Was there any being in the 7 realms to take up the Cloak and Scythe? "Brothers you are aware that all the atrocities we have committed were dealt by Man. War, death, famine and conquest. These were all Man's undoing. Who else better to don the burden of Death then a man himself?" Famine's ragged hood covered his face, only showing his decaying mouth twisted in a sick smile. Conquest was quick to challenge. "Man, donning the very bane of his existence? Brother, your imprudence will be the end of us all. A mortal man is hideous creature. He is greedy, selfish and cruel. Giving one this much power will only result in abuse." "Conquest, you are as foolish as ever. He was the wisest of us all, he-"
"If Death was so wise, explain his abrupt departure. Have you learnt nothing from Death? Why did he leave his duties behind? We are the horsemen of the apocalypse; both terrible and glorious. When the Horn of the Heavens sounds we will charge and strike fear into the hearts of sinners. It is who we are. "ENOUGH!" Death was a fool for leaving." War slammed into Conquest, knocking him down to the brimstone. He unleashed an onslaught of blows onto his golden armor until it was dented beyond recognition. Breathless, War stood up towering over his foe and boomed. "I will not take this insolence. Death was the best of us. I loved him as a brother and a mentor." War's stone face softened for a second. "Should you be stupid enough to blaspheme our brother again, I will end you." He was not used to the bitter taste of defeat. Conquest nodded in shame. He silently vowed that War would pay for the humiliation he suffered. "Famine. You say that a mortal can replace Death. "As you wish brother." Bring him to me."