One of the most famous software programs for digital forensics is Autopsy, a toolkit that examines the images present on a device’s hard drive. Digital forensics tools are highly popular among digital investigators, as they allow easily conducting of the necessary technical analyses. Specifically, Autopsy allows viewing graphical information stored on the device, searching the repository for specific items, or extracting the data ( Autopsy , n.d.). Some digital forensics software is incredibly specific, created to examine a particular system. Capable of interacting with personal computers and smartphones, Autopsy is highly versatile and contains several functions for properly investigating the image files present on the storage unit ( Autopsy , n.d.). Although this software is distributed freely, it remains an excellent tool for forensic analysis and is continuously updated to follow technological advances. As such, Arsenal Recon is an instrument constructed to explore the Windows operating system and its registry, thus accessing information about the device’s configuration specifics. However, this software is produced commercially, it cannot be obtained free of charge, and $65 a month or $756 a year must be paid to receive access. Considering that a Windows registry contains a vast amount of information about the applications installed and data processed, Arsenal Recon can be extremely valuable when conducting a digital forensic investigation ( Arsenal Recon , n.d.). Finally, unique programs are required when working with a smartphone system. In light of this evidence, Cellebrite UFED possesses a range of functions to remove the phone’s security measures, and access the information stored in the internal storage or on external cards ( Cellebrite UFED , n.d.). Cellebrite UFED is one of the methods used to retrieve data from various types of mobile devices, primarily modern-day smartphones that have distinct operating systems ( Cellebrite UFED , n.d.). Nevertheless, the software can only be purchased for particular purposes, with prices starting at $2499.