It was a warm summer day and I was out for a stroll. I saw them on the other side, walking down the sidewalk, two by two. I didn't pay much attention until they passed under the glow of the gaslamp. Never had I seen such an pair of opposites! For the brief time they walked under it, the light illuminated the pair. The man's limbs and head were covered in scars! What I had mistaken for a beard was a mass of scars! His arms and legs were so densely overrun that I had thought it a coat and trousers! The woman had black hair, long and straight, as if it were manufactured string by string. But her skin is what shocked me, even greater than the man! It had the most exquisite complexion, almost translucent in the light, and I saw nary a flaw on it. I looked to my own marred hands, although compared to that man, it was a blessing; as I worried, small cuts formed on my arm. It began to sting as my sweat seeped into my fresh wounds. Not wanting more scars, I shook my negative thoughts and ran to the couple.
I asked, "Excuse my frankness sir, but I must inquire, how is it that your wife is so beautiful, yet you are?"
The man and woman looked at each other and she turned away.
"Hideous?" asked the man between laughs.
"N-n-o," I stammered, embarrassed by my rudeness.
He put his arm around my shoulder and said, "I get it all the time."
How did you keep your wife from getting scars?
"Well, you see," he said with a wink, "she's not my wife, but my daughter."
I was taken aback.
"Well, she's not entirely flawless. She can't tell a joke and her cooking's lousy! Takes after her mother I guess!"
Laughing, he said, "Take a look at her finger."
I saw a red streak on her index finger as I peered at the daughter.
The man pulled me in, "I'm gonna tell you a story."
I swore never to have children, but my wife had other plans, and so my daughter was born.
He took a deep breath and continued.
"On one particular visit to a doctor, I had my daughter with me and upon exiting the building, I met a man dressed all in black.
I immediately thought, 'This must be the devil' and turned heel back into the building.
'Wait,' the man in black said, 'I can save your daughter.'
I was skeptical and scoffed, 'What for my soul?'
He replied, 'I am bored with just bartering with souls, I am more interested in it's durability.' The devil continued, giggling, 'You see, I do have the power to stop your daughter's scarring, but I'm not a very charitable person.'
'What do you want?' I asked.
If you can manage this wager, you keep your soul, if not.
I was dumbstruck that he took the deal, and that he managed to last this long.
"And so," the man continued, "I agreed and the devil pricked mine and my daughters finger to seal the deal. So she grew up and I took the blows. Puberty was a rough time. Children can be so cruel. But that scar on her finger was the last one she'd ever get, I had sure of that."
I was amazed at this man's love for his daughter and his willpower. How much pain did he have to endure? Every scar on his body seemed to pulsate as I wondered this. I asked, "Do you ever regret it? Your deal with the devil?"
He replied with a smile, "Not at all."