The commission of a great sin before God is the most important flaw of the problem.
In the modern world, despite the relatively progressive development of medicine, people are faced with diseases that, unfortunately, do not respond to any treatment. In such cases, the blow that the disease inflicts both physically and mentally can be tough to bear. Because of the fear of losing self-care and dignity, people are thinking about euthanasia or, in other words, voluntary suicide. However, this statement contradicts God’s attempts to restore the Christian religion. Thus, this scientific paper explores a thematic study about a man who has lost hope and is thinking about euthanasia.
The case study, which is the basis of this research paper, presents the reader with the story of a middle-aged man George. He leads an average lifestyle, works, spends time with his family, and devotes time to his own interests. However, one day a man begins to experience muscle weakness and immunity to muscle coordination. Subsequently, he gets injured, and when he goes to the doctor, he gets a far from satisfactory diagnosis. According to the results of further tests, George is diagnosed with such a severe and terrible disease like amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). This disease is expressed in the disruption of the nerve cells of the brain, which are responsible for the muscles and spinal cord (Westeneng et al., 2018). The most famous representative of a person with this disease is the great scientist Stephen Hawking (Westeneng et al., 2018). Deviation leads to the complete demobilization of a person, but aspects such as smell, touch, sight, hearing, and taste remain.
George was told that there was no treatment for the disease and that scientists had not found a way to stop it.
Euthanasia has been legalized in nine regions of the United States of America.
The Christian doctrine emphasizes that God decides when to take a person away.
The introduction of risk for the weak and defenseless is one of the reasons not to support euthanasia.
On the one hand, in the light of the Christian narrative, George’s sufferings can be interpreted, as already mentioned, with an emphasis on the sinfulness of the world. This is due to the fact that euthanasia is considered suicide and cannot be justified by religion. On the other hand, the fear of future loss of control over their lives and loss of dignity significantly affect the patient. When considering the emphasis on the hope of resurrection, then the experiences of a man can be interpreted as a desire for a speedy meeting with the almighty. Therefore, George may feel the unwillingness to be in this world as a burden for his family, and in some ways, the motivation of a man can be understood.
Human life is the most important value in the Christian view of the world.
Further, based on the above, the Christian faith denies the use of euthanasia as it contradicts the central values and considerations of religion. Firstly, the value of a person’s life, which is given to him by the Almighty, is violated (Reese, 2019). Secondly, euthanasia is considered as voluntary suicide, that is, one of the greatest and gravest human sins. Thirdly, the promotion and dissemination of the popularity of this event can destroy the idea that human life is worth living, and people are obliged to support each other’s desire to continue living.
There is no way to justify the procedure of intentional end of life.