Eight of the top 10 publicly traded U.S. health maintenance organizations are expected to report lower or flat fourth-quarter profits as the industry shuts the books on a dismal year.
Despite plenty of merger and acquisition activity in the HMO sector, Wall Street is dissatisfied with narrow profit margins and is cautious on many HMO stocks.
"Consolidation will remain at a high level," said Salomon Brothers managed healthcare analyst Robert Hoehn.  
As HMOs report quarterly results over the next few weeks, two companies are expected to defy the earnings slump.
Booming Oxford Health Plans Inc has been a bright spot in the gloom all year and is forecast to post profits 70 percent higher than the year-ago level, analysts said.
PacifiCare Health Systems Inc is expected to show 10 to 13 percent earnings improvement, although its quarter will be complicated by a pending acquisition of FHP International Corp.
"It's sort of a throw-away quarter for" PacifiCare, said Volpe Welty analyst Ed Keaney.  
The problem that most HMOs were unable to solve was a mismatch between medical cost inflation forecasts that fell short and an inability to push through premium increases.
"This year there may be room for a little bit of (premium) expansion as the year unfolds, but not enough of an increase to make it possible for these companies to restore margins to previous levels," Keaney said.
"Uncertainties regarding profitability will remain, albeit at a reduced level from 1996," Hoehn said, citing small premium rises so far in the January renewal period.
U.S. FIRST CALL CONSENSUS QTRLY EARNINGS FORECASTS
The estimate of the company's earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization.
Foundation Health	 Q2	 $0.64	   $0.72
Humana		     Q4	 $0.21	   $0.30
Mid Atlantic Medical had a Q4
Oxford Health Q4 was $0.36
PacifiCare Health		  Q1	 $0.99	   $0.88
The physicians health q4 had a price of $0.42.
Sierra Health	    Q4	 $0.59	   $0.59
United Healthcare	Q4	 $0.48	   $0.57
Healthsource		Q4	 $0.10	   $0.22
Parentheses indicate loss.