English football champions Manchester United extended their outstanding recent stock market form on Monday as renewed bid speculation sent the share price soaring by over 10 percent for the second straight session.
The Sunday Express reported that Mark McCormack's agency was considering a bid for United.
"We never make comments on unsubstantiated press stories," said an official at IMG's London office. But he said that IMG, most active in sports such as tennis and golf, was interested in increasing its involvement in football.
Earlier this year IMG lost out to sportwear company Adidas in a battle for control of former French football champions Olympique Marseille.
According to the Express report, any credible bid for United would have to be around 700 pence per share.
The club's shares were worth around 350 million pounds on Monday.
The share price has tripled and added 25% in the last two sessions.
United's status as Britain's most profitable soccer club made it a likely bid target, which triggered the latest winning run.
The 300 million pound bid for United was rejected by the group.
Analysts say that United would be an attractive target for media companies, citing the U.S example of television mogul Ted Turner who owns the Atlanta Braves baseball team.
The potential income from pay-per-view television deals is also helping to drive the share price and may make United's main shareholders think twice about selling now.
"The directors own 22 percent of the club...They can sit back for five years and enjoy the football and then enjoy the benefits when the really big money comes in from pay-per-view," said Vinay Bedi of brokerage Wise Speke.
Pay-per-view is expected to be introduced by the end of the century and could allow leading clubs such as United to earn tens of millions of pounds annually from television.
Spurs shares gained 11p to 465p because of their focus on future pickings.
United, who last season won the coveted English league and F.A. Cup double, had television income of 5.7 million pounds in 1995-96 when the club made a profit of 15.4 million before tax.