According to the company, there will be more charges against earnings in 1997 and 1998 as a result of a radical restructuring that is only five percent finished.
Restructuring is about "five percent complete as far as going down the road and getting the savings," said spokesman Stan Main. "That does not mean that we've taken only five percent of our restructuring charges ... There will likely be more charges during '97 and perhaps even into '98."
Shares in Outboard on Friday were off 1/4 to 15-3/4.  
The Waukegan, Ill.-based maker of boats and boat engines reported fourth-quarter profits Thursday that, excluding restructuring charges, beat Wall Street estimates.
There is a long-term project at Outboard.
"They're going to be continuing this restructuring process in '97 and they're going to continue to have some more charges," said a Lehman Brothers analyst.
Outboard executives are scheduled to meet with analysts and investors in New York on Tuesday.
Expected to be in attendance are the principals of Greenway Partners, an investment firm led by former Carl Icahn associates Alfred Kingsley and Gary Duberstein. Greenway bought an 8.5-percent stake in Outboard this summer.
Although the firm is known for activism, Greenway so far has not pressured Outboard to alter course, Main said. Nor has there been further communication between Greenway and company executives since initial discussions in August, he said.
Analysts speculated that there could be fireworks next week or at the annual meeting of shareholders, who are said to be growing impatient for a cohesive recovery plan.
A restructuring was set in motion this year by chief executive Harry Bowman, who came aboard in 1995, when the stock was trading in the low 20s. Bowman continues to deliberate over how to fix Outboard and key pieces remain to be put in place, analysts said.
The business is under evaluation from top to bottom, Main said. Once restructuring is complete, Outboard "certainly will be a marine products company," he said.  
"Longer term, we could get into products that would not be marine related. But our initial focus over the next two to three years is to fix the business that we're in and then perhaps look at other areas that might be less cyclical or seasonal," said Main, who is director of strategic planning.
Lake Forest, Ill.-based Brunswick Corp, which has diversified into bowling, fishing and camping gear, has more stability than Outboard, which suffers more from boating's boom-bust cycles.
Main said that Outboard sees opportunities to enter other markets through its innovative fuel injection engine technology.
Spending on capital and tooling in fiscal 1996, ended September 30, fell to $52.7 million from $66.5 million the year before, but spending on FICHT is holding steady as the company converts more of its engine line to it, he said.
The 150-hp engines will be sold in December and January.
The company plans to convert its entire outboard engine line above 20-hp to FICHT engines, which will cost 22 to 25 percent more than their traditional equivalents, Main said.