The move to lift the ban was dismissed as meaningless by the prosecutor.
The country's anti-drug prosecutor dismissed the recent move by the government to lift the ban on extradited citizens accused of drug traffickers to the United States as meaningless.
The law prohibiting the extradited of its citizens was passed in 2012 in order to protect drug traffickers from being extradited to the US.
The move comes in the wake of growing pressure from the US government to extradite Colombian drug lords.
While the Colombian government hailed the move as a major step in the fight against drug trafficking, the country's anti-drug prosecutor, Claudia Carrasquilla, rejected it as virtually meaningless. She said the move would not change the situation on the ground, as the ban had already been lifted in practice. She pointed out that Colombia has been extraditing its citizens accused of drug trafficking to the United States even when the ban was in place.
Carrasquilla said that since the ban was enacted in 2012, Colombia has extradited about 1,200 individuals to the US, including several notorious drug lords, such as Juan Carlos Ramírez Abadía, alias "Chupeta," and Diego Montoya Sánchez, alias "Don Diego." She added that the Colombian government had approved all these extraditions despite the ban.
The recent decision to lift the ban was a symbolic gesture aimed at the US government, which has been pushing for more extraditeds.
Drug lords continue to operate across the country despite the government's efforts to combat the trade.
The US has provided financial and military support to the country's security forces in the fight against drug traffickers.
The recent move to lift the ban on extradited citizens related to drug traffickers to the US is seen as an attempt to appease the US administration, which has demanded that the country hand over several high-profile drug lords, including Dairo Antonio suga.
However, the anti-drug prosecutor's dismissal of the move as virtually meaningless suggests that it may not have the desired impact. While the Colombian government may have lifted the ban, it remains to be seen if it will actually start extraditing its citizens accused of drug trafficking to the US in significant numbers. If it does not, the move will be little more than a symbolic gesture.