The introduction is about something.
Peoples’ behaviors and decisions are often the central scope of sociological inquiry. Flint (Michigan) water crisis can be seen as an illustration of such decisions and behaviors that have led to severe issues with multiple implications. To understand the causes of the crisis and ways to prevent such problems in the future, it is possible to employ the Marxist approach. The class concept of this paradigm best fits into the analysis of the situation as a conflict between two major groups is apparent.
Flint (Michigan): Demographics
In the middle of the twentieth century Flint (Michigan) was a rapidly developing and prosperous city that hosted such giants as General Motors. However, in the 1980s, the town started to degrade due to the severe oil crisis that hit the automotive industry (Pauli, 2020). The city saw tremendous demographic shifts because thousands of people left searching for better employment and living conditions. At present, the city’s population is slightly over 96 thousand people (Data USA, 2021). The majority of residents are Black, and a third is White. The poverty rate is relatively high and reached 39% in 2020, while the median age is quite low (35,5 years). These figures suggest that the socio-economic situation in Flint is alarming, and significant changes are needed.
Water Crisis in Flint (Michigan)
The crisis started in 2014, and officials in collaboration and supervision of the public and scientists could not solve it until 2019. In 2014, officials had to change the water source due to the difficulties with maintaining the existing infrastructure (Krings et al., 2018). No rapid measures to improve the infrastructure were implemented. The same year, people addressed officials due to their dissatisfaction with water quality, which remained unattained. After several studies and data publications regarding extreme violation of water quality standards (high lead level, harmful bacteria), the officials were forced to take action. As a result, pipes were replaced, and the necessary improvement to the infrastructure was made with the help of the federal budget funds.
There is a water crisis in Michigan.
One of the central issues that caused the crisis was the city’s constraints related to infrastructure. Flint’s budget could hardly ensure proper maintenance of pipes and other infrastructure components (Pauli, 2020). Due to the economic situation in the city, the public had less control over the actions and decisions of an emergency manager and Governor Rick Snyder. Residents addressed the authorities, but their claims received little attention as the authorities concentrated on the economic development of the city rather than public health or safety.
Flint Water Crisis: Social Concept Applied
The concept of class is relevant when addressing the causes of the crisis.
The Marxist Theory is about class.
According to the Marxist theory of class, human society is mainly divided into the proletariat (laborers) and bourgeoisie (those who usurp laborers’ resources). The former are working people with little resources as they are taken over by the rich (Neilson, 2017). These two groups are in constant conflict, and their resolution can be achieved by revolution. The revolution can be implemented peacefully in terms of the coalition with a part (minority) of bourgeois and proletariat or due to violent struggle. Marx believed in the victory of the proletariat and the establishment of communism with its justice and proper distribution of resources.
Marxist Perspective Regarding the Crisis
The officials took the side of the bourgeoisie and didn't pay attention to potential outcomes.
Marxist Perspective Regarding the Crisis (Social Concepts)
Civil society and race are concepts that can be looked at more closely thanks to the discussion of the crisis from the Marxist theory of class perspective.
The crisis from Bourdieu's perspective.
Bourdieu believes that classes are analytical constructs and that different groups with individuals joining and leaving these clusters, collaborate or find themselves in a conflict can be viewed from this perspective.
Conclusion
Marxist and Bourdieu’s perspectives can be both applied to analyze the Flint Water crisis. It becomes clear that classes are objective constructions, although they are not clear-cut. Workers, entrepreneurs, big business owners, merchants, scientists, and employees have diverse interests, and they may sometimes be in conflict. However, the needs of people pertaining to different groups can be achieved by collaborating. The Flint Water Crisis is an illustration of the conflict and its resolution. Although the focus was initially on the interest of businesses and economic growth at the expense of public health, people managed to force officials to make the right choices and address the water issue. The representative of different classes and clusters of society formed the civil society that became the power bringing the solution. The authorities had to implement appropriate measures to solve the problem. It is clear that civil society can be a supervisory force to ensure that officials make proper decisions.