Internet censorship

 The censorship can be defined as any kind of surveillances that any kinds of authority do to prevent specific material to be published. This topic in some places in the world can have a lot of argument and in other places it's not an issue at all. Internet censorship is a matter as a human right. 

 The right of being able to choose the way you want to think is being violate in the internet censorship. And this makes you feel that you being under control by the others. I had experienced this back when I was in my country. As I can imply from my experience, censorship could prevent some unacceptable truth or fact to be published. And this is against our freedom to choose whether any material that we found in the internet is acceptable or not regarding to our culture. 
 
 Let the parents do their job. One of the biggest issues that made the internet censorship legalized is adult's material. As I can see this issue can be different from culture to another culture. In some conservative societies it's really a big issue but in some other it's not that important. And as we can see nowadays there is almost no huge country that wouldn't contain a minority of people from different culture living together under the name of one community. So it's not acceptable to impose something not acceptable regarding to your culture or religion to the others group of people. And when we get back to pornography problem, there is other solution for it instead of censorship. For instance, in some countries where I can see that they had succeeded in on order to solve this problem, they have a censorship in their schools to prevent the bad materials to reach the underage. And when it comes to out side schools, I think it's up to the parents of the underage.

 The collateral damage from the censorships. As what I have seen from a lot of example of internet censorship, its sometime gets more then what it really made for. For example of misused of the censorship in some countries. Its being announces that the censorship is just made for blocking the pornography. But, in fact it's getting wider to include political issues and some other parties different opinions. And sometime it's become so silly to include some personal matters.

 In general, we can't deny the importance of censorships. But whether we agree or disagree, it's impossible to get an authority wouldn't misused it by any way. So I would suggest that the best way to get this problem solved is by spreading the knowledge of the terrible effects of uncontrolled using of internet by a group of people. To make it a self control as much as we can.