Outline:

I. Introduction (there are many successful people and they are different).
In my opinion, my uncle is a successful person.
II. His history topic.
III. His present work as a doctor.
IV. Summary.



My Successful Person


 There are many successful people in our live in different fields. Some successful people are well-known just in their country. For example, ANON_NAME_0 Bin Abdalwahab was a successful person and he was a famous religious leader in Saudi Arabia. However, some successful people are popular in all the world, For example, John Kennedy was an important president in the U.S. In my opinion, my uncle is a successful person; he is a doctor and a specialist in Cancer disease.
 In fact, he lived in a farm, and he worked there to assist his family. Because his father was a wise person, he sent him to a school to study. In that way, he finished his study in primary school, elementary school and secondary school in his village. Then, he traveled to another city in order to study in a university, so he entered the King ANON_NAME_1 University in the college of medicine. After that, he had a great chance to complete his study in Canada in order to get a master's degree and a PhD. So, he lived there for 6 years. By the end of this time, he went back to Saudi Arabia. As the result of his history, we know how he became a doctor.
 Right now, he teaches in a university, and he works in an important hospital in Saudi Arabia. Also, he owns a clinic. However, he is always busy with his patients and he usually travels to communicate with different doctors and to attend many courses about his major to improve himself. In addition, people can see him on the medicine show in the channel of Saudi Arabia. In fact, working as a doctor takes a lot of work.
 In summary, I think all the successful people have the same feeling and perseverance to achieve their dream; nevertheless, they each have different strategies to reach their goal. I hope in the future I will be a successful person like my uncle.