In Taiwan, we have a proverb, "Far relative can't salvage you when you are in danger." It shows that neighbors are important. Nowadays, people are too busy to contact with their neighbors, even they don't know their neighbors. It is not a good situation; sometimes we have some emergency problems, it is convenient to ask neighbors to help instead of friends and relative. Having a good neighbor is very important and lucky thing; however, what are the qualities of a good neighbor? A good neighbor should be kind and helpful to us, so that we can get along well and help each other. 
First, one of the good neighbor's characteristics is kind and friendly. A kind neighbor will have a good relationship with others. Many people are so cold, they don't chat with others randomly. It is common for people not to know their neighbors. They never talk to each other, even in the elevator. However, if we have kind neighbors, we can chat and understand their backgrounds, such as their careers, families and so on. Several years ago, my family moved to a new place. We don't know anyone near there. When we move to there at the first day, we feel our new neighbors' passive. They visited us and introduced them to us. Until now, we still have a good relationship. After working, my parents sometimes visit them and chat with them. They can share everything about their lives. They become good friends. 
In addition, a good neighbor should help each other. A good neighbor will notice the abnormal situations in the neighborhood. If you have emergency problems, it is more convenient to you to ask your neighbors' help. I have some good neighbors in my hometown. One day, my brother forgot to close the door of our house. One of my neighbors found it, and he just called us and made sure what happened to us.
Finally, having a good neighbor is a wonderful and luck thing for us. They are kind so that we can have a good and close interaction. We can become good friends. Besides, neighbors can help each other.