Giving your body the necessary substances to it, is an important thing that everybody should do. Some people do not care of this really well; therefore, they might not be in a good health. Others might be a very care people about their eating, so they can be in a good health. Therefore, these people usually prefer to eat at home rather than restaurants because it will affect their health and their money. 

 Eating at restaurants or stands is a bad habit because it damages your health and affects your finance. First of all, when you eat at restaurants, you usually do not get all the necessary substance to your body such as, Vitamins and minerals. In Addition, It usually gains you a lot of fat. For instance, fast food usually does not have a lot of minerals and it has a lot of fat and calories, instead. They also do not provide good beverages. Eating at restaurants leads sometimes to serious diseases, especially eating at fast food restaurants. For instances, Studies have proven that it leads to cancers. In addition, it costs you a lot of money. For instance, I have spent a lot of money when I was eating at restaurants. All in all, to be in a good health, you have to avoid eating at fast food restaurants.

 Eating at home will probably gain you a lot of benefits, such as getting the necessary substances to your body and saving money. When you at home you usually eat a variety of food; Therefore, you will get the most of the necessary substances to your body. In addition, you usually cook the food that you like in an appropriate way. For example, when you fry something, you usually do not put a lot of oil. In addition, it is the food that you like the most. Besides all that, eating at home is much cheaper than eating at restaurant. Therefore, you will save a lot of money when you eat at home.


 Overall, Eating at restaurants have a lot of disadvantage, such as getting fat and being unhealthy. In addition, it makes you loose a lot of money. In contrast, when you eat at home, you will be in a good health and you will save money.