The expectations of women and men and their roles within society has always been an ongoing topic of debate amongst many cultures. Usually these discussions have favoured men over women and resulted in political movements, such as the suffragette movement in England.
As a Muslim, I believe that God created man and women equal to one another and to complete each other. There is but minor differences between the two, yet these differences do not under any circumstances question their status.
My native country is Saudi Arabia. Almost all Saudis are Muslims. And so the country and its people try to guide their life according to the teachings of the Quran. This teaches of respect and equality to everyone. A persons gender is second after the persons being as a human. And so before god we are all humans. Not males or females, just humans. And hence the Islamic belief is that every man and women has the duty to work hard and is expected to succeed in whatever path they have chosen to take.
However Saudi is facing many problems with regard to equality amongst men and women and so many people question its existence as an Islamic state. With my stay in the USA I realised this difference more. Saudi cultural life segregates male and female life. Education, work, and other daily interactions always separate male and female interaction. Both girls and boys are encouraged to grow up with a solid education. However since employment in the female sector is limited, men are seen as the bread winners of the family. Islam teaches that a man must always be there for his family and so Saudi culture frowns upon men who do not support their families, both physical and emotional support. Women usually take up the role of the housewife and so she stays at home to be able to mother her children. And so as we can see male and female roles differ amongst Saudi culture. However with their role differences, both genders are expected to succeed in their lives with hard work. It is only when a role change occurs that peoples expectations of success begin to fall. So for example when women see men cooking and looking after the kids their expectations of having a delicious meal and tidy, clean children doing their homework is low. And vice versa.
Saudi culture however is seen as a traditional culture. And many people in the US see it as dated. The USA is known for its freedom and liberty and so men and women are liberated. The US system of equality amongst men and women is actually very much like the equality values of my Islamic faith. And so men and women aren't segregated with role duties. And so with the US cultural system of freedom and liberty, men and women are expected to succeed