Reflecting on, talking to, and remembering a successful person's life is like a wonderful souvenir for me. A magnificent experience that he has had is interesting and exciting. The name of that person is Mamadou, who is a prominent businessman in my community. He toiled very hard in his career. The courage and hard work put him on the way to happiness, which also made him a successful person in his life.
 Mamadou is one of my cousins, who I lived with and used to go out with sometimes. He is a 36 years old businessman. He also has four children and two wives. His occupation is to sell merchandise in the market. In fact, he imports goods from outside of our country. For example, selling tea, oil and rice is his job. In addition, sometimes he does other kinds of businesses like making deals with the government. I noticed the following things about him. First of all, everyday he always goes to the market early, sometimes at 6 a.m, he also comes home late from work. Secondly, his comings and goings in the market, trying to satisfy all of his clients. Lastly, he provides so much effort in order to avoid the problem from his supplier. I remember one day, I went to visit him in his personal office. We passed hour after hour talking about his work. When he started talking, I was curious about the next things that he was going to tell me. "Often, when my father and I were alone, my father would say to me: you are different, and you will be successful," he said. That message his father told to him gave him more courage, than he had ever had before; and by taking that courage everyday gave him intelligence and talent in his job. He also got me to come to the U.S.A because when I graduated from high school, my brother wanted me to go to London. He said that in the U.S.A I would have a lot of opportunities, and I really realize and see these opportunities. All these qualities that he has, like intelligence, hard work, and luck, I appreciate a lot.
 I am very happy to have Mamadou as a cousin because seeing him succeed in his job, become a significant member of my community and even give me advice as mentor, is wonderful.