If I asked American about what the most popular sport is in the U.S., my question would be considered very absurd. There is no room for doubt that football is the most popular sport in the U.S. Why is it so popular? From foreigner's view point, football seems to be too simple to be crazy for. Besides, there are few countries enjoying it as much as the U.S. I think there are three reasons. First, it is related to the vast territory. Second, it is influenced by the early history. And third, it is peculiar to the U.S.
 The U.S. has vast territory. When the pioneers had settled down, there was an immense land belonging to nobody. I heard they had occupied their own land through running as far as possible and flagging the land. The last part of the movie "Far and away" flashed across my mind. A big crowd was driving their carriages to all directions. Where they stopped, there became their own land. The rule is very similar to that of football. The further the players run, the more points the team gains. Those kinds of game could be possible only in vast territory.
 I think football is closely connected with the early history of the U.S. There were many foreign countries in Europe having tried to occupy and dominate the U.S. There were many wars to be happened for the purpose of taking larger possessions. Sometimes wars broke out between foreign countries, sometimes foreign countries versus the U.S., and sometimes within the U.S. Conceptually, the way to play football reflects the history very much. 
 Football is one of the most popular sports. For example, the most expensive advertisement in the world is the TV spot of Super bowl. It means the most people watch the game. Nevertheless, it is mostly enjoyed by the American. Some countries enjoy rugby, but it's different from football. They love football passionately because it is their peculiar sport. Many Americans don't care much about any other countries and any other culture. They might think they are the center of the world. The uniqueness of football might symbolize the Americans' view of the world. 
 Americans seem that they really go crazy for Football. I think it is because it has some cultural and historical meaning. To understand it may be the best way understanding Americans and the U.S culture. I am waiting impatiently for the day to come.