RCS: chapter 6



REASONS TO GO COLLEGE

 Colleges and universities are places where students can learn more and can gain new knowledge and experience. Why do most people attend colleges? Different people have different answers to this question. However, there are many people who want to go to a university or a college every year and they decide to do so for many reasons. I believe that they attend because they are preparing for their futures. There are three common reasons: (1) to prepare for a career (2) to increase their overall knowledge (3) and to get new experience.

 Higher education is a necessary step for any person who wants to start a career in any major or area, especially nowadays. It is very important for young people to attend college or university and receive a formal degree. If they do not have a good educational background, they will not have get a good opportunity to begin a career or even perhaps find a job. Finding a good job is becoming more difficult day by day because the population and technology in the world have increased so quickly. So colleges and universities can provide students the new skills to meet the requirements of a career in this competitive world. 
 
 Also, students attending a university or a college can increase their knowledge in subjects they are interested in. For many people this is perhaps the primary reason to go to college. There are many excellent professors and experts who can give plenty of knowledge across many subjects. For many people this may be another source of knowledge in addition to what they have learned from their families. This extra knowledge from a university or a college will be very useful for life and employment. Attending college or university produces a well-rounded person.
 
 Other people want to go to college or university because they decide to live a new, different, and exciting life. For example, meeting new people and spending time at university activities will be new experiences for college students. Some students go far from their families and some even go abroad to another culture totally different from their native countries. Universities can support young people in an environment where the students can communicate and discuss many topics such as literature, the goals of life, art and emotions which may have been difficult to discuss in their pre-university lives. So it is a special experience for young people to live and to study in a college or a university.
 
 In conclusion, there are several reasons to attend college or university. However, I chose to attend college to increase my knowledge and to get a special experience that will better prepare me for a career. Career advancement partly depends on your knowledge and your experience in different stages of life. College can provide this wealth of knowledge and experience.