The way of grading students differs from one place to another, sometimes from one professor to another. Grading affects the students a lot. That's why it's important to know how your professor grades your work at the beginning of the term. Either he grades on exam only or both on exam and participation. Some professors think that grading students on the exams only is the best way for grading; others think that participation is important, too. I think that dividing the grades into exams and participation is the best way. It gives the students the opportunity to get good grades, they will be relaxed, and it will encourage them to search for extra information.
By grading the students by their exams and participation, the professor will give the students more chance to get good grades. However, participating in class will help the students in their lives a lot, they will be more confident when they graduate. Dividing the grades is better for the students, because if they fail in one test they can make-up in the other tests.
The second reason which I think dividing grades between two things is better is that it will let the students more comfortable. Since they know that they have to study every day, but at the same time they will not be stressed about a final exam. Therefore, they will study more and they will gain more knowledge.
 To have more information about a certain subject and to know how to discuss it in front of others, which is difficult for some people, is one of the reasons why participation is important. Participation will help the students to talk in front of others even if it is difficult, but they have to since they will get grades on it.
From my own experience, I think that participation is important. When I take classes with a professor who divides the grades, I usually get a higher grade than the subjects in which the professor depends on the exams only. I feel that I understand the subject very well because I have to study every day and I have to prepare the lesson to participate with the professor. 
Finally, I think that grading students by exams and participation is more effective for them. It will help them to get good grades and it will be one of the reasons why they will love the course. They will be more comfortable while studying. The last thing is that the student will benefit from this way of grading by knowing how to talk in front of others without difficulty.