Good Effects of Onsen
 Have you heard of the word "onsen"? "On" is hot, and "sen" is springs in Japanese, so "onsen" means hot springs. In Japan, there are a lot of onsens, and people really love them. Soaking in a hot bath, not just taking a shower, is a traditional custom in Japan. The reason why Japanese people love onsen is not that they just like keeping their bodies clean. Onsen appears to make people feel good, relaxed, and refreshed. That is why people seem eager for it. Onsen brings good effects for your health: physically and mentally. Although the effects are still controversial, some experts maintain the idea.
 Onsen seems to cause good effects on your health physically. If you soak in onsen, you get the influence of heat, buoyancy, and water pressure. That could make your circulatory, nervous, musculoskeletal, and hormonal systems work right. In addition, onsen has effects from minerals that are one of onsen constituents. The examples of minerals are sulfur, copper, iron, magnesium, calcium, or carbonate and so on. If you soak an onsen, the minerals will be absorbed through your skin into your body. If you drink it, they will be absorbed through your stomach and intestines and lead to good effects on your visceral system. Although the effects depend on what mineral the onsen contains, there are some general, common effects that are good for tiredness, sore muscles, stiffness, joint pain, and mild skin trouble and so on.
 Next, onsen has good effects on your mental health. Onsen usually has spacious bath and broad bathtubs that may be different from yours. In addition to that, the environments of onsen bring you unconstrained feelings because you are away from your usual life and could forget your stressful life, job, or problems even though it is temporary. Also, you may be able to relieve your tiredness, regain your energy, and refresh yourself because of onsen itself and the environments. Feeling comfortable may be the biggest reason why Japanese people love and use onsen from the old days.
 Onsen brings you good effects on both your physical and mental health. The physical effects need more research to prove the reliability because they are still disputable. However, from my own experience, onsen makes people relax. I believe it must have good effects on people's mental health in some ways, and many people have this comfortable feeling brought by onsen effects in the same way as me. Although I hope the effects will be proven scientifically, I think they have already been demonstrated empirically. Therefore, if you have an opportunity to have onsen, just try it. If you believe the effects or not, you can enjoy onsen.