All religions are based on beliefs. In order to accomplish the targets for these beliefs, people who follow these religions do some kind of special activities or rituals. Similarly, Muslims have a lot of beliefs which require them to do some rituals. One of the most important rituals to Muslims, which is the third pillar of the five Islamic pillars, is fasting Ramadan. It is the ninth month of our Islamic Lunar calendar. It is the holiest month because we believe that the holy Qur'an was sent down in it. Therefore, Muslims are obliged to fast Ramadan, which has a lot of rituals and activities to do, a lot of benefits to gain and it has a special traditional taste to Muslims. 
In order to obey god, we fast during our holiest month, which is Ramadan. To fast this month, we are obliged t not eat, drink, chew gum, smoke and have any sexual contact during the day while it is light. Therefore, our first meal, which is a breakfast, is after sunset. After that, our last meal, which is called Alsuhoor, is in the dawn before the sun rises. Our fasting is not limited to the physical abstaining. In fact, in order to gain the whole boon, a lot of benefactions, blessing, and lose sins, we are strongly encouraged to give up the bad behaviors, such as swearing, lying, slandering, and gossiping.
 We are encouraged to do a lot of good actions. One of those is giving charity. We are also urged to read the whole holy Qur'an during this month. For instance, some people read one chapter every day because the Qur'an is divided into 30 chapters. Doing a lot of praying is also encouraged in this month, especially during Laylat Ul-qader - night of destiny. It is the night of the 23rd of Ramadan. Others say it is in the last ten days of Ramadan, but it is mysterious. It depends on your sect beliefs. Anyway, it is the holiest night in Ramadan because the Qur'an was first revealed to prophet ANON_NAME_0 through the angel Gabriel. As a consequence, we are urged to do a lot of praying during this night. In the Qur'an, it is stated that praying during this night is better than thousands of years praying. Finally, after Ramadan, in the first day of Eid Al-fter we are obliged to give charity. 
Observing Ramadan has a lot benefits, such as humanitarian, spiritual, and health benefits. First of all, we fast from sunrise to the sunset, which means we have to be disciplined. Thus, fasting teaches us how to be self-disciplined. In addition, it is a long period of time where we need to endure hunger and thirst. As a result, it teaches us self-restraint, and it reminds us of the poor people who cannot afford their food. Thus and Because of the urgency of giving charity, it teaches you generosity. Moreover, Fasting is a great experience, which takes you to the profound spirituality. It makes us feel the spirituality of obeying god and be more mind conscious. For instance, it makes your brain more awareness and makes you devise new ideas better. Fasting has health benefits, too. It helps to cure many illnesses. For example, it helps to cure the digestive system diseases such as gastritis and indigestion. It also helps cure obesity and high blood pressure. 
Ramadan is a month which has a special traditional taste for Muslims. Families usually cook special dishes in Ramadan, which they usually do not cook in other months. For example, we usually cook Harisa - a dish made up with wheat and beef, only during Ramadan. Many families usually gather and eat their breakfast together. In addition, a lot of people contribute food to their relatives, neighbors, and to homeless people. All in all, Ramadan has a special taste of food and family mutual cooperation.
Overall, we are obliged to observe our holiest month by fasting during the day. In addition, we are urged to give up the bad characteristic behaviors, such as lying and slandering. We are also encouraged to do a lot of the actions, such as reading the holy Qur'an and giving charity. Praying a lot is encouraged, too, especially during the night of destiny, when the Qur'an was first revealed to our prophet ANON_NAME_0. In addition, fasting Ramadan has a lot of benefits, such as teaching self-restraint, self-discipline and generosity. It also helps your mind such as making your brain more awareness. It also plays a role in helping to cure many illnesses such as the digestive system illnesses and high blood pressure. Finally, it has a special taste for Muslims, which families cook special dishes and eat them together. They share their food to each other, their neighbors, and poor people.