Hollywood and the Arabian Culture

 Nowadays the media are playing a big role in our life. From them we got connected to the whole world. Movies industry becomes a big part from the media sector and it has good effects and bad effects. "Hollywood" has the biggest hand in this industry in world nowadays. One of the biggest problems that we can see in the movies industry is the misunderstanding or the lack of information from the movies producers. And the Arabian culture one of the cultures that have been misunderstood, especially from" Hollywood" producers as we can see in many a lot of Hollywood movies. 
 Hollywood and the lack of information can be observed in its product. What we can figure out about what Hollywood knows about the Arabian culture is that they don't have enough information about the culture. Mixing between the Arabian culture and the Indian culture is one of the evidence that shows the lack of information. I really wondered when I saw in some movies when they have a scene about the Middle East they play in the background Indian music for example, Although, there are no relationships between them. Additionally, when they represent the terrorism issues, I can see that Hollywood shows the whole Arabian people as criminals convicted as terrorism. Ignoring the facts that in every nation there are an extremist and good people who against that but Hollywood denies that. When they represent some of our traditions in wrong way it does reflect a bad image about our culture "Typically when we look at Muslims represented on the big screen or on the spot screen, we see that they have always been stereotyped. There are always Arabs with long beards, terrorists and women who are fully covered with Hijab and who do not speak English. It's very negative and stereotypical." Islam had been lampooned in movies, writings, and TV shows in the United States, including "JAG," "24," and Arnold Schwarzenegger's "True Lies."(One of the Muslims movies makers)
 How does Hollywood damage the Arabian culture? It's obviously that what Hollywood produce have effects; either it's good or bad. But in the Arabian culture case it's almost a bad effect, I can see it in everyday life. When Hollywood showed a person with an Arabian face always a bad guy, it will reflect in our life especially in the societies where Arabs are minority in. In August 2006, a USA Today/Gallup poll showed that 39 percent of Americans said they feel prejudiced toward Muslims )ANON_URLPAGE (
 Hollywood also represents its own culture in a bad way sometime. The first time when I came here I thought America is full of criminals, and it's impossible to go out in America alone at night because of the serial killers that I saw in the American movies.
 In general, I believe that Hollywood needs to grab the viewers' attentions by showing things that unusual and extreme, and this is a big part of the movie industry. But also Hollywood shouldn't destroy the others repetitions in order to satisfy their own viewers with breathtaking scenes. They should get more knowledge about each culture which they represent, in order to be a reliable part of the media.