There are many kinds of characteristics which are important for success in our life. I think we can have different opinions about the subject according to what people think success is, such as intelligent, honesty, concentration, a sense of humor, and diligence. Especially, concentration and having a sense of humor are the most important characteristics for success because those two characteristics benefit more easily than the others. 
First, one of the most important characteristics is concentration. Actually, I have felt the importance of concentration since high school. When I was a high school student, I prepared for several kinds of math exams to enter university. The first time I took one math exam, I really concentrated well on that. For example, I could not think about anything except the exam while I was taking it. I also got a high grade on the exam. However, another day, I took a same exam again to improve my score. At that time, I did not concentrate very well because I was sure I would get a better score than the first time. It was not right. Consequently, I got a lower grade on the second exam than the first time. I think this experience shows how concentration is important to be successful in our life.
The other characteristic is a sense of humor. Some people might think that a sense of humor is not essential for success in their life. However, I realized that a sense of humor is one of the most important characteristics when I worked on team projects with my company. In fact, since entering university, I have had a lot of team work. While I was working on one project, I had conflicts with my company several times because we had different opinions for the project. However, one of my friends has a sense of humor. She usually made us laugh through joking when we had some troubles. Surprisingly, after laughing, we usually forgot the troubles and could figure out good solutions. I think a sense of humor can help us create powerful energy to do something well. In addition, the energy will lead us to finish work successfully in our life.
Although there are various characteristics needed for success in our life, those two characteristics have influenced me a lot. I also think I have gotten many benefits from them. If I need to concentrate on a particular subject, I can do well. However, it is sometimes hard for me, so I hope that I can concentrate well whenever I want. In addition, I am not used to having a sense of humor, so I am looking forward to being a person who has a lot of sense of humor. Consequently, concentration and a sense of humor will help you do better job in our life.