The Effects of Watching movies

With the development of society, people are quite busy in their jobs and studies. They must concentrate on their assignments the whole day. Many people like to watch movies after a busy day. Gradually, watching movies has become one of peoples' main hobbies. Some people feel movies will make people be violent. A number of people, regardless of adults or children, might commit crimes by imitating the violent actions in movies. Some movies might scare children. However, the present movies are sorted into several categories according to audiences' ages. This measure can protect children from watching the scary movies. Watching movies has a lot of advantages. For most people, movies can make them relax, have more topics to talk with others, and get more knowledge or ideas. 

First, movies can make people relax. Nowadays, people are too busy to take a rest and feel relaxed entirely. They are usually under high pressure. After working, they can watch movies. It can help them to forget their jobs, relax, and be in a good mood. For example, when I feel under pressure, I like to watch the comedic movies. While I am watching this kind of movie, I don't think about my jobs, setbacks, and unhappiness. I just laugh at the plots of the movies. After laughing, I will be in good mood. Then, I have more energy to solve my problems, and to face the challenges. 

Besides, I can have more topics to talk with others from movies. If I watch the same movie with my friends, classmates or colleagues, and even strangers, I can discuss it with them. It can help me to make friends easily or to have good relationships with them due to the topics about movies. In addition, sometimes we are too busy to spend time with our families. I like to watch movies with my family because I have more opportunities to communicate with them. Also, we could share our opinions, ideas, and feelings about the movies with each other. In my family, I usually watch movies with my family on the weekends. We sit on the sofa and drink coffee or tea. After watching movies, we will talk about them; no matter whether they are good movies or not. Watching movies together makes me have close interactions with my family. 

In addition, I can learn some knowledge and new ideas from movies. Movies involve many different kinds of fields, such as computer science, technology, psychology, and so on. They might differ greatly from the fields that you are familiar with. You can learn the unfamiliar fields from a variety of movies. When you are comfortable watching movies, you also can acquire knowledge and new ideas much more easily. For instance, when I was a senior high school student, I was confused about the chronological historical events. My history teacher often showed us some movies which were related to the period. They helped me to understand the developments of the events according to the backgrounds that those movies described. I was very impressed by them, and I wouldn't forget them. Watching movies is a good way to get knowledge and ideas. 

In a word, movies can make our lives become colorful and rich. They can not only help us to learn and absorb different and various knowledge or ideas, but also bring us entertainment and make us relax. If we relax moderately, we will have more energy to face our difficulties. Furthermore, movies can help me to have more subjects to talk with other people. We can discuss our feelings and opinions of the movies. It can help me enhance relationship with others. Try to watch movies when you have free time. You will discover why watching movies is wonderful.