Choosing Mr. / Mrs. Right before Marriage

"People come into your life and people go. But it's comforting to know the ones you love are always in your heart." said Carrie, who was a character acted by ANON_NAME_0 ANON_NAME_1 Parker in the famous HBO TV series, Sex and the City. It's not easy to find our Mr. or Mrs. Right because there are too many variables, such as families, wealth, and habits. However, if we can choose the right partner, he or she may make our life more colorful. In my opinion, there are three important concepts we should realize to help us to choose our Mr. or Mrs. Right.

First of all, everyone should acknowledge that men's brains are different from women's, and then we can avoid some arguments. For instance, men consider things straighter then women do. Like in the shopping mall, men usually find what they want quickly and then finish their shopping. In contrast, women are usually attracted by discount and charming appearance. As the result, they spend more time and buy more commodities. This difference makes men and women complain to each other very easily. Thus, if we find our partner's action is quite different from ours, it doesn't mean he or she is really the wrong person. Sometimes, it's only because that men and women have different behaviors.
 
The second valuable idea is that we should never think little of religious power. Some religions do have a great power to change people's mind and let our right partner become a wrong one. In my case, I broke up with my ex-girlfriend just because of the religion problem. She has been participating in the Taiwan Zen Buddhist Association for more then four years, since one year after we met each other. Before that, we were almost perfectly suited. However, it had changed her thought a lot. One obvious example is that since we don't know what will happen in the future, I think we should do our best at the present moment in order not to be regretful. But in her opinion, we should practice moral teaching to turn something bad in the future into something good. That's the main reason why I couldn't communicate with her anymore.

Finally, to have a soul mate as our Mr. or Mrs. Right is more significant than to get together with a roommate. We don't want our partner only to share casual or physical elements with us, such as how much salary we earn or how comfortable our house is. In the contrary, we need someone who can really share our spirit, our emotions, or our passion. Moreover, having a soul mate as our right partner will let us feel like a real couple, not just two individuals.

It's no doubt that everyone has his or her own standard of choosing Mr. or Mrs. Right. However, to realize differences between men and women first, not to ignore the effect of religion, and to find someone who can really share our mind are three important things in my thoughts. Perhaps try to live together for a while before marriage is a good way to figure out that our partner is suited or not, because it allows us to know each other more deeply.