Summary of "Before You Buy Notebook Computer Systems" by Mark Kyrnin. Retrieved September 10, 2006, from ANON_URLPAGE

 How to buy a notebook computer

 Nowadays, notebook computers are popular. A notebook computer is considered portable personal computer. Sometimes it is called a laptop computer. In many cases, it may be a replacement for a desktop computer. There are many factors need to be considered when choosing a notebook computer. The key items you want to look at before you purchase your next notebook computer are size and weight, processor and display.

 The first characteristic to look for in a notebook is its portability features. Those are its size and weight. The lighter one is more portable but sacrifices items such as a CD-ROM drive. The bigger and heaver one makes it difficult to carry around. Do not ignore the weight of accessories such as an AC adapter when carrying the notebook computer.

 Another characteristic to look for before you choose the right notebook computer is its processor. In nowadays market, Intel and AMD are the two most famous manufacturers of computer processors. One of the main features of a processor is its clock speed in expressed in gigahertz (GHz). For normal computer use, above 1GHz processor is sufficient. On the other hand, at least 1.8GHz notebook computer is recommended in case to be a desktop replacement. Although the amount of memory (RAM) factor is important, it can be upgraded later.

 In addition to the size of a notebook computer, display size affects its overall size. In other words, a bigger screen is better but it becomes more difficult to carry. Another factor is the screen quality. Display resolution describes the sharpness and clearness of an image stated as number of pixels that enables us to identify the different kinds of screens.

 Although, there are many more factors when selecting a laptop, choosing the proper size and weight so you can carry it easily is one of the important ones. Moreover, selecting the right processor and right display are important too when choosing your next notebook computer.