He was born in 1938 in a small village in the middle of Saudi Arabia near Riyadh. When he was 8 years old his father died from a dangers disease, and he was the only child his parents had, so he quit studying and start working to help his mother. He is the milliner Abdullaziz Alraghe. How did he live and what he did for poor people made him my role model.

 He started selling water to the people in his small village. He waked up in the early morning to walk with his donkey for more than 2 hours to bring water for the people in his village. The people were happy. Instead of going to Riyadh and spending more than 2 hours every day, he was bringing the water to there houses and selling it for a small amount of money, so he could earn some money. He was also thinking about the future since he was 12 years old. He started saving small amounts of money day after day. When he reached 20 years old he had 1000,000 SR in his account. He started his new business by buying cars from Egypt and sells the cars in Riyadh. Day after day his small business is getting beggar and beggar. When he reached 25 years old he was the owner of the biggest car dealership in Saudi Arabia. He got married by 1968. Now days he has 2 children and he owns one of the biggest banks in Saudi Arabia (Bank Alraghe).

 He has one of the biggest community organizations. It helps poor people to get rich by giving them a small amount of money and teaching them how to start making good interest by opening their own small businesses. He helps 10,000 of poor people to get married every year. He helps them by giving them the money that they need to buy the important things that the men and girls need to buy before the wedding. He belt more than 26,000 houses for poor people, but this year he did something most of the people did consider this strange. He gave half of his money to a charity that helps poor people. it was more than 800,000,000 SR.

 He is my role model because of what he faced in his life and what he did for poor people. He lived a difficult life. Then he got rich but he is still thinking about his life in the past by helping their poor people.