Hobbies 


 Most people have things that the like doing to spend their free time on. However those things may be their hobbies and may not. Hobbies take a big part of our life. Sometime our hobbies affect our professional life and our social life. It changes the organization of time, the career which we choose, and sometimes it effects in our health. 
 We like spend time doing our hobbies, but several people may exaggerate the time that they spend on their hobbies. So they may lose control of time. For the last reason thy miss doing their life work, such as taking care of their studying or taking care of their families or seeing and spending time with their friends. What if that hobby was also their career so they are going to spend most the time working, because they are going to love it and they will concentrate on it, For example if someone has a career as a programmer and his hobby is related to that. Can you imagine how good he is? And how much time he will spend on his career sitting in front of the computer doing his job?
 Some people have hobbies can also be a life career, but they couldn't choose it for a reason, such as their grad weren't good enough to be accepted to a major that related to their hobby, or their family want them to be a particular person with a particular field of a study that they pick, or their hobby hasn't a good career for their future, or it can't be related to a career. But what if a person who has a career that related to his hobby? or his hobby was his career, he will like his professional life, and he will be a satisfied about that life because he will have a good time working and not just that he will give a great result of his work. I had a friend who hadn't a good high school grad so he was going to go the architect school but he tried his best and somehow he went to it. What happened next to this guy he graduated from that school with a good grad? Now he has the life that he was dreaming about as a manager of an architecture company. Another example of a person who went to a medicine school just as his father wanted him to. After one year that person changed his field of study to something he loves to chemistry. Just as what he wanted to do. So, what if our hobby can also be a good professional life, how good our life can be? And how much we are going to love our life?
 Hobbies can affect our life in appositive or a negative way. If we like to do a particular kind of sport and it's our hobby, for example swimming or playing soccer. That lead us to be in good health, beside it keeps us in a good shape, when some has healthy body it helps him being good thinker. The negative result of being an addicted to your hobby if it unhealthy one. if we have a child who loves sitting in front of the video games for twenty four hours a day. for sure that affects his mind and his health for that we need to organize and control the time we spend doing our hobbies, so it may not affect our health in a negative way.
 After all, if we have a hobby with a good field of studying and a good professional life. Why don't we choose it to be our life? If we have unhealthy hobby, why don't we control our time to make the affects of it less? If we have a hobby how can we organize our time doing it? Hobbies affect our life and they take a big part of it, but how can we control our love of it?