Outline
I. Introduction — the reason we need a car, benefits of having a car
II. Body — the way of choosing a reasonable car
1) Reason you buy a car (purpose) – engine, size
2) To consider the price – budget
3) Option – use versus new
4) Option – where
III. Conclusion – should consider the situation

In a modern society, a car is one of the most indispensable things such as drinking water; most people want to have their own car because by having it, people can change their life efficiently and the life can be safer. For example, your children might be sick in the midnight when buses do not work or suddenly you could be hungry. Of course, even if there is no bus when you need to go to somewhere, you can call a taxi. However, you may not deny that the cost and time is more required on that case. If so, what is the perfect way to buy a car? Here is the best way.
First of all, you must think that which kind of cars you need. In other words, you need to think about the purpose of purchasing a car; it might depend on your status. If you're a student, you want to go to school, to go to shopping, and even go to travel somewhere with your girl friend by your car. If so, you may buy a small sedan, a coupe, or a sports car having two doors. However, you should buy bigger one, if you are the head of family who has children. In that case, it is better to buy a jeep or a van. As for business man like a CEO, a high-class car might be needed because the car could express their or their company's trust.
Second, the price is also the essential point of buying a car. You must not buy an excessive car. If you need an expensive car by all means, it might be better to consider used one. Another effective choice is to check the web site or a flea market. Perhaps, in the area, you can find the cheapest car in the U.S. Besides, by comparing the insurance companies, you can find high-quality coverage.
Third, you need to examine specifications and features of the car you will buy. Engine displacement, transmission, the number of doors, and wheel are important factors as well. You should never forget to check the number of airbags and whether Anti-lock Brakes System is or not.
To conclude, you should consider your situation before you buy a car. If you check above the 3 points—aim, price, and spec, you can get a reasonable car easier; you never regret with that.