How to Be Successful at the University
 It is important to graduate from the university with high grades, because this will help you to get a good job you like, or will let you complete your studies as a graduate student. If you want to graduate with a high GPA, you should focus on these activities: exercising, managing your time and setting priorities.
 Exercise is the most important thing. Spend an hour or half an hour a day or every other day in the gym, go jogging, go to the pool, or play other games such as table tennis. Keep yourself physically fit. This will improve your thinking by getting your blood flowing and bringing much-needed oxygen to the brain. This causes a boost of energy that's especially needed during exams. I know it's hard to do it, but instead of cramming 12 hours a day for 5 days during the finals, spend one hour each day at the gym. You will immediately feel the difference. You will not lose that hour because you will, in fact, be studying more productively the other 11 hours.
 Time management is the best way to succeed. You need to choose where and when you study best. The excellent place for study is your room, but you have to keep it clean and arranged; this will keep you comfortable. Also, the best time to study is early in the morning, because your brain will be very active. Most likely, the worst way to study is in a group. You will spend most of the time talking and joking with each other. It is a waste of time. Out of two hours of study, you may only get 15 minutes of information going to your brain. In addition, separate your day time, time for exercise such as playing some sports, time for homework, time for close study such as studying old subjects and preparing for new lessons; time for fun such as watching TV or listening to the radio. 
 Setting priorities are one of the most important things. You should always keep your goals in front of your eyes. And try to plan to reach these goals. For example, my goal is to graduate from the University of Pittsburgh. For this reason, I have planed to work on the TOEFL test while I'm studying the intensive English program. After that, I'll apply to the university on the summer semester. However, you might do this, take out a piece of paper and write the most important goal you want to accomplish, and then write the ways to reach this goal and the time needed to do so. In your bed every day, think about this. Also think about new plan ideas every day. I think you will soon achieve your goals.
 In fact, it is a very easy thing to do toward a high GPA. It will not cost anything. However, there are some other points to remember. Get to know students a year ahead of you to ask about the professors and the courses. You need to study hard and attend all the classes. Don't come late and don't forget to do your homework. Manage your time and study well for the quizzes and tests. If you do so, in the final exams you will feel comfortable and you will do well. Also focus on the class notes more than the books. Finally, take classes you like; you will do better in classes you enjoy.