Outline:

I. Introduction.
II. Steps for learning how to write an essay.
a. Take courses
b. By the internet.
III. Steps to be a brilliant writer.
a. Read more books.
b. Free writing.
c. Revise your writing.
IV. Summary.



Steps to be a brilliant writer

 If you plane to go to any university or college in the United State or even to work, you should know how to write an essay, and how to write brilliant essays. Therefore, there are many ideas to help you to do this.
 In fact, there are many ways to learn how to write an essay. The first way is taking some courses in writing. In this way, you can learn how to arrange your ideas with the information you have, and how to present this idea in clear sentences. In fact, I have been taking writing class for 2 semesters in order to prepare myself to academic study. The second way is the Internet, because the Internet has many websites that teach us writing. So, if you don't have enough money to take writing courses, or you don't have time to attend these classes, you might have a chance to learn by the Internet. So, I used to use this method before I came to the U.S to learn not just writing, but the English general , because it doesn't cost any thing, and I didn't have time to take a regular classes.
 In addition, there are many ideas to develop your writing skill. For example, try to read in your free time. For instance, you can read newspapers, magazines and academic books. Also, you might write in a various type of writing such as a letter, a report or a short story. And, after you finish your writing you may revise it by yourself or ask your friend to do it for you. In that way, you will know your mistakes, so you can avoid them in the future. In fact, I always write my assignment of the writing class, then I often revise it by myself, after that I usually ask my friend to check it for me, so if I have mistakes I can correct them before I send this assignment to my teacher. You might do this process many times until you become satisfy about what you wrote. 
 Overall, if you follow these steps you will success in the study life and in the work life.