Manage time as a student
 Time is very important for students. However, the majority of students don't know how to manage their time well and they often confuse that why they always haven't enough time to finish their homework, prepare for the test or enjoy their life at school. Students can accomplish it if they learn these strategies, making good use of your time on the classes; having a reasonable schedule and carrying it out strictly.
 The first and vital step is to make good use of time on the classes, paying most attention on the materials that your teachers teach and taking the notes to help you remember. The teachers are good guiders, they know what context will be hard for you to study, what part should be emphasized for you to grasp. So they can find a good way to make you sense easily and quickly. Concentrate on the materials, and take the notes, you can grasp all the new knowledge. If you don't do, you'll both waste the time on the classes, and have to spend much more your spare time on studying them by yourself. Sometimes, even if it takes you a long time to learn them and you're probably quite tired of them, but you still can't fully grasp all the materials that the teachers have taught. That's the reason why many students are busy studying, but they can't study well. Therefore, by making good use of time on the classes, you will find study isn't a difficult and boring work, and you'd like to enjoy it.
 Another step is to have a reasonable schedule and carry it out strictly. This schedule includes that what period you should have to study, doing your homework, reviewing what you have learned and previewing what you're about to learn; what period you can have a rest, make friends and have fun. You should divide your time in detail with these contexts and write them down. When you've finished one of these contexts, you should sign it. It will be helpful for you to carry out your plan strictly. 
 The task of students is not only to study the knowledge well, but also to fully enjoy the life at school. As a consequence, by managing your time well and effectively, you will find what a rich and meaningful life you will have.