Be a successful language learner


 Learning a new language is hard for everyone, but it is very important to learn one or two languages which is not your native language. Because it is a global word right now, we have many chances to talk with foreigners who are not use the same language as us. As an English learner right now and I have had 10 years experience about learning English, I think there are several ways to be a successful language learner. I think attending the language school, finding a native speaker to be your conversation partner, and keeping on practicing are the good ways to improve your language skill.
 
 Attending language school is the most direct way to make your foreign language become better. For example, if you want to learn Japanese, it will be good for you to attend the language school in Japan. You will have a good learning environment there, and teachers there will give you the complete education about Japanese. Thus how to choose a good language school is an important part of making your Japanese becomes better. I think there are a lot of information about how to choose the good and suitable language school, it's good to gather this kind of information before choosing the language school.

 The second way to become a successful language learner is to find a native speaker as your conversation partner. I think some of the language learners have experiences about having conversation partners. Having a conversation partner not only can help you practice your foreign language, but also can get some information about the foreign culture. If we have conversation partner, we can improve our listening and speaking skill, especially I think the speaking skill is the hardest part for foreign learner to improve. I strongly recommend finding a conversation partner if you want to make your foreign language just like your native language!
 
 Besides those, you still need to keep on practicing the foreign language in any chance. All kinds of language, if you don't use it often, you might forget it. In order not to forget it, you should practice foreign language usually by yourself. It will not only maintain your language skill, but also improve it.

 Learning language successfully is not easy, because there are too many things need to be considered. However, following the three ways above can make you become a good language learner. If you still don't know how to learn language well, maybe you can try it now.