ANON_NAME_0-Long Lin
 10/07/2006
 Writing 4Q

Setting Up an aquarium

 Have this ever happened to you? You desired to possess a group of fish after you saw colorful and beautiful fish swimming in an aquarium. Unfortunately, when you bought all things and put them together with fish, the catastrophe gradually appeared. Although you, however, had made a maximum effort to sustain the fish, they still died. This is a normal typical of people breeding fish first time. Actually, it can be avoidable if we set up a good enviroment for fish by selecting coordinating fish, using correct materials, and adopting right procedures, not simply mixing the material together with fish in a tank.
 First of all, choosing fish you want is the most important thing. Remember the natural rule --- big fish eat smaller fish. The fish in different size can not live together. Especially notice that some small fish you purchase are still baby at the time. You need to know how big they will be when they grow up. It is because they will kill all of the smaller fish when they grow big enough. If you do not know enough informatin about them, you could read the card in front of the selling tank or ask an employee.
 Carefully choose the materials you will put into the aquarium for decoration. Some of them, except the artificial ornament, will release chemical substances into the water. The chemical substances will change the quality of the water. For example, if the sand used to cover the bottom of the tank comes from the ocean, such as it made of coral, it will release salt into the fresh water. Then the fresh water will become salty, and it can easily make some fish ill, whereas if you are setting up an aquarium for seafish, the sand is the best choice for it. Therefore, before you choose the materials, you could refer to the demonstration in the store or read the use directions.
 Before you put fish into the tank, do not forget to provide a stable environment for the weak fish. It means that when you set up the equipment, put up all of the materials first, and after pouring water down 7 days later, then only can you put fish into the tank. The period will determine whether or not fish survive. Due to adding the good bacteria during the process of setting it up, they need some time to settle down. The good bacteria mainly decompose the fish waste and make the environment stabilized. Thus, you must be very patient until the bacteria start to work.
 After buying appropriate materials, building up a stable environment, and choosing some species of fish which can live together in peace, you have a good start now. To maintain the good quality of the water you only need to change one-fourth of the water to fresh water every week afterwards. Controlling the quality of the water is as crucial as feeding food to fish. Pay attention to these. You can have a vivid and active water world.