The beauty contests must be abolished for women's future. There are innumerable beauty contests to be held all over the world. However, those have focused on only the external beauty and have distorted women's roles and values in the society. The beauty is inherent. Besides, the real beauty is made of the internal beauty such as self-esteem and enthusiasm for the life. 
 Few days ago, I saw the movie, "Little miss sunshine." There was a beauty contest for young girls named little miss sunshine in the movie. Many girls prepared for their own specialties such as dancing, singing, and gymnastics to be the winner. However, the ways to do just copied those of adults'. The panel of judges didn't accept the unique way the little heroin performed. Most beauty contests force women standardized like that. There is no one not to like the beauty. The standard of the beauty can be different according to various values, though. The beauty contests make people pursue only one standard that women like Barbie are beautiful.
 Most women do multiple roles as professionals, mothers, wives, and so on. Besides, the value of their participation in the society is getting more and more important. For the future, it will become a competitive edge how to make efficient use of women in each country. However, most beauty contests don't change the image of beauty as ever. It influences a lot on men's thought, as well as women themselves. Many men don't try to evaluate women as they are. Many young women think the beauty might be the best method of success. Those kinds of thought are promoted by the beauty contests.
 The beauty of one's own could be hardly changed. Every people have their own merits and personalities. It always deserves to have self-esteem. Nevertheless, the beauty contests destroy its value. They make many women not to be satisfied with their beauties. They disturb many young girls growing up healthy. Think about the plastic surgery. The beauty contests mass-produce the plastic surgeries. They cause a lot of healthy and mental problems. 
 I think the real beauty must be come from making efforts to accomplish one's dream. There are many other values required making progress such as self-esteem, confidence, and improving competence. The beauty contests are really unnecessary to develop women's social value and status. I think those ought be abolished for the women's promising future.