How to select a major
 High school students finish high school when they are about 18-19 years old. Then some of them will go to study Bachelor's degree. They have to make a decision to select a major for studying in college or university. If you are a high school student who wants to select a major and wants to be successful in university, you can decide the major that you like, find information about your major and know the kinds of job and your major relate.
 First, when the high school students want to choose a major which they will study with Bachelor's degree, they should know what they like. Because the major that they like will be more interesting than majors that they do not like, they will be interested in lessons and satisfied with their major. They have to determine their suitable major. That can help them to be successful in graduation because they can quickly and easily understand the lessons and solve the difficult problems. For instance, if you are a high school student who will graduate from high school next semester and you think that you like Mathematics and Physics and do not like Biology, then you can study engineering, computer sciences or sciences, but you should not study in medic. If you want to study medic, you may not be happy when you are learning, and you may want to change your major. That would be a waste of time and money.
 In addition, you should know information about the majors which you want to choose or you are interested in. You can find a lot of information about majors from your teacher, universities' websites or your friends. The information can help you to select a major because you will know subjects which are in a curriculum. That can help you decide whether or not you like the major. You also can use a lot of information to compare majors that you want to select with another or compare with other universities. For example, if you have two or three majors which you like, you can find out about these majors. You know that there is one major which you have to study Biology which you do not like, thus you may not select this major.
 Lastly, you should learn about jobs when you graduate from your major. It depends on cities, states, and countries because in some places, they may want more doctors or more engineers. For that reason, you should find information about job which you can use your ability and knowledge. If you can graduate from your major but you cannot find a job that you can do or you can find a job which you cannot use your knowledge from your major, you will not feel good or will not be successful in your life even though you can study in a major that you like. As an example, if you live in Thailand, there are too many buildings in Bangkok, thus we do not want to construct more buildings. Consequently, civil engineers in Bangkok may have a lot of trouble finding work. If you want to study in engineering and you are making a decision between civil engineering and computer engineering, if you know about this information, you may choose computer engineering as your major.
 Finally, you can select your major which you like, you know its information and you know the kinds of job you can get when you finish your major. You can feel happy, enjoyable and pleasant when you are studying in university. If you confident to your determination, you can select a suitable major and will be a prosperous person in the future.