The first short movie of the American director Maya Deren, "Meshes of the Afternoon", left its mark in the history of American movies with a critical point of view of the Hollywood system, and established a new way to think of Cinema. This movie continued the work of French experimental cinema like "Le Sang d'un Poète" by Jean Cocteau, and participated in creating a new experimental movement. It also marks a transition between narrative classical movies and a new free cinema in its own creation and its connection with reality. Maya Deren opens a new direction with "Meshes" which represents a triple transition: in her personal life, in the movie itself and in the history of experimental cinema in United States. 
First, "Meshes" is a transition in the life of Maya Deren. She produced it in her own house in California with her husband, Alexander Hammid, in 1943. Before that, she studied in Europe and New York, and when she came back to the United States, she began working as an assistant to the famous dancer and choreographer, ANON_NAME_0 Dunham, who taught her voodoo rites. She also worked as a journalist, a poet and an anthropologist, and she was the first woman to win the Guggenheim prize to study voodoo in Haiti. When her father died, she received an inheritance with which she bought her first video camera, and which helped her to create her films without money problems. From then on, she learned to think and write in images with the help of Alexander, who was already a filmmaker in Europe before living in the United States. 
 Secondly, the movie itself portrays a certain transition. We could see a young woman who comes into her house and sits down on a couch to sleep. She begins to have a nightmare in which she retraces the same path four times until breaking a mirror with a knife in order to destroy the reflection of her husband. One can see in this act Maya Deren's refusing sexual rules of western society, but also, with the final death, see the symbolic passage from one life to another one. The repetitive structure shows us a passage from death to rebirth. In other words, this movie shows the end of a preamble where the artist has found the best way to express her ideas. That is to say the death of the woman in this movie is a possible metaphor which represents a new direction on Maya Deren's life and work (before this movie she tried to express herself by writing, with the cinema she found the good way to express her ideas). 
 Finally, this movie gave to Maya Deren a new way to think about cinema. Art pioneer in experimental filmmaking in the United States, she was both a film theorist and a filmmaker, and the reaction to her work allowed directors to see that an audience existed for this sort of movie. Before that, experimental movies were shown, most of the time, in art galleries and private houses in New York, Los Angeles, Paris and seldom at festivals and only for artists, filmmakers and rich people like Anais Nin (a rich woman who played and produced some of the experimental films in United States), but she decided to show them everywhere in the United States. Then she developed a new system to speak about her work and her theories. She was the first experimental filmmaker to propose a lecture in the universities. The first one was at the University of Syracuse in 1945. Strange though it may seem, this system of lecturing about her own work actually helped to promote the experimental cinema in general while helping to show that an audience existed as well as helping to develop cinematic theories. 
 To conclude, even if this movie functioned as a catalyst to experimental cinema and seems like a rite of passage in the director's life, we mustn't forget that she wasn't the only one to work for a new cinema. Some filmmakers like Kenneth Anger, Gregory Markopoulos and later, Jonas Mekas and Andy Warhol, tried to find a new way to express themselves, with new subjects, outside of Hollywood. Nevertheless, Maya Deren is still considered the "mother" of Underground Cinema.