How to Organize a Special Event
 Event means a performance, sports competition, party because of some especially reasons or purposes. For example, a small party for a little child 8 years old birthday is a kind of event. A big competition such as a Dragon Boat Race also is an event. Some students who work on a club or group might need to prepare a ceremony for the new fresh students, so they need a principle to lead them. Some employees who work for a company might need to organize a special event for an annual ceremony. If we can't know the principles about how to organize it, that would face a challenges for organizer's abilities. We can control everything every well for an event based on these principles: gathering people, controlling the process, preparing objects and dealing with emergencies.
 Gathering people is a function for the event because most of purpose of event is to build a brand for a company and let more people learn the products. First, we need to collect a group and decide who the speakers are and who the audiences are. Then we might remind the speakers about a concept of event, time of the event and place of the event. Don't forget confirming with them before hand. That is useful and helpful. For audiences, we might produce a letter of invitation to remind the audience to show in event, and we might make a reward for the attended audiences. 
 If the process of the event is controlled, it indicates the organizer makes a great job. A schedule is an effective way to control everything. We can write down most of things such as the boss, the assistant, and responsibilities for each person, etc. Do everything on time. An entire schedule would clarify what is the most important at different moment. Also, a useful schedule can help workers know what had gone and what's going on. Some sheets will be wild and flexible way and we can use it in a variety of areas. For example, when we hold a ballet race, we need a sheet to organize an order of dancer. It helps the process of the race. When every one gets a sheet which includes their responsibility, we can work in easy way. Confirmations are also necessary.
 Objects include equipment and materials that work as second foundation. Make a list which includes name, number, required and operator. That can clarify most details including some tiny features. Sometimes we need to predict a number of materials like preparing food in a ceremony. Ask somebody to help and avoid waste. Anything should finish before the event one night at least. If an emergency happened, we would have enough time to adopt. 
 Emergencies can happen on any event, so we need some skills to deal with that. Nobody likes an emergency, but anyone should have alertness in our mind. Sometimes emergency will accompany us, so pay close attention into the whole process. Unfortunately, if an emergency happened, we would follow three principles. The first principle is to keep claim. Then, make sure people safety. Think about an instead method to solve it. That needs to work on all of our intelligences and experiences. So experiences and relationship are very important factors at that time. For example, if a speaker was late, a good organizer would be able to find somebody instead them.
 Organizing an event success is one of the most experiences in life like a new life made by ourselves. That makes our job or study wonderful. It might be difficult or easy, but we can enjoy it and lean more in that. That is a long way to lean all of the skills and practice is a best way to get it.