Young Adult Independency 

Each one us has his point of view about how to live especially when we became adult, because they may live with their parents or they can live alone. Both of them have its advantages and disadvantages. So if they decide to stay with their parents they will feel safer with fewer responsibilities. But if they want to live separate out of their family they will become reliable on them self. 
Live with parent have many advantages for young adult who don't use to live independently. Also, it has reward and punishment. First, some of them don't want to have responsibilities toward home and family. Second, some of the young adults don't expend a lot of money while they live with the parents. For example, they won't pay house rent if the house has rented, bill payment and food expenses. Furthermore, parents take care of all responsibilities and give their son or girl some advises will help them in their life. On other hand, live with parent have many disadvantages. There are some of them. First, independency a lot of the young adults feel they don't have right to live freely when they stay with their parents, or they can not decide in small thing as they think such as at what time they should come to house . For example, if they come home at night late, their parents blame them, and may be they will punish them as well. Second, they have restraints in the house. They can't meet their friends at home so they have to go out and meet them at cafe shop, or restaurant, and discuss about their problems.
To decide to live individual without parents and family is a big challenge for students, or worker who has the first step in his life out of his house and his family. It seems easy for person has no experience in the real life. When the young adults make a decision to separate out of family life and live their own life. It has many advantages and has disadvantages, too. The most advantage of living by themselves is learn how to mange their life well, and they can make own decision without help from any body. Young adults who live with their parents are less confident than people who live individuals. Second, they can develop their creative potential. For example, they can deal with difficult situation when they forced to it. On other hand, separate from family and what the person has habit is very hard and very difficult. Independency may sometime case many problems and has disadvantages. One of disadvantage is how can they earn money without experiences. For instance, in my country the biggest problem for people who want to separate from their family is they aren't qualify to do that because they used to depending on their parents in every thing until they get a job. One of the problem will face them are addiction on drugs, addiction on alcohols because Parents always advise their sons.
Finally, to live alone or with the family it is depend on the young adult so there are some young adult can live by themselves and some are not. It is rely on how they used to living . Live with family for long time is better than live alone independently because it has disadvantages will effect the person who aren't be eligible.