How to be a good friend
 Nobody can live without people supporting and being happy for him. These people called his friends, too. To have good friends you have to be a good friend. This means, you should treat your friends as you like to treat you. However, having good friends is simply focusing on you. If you deal with your friends by dour definitely they will deal with you as you deal with them. For instance, if you were saying bad things about your friends they will hate you, and then they are going to get far away from you. Furthermore, to be a good friend you should find out a way to their heart. To find out this way you should follow some wonderful rules. These rules are helping, advice and kindness. 
 People always help each other to make their life easier than in the past. Inventions are the most proof of this fact. If people were not helping each other to create new invention they will not get better in their life. Anyway, helping your friends is one of the most common ways to get to their heart. Helping them is the evidence to make them believe about your honest. If somebody was in trouble you should try to solve that problem for them. For example, if one of them made an accident and they forgot to get insurance you should give them your hand to extract them from their situation and reduce their depression by helping them and loaning them some money. Do not leave them alone without giving them any help. In additional, you might give them some advice such as to get a new insurance in that situation or any advice on others situation. Guide them to the right way and make them feel comfortable toward you. Even if you do not how to solve that problem try you best to make them relax. As an example, if your friend had trouble with their car and they cannot fix it, you should try your best to fix that car. However, if you do not know how to fix that car, you might know another friend who can fix it, and they may do not know them. Giving advice to your friends is going to certain your relation and makes it stronger than in the past. 
 You should deal with your friends by amiable way and give your kindness. Do not hurt them by a strong action. For example, if they like to talk about sports try to talk with them about them. Even so, try to control yourself when you talk with them about your opinion and, definitely respect their opinion. Do not make any gaping between you and your friends by making a strong action. 
 Being a good friend is your chance to make people remember you. However, each person has their way to gather people around them. Nobody can imagine how the friendship is nice only who do not live on this earth. The ways to a person's heart are helping, advice and kindness. To have good friends depends on you. However, your morals reflect your position, not appearance and not money can get people together with you. In fact, your morals are helping, advice and kindness.