Which major to choose; the Hobby or the Market!?
 
When you graduate from high school, you start to think about your future and which major to choose. Choosing the appropriate major is usually a huge and a difficult task for college students. As a consequence, some students have specific criteria in which major to choose. Some might choose a major which the market needs, and it has a scarcity in the market; because they think that they can make lots of money quickly. Others might choose a major which is related to their interests and their hobbies. In my opinion, to accomplish many elements in your life, it is more important to choose a major that you like, rather than choosing a major based on the market.

First of all, on of these elements, which is usually important for all people, is that to be comfortable at school and later at work. For this reason, you have to choose a major which is related to your interest; otherwise, your life might be uncomfortable or even a nightmare. In addition, when you choose your favorite major, you will be entertained in your studies and later in work. You will not have a stressful classes or work, even if you have a lot of work in your classes or job and you stay the whole night studying or working. In contrast, you will not enjoy your studies or work and you might have a stressful time especially when you have a lot of work to do. For instance, if someone's hobby is using computers, he will be very happy if he chooses to study computer science because this field will be enjoyable and easer for him. On the other hand, if this person chooses other major which he might not like, but the market needs it; his life will be uncomfortable and even more like a nightmare. In addition, he will not have enough time to do his hobby. Ultimately, he might skip classes or work which can cause him a lot of troubles.

Second, if you want to be successful, you have to choose a major which you like; otherwise you will be unsuccessful if you choose a major which is only related to the market. When you start studying at college in a major that you like, you will work very hard in this field. In addition, you will enjoy studying or working later in this field. Therefore, you will earn high grades and will get a lot of raises later in your job. On the other hand, if you choose to study in a major, which you do not like, you will not get good grades and you might even fail in some of your courses or work. Moreover, when you choose a major that you like, you will be able to devise new ideas and you might invent new things. Also, you will be more likely to expand your knowledge and get a masters or a PhD. Moreover, you will be at the peak in your work, which will make you earn a lot of money. In contrast, if you choose a major only based on the market, you will not devise new ideas and you will not be professional in your field. Ultimately, you will hate school and you will not try to expand your knowledge. In addition, you might hate your job, which leads to the poor work and poor salary. 

Besides all that, is the urgency of managing the time in your life. When you choose the major you like, you will be able to mange your time better because your life will be comfortable. First of all, you will finish your work faster because you are profession in the field that you study or work in. Therefore, you will have more free time. In addition, your classes or work are one of your hobbies, which will make you stay extra time with your family or your friends and will make you do other activities. 

Overall, everyone has to choose a major which they like and not to choose a major which the market needs, because your whole life is going to depend on this chose. When you choose this field you are going to have a comfortable life which will make you feel the excitement in life. In addition, you will be in the flow in your studies or work which will make you devise new ideas and manage the life itinerary very well, which leads you to the peak.