The Effects on Students Who Have a Part-time Job
Students often have much time to use, especially after school. For example, they can do their homework, go to a party, or have a part-time job. In my opinion, having a part-time job has become a general trend in this society. More and more students are trying to find some suitable part-time jobs. As a result, having a part-time job for students may have some effects, which are having more pocket money, the work experience, and the influences on school work.
First, the biggest effect is having more pocket money which is the main reason for students to have a part-time job. Not all students have enough money to pay their tuition or buy their materials. Also, some of their parents may not support them all the money they need. Their parents may not be rich or they may want their children to be independent. Therefore, they need to find jobs to earn some money. For instance, they may be a waiter or a waitress in a restaurant, which is the most popular place for them to earn some money. With the money they earn, they can do anything they want. For example, they can save it, buy textbooks, or buy their clothes.
The second effect is the work experience. For students, this is a good opportunity. Students usually learn many strategies from their major. However, they do not really have many opportunities to practice. Therefore, having a part-time job is a big step. For example, they can learn different points of view and experiences from their coworkers. Practical training is also a good way to learn about their major. In my opinion, working ahead before entering their work field can make students have mental and physical development. They will become more skilled.
The last part is the influence on their school work, which may be a opposite effect for having a part-time job. After finishing their jobs, the time is usually late at night. They might feel tired which might cause them not to be able to do their homework or concentrate in class. If their first class is in the early morning, they may skip it. As a result, they might fail their classes. However, not all students who have part-time jobs fail their classes. Some students choose their part-time jobs which is similar to their major. They might be able to do their homework and work at the same time.
Finally, students can be influenced by having a part-time job. Learning how to earn money, how to be independent, and having more experience for students are big influences in their future. Although some students might not be able to handle their school work and jobs at the same time. On the other hand, if they can organize their time well, they can still earn a good grade.