Deciding Who should care for the Children
 10/13/2006 ANON_NAME_0

1: candidate that I think are best
 ANON_NAME_1 and Michael Wang are best choice, even though Victor and Caroline didn't nominate them to be guardians in the first place. I think they have many good requirements for taking care of children. First, their surrounding is good. They are not wealthy, but they have enough money to take care of children. In addition, they have a house which has enough room to take care of children and they have good neighborhoods. Next, they have a way with children, because Mike works is an elementary school and ANON_NAME_1 also used to teach in an elementary school. Finally, before everything they really love kids. Unfortunately they couldn't have their children for 12 years. I think if ever they have own children, they won't discriminate between own children and others children. As above I think they should take care of children.

2:the other people is not as good a candidate 
 ANON_NAME_2 Crowley is a bad choice, even though Victor and Caroline nominate him to be guardians in first time. However Caroline Crawley desired to change the document written about nomination of guardian, because he was divorced and is unsuccessful in his job. So he might have debts now. As above I think he is not good choice.

 Lydia also isn't good choice, even though Caroline was wondering if she would be willing to be children's guardian. However she decided to end her engagement, because she can't give up her career now. In addition, she has to travel around the world in her job. I think she must get marry at some future date. Therein before I think she is not good choice.

 The Crowley's also aren't good choice, even though the children have been staying with them since the death of their parents. However, they are elder, so they must hard work to take care of children. Because, Mr. Crowley has an experience a heart attach and Mrs. Crowley is getting worse her condition. I think it is difficult that they attend some activity with children. Therein before I think they are not good choice.