I think ANON_NAME_0 and Michael are the best guardians of children for several reasons. First, they love kids, and they are very looking forward to having children. I believe they'll cherish of children very much. Second, they have a nice house and neighborhood for children. I believe children can benefit a lot from a good neighborhood. Third, their financial situation is doing okay, so they don't have any money problems. Thus, they won't misuse the fund. Fourth, they're all teachers, and consequently they have many experiences with young children. Fifth, ANON_NAME_0 realizes that she has to spend sufficient time with children, so she is willing to quit her job to take care of children. Sixth, they are young, thus they have enough energy to take care of children. Finally, because of the problem of getting along with Caroline, she wants to make up the problem, and I believe she will do her best to raise children in order to atone for Caroline. 







 In my opinion, both Caroline's parents, Ruth and Bennet, and Victor's parents, Violet and Henry are not good choices of guardians because they are too old to take care of children if they die early. Also, when people are getting old, they may have some illnesses, such as: Mrs. Crowley has the problem of arthritis. Even though they didn't have any problem of health, I believe they don't have enough energy to take care of children. Therefore, I think the children's grandparents will not be the best guardian for the children. In addition, Victor and his parents didn't share the same values, for example, they had some very public disagreements on the construction of government housing for the poor. Lastly, Mrs. Crowley's religion is very important to her, however, the children are not familiar with that and their parents would not like to take them to a religious school. To sum up, their age and healthy situation, different values and religion are the factors that they might not be the suitable guardians.
 I feel ANON_NAME_1, Victor's brother, is not a good choice to be the guardian of the children. There are some reasons, first of all, he is a bachelor, and I don't think he can take care of children well by himself. Next, he is irresponsible to manage his finance, actually, he was bankrupt, so I don't think he has enough money to take care of children. Although money is not a problem to children because their parents provide for them by the will, I still think ANON_NAME_1 is not a good choice. Because of his money problem, I doubt that he will use the money responsibly. For these problems, even though he loves children and always have fun with them, he may not be able to provide a stable and secure environment to children.
 I think Lydia is not a best choice to be a guardian of children for several reasons. First, I feel she is busy at work, maybe she doesn't have enough time to take care of children. Second, visiting and raising children are very different, even though she has a very good relationship with children, she might not be good at raising them. Third, she has to take care of children alone and she doesn't have any experience of taking care of children. Finally, maybe the change of her life is too much to handle.