The Japanese Jury System Needs More Discussions
 Are you familiar with the jury system? In 2009, the jury system is going to be introduced in Japan. Actually, the system was being enforced from 1928 to 1943 in Japan. However, it was stopped operating because it took huge expenses and was not fit for Japanese people thinking that jury trials were unreliable. At present, a trial is judged by juristic professionals. In the future, however, Japanese people are partly responsible for judgment in court. Would it be possible that Japanese people could get accustomed to the system? I think Japanese government is trying to introduce it without enough considering and people's understanding. It might face big difficulty soon after it starts. Introducing the jury system in Japan is too early; people can be demanded a lot of knowledge and time and get psychological damage.
 Lack of knowledge and attitude about law or trials can be occurred misjudging. Jurors take a responsible task judging a person, which affects the person's life directly. One of the purposes is said to reflect the social common sense into a trial, so it is assumed jurors do not need special knowledge. However, would it be really true? To judge a case, at least jurors are required understanding information and technical terms. Otherwise, the judgment could lead to misjudgment, even worse a false charge. Furthermore, jurors are needed a sober attitude and detached judgment. They are not supposed to have any prejudice. However, what if a case is a child abuse? What if they watch a TV gossip show? Would it be possible that untrained regular people do not have any prejudice or empathy? It could influence their judgment. To do all are related to judging a case, I think people need certain period of training. If so, it would be the best way that trained juristic professionals take care of trials.
 The jury duty can rob jurors of their time. This duty is considered to be the responsibility of citizens that is supposed to be approved by the society. However, how would the person who is chosen as a juror and his or her company think about it? The company is not to treat a juror unfairly, but it would be true it could make the company busier to take care of extra work because the person is absent. Also, could the juror be absent from work without feeling any guilty? Moreover, can jurors get enough payment? If the person owns business and cannot enough money for the duty, it will hit his or her life directly. It might also lose customers or its reputation during temporary closing. It is possible people cannot find value in taking part in the system if they see the disadvantages. Even homemakers are not exceptions. They cannot leave early during a trial or session even if they have to pick their children up or prepare dinner. I was wondering how many people can do this duty and want to do it. If many people avoided playing a jury role because it could cause extra trouble into their lives, the jury system would merely make a trial delay and not work well.
 There are some possibilities jurors could get damage mentally. They are going to deal with felony trials, so they sometimes have to read a murder report or see pictures of victims of a criminal. Ordinary people hardly ever have opportunities to do them, so I am concerned if they get trauma after they see them. If the government thinks the jury system is a duty, it should sufficiently prepare to provide mental care for jurors. I feel anxious if the government considers well about it. I believe jurors should not get serious health damage by the duty. It does not make sense if it a more harmful system than a good one.
 Although this is my shrewd guess, the government is just trying to catch up with the way of G8. The seven countries except Japan have the jury system or a similar one. The government might be just concerned about the absence of it, so I guess it is trying hasty enactment. I hope my guess is wrong, though. My guess aside, I think the jury system still remains some matters to discuss. It will run into difficulty to proceed without any trouble in the near future unless Japanese government and people have full of discussions about it. Furthermore, the system did not penetrate in the Japanese society in the past because people could not believe the reliability. Could it be accepted this time? For a certainty, people will be interested in judicatory or trials after the enforcement. However, in the Cabinet Office's survey in 2005, seventy percent of citizens said not to want to take a role of a juror. Would it work well with citizens' reluctance? Also, the present system is operating pretty well. In spite of the fine system, why is it going to be introduced now? The system is needed sufficient discussions. It is better that it will be introduced after public enough understanding. We can wait until then because we have not been caring about it for sixty years already.