Making Friends on Internet

With the development of computer technology, a lot of people rely on computers increasingly to help them. For example, they get used to paying various expenses on Internet, buying various articles on it, and even making friends. Nowadays, many people, regardless of being office workers or young student generation, like to make friends by internet. Office workers think they spend most time working, so that their circles of living are too narrow. They are too busy in working to meet new friends. Furthermore, students are curious about the virtual Internet world. They think making friends on Internet is a fashion activity, so that they want to catch it up. Both of them think this different kind way of making friends is interesting. They can meet lots people who are from different cities, countries, fields, and so on. However, Internet is a virtual world. People on Internet can make up their identities. If you like to make friends on Internet, you might meet some situations, such as you might not have your wish to make the true friends on Internet, you might be defrauded, and you will addict to the Internet World. 
First of all, you may not make the true friends if you are interested in making friends on Internet. Internet is a virtual world. People can make up their true identities for protesting themselves, fun, or other purposes. That is impossible for you to understand a person completely and properly on Internet. You should communicate with a person for a long time, you might be able to know who he or she is, and whether you and he or she can become good friends or not. However, people on Internet can pretend themselves to be a wonderful person. They might not want to make friends with you sincerely; they might just have fun instead. They may not be a good friend that you desire. When I was a freshman of the university, making friends on Internet was quite popular among my classmates and me. We were interested in chatting with others and making friends on Internet. At that time, we made some friends on Internet. At first, we communicate with each other in the chat rooms, and by phone. But, after a period of time, we did not contact gradually due to losing the fresh interest.
Besides, if you are addicted to make friends on Internet, you might be defrauded. People have different purposes to make friends on Internet. Some of them feel lonely, and some of them may want to get some benefits from others. We often hear some bad news from the TV news program. They might be people are cheated money, and even are raped by their friends who meet on Internet. At first, persons who have abnormal purposes on Internet pretend to want to be friends with you. After you trust them, they will seduce you into their traps. This issue is getting serious at present. How to prevent from crimes on Internet has become an important challenge for the public security. 
In addition, addicting to the internet makes people become unsociable. They just concentrate on their virtual world. They make friends on Internet instead of the real life. They do not know how to make friends, and how to communicate with others in their ordinary lives. Gradually, their behaviors will become strange. Also, they will emphasize on Internet rather than their jobs or studies if they are addicted to making friends in the chat rooms. They do not want to work, or study. Students will fail to their studies; on the other hand, the workers will lose their jobs. This situation will make them have abnormal lives. Even it would damage their health due to the abnormal lives.
Making friends on Internet is a fashionable tendency. It is good for people to make different friends. You can get the information of the different fields, life and culture from these friends. However, Internet is a virtual world. You should prevent yourselves from being cheated, and even being raped. You should be careful especially when you will meet these friends. Besides, Internet is a source that you can make friends, but it is not the only way. You should not addict to it. Actually, you should strengthen your friendship and expand the circle of your life. You should concentrate on your jobs, or studies, lives, and so on. Addicting to Internet is bad for you. Internet is one part of your real life; however, it is not your whole life.