Comparing Guardians

Guardians ANON_NAME_0 Wang 
Michael Wang Lydia Montgomery
 Henry Crowley
Violet Crowley Bennet Ames
Ruth Ames ANON_NAME_1 Crowley
Health
& Age (1)They are young.
(2)No health problems and have a lot of energy to take care of 2 children. (1)She is young. (2)No health problems and have a lot of energy to take care of 2 children.
 (1)They are old.
(2) Don't have a lot of energy to take of 2 children. (1)They are old.
(2) Don't have a lot of energy to take of 2 children. (1)He is young. (2)No health problems and has a lot of energy to take of 2 children.
Relation-ship Good Good Good Good Good
Experience Have some experience, but not very strong. No experience. Have experience.
 Have experience. Have experience.
Stability 
Security
Loving Can provide stability, security and loving environment. Can provide security and loving environment. But stability is not good. Can provide stability, security and loving environment. Don't know. Can provide security and loving environment. But stability is not great. 
Religion & Culture No problems No problems Don't know. No problems
Time & No. of Children Can spend sufficient time with children. Don't have plenty of time. Can spend sufficient time with children. Can spend sufficient time with children. (1) Don't have plenty of time.
(2) Has an own child.
Practical
Considera-tions (1)ANON_NAME_0 needs to quit her job. (2)Have a large enough house. (3)Don't have to make special childcare arrangements. (1)She needs to change her job place. (2)Have a large enough house. (3)She has to make special childcare arrangements. (1)Have a large enough house. (2)Don't have to make special childcare arrangements. (1)Don't know their house condition. (3)Don't have to make special childcare arrangements. (1)Don't know his house condition. (2)He has to make special childcare arrangements.
Finances No problems. No problems. No problems. No problems.
Willingness Strong Strong Strong Don't know Don't know.
Guardians Score


Guardians ANON_NAME_0 Wang 
Michael Wang Lydia Montgomery
 Henry Crowley
Violet Crowley Bennet Ames
Ruth Ames ANON_NAME_1 Crowley
Health
& Age 5 5 1 1 5
Relation-ship 5 5 5 5 5
Experience 4 2 4 4 3
Stability 
Security
Loving 5 4 5 4 3
Religion & Culture 4 4 2 3 4
Time & No. of Children 5 3 3 3 2
Practical
Considera-tions 5 2 3 3 2
Finances 4 4 5 4 2
Willingness 5 5 5 4 3
Others 5 4 3 2 1
Score 47 38 36 33 30


 
Who should be the best guardian(s)?

In my opinion, the couple, ANON_NAME_0 and Michael Wang, are the best guardians for Meredith and Andrew. Thinking about the best guardian for children should consider the ten points below: health and age, relationship, experience, stability and security, religion and culture, time, number of children, practical considerations, finances, and willingness. Choosing guardians is not easy, because you must consider a lot of aspects. However, it is the most satisfactory to choose ANON_NAME_0 and Michael for the guardian. First, they love the two children, and I believe the children love them, too. This is the most important point. I don't think that the couple have bad relationship with the children's parents. At Family Court, ANON_NAME_0 said "when he and my brother in law Victor got together they always talked about baseball" this means that they frequently got together. Although ANON_NAME_0 was always jealous of her sister, Caroline, and they never got along very well, but these are very little problems. Because they are sisters and the blood relationship usually doesn't make big problems. I think they only had little problems and didn't have big problems. Choosing guardians is a big thing, so don't think the small problems. I feel the following opinion from Victor is not good. She said to her friend, Lydia that "our problem is that we can't think of any couple that we would like to name" I don't agree with her and I think she was narrow. Their relationship was not very good, and I don't think this is all ANON_NAME_0's mistakes, but ANON_NAME_0 didn't mention, just because she was gone. ANON_NAME_0 and Michael were sane and not narrow. In the other hand, adult's relationship don't influence the relationship between adult and children, because of the blood relationship and children are harmless. ANON_NAME_0 and Michael weren't thought about the guardians in the first place, just because they had better choice (ANON_NAME_1 couple) and they are narrow. Second, ANON_NAME_0 and Michael were willing to be guardians very much. ANON_NAME_0 was very sorry for her Caroline and tried to make up to her sister for all the problems. In addition, she was willing to quit her job to take care of the two children, and they could even move their home. Third, they didn't have their own children, this is an advantage. If they have, maybe they would have some differences with the two children and their own children. Finally, they are not rich but they are doing OK. I believe they must give the two children a stable, secure and loving home. 
 I think Lydia is not the best choice but she can be a good guardian. She has a lot of advantages to be a guardian and her condition accord with the standards of a guardian. So I just talk about her disadvantages for a guardian. She is a bachelor and she will make an engagement with her loving man, and no one knows if he will agree with her being a guardian. Maybe being a guardian is a problem for her marriage. But if he loves her very much, this is not a problem. Henry and Violet Crowley is a good choice for the guardians. They only have one problem, just because they are old and will have something wrong with the health. The two children's another grandparents, Bennet and Ruth Ames, didn't apply for the guardians, maybe they think that they aren't the best guardians, and they know clearly they have some problems for the guardian. But I believe they love the children and the children love them. Finally, ANON_NAME_1 couple wasn't the best guardian in the first place. Because he was divorced and was forced to file for bankruptcy, so he is irresponsible.