These days, many people are running for success in life. Although the result of the success is different depending on what they desire, it is definitely truth that everyone wants to feel the happiness of the success in their own ways. Actually, to succeed in life, some elements are required, such as intelligence, money, and degrees of high education. Also, some people might think that being lucky effects to succeed more than hard work. However, being lucky has nothing to do with success in life because it bothers us to concentrate fully, and depending on how much effort people make to do something, people achieve the success differently.
 First of all, people need to concentrate amply when they would like to conduct their work successfully. However, while they are focusing on their work, they sometimes lose the flow, and they have difficulties to continue the work. At that time, they often think to be lucky; in other words, by being lucky, they hope to succeed in their fields more easily, earlier, and better. Some people spend much time to find the luck. For example, making assumptions and following superstitions. In fact, the behaviors do not help succeed in life virtually. This is because finding the luck makes people neglect to do their main work, so the neglect might causes to take a longer time for success in life. As a result, being lucky is one of obstacles to concentrate on main work deeply instead of getting advantages from that for success.
 Second, success depends on how much effort people make rather than whether having the luck. Some people say that it is difficult to succeed in life because they were not born with the luck. Also, they think that a person who is lucky needs to make less effort than one who is not lucky for success. However, being lucky comes from making effort, so it never happens alone; in other words, a person who is not working very hard can not have the luck. For example, when I was a high school student, I had a friend who though that she had the huge luck. Although she slept during her classes and she never does her homework, she usually easily got an A on her exam. Everyone thinks she definitely will go to one of top universities because of the huge luck. On the other hand, I tried to listen to every words from my teachers in classes, but it was not very easy to get an A. One year after I became a high school student, I chose a complex way to go to university successfully. This is that I participated in a leadership program and a musical circle besides classes to gain various kinds of knowledge. As a result, when I was in my final year in my high school, the much experience besides my classes allowed me to enter university earlier than the other students. While I was in high school, I was sometimes exhausted because many school works: studying, position as a leader, and performing musicals. However, finally, my effort which was not based on being lucky helped me enroll university earlier and better university than my friend who had huge luck.
 Thinking about being lucky might help people view in positive ways because the luck could encourage them. However, the time that people spend on finding the luck is going to nothing. If the people spend the time for making effort or concentrating on their work, they will get much more advantages than getting only the luck.