Working in a small company is better than in a big company for ambitious workers

There are two options for a job seeker that whether to work in a big or in a small company. There are many factors determine the best choice. Although, working in big company has some better features than working in small company such as career and financial stability, it overlook many good features that confirm that working in a small company is better than in a big company for ambitious workers

Flexible work habits are much common in small companies. Change is much easer than in big company. For example, working hours can be adjusted to workers needs since but in big company with many branches that follows same work directory which is difficult to change according to workers of one branch needs.

Moreover, Small company opens doors for worker creativity and ingenuity to improve the work. In the big company the change process is much complicated. It is not easy to implement workers ideas that may affect the company progress in one way or in another. 

Working in big company is less friendly following the work code according to its hierarchy and directory. Most of the time it is not suitable to contact with the top management for any of the worker concerns. Actually the top management people are much busy with doing other things than listening from an industrious worker. In addition, Worker in small company can be promoted vertically much faster since the company has small work hierarchy. In large company, the large number of competent workers and its big hierarchy limit promotions chances. Close relation between 

In general, large companies have much bureaucracy than small ones. This aspect affect there employees too. For example, long paper-work process is needed when applying for vacation, promotion or compensation. On the other hand, this can be eliminated in small organizations that normally have less bureaucracy.

Finally, worker of a big company has to follow a limited job description most of the time and he have very limited chances to experience other tasks that he can learn and new skills which very useful for young employees credentials. Mostly the worker productivity will be focused in single task that limit the worker learning process.

Therefore, working in a small company has many promising factors for motivated worker rather than working in big company. By remembering that the successful small company will be big by the time, its small worker will be big too. In conclusion, work in an undersized business is better than in a large business for striving workers