• Paragraph 1: the best guardian (s)

In my opinion, the couple ANON_NAME_0 and Michael Wang will be the best guardians for Meredith and Andrew Crowley for several reasons. First, ANON_NAME_0 demonstrates a truly feeling about there willing to become Meredith and Andrew's guardians within the Family Court. For example, she told that Michael and her self will accept the necessary changes in the job and the permanent address and the suitable arrangement of relatives visits. In addition, she is going to quit her job. Also, ANON_NAME_0 feels especially that she has to take care of her children's sister -in specific- regretting of her faults forward her sister. Second, the couple ANON_NAME_0 and Michael Wang has a strong drive to take care of the children. They love children. For instants, they are anxious to have children because they have waited 12 years to get children since they marred, but that didn't happen. I think that the love and this anxious to have children is the importance factor to choose this couple for guardianship. It pours in the children's benefit directly. Finally, there are many auxiliary factors support this choice. I collect all these factors under one meaning. It is the preparation. For instants, this couple has the sufficient house for the children, the experience to deal with children in both aspects: the education and the upbringing, the similar interests with Meredith and Andrew's parent (the music and baseball), and the mother's free time. For all of that, I believe that the couple ANON_NAME_0 and Michael Wang will be the best guardians for Meredith and Andrew Crowley.

• Paragraph 2: the unsuitable people for guardianship
 
I think that ANON_NAME_1 Crowley and the couple Henry and Violet Crowley even Lydia Montgomery will not be good choices for guardianship. I will state one crucial factor for each of them. First, ANON_NAME_1 Crowley, he is irresponsible man. He could not take care of his money even he could not keep his son and wife with him. Next, the couple Henry and Violet Crowley, they both are old, and that make difficulty for them to take care for young children alone. Lastly, the best friend and the famous woman Lydia, although that Lydia can be a good choice for the some according to reading 3 and reading 4, there is one crucial question about the value of the word "sacrifice" for Lydia. She couldn't make a genuine sacrifice about her career to keep her relationship with her formal engaged Alex. And if we consider she willing to make sacrifice for her close friend's desire this time –not because she love the children- Then, at least she will accepted the new job in the U.S.A. because it is a good job. Again that will make other question about how many sacrifices can she handle? For example, If some one wants to engage for her, so how many sacrifices can she do to find the suitable partner for her and the children? Do the children will be difficult for Lydia's career and life success?