I think ANON_NAME_0 Wang couple is the best guardians for three reasons. First, ANON_NAME_0 and her husband Mike are able to provide a stable, secure and loving environment for Merry and Andrew. Their house is large enough for the children to live there and in a good neighborhood. Also children can meet a lot of friends there. Although, ANON_NAME_0 couple can't have children, they still really love children. They have a problem in bearing. I think they maybe can't own their children all their life. Therefore, I believe when they become children's guardians, they will pay a lot of attentions to take care of Merry and Andrew. If ANON_NAME_0 gets the custody of children, she will quit her job to become a full-time mother. I feel that she also has a strong willing to become their guardian. At environment, I believe their ability is enough to give a stable, secure and loving surrounding. Second, ANON_NAME_0 couple has enough money to take care of children. The children also are provided for their parents will. Because in Caroline wrote a letter for Lydia said if they died, the children would be millionaires, and money would certainly help solve any of the problems the children might have without them. I think that in Victor and Caroline's will, they left their money to their children. However, I believe ANON_NAME_0 couple will use the money responsibility. Because they don't have bankrupt problem likes Victor's brother ANON_NAME_1. At finances, I believe that they have enough money to care for the children and use Caroline couple's money for their children responsibly. Finally, ANON_NAME_0 couple is teachers. ANON_NAME_0 teaches music in high school, but she used to teach in elementary school. Mike works in an elementary school. Although, they don't have any experience raising children. However, they have a lot of experience teaching children and they meet many kinds of children in their school. I think that they have a lot of professional ideas to take care of children, and can solve many questions when children ask them. Looking after children requires patience. Their occupation needs more and more patience to teach children. Hence, I believe that they are able to make adequate childcare arrangements in order to be work. 

I think ANON_NAME_1 will not be a good choice to become Merry and Andrew's guardian for two reasons. First, in Caroline wrote a letter for Lydia said they no longer think that ANON_NAME_1 would be a suitable guardian. I think it means they don't want ANON_NAME_1 become their children's guardian. ANON_NAME_1 is too irresponsible to take care of children, even though he has his son Stephen. The man can't raise his son responsible, how to take care of Victor couple's children. Second, the children are provided for their parents will. In Victor and Caroline's will, they left their money to their children. But ANON_NAME_1 has bankrupt problem for a long time, and his father refused to help him this time. So I am afraid that he can't use Caroline couple's money for their children responsibly. If he could use money responsibly, he didn't have serious money problems. ANON_NAME_1 can't give children a stable environment and also he doesn't present willing to become a guardian. He just was nominated to children's guardian in an official document. Hence, I feel ANON_NAME_1 is not an adaptable guardian.