1. I think Lydia Montgomery will be the best guardian. Because first, according to Reading5 that the court first considers the wishes of the parents when If both parents die, then the court will appoint a legal guardian for the children. Also I think it is important that Victor and Caroline Crowley want to who would be Meredith and Andrew's guardian. They already chose ANON_NAME_0 and ANON_NAME_1 Crowley to be the legal guardians of Meredith in the Reading2. However, according to Reading3 Caroline said to Lydia that "I was never very happy with that decision" and "We no longer think that ANON_NAME_0 would be a suitable guardian." In addition, Caroline said to Lydia that "We were wondering if you would be willing to be Meredith and Andrew's guardian?". I think they really trust her because Caroline said "We can't think of any couple that we would like to name. We were wondering if you would be willing to be Meredith and Andrew's guardian?" They really want to Lydia who would be Meredith and Andrew's guardian. So, I think Lydia Montgomery should take care of the Crowley's children. Second, According to Reading5 that child and guardian should know each other well and they should be comfortable with each other. Also I think it is important that guardian and child could love with each other. It is true that Lydia is not blood relative. However, I think it is not important because Victor and Caroline Crowley the most trust her than other family as previously a paragraph. In addition, Victor and Caroline Crowley and their children and Lydia have good relationship like family for a long time. And she and children know and love each other. According to Reading3 Caroline said to Lydia that "We both love you like a sister. Meredith adores you, too. She's always asking when aunt Lydia is coming to visit again." I think Lydia love Meredith also, because if she doesn't love Meredith, then Meredith doesn't love her. But Meredith adores Lydia. In addition, I think Lydia wants to be the guardian for the Crowley's children. Because she sent a fax to a lawyer about becoming the legal guardian of the children. I think children and Lydia know, love and be comfortable with each other. So, I think Lydia Montgomery should take care of the Crowley's children. Third, Lydia is violinist and Meredith's dream is to be violinist too. If Lydia would be guardian for the Crowley's children, then she helps Meredith to be violinist. So, I think Lydia Montgomery should take care of the Crowley's children.

2. I think ANON_NAME_0 Crowley won't be a good guardian. Victor and Caroline Crowley already chose ANON_NAME_0 and ANON_NAME_1 Crowley to be the legal guardians of Meredith in the Reading2. However, according to Reading3, She was never very happy with that decision. And Victor and Caroline Crowley no longer think that ANON_NAME_0 would be a suitable guardian. Because ANON_NAME_0 and ANON_NAME_1 Crowley are divorced. So, he is bachelor and, by himself, he is just too irresponsible to take care of children. In addition, Victor has serious money problem. According to Reading3, she said to Lydia that his irresponsibility has also led to serious money problems. So, Caroline doesn't think he would be able to take care of them alone. Therefore, Victor and Caroline Crowley didn't want to that ANON_NAME_0 would be guardian for their children. I think it is important that Victor and Caroline Crowley want to who would be Meredith and Andrew's guardian. So, I think ANON_NAME_0 Crowley shouldn't take care of the Crowley's children.