Advantages of Taking the ELI Courses

Since many years ago, many international students have come to America to study in colleges, universities, or graduate schools. Everyone knows that whatever school we want to be accepted, passing the TOEFL test is the basic requirement. It is used as a judgment of students' English ability. However, having a high score in the TOEFL test doesn't equal to using English very well. There are too many examples show that international students are very difficult in their first year in America because their English abilities are not enough. In my opinion, taking the ELI courses in advance is a better way and it has some advantages can help international students solve this problem. 

First of all, most international students study English in their own language. If they study in the ELI, they will use English to learn English. For instance, in Taiwan, English courses are required since elementary school. Even though we begin to learn English so early, many people still have trouble in speaking and listening. Since most of our teacher use Chinese to teach English, students need to translate these two languages all the time. In addition, Chinese and English are completely different linguistic system. The more we use Chinese to explain English, the more confusion we may have. 

Moreover, in the ELI, students are from different countries. They are forced to speak and listen to English every moment. Otherwise, they will not able to communicate with each other. It's no doubt that every student has their own accent of speaking English, and not everyone's level is equal. However, this situation is a great chance to practice English. When students contact with each other, sometimes it is difficult for someone understanding the meaning. Therefore, the speaker has to explain it in English or try to pronounce more clearly. It will allow students to improve their English thinking.

Finally, in America, international students not only need to use English in the school, but also have to do so outside classrooms. When they studied English in their native countries, usually they only use English inside classrooms. After finishing English courses, the whole environments are their native language. On the contrary, if students want survive in America, they must use English everywhere, such as ordering meal in McDonalds or buying commodities in the grocery. Thus, studying in the ELI also helps international students practice English all the time and be used to living in America before their regular college or university courses.

In conclusion, I suggest that international students whose English abilities are not really well should study in the ELI at least one term before attending their colleges or universities. They can contact to English teaching environment earlier, develop their English thinking, and get used to America life in advance. Furthermore, these three advantages have the same purpose, that is, to practice English everywhere and any time.