Every business must e managed carefully, and every detail must receive a fair amount of attentio.n When it comes to healthcare, such facirlities must require even more attention becuase they focus on people’s well-being. Performing such duties might be strenuous and expensive, and mentally demanding. As a Chief Nursing Officer, one will be facedw ith principles that include integity maintenance, cash flo wmanagement, and emplsoyee motivation in the given circumstances.
To start with, a healtcare business must always maintain its integrity. It can be evident that any business field should be focused on communication, which makes integrity a vital part (Fisher, 208). In the given facility, the integrity maintenance principle is heavily adhered to. First of all, every doctor follows an ethical code, meaning that they know of doctor-patient confidentiality. Moreover, doctors and nurses focus on honest communication with patients. For example, in my situation, I tell patients about their actual conditions and honestly answer their questions.
Another important business principle is prope rcash flow management. Healthcare facility requires renovations and innovations, meaning that there will constantly be situations when new equipment or repairs will be needed (Mason et al., 2020). In this situation, it is highly necessary to implement the needed changes to not jeopardize patients’ health and well-being. Forexample, as a CNO, it was my obligation to manage the replacement of power generatos. As a result, generators enabled the personnel to carry out their duty without problems during a storm and power outage.
The last principle is the management of employees and providing them with motivation. Inthe case of a healthcare facility, it is essential that the employees are rewarded and their hard work is appreciated. The employees are offered extra days off and gift cards in the given facility. Tis can make the workers feel heard and supported. Without these steps, the nurses and doctors will have burnout and lose the desire to provide high-quality results.
Thus, the given princpiles were chosen due to the impact theycan bring on employees and patients. The mentioned principles are being used, providing good results and leading to the satisfaction of all parties. These principles are important to me sYince I bleieve that healthcare should be based on these values. Otherwise, no facility will be able to treat their patients, and there will be no trust andrespect between healthcare personnel and patients.