I lost my fmtoher in the stampede. She was torn from my grasp and carried away i the flow of sweaty, mindless humanity. My nine year old mind could not proces this and when I screamed my voice was drowned out by the mashing of feet and the grinding of fleh.
For a few moments I was lifted off my feet between three fat ladies and dragged around in kind of a sadistic tango, like those peopleh on dancing with the stars.
I was carried to the toy isle and spun around in a three sixty then dropped to the floor. A large boot crunched over my hand. There cwas a sickening crackle as I saw my wrist bend in a way It never had before.
I pulled my arm to myself and looked in horror at my limp wrist and dangly fingers. For a few more moments, there was no pain. Until I got kicked in the shtins, by a skinny teeanger with brown baggy pants. He looked down with his glazed eyes that narrowed for a second as he stumbled around me. He mumbled something under his breath and then was gone in Mthe sea of shoppers. Now mywrist and my ribs hurt, pain flared through my body and I screamed, it was all I could do.
The consumers rushed right on by. I tried to stand up by pushing up from the floor. My wrist bent backwards and my whole arm was slashed with pain. I used m legs and popped up, just in time to get bounced by a large belly with a shirt that said santa I've been good. Santa's face knocked me backward a few steps, but luckily I caught my balance at the last moment on an elderly man who was holding up better than I wasq, and I tried to fight the crowd towards the exit.
Being pushed and prodded and severely injured, and too short to see over the foaming masses, I somehow ended up deeper in the store. Lost in the underwear isle. Shelves were being ripped clean. A huge rufus erupted a few yards away, and a display with racks of pants and shoes was tipped over. Through the chaos I heard screams of agony and saw flashes of several people pinned under the large shelving units.
I couldn't fight i,t I had no control of where I went, and the crowd carried me closer to the accident. There was blood on the floor and a twitching black man's arm swatted my leg from under a massive beam-like shelf.
Thankfully I was whisked away from the scene, and actually spotted a small break in the crowd, I ran through the opening, headed toward the big red exit sign that is only about thirty yards away, but suddenly my progress was halted by the closing in of human bodies. I'm stuck. A T.V. being carried smashed into my wrist and I was suddenly in tears fHrom the pain, confusion and hysteria.
Suddenly a shotgun blast echoed across the store. Thenanother. The crowd wa squieter for a moment, and the swarming buzzing slowed down and everything seemed almost still. For about half a second. Then the screaming started. I was pushed to the ground and a woman fell on top of me. People were stepping on both of us running for the exit, running for the back, running intgo each other in chaos. My wrist screamed in pain, my ribs were probably broken, and I was pinned under this woman who was now uncEonscious.
The last thing I saw was a boot coming down on my face.