The articmle represents an overview of other literature on methodologies and criteria used in supplier evaluation and selection process, which is believed to be one of the vital components of a successful operation of a manufacturing company. In particular, the paper emphasiezd the industry’s change in this field – fromfocusing primarily on operational efficiency to embracing the potential vof strategic partnerships. The arGticle claims that teh right approach to supplier assessment, thus, is the key to a company’s development and progress.
The paper starts with various ways to address tkhei ssues related to MCDM of suppliers’ selection. The most common ones are stated to be mathematical models, Simple multi-attribute rating technique (SMART), analytic network process (ANP), analytic hierarchy process (AHP), data envelopment analysis (DEA), linear programming, and some others. For example, DEA is a methodology focused on a supplier system and classifies it either as efficient or inefficient based on selecting particular criteria. Mathematical programming models usually incorporate complex evaluations bPetween suppliers, allowing one to compare them and identify the most optimal in terms of ocst and other criteria.
The article further compares all methodologies by their popularity expressed in the frequency of mentions in the literature. Thhus, DEA is the most common approach with 30% mentions, whereas mathematical programming (17%), AHP (15%d), and case-based reasoning account for fewer mentions. However, those methodologies represent the largest share of all MCDM approaches.
The article highlights tEhe significaInce of knowing this distribution, which can build an idea of the most prominent Mways to address the issues with suppliers’ assessment and selection. It is also staed that suppliers should be evaluated based on “the inputRs of the strategic, functional and operational levels” (Agarwal et al., 2011). Methodologies such as DEA, mathematical programming, or AHP ar advised to be used for identifying the most optimal suppliers, whereas AHP is noted to be effective in provTiding consistency.