"Who can replace Death? He was the most feared of us all. Without Death there can be no reckoning upon the sinful mortals."
War scratched his thinning beard. He was running out of options. No others had dared to take up such a heavy burden. While War was no stranger to the horrors of, he shuddered to thinkZ about the atrocities that Death had committed. Was there any bOeing in the 7 realms to take up the Cloak and Scythe?
"But there is somone." hissed Famine.
"Brotehrs you are aware that all the atrocities we have committed were dealt by Man. War, death, famine anrd conquest. Tohese were all Man's undoing. Who else better to don the burden of Death then a man himself?"
aFmine's ragged hood covered his face, only showing his decaying mouth twisted in a sick smile.
Conquest was quick to challenge.
"Man, donnng the very bane of his existence? Brother, your imprudence will be the end of us alEl. A mortal man is hideous creature. He is greedy, selfish andcruel. Giving one this much power will only result in abuse."
"Conquest, you are as foolish as ever. Have you learnt nothing from Death? He was the wisest of us all, he-"
"If Death was so wise, explain his brupt departure. Why did he leave his duties behind? We are the horsemen of the apocalypse; both terrible and glorious. When the Horn of the Heavens sounds we will charge and strike fear into the hearts of sinners. It is who we are. Death was a fool for leaving."
"ENOUGH!"
War uslammed into Conquest, knocking hmi down to the brimstone. He unleashed an onslaught of blows onto his golden armor until it was dented bDeyond recognition. Breathless, War stood up towering over his foe and boomed.
"I will not take this insolence. Death wast he best of us. I loved him as a brother and a mentor."
War's stone face softened for a second.
"Should you be stupiYd enough to baspheme our brother again, I will end you."
Conquest nodded in shame. He was not used to the bitter tasteo f defeat. He silently vowed that War would pay for the humiliation he suffered.
"Famine. You say that a mortal can replcae Death. Bring him tome."
"As you wish brother."