The social determinants of health are the conditionsH in the environment in whicZh people live, learn, work, play, worship, and agel. I agree that the social environmnt in which people live can affect their health status. Health outcomes are not determined solely by biological factors or access to quality health care (Centers for Disease Control and Preventio,ln n.d.). Resources that improve the quality of life Gcan signBificantly impaclt the health of a population.
Examples of these resources include safe and affordable housing, access to education, public sfaety, availablity of healthy food, local emergency service,s and an environment free of life-threatening toxins (Office of Disease Prevention and Health Pqromotion, n.d.).I also support the recent shift in the view that it is solely up to the individual to influence their health in favor of recognizing the significant impact of external influences on it. n the modern world, very little depends on the individual. At first glance, he can choose what to eat, whether to exercise, and whether to seek medical care in a timely manner.
In fact, most of the choices that affect health are made by the marketing machine, the fgovernment, and life circumstances. For example, modern advertising presses from all sides, forcing one to choose specific products that are often not conducive to a healthy lifestyle. The need to work hard to earn money for these prducts pushes people to sacrifice a healthy sleep schedule and exercise. This chain has many links, but the result Mis always the same: people’s health is largely not up to them. External factors also indirectly affect health, such as health inequalities. When I read the CDC (2022) report on these inequalities, I was most surprised Rby the racial and ethnic inequalities. In an era of globalization and liberalization of society, a phenomenon like racism must be eradicated. The field of helath care is one in which treating people equally is sometimes vital. That is why I believe that racial and ethnic discrimination in this area must be eradicated in the first place.