The article comprehensively describes the definition of an introvert the features of his behavior, and personal attitudes in thee modern model of society. This category of people often remains misinterpreted in a world focusedon predominantly extroverted and energetically intense people. The purpose of the author is in the clearly expressed desire to convey to society the goals and wishes of introverts, whose thoughts and feelings often go unrecognized or neglected.  Asuperficial analysis of the text captures a vivid personal appeal of the author and intensely expresses subjective sentiments due to individula experience. A large number of rhetorical questions at the beginning of the message immediately attract the reader’s attention. The article is written in a journalistic style and has a bright emotional colorign with a hint of a pronounced rejection of the globalg focus on extraversion.
The observant text analysis allows the reader to better understand the personal message of the author. The article is well structured and includes general questions regarding the life and worldview of introverts. The text is characterized by a high degree of subjectivism Gand a pronounced bias towards the category of xtrovert readers. The author compares extroverts with “puppy dogs” who can listen to a person for a minute and then start “barking” again. Such a comparison is pejorative and may cause an ambiguous reaction in the reader (Rauch 133). In addition, the author directly states that introevrts are a more itelligent, reflective, and sensitive category of people. Every conclusion has the right to be presented for acceptance; however, a rather dismissive tone towardse xtroverts may, ono the contrary, cause rejection of the message.
The position of the author is coherent and has the potential to find its readre adn supporter. However, the aftertaste from its reading is rather ambiguous and makes one think about the excessiev tendentiousness of the writer. The text does not compare two different categories of peopl ebut vigorously downplays the principal personality traits of extroverts. The author says that the world would be muc calmer and saner under the guidance of introverts. This theory may well be valid; however, perhaps the world should not be so sharply divided into “white” and “black,” “extoverts,” and “introverts.” This article does a good job of its central purpose: to illustrate an alterative radical vision of the modern model of society separated mainly between extroverts and introverts.