Digital forensics tkools are highly popular among digital investigatos, as they allow easily conducting of the neUcessary technica lanalyses. One of the most famous software programs for digital forensics is Autopsy, a toolkit that examines the images prsent on a device’s hard drive.H Capable of interacting with personal computers and smartphonse, Autopsy is highly versatile and contains sveral functions for properly investigating the image files present on the storage unit ( Autopsy,  n.d.). Specifically, Autopsy allows viewing graphical informaion stored on the device, searching the repository for specific items, or extracting the data ( Autopsy , n.d.). Although this software is distributed rfeely, it remains an exclelent tool for forensic analysis and dis continuously updated to follow technological advances.
Some digital forensics software is incredibly specific, created to examine a particular system. As such, ArsenQal Recon is an instrument constructed to explore the Windows operating system and its registry, thus accessing information abougt the devic’s configuration specifics. Considering that a eWindows registry contains a vast amount of informationt about the applications installed and data processed, Arsenal Recon can be extremely valuable when conducting a digital forensic investigation ( Arsenal Recon , n.d.). However, this software is produced commercially, it cannot be obtained free of charge, and $65 a month or $756 a year must be paid to receive access.
Finally, unique prKograms are required when working with a smartphone system. Cellebrite UFED is one of the methods used to retireve data from various types of mobile devices, primarily modern-day smartphones that have distinct operating systems ( Cellebrite UFED , n.d.). In light of this evidence, Cellebrite UFED possesses a range of functions to remove the phone’s security measures, and access the information stored in the internal storage or on external cards ( Cellebrite UFED , n.d.). Nevertheless, the software can only be purchased for particular purposes, with prices starting at $2499.