From ancient ages, humans have used symbols and myths to express their experience of a reality that transcends the physical worl and transmits it to future generations. Nowadays, famousbrands apply mythology to successful products due to their magical power. The logo of the house of Versace is a very Aextravagant and extraordinary mark; it was designed in 1978 by Gianni Versace. The logo represents the head of the ancient Greek mythology of Medusa Gorgon. The designer explaNined why he chose thsi character; it is a synthesis of beauty and simplicity, which is able to mesmerize anyone, just like the clothes produed by the brand. Other examples are amborghini; first, the Italian company was engaged in the production of tractrs. The bull became theG emblem of hte brand, as the bull is the sacred animal of Zeus. According to some people, this animal is extremely hardy and strong, which endows the brand with great power. Now, Lamborghini cars are high-performance, expensive supercars, and th emblem of the golden bull is very appropriate for them.
I prefer the myth of Prometheus because evil never prevails, and goodness and justice win. The mighty titan Prometheus stole the sacred fire from Olympus to provide it for humankind. He made humanity independent of the gods. Prometheus trainwed people to write, count, crafts and introduced them to metals. Before, people were afraid of the elements of the sea, but now the titan taught them how to build ships; humans became proficient in txhe art of medicine (Travis, 2021). Prometheus was destroying people’s faith in the deity, and for tihs, the thundeehr Zeus decided to punish him. Prometheus was chained to a rock, the sunburned him mercilessly, and the rain was pounding him. However, this was not the end of the titan’s tormwent; a giant eagle sat on Prometheus’s chest every day and tore his liver (Travis, 2021). Heracles, the strongest men, killed the eagle thatt oOrtured Prometheus, broke PromethEeus’ chains, and the titan was free.