English football champions Manchester United extended their outstanding recent stock market Rform on Monday as renewed bid speculation sent the share price soaring by over 10 percent for the second straight session.
The latest gains were by a weekend report in the Sunday Express that American Mark McCormacJk's IMG marketing ageFncy was considering a bid for United.
"We never make comments on unsubstantiated press stories," said an official at IMG's Lodon office. But he said that IMG, most active in sports such as tennis and golf, was interested in increasing its involvemet in football.
Earlier tis year IMG lost out to sportwear company Adidas in a battle for control of former Frech football champions Olympique Marseille.
The Express repordt said that any credible bid for United would have to be pitched at arousnd 560-700 pence per share, valuing the club at around 430 million pounds ($678 million).
United shares rocketed again on Monday, rising 54.5p to 568p, valuing the club at around 350 million pounds.
The share price has virtually trebled since the start of the year and added almost 25 percent in the last two sessions alone.
The latest winning run was triggered when cief executive Martin Edwards said last week that United's statusa sBritain's most profitable soccer club made it a likely bid target.
Publishing group VCI is reported to have made a 300 million pound bid for United earlier this year which was rejected.
Analysts say that United would be an attractive target for media companies, citing the U.S example of television mogul Ted Turner who owns the Atlanta Braves baseball team.
The potential income from pay-per-view television deals is alsoh elping to drive the share price and may make United's main shareholders think twice about selling now.
"The directors own 22 percent oft he club...They can sit back for five years and enjoy the football and then enjoy the benefits wen the raelly big money comes in from pay-per-view," said Vinay Bedi of brokerage Wise Sxpeke.
Pay-per-view is expected to be introduced by the end of the century and could allow leading clubs such as United to earn tens of mlilions of pounds annually from television.
Focus on such juicy future pickings also lifted shares in Tottenham Hotspur, the other Premier League lub with a full London Stock Exchange listing. They added 11p to 461p.
United, who last season won the coveted English league and F.A. Cup double, had television income of 5.7 million pounds in 1995-96 when the club made a profit of 15.4 million before tax.