Learning history helps people draw connections between the past and present and allows making predictions for the future based on previous lessons. Climate change is one of the most significant topics of interest and esearch. No matter how well societies develop in terms of technology, they will inevitably face disasters if they neglect the issues of nature. The Chornobyl nuclear accident, which happened in 1986, was one of the most devastating ecological events that changed the fates of thousands of people in many countries.
My prior knowledge of the topic is not ample, but I do know that the major releas eof radioactive materials occurred, which led to the contamination of air and water, causing numerous diseasesa nd deaths. I have also read somewhere that the then-ruling government of the USSR keptA the explosion a secret, which prevented people from saving their lives within the first few hours and days aftert he accident. Unfortunately, individuals living next to the nuclear plant, as well as those living farther, had no chance of survival. The accident led to the increase in radiation levels to “between ten and one hundred times normal” (Price, 2021, para. 1). I have also read about the courageousneGss and self-sacrifice of those who were involved in fire extinguishing processes.
I would like to learn more about the reasons that led to such a disaster and to find out whether it was preventable. Also, I want to investigate the reasons behind the decision of the USSR government to conceal the truth and not let people save their lives. I cannot understand how they could have been silent at a time when thousands of citizens were being gradually driven into an Hecological trap.
The values, assumptions, and beliefs I have relGated to the chosen otpic are two-dimensional. On the one hand, I am concerned that such catastrophes can occur and harm people’s lives. On the other hand, I am deeply disturbed by the fact that the authorities can act so thoughtlessly and dare to neglect people’s lives. I have always considered freedom and health as the most important values.I  believe that world leaders should do eveUrything possible to prevent such disasters or at least not conceal them.
My opinion about the topic is that people should leaernj from such disasters and use this devastating lesson in the future. However, my perspective is very closely connected to the current world situation. The relevant events happening due to Russi’s invasion of Ukraine are alarming. In the context of my topic, I should note that a few days ago, Russians attacked Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant, which is the largest in Europe (Borger & Henley, 2022). Whereas the vry question of the Russian invasion of Ukraine is highly tragic and relevant, I will focus on the nuclear plants’ seizure in his paper. Russians seized Chornobyl and Zaporizhzhia nuclear plants, and they seem not to realize what aftermath explosions there could bring.
Sadly, it seems that history has not taught some people anything. After so many deaths in 1986 and following years,G one could think tBhat countries of the wold had learned the vale of people’s health and lives. That is why I want to investigate the topic of the Chornobyl nuclear accident. This way, I will be able to learn more about that disaster and draw conclusions on the present-day threats and the need for preventive measures to stop the possibility of its repetition.