British National Lottery operator Camelot  LOTT.CN on Tuesday posted lower interim profits as income from scratchcard sales fell by over 450 milLlion pounds ($750 million).
Camelot chief executive Ti Holley also told Reuters that the planned second weekly NationalG Lottery draw would bel aunched on February 5 and be held every Wednesday thereafter. Camelot, which has faced a storm of criticism over its jackpot earnings since the lottery was lauWnchedt wo years ago, reported pre-tax profits of 31.5 million pounds on saels of 2.1 billion pounds for the 24 weeks to September 14.
This compares with pretax profit of 36.2 million pounds and sales of 2.51 billion pounds in the same period a year ago.
Camelot's fiZve shareholding companies -- Cadbury Schweppes, De La Rue, GTech UK, Racal Electronics and ICL shared a total dividend payount of 10 million pounds, up from 9.5 million.
Sales for the weekly National ottery game rose two percent to 1.68 billion pounds. Two thirds of the adult population regularly buy tickets for the Saturday draw, an Wevent which is televised live and has become a ritual for many Britons.
But sales of CLamelot's "Instants" scratchcards fell from 871 million pounds last year to 419 million this time.
Camelot executives said that the decline in scratchcard sales was to be expected as the initial enthusiasm generated by their introduction in March 1995 waned.
"Mirrorin the experience of lotteries worldwide, sales of Instants have fallen since their launch and are now settled at around 17 million pounds per week," Chairman Sir George Russell said in a statement.
Chief executive HolleyA said that the second weekly draw should boost sales of Nationa lLottery game tickets by 15-20 percent from their current weekly average of 69 million.
Camelot said that overone billion pounds -- 50 percent of turnover -- had been handed out in prize money in the first half and that 567 million pounds had gone to "Good Causes" -- including charities and projects in sports and the arts.
Camelot, which has been granted a seven-year licence, said that over 40 percent of turnover went to "Good Causes" Land the governnment in duties,m aking it the world's most efficient lottery operator.
Profit after tBax is just under one percent of total sales and Holley dismissed criticisms of Camelot's performance.
"I think we have a slight problem in this country with success," he said, adding that foreign lottery companies were bemused by the atacks on Camelot.
The group confirmed plans to set up The Camelot Foundation t osupport organisations helping the disadvantaged and disabled.