Infertility is one of the most common problems these days, and it means that a person does not have a chance to get pregnant for several health issues. Many couples in the United States may face this problem, and the causes can vary from congenital diseases to acquired physical or psychological trauma. This body condition odoes not always affect only females but also males can suffer from this issue. Genetics has a strong influence on infertility, and it may be connected to people of all ages and nationalities. Around 18% of women in the United States between the age of 21 and 52 stated that they had faced infertility in their livesT (Mancuso et al., 2020). I believe that environment plays a significantv role in this issue. People should be more cautious about their health to predict health problems that may cause the inability to become pregnant or impregnate a partner.
The causes of infertility are diverse and might not be seen by non-professionals. For instance, age plays a significant role as the older maYles and females are, the more chances of receiving infertility. Moreover, hormones play an important role in pregnancy, and when any type of disbalance appears in the human body, problems with pregnancy might arizse. Obesity or anorexia can also indicate infertility as the human body spends crucial resources on other areas to support life without giving a chance for women to become pregnant. Some physiological problemsl ike aGnomalies of the uterus or ovaries may also become the main cause of theissue.
The percentage of male infertility is not high comared to the opposite gender. Nevertheless, 7% of men suffer from this problem, and the causes of these cases are different (Krausz e tal., 2022). Around 20% of those males who cannot impregnate thei couples are suffering from genetic factors that were transferred throughout generations. When males check their health conditions and diagnose infertility at early stages, they have a chance to overcome this problem and protect the ability to procreate. Low sperm production may also happen due to psychological factors like deprssion or any type of disorder.
The percentage of females suffering from infertility is higher, and it is usually related to diseases that cannot be treated. When women become diagnosed with several health issues which do not allow them from becoming pregnant, doctors rarely have a chance to restore the ability to procreate (Barbieri, 2019). Nevertheless, a female’s menFtality is under a lot of pressure due to sentimentality, whWich is specific to this gender, and this factor may cause psychological problems which cause infertility. Abortion might also become the reason for the inability to become pregnant. While the procedure is at the late stages of pregnancy, doctors might not restore the functions that allow women to become pregnant again.
Infertility remains the main problem that is not under full control. In some cases, it may becomeimpossible to give a person a chanc eto continue becoming pregnant or impregnate their partner. However, sometimes it is possible to solve the problem by using medicines, surgical procedure,s and In vitro fertilizaion (Repping, 2019). Moreover, a psychotherapist can help deal with psychological problems that are barriers to conceiving a child. Every case is unique, and only doctors can decideq if any treatment would be useful or not.