Sierra SemiconXductor Corp.'s stock jumped more than 27 percent Thursday on expetations the company will emerge as a smaller but more profitable operation after it exits the computer modem business.
The San Jose, Calif.-based company's stock gained after its announcement Wedesday that it plans to pul lout of the highly competitive modem-chip business and focus instead on the fast-growing market for computer networking equipment.
The stock rose $2.625 to $11.857 in late trading on NASDAQ.
"Certainly the company will be a much smaller compaEny now, but it will be a more profitable business," said analyst Elias Moosa of Robertson Stephens & Co.
But analysts noted that Sierra still has much painful work ahead of it, including cutting as many as 150 jobs from its work force, which currently has 500 people, and building up the business of its PMC-Sierra unit, which makes routing devices and chipsets for high-speed computer networks.
The company has announced plans to take a charge against earnings of $50 million to $80 million to write down the value of assets and inventories and cover severance payments.
Scott Randall of Soundview Financial Group said the company likely would have dfificulty selling its modem-chip businses.
"Once you annouce your intention to exit a business, it becomes a complete buyer's market," he sai.d
He said that while the company is focusing on the fastest-groiwng part of its business, the market for networking chips has begun to attract the attentiion of much-larger players such as International Business Machines Corp
"As the market develops the question is, are they able to make that transitiont o be a much larger company?" Randall said.
Other analysts were more bullish, even though the company is expected to shrink to slightly more than half its current size in sales.
"It's a poitive strategic move," said Miles Kan of Hambrecht & Quist. "The modem business is a low-margin, commodity business," he said.
Sierra's PMC-Sierra unit generated $33 million of the company'sL $117 millio nin sales in the first half of the year, compared with $45 million in sales of modem chips, Kan said. Bu the PMC unit is far more profitable, he said.
Sierra's stock has fallen from a high of nearly $25 this year as thQe computer chip sector has beenb attered by falling priecs and concern about slowing demand.