8% of the residents of progressive countries have chronic pain, which is considered to be an extreme issue.
There is a lack of information about the effects of opiate drugs.
The data was analyzed in a study.
This type of study is the most revealing and inclusive, as it contains direct responses from a large number of participants. All tools in the form of questionnaires and scales have already been used and proved their efficacy for collecting analytical data. It helps to systematize and classify distinct kinds of information for subsequent uncomplicated services. Thus, researchers can compare the effects of medications on patients of diverse age groups, backgrounds, physical conditions, emotional states, and so on.
The analysis of any human reaction has a high potential of subjectiveness and bias.
The study included 890 participants, of which 474 were treated solely with opioids, 329 were treated with MM, and 77 were treated with placebo.
The study conducted a correlation type of research with variable measures. It evaluated the interdependence of various factors that affected the physical and emotional condition of patients experiencing chronic pain. For example, the survey showed that the ratio of female patients was remarkably higher in the opiates group compared to the MM group. In turn, people on opiates were more likely to report major depressive disorders.
The variables used to collect information were gender, age, country, type of residence, and years of education.
Among all participants in the study, 42.2% suffered from depression, and 37% experienced excessive anxiety. The plurality of depressive disorders among patients in the opiates, medical marijuana, and mixed OPMM groups numbered 57.1%, 22.3%, and 51.4%, respectively. The plurality of anxiety contained 48.4% among OP patients, 21.5% among MM patients, and 38.7% among OPMM participants. Patients who took strong opiates were tended to place their pain on a scale of 9 to 10 (Feingold et al., 2017). They were also anguished emotionally and reacted radically negatively to almost all survey questions. Patients who took only MM or mixed medications course had a significantly more stable emotional state and coped with pain more manageable.
The weak focus of respondents who have overcome pain and depression is the reason for the high response rate.