Australian fast ferry and transport group Holyman Ltd plans to further expand operations in Europe before moving into the Asian market, managing director Christopher Butcher said in an interview.
"We currently have operations in North America and northern Europe and we can't see any reason why we can't start doing the same thing in the Mediterranean," Butcher told Reuters.
Holyman is likely to expand into Asia in the future as the cost structure for operating fast ferries improved in some markets in the region, according to Butcher.
Butcher said that they are likely to move into some markets in north Asia and south east Asia.
He said that as incomes rose in Asia the amounts charged for ferry services would rise, making it more economical for operators like Holyman to enter the market.
Holyman company secretary Simon Lennon said the company was looking at fast ferry services from Darwin to Indonesia, but he did not expect a decision to be made for at least a year.
"It is one of a number of projects we are looking at in the region," he said. He said Holyman had looked at particular routes within China and Indonesia, but they did not fit within the company's plans. "I would imagine in a few years we would have something up there (in Asia)," Lennon said.
Holyman shares had a lackluster showing in its first year of listing, but since January this year the shares have more than doubled to make them one of the strongest sharemarket performers over the past year.
The shares listed in April 1994 at A$2.00 and hit a high of A$6.00 on November 11 and are currently trading around A$5.06.  
When the transport group was selling assets to trim its high debts, the group was floated on the local stock exchange.
"The stock really took some time to get off the ground," Butcher said.
Butcher said there has been a lot of hard work done over the past year to educate shareholders in what the company is doing and where it is going.
Holyman's main activities are its fast ferry services in Australia, across the North Sea between Britain and Europe, New York and in Denmark. It also operates a gas pipeline, bulk commodity handling and freight forwarding businesses.
"There are a number of different projects and businesses, we found there are quite a lot of common threads going through," Butcher said. "I think these operations all have their own place and there are opportunties to expand these further," he said.
Butcher was in charge of Holyman when it split from TNT.
Butcher said the group had no plans to raise capital to fund the expected expansion, as the company was well financed.
Holyman bought a fast passenger ferry for A$43 million.
Butcher said he could not comment on its trading performance or earnings forecasts.
Holyman had a net profit of A$16.09 million in 1995.