These days never get easier. Actually, the days I like, that's when I get to rest. It's when the sun goes down that things start to bother me.
You see that kid above me? Cute kid, good with his parents, and never causes any problems. I've seen him outgrow his crib and move into this racecar bed with flames down the side. It's a good upgrade from the cramped space under the crib, let me tell ya. I haven't seen the kid much outside of this room; the truth is I'm not allowed anywhere else. Boss's rules, not his. I don't mind though, the view is good and I can hear everything in this small house which makes me feel like I'm part of the family.
I don't want to take too much credit since I have never met the kid, but I think he turned out alright since he gets good rest at night.
"Taylor, buddy it's alright. The lights go out, but everything is fine."
The boy said "But dad I know he's in here".
The dad said that he knew we shouldn't have allowed him to watch the movies with his mom.
Taylor didn't want his dad to think he wasn't ready to be a big boy so he shouted
"No way dad, I can handle anything!"
"Okay then bud, sleep well. Remember it's just like any other night." The dad said as he turned out the lights and shut the door behind him.
I'll be busy, but maybe another night for you Taylor.
I mean, how this kid can be scared of me when we've never met!
I've tried to come out and say hi a few times before, but every time this kid hears the slightest noise I can sense he gets worried. So I stick down here and haven't moved since. Not that I get much spare time to even come out, but one day would be nice.
No one in Taylor's world knows that I'm from a rough part of town.
You see these guys night after night go out seeking kids like Taylor. They don't even call them kids; they call them "dessert" … real sickos.. Luckily, for the little ones they've each been assigned their own "Boogeyman" to make sure they stay safe and don't get snatched up. So when I hear Taylor tell his dad that he is scared of *me*, it hurts.
You've got Aeran with his scaled skin and claws the length of a cable car.
Hearing Taylor laugh is what keeps me going.