The Toronto Stock Exchange (TSX) announced yesterday that it will be changing its rules governing control blocks, a move that will have a significant impact on large-cap Canadian stocks.
A majority of independent directors will be required for any company that owns a control block of shares.
This change is part of the TSX’s efforts to improve corporate governance and increase transparency in the market. The TSX believes that having a majority of independent directors on the board will ensure that all shareholders are treated fairly and that the company is run in the best interest of its stakeholders.
The TSX has been working on this rule change for several months in consultation with stakeholders and industry experts. This change is expected to come into effect later this year.
The CEO of the TMX Group said that this is an important step forward for the TSX as they seek to enhance the quality of our markets and ensure that issuers comply with the highest standards of corporate governance.
The rule change is expected to affect a number of large-cap Canadian stocks. Many of these companies have control blocks owned by founding families, which will now have to ensure that they have a majority of independent directors on their boards.
Some experts predict that this rule change will lead to increased activism among shareholders, who may see this as an opportunity to push for changes in the governance of these companies.
According to a corporate governance expert at the Schulich School of Business, investors will now have more power to push for improved governance and greater transparency at companies with control blocks.
The founding families may want to retain control of the market.
John Smith, a securities lawyer with Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt, said that they could see a situation where founding families became more entrenched and less willing to give up control.
Many industry experts believe that the rule change is a positive step for the TSX and for Canadian companies.
“This is a welcome development for the Canadian market, which has been criticized in the past for lax governance standards,” said Levy.
The TSX has made significant strides in improving the quality of its markets in recent years. In 2017, it introduced a new rule requiring issuers to have a majority of independent directors on their boards, and it has since implemented several other initiatives aimed at improving corporate governance and increasing transparency.
The TSX’s rule change on control blocks is the latest in a series of measures aimed at making Canadian companies more accountable to their shareholders and ensuring that the market operates fairly and efficiently.