The stock market form of Manchester United was extended on Monday as renewed bid speculation sent the share price soaring for the second day in a row.
The latest gains were by a weekend report in the Sunday Express that American Mark McCormack's IMG marketing agency was considering a bid for United.
The company is interested in increasing its involvement in football, according to the official at the London office.
Earlier this year IMG lost out to sportwear company Adidas in a battle for control of former French football champions Olympique Marseille.
The Express report said that any credible bid for United would have to be pitched at around 650-700 pence per share, valuing the club at around 430 million pounds ($678 million).
The club's shares were worth around 350 million pounds on Monday.
Since the beginning of the year, the share price has tripled and added 25% in the last two sessions.
The latest winning run was triggered when chief executive Martin Edwards said last week that United's status as Britain's most profitable soccer club made it a likely bid target.
Publishing group VCI is reported to have made a 300 million pound bid for United earlier this year which was rejected.
Ted Turner, the owner of the Atlanta Braves baseball team, is an example of why United is an attractive target for media companies.
The potential income from pay-per-view television deals is also helping to drive the share price and may make United's main shareholders think twice about selling now.
"The directors own 22 percent of the club...They can sit back for five years and enjoy the football and then enjoy the benefits when the really big money comes in from pay-per-view," said Vinay Bedi of brokerage Wise Speke.
Pay-per-view is expected to be introduced by the end of the century and could allow leading clubs such as United to earn tens of millions of pounds annually from television.
Focus on such juicy future pickings also lifted shares in Tottenham Hotspur, the other Premier League club with a full London Stock Exchange listing. They added 11p to 461p.
United, who last season won the coveted English league and F.A. Cup double, had television income of 5.7 million pounds in 1995-96 when the club made a profit of 15.4 million before tax.