According to international accounting standards, the Czech power producer's nine month net profit hit 8.4 billion crowns, up from 7.4 billion for the same period last year.
According to the Director of Planning and Analysis section, the opening of new installations cut the company's tax obligations and boosted its bottom line.
There was no change in the company's gross profit for the period.
Czech accounting put the firm's profit for the first nine months at 7.04 billion, up from 6.7 billion last year.
CEZ said the result did not change the firm's profit forecast under Czech standards for the whole year, which is 8.1 billion crowns, equal to last year's.
A financial statement showed CEZ wrote off 4.1 billion in the first nine months compared with 3.4 billion in the same period of 1995, and paid 4.7 billion in income tax after 5.7 billion last year.
Voboril said, "Lowering of tax obligations in connection with depriciation policy have influenced this (profit) increase."
He said that the demand for electricity is expected to reach a record high of 55.3 terra watthours in 1996, up 6.1 percent from the previous year.
Large clients demanded almost two percent more power over the same period of the last year, while household consumption drove the increase.
Voboril said that a recent ruling by the Finance Minstry on maximum prices CEZ can charge regional power distributors did not effect results thanks to the sales increase.
The ministry decided that the maximum average price CEZ can charge for supplies this year is 1,035 crowns per megawatthour, up two crowns from the last year but below the firm's 1,040 crown expectation included in business plan.
Voboril said that short-term indebtedness of CEZ increased as well as financial expenditures due to unpaid debts from some of the eight regional distributors, which totalled 3.2 billion crowns as of September 30.
CEZ and six of the country's eight regional grid operators had been locked in a price dispute with CEZ until the ministry ruling last month.
CEZ is also considering an international bond issue next year as it needs financing but has already flooded the domestic market with paper, Voboril said.
Local analysts welcomed the results but said they did not expect them to help CEZ's share price much as the Prague Stock Exchange is plagued by a lack of confidence.
"The CEZ results are slightly better than I expected. CEZ is fundamentally undervalued but genereal market sentiment is not very strong," said Petr Dousa of Zivnostenska Banka. "I don't expect the price to go up to 1,000 in the next few days."
CEZ shares closed up 14 crowns on the Prague Stock Exchange on Friday to close at 937. -- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003