The introduction is about something.
In addition, leaders help ensure that activities run effectively during care.
Identification of Leadership
Leadership plays an integral role in the performance of an organization. It is defined as leading a group of people towards achieving a given objective (Keats, 2019). For example, leaders help solve disputes among health professionals or between patients and providers. They also assist in eliminating instances of workplace incivility such as bullying, biases, and other negative emotional responses (Keats, 2019). In addition, leaders ensure that followers can work in teams and acquire appropriate communication skills. As a result, leaders ensure that an organization runs effectively.
Appraisal of Leadership
Leadership appraisal is an evaluation that consists of capabilities and traits. Firstly, leaders should be role models or an example to their followers. The followers should learn through them (Becker et al., 2019). For instance, leaders should effectively solve disputes professionally. Secondly, they should guide the followers on the right path, especially in teamwork. Thirdly, leaders should communicate effectively and make sure they listen and respond appropriately. Thus, a high score in the evaluation is determined by the leadership capabilities a leader displays.
There is an identification of safety.
Safety is an important aspect of healthcare because it affects care outcomes. By definition, safety is a state of being free from any harm or danger. It can be the safety of patients or healthcare providers in a setting (Trinchero et al., 2019). It makes sure that providers’ actions, such as diagnosis and treatment, are free from errors. Safety also assists in the creation of a conducive working environment for providers. For instance, working in a clean environment ensures that nurses are free from harm that could be caused when they stay in unclean surroundings. Thus, the overall outcome of safety in a healthcare setting is providers delivering quality healthcare services to patients.
There is an appraisal of safety.
Safety appraisal involves aspects used to evaluate safety in a healthcare setting.
Impact on the Nurses’ Need to Use High-Level Clinical Judgment
The concept of leadership and safety influence nurses to use high-level clinical judgment.
Emerging Health Initiatives – Leadership
There are emerging health initiatives on the aspect of leadership. Firstly, there is a need to create a conducive working environment where nurses can work effectively and provide quality care. Secondly, adequate nurse staffing to eradicate stress levels that adversely impact care. Third, nurses should have conflict resolution skills to address problems that arise in healthcare (Keats, 2019). Finally, nurses should be educated to help eradicate workplace incivility. For instance, they should understand the effects of incivility on the performance of an organization. Nurses should know the role of technology in providing quality healthcare to patients by improving the efficiency of operations. Thus, the emerging initiatives that leaders should consider are fostering an enabling environment to provide quality healthcare services to the people.
Emerging Health Initiatives – Safety
Ensuring that nurses work in a safe environment and that patients are free from medical errors is one of the emerging health initiatives.
Ways to Advance Communication Related to Leadership and Safety
Communication is integral in the effective management of operations in a workplace. To advance communication, there is a need to cultivate trust between relevant stakeholders in healthcare, such as nurse leaders, nurses, and patients and their families (Daft & Marcic, 2019). Trust ensures that stakeholders are open and transparent during communication. The other way is to adopt appropriate infrastructure such as communication apps or use the latest technology to improve communication between stakeholders. Another way is by constantly training nurses to be effective communicators. For instance, nurses should have listening skills because it is essential in providing quality care to patients. Thus, effective communication can be attained when there is trust among providers; the facility has appropriate tools to support information sharing, and when providers are equipped with communication skills.
Conclusion
There is a link between leadership and safety.