Financial services and property group Liberty International Holdings on Thursday unveiled a move into the British pensions market in ventures involving the British Telecom Pension Scheme and pension fund management group Hermes.
Liberty International Pensions will cater to both the needs of money purchase pension schemes and retail pensions.
The equity of Liberty International Pensions will be paid for by the scheme.
Liberty and Hermes said in a joint statement that they were setting up a new subsidiary called Hermes Liberty International Pensions to offer specialized investment services to the British pensions industry.
BT Pension Scheme is giving the Hermes Liberty joint venture "critical mass from the outset" with a 1.5 billion pound transfer of assets to the new funds, Liberty's chairman Donald Gordon said.
According to Gordon, Liberty was well positioned to take advantage of the changes affecting the UK pensions industry.
David Fischel, Liberty's managing director, said Liberty International Pensions still required approval of Britain's Department of Trade and Industry but was otherwise ready for launch.
Hermes called the joint pensions venture a meeting of minds.
"Liberty has the ability and techniques of selling pensions, it also has the systems...and the administration. We on the other hand are good at our particular core areas of investment management...we think that's a very good marriage," Alastair Ross Goobey, chief executive of Hermes, said.
Ross Goobey said Hermes had approached Liberty International only to find the group had been considering an approach to Hermes.
I think one step at a time is enough for us.
He said the venture would probably not be up and running until the first quarter of next year as regulatory approval first had to be obtained for the new group.
The decision by the giant British Telecom Pension Scheme to transfer assets to the new Hermes Liberty International Pensions funds would give the new venture a boost.
"I hope it gives some people some sense of security that the biggest pension scheme in the country is willing to do this," he said.
Liberty plans to sell personal pensions at its regional shopping centres, which are held through a majority-owned subsidiary Capital Shopping Centres. These have more than 150 million customer visits a year, Liberty said.