I sat at my desk, racking my brain to find who could have possibly discovered the truth behind the death of Phillip Mercer, the heir to one of the most powerful petroleum companies in the world. The job was done without a scrap of evidence, I made sure of that much. It simply made no sense, every living soul that knew I killed Mercer were the very ones that orchestrated it. I may not know who this mysterious person is but I do know that I will answer their question with a bullet to the brain.
I heard footsteps in the hallway, so I went for the only entrance to my office.
The scar tissue on his face looked like he had been killed.
"You should be dead!" were the only words I could say.
He replied with an odd sense of calm, "For all intensive purposes I still am, thanks to you."
I recounted the entire tale that crossed our two paths on that fateful night 5 years ago. I told him how I was approached by a man that worked for Prism International, the most powerful energy corporation in the world. Prism stood to gain billions from the collapse of Mercer Petroleum, giving them an even tighter stranglehold on the energy market. The terms were simple enough, kill Phillip Mercer or have everyone I love systematically killed. The choice was made for me. My military background coupled with the fact I helped my step-father design the Mercer home made me the obvious choice for the job no doubt. From there I told him how I was able to bypass the security of his mansion because I helped design it. "What it boils down too is your life meant less to me then those of my loved ones. The part I don't understand though is how your still alive! I shot you in the head, then as you collapsed you knocked over a candle, starting a fire that destroyed your home."
The bullet went through the side of my jaw, lodging itself in the cheek region of my skull.
"You can't possibly think you could take down a single handed weapon!"
"I won't have to do it alone because your going to help me." He said with his eyes glimmering with more determination than superiority. It was the kind of look that was impossible to refuse.