According to the company, there will be more charges against earnings in 1997 and 1998 as a result of a radical restructuring that is only five percent finished.
Stan Main said that restructuring is about five percent complete as far as going down the road and getting the savings.
Shares in Outboard on Friday were off 1/4 to 15-3/4.  
The Waukegan, Ill.-based maker of boats and boat engines reported fourth-quarter profits Thursday that, excluding restructuring charges, beat Wall Street estimates.
There is a long-term project at Outboard.
"They're going to be continuing this restructuring process in '97 and they're going to continue to have some more charges ... They describe the phase they're in now as the discovery process," said Lehman Brothers analyst Harriet Baldwin.
A key moment could come Tuesday when Outboard executives are scheduled to meet with analysts and investors in New York.  
Expected to be in attendance are the principals of Greenway Partners, an investment firm led by former Carl Icahn associates Alfred Kingsley and Gary Duberstein. Greenway bought an 8.5-percent stake in Outboard this summer.
Although the firm is known for activism, Greenway so far has not pressured Outboard to alter course, Main said. Nor has there been further communication between Greenway and company executives since initial discussions in August, he said.
Analysts speculated that there could be fireworks next week or at the annual meeting of shareholders, who are said to be growing impatient for a cohesive recovery plan.
A restructuring was set in motion this year by chief executive Harry Bowman, who came aboard in 1995, when the stock was trading in the low 20s. Bowman continues to deliberate over how to fix Outboard and key pieces remain to be put in place, analysts said.
Main said that Outboard will be a marine products company once the restructuring is complete.
Main said that they could get into products that weren't related to the marine industry.
Bowman has spoken of finding more stability for Outboard, which suffers more from boating's boom-bust cycles than rivals, such as Lake Forest, Ill.-based Brunswick Corp, which has diversified into bowling, fishing and camping gear.
Outboard sees opportunities to enter other markets -- such as motorcycles, snowmobiles and personal watercraft -- via its innovative FICHT fuel injection engine technology, Main said.
The company spent less on capital and tooling in the fiscal year ended September 30, 1996, as it converted more of its engine line to it.
The 150-hp engines will be sold to dealers in December and consumers in January.
The company plans to convert its entire outboard engine line above 20-hp to FICHT engines, which will cost 22 to 25 percent more than their traditional equivalents, Main said.