The introduction is about something.
The water crisis in Michigan is an example of how decisions and behaviors can lead to problems.
Flint (Michigan): Demographics
The oil crisis that hit the automotive industry in the 1980s caused the town to degrade.
Water Crisis in Flint (Michigan)
The crisis started in 2014, and officials in collaboration and supervision of the public and scientists could not solve it until 2019. In 2014, officials had to change the water source due to the difficulties with maintaining the existing infrastructure (Krings et al., 2018). No rapid measures to improve the infrastructure were implemented. The same year, people addressed officials due to their dissatisfaction with water quality, which remained unattained. After several studies and data publications regarding extreme violation of water quality standards (high lead level, harmful bacteria), the officials were forced to take action. As a result, pipes were replaced, and the necessary improvement to the infrastructure was made with the help of the federal budget funds.
Water Crisis in Flint (Michigan): Causes
The public had less power due to the economic situation in the city.
Social concept applied to the water crisis of flint.
The concept of class is relevant when addressing the causes of the crisis.
The Marxist Theory is about class.
According to the Marxist theory of class, human society is mainly divided into the proletariat (laborers) and bourgeoisie (those who usurp laborers’ resources). The former are working people with little resources as they are taken over by the rich (Neilson, 2017). These two groups are in constant conflict, and their resolution can be achieved by revolution. The revolution can be implemented peacefully in terms of the coalition with a part (minority) of bourgeois and proletariat or due to violent struggle. Marx believed in the victory of the proletariat and the establishment of communism with its justice and proper distribution of resources.
Marxist Perspective Regarding the Crisis
The officials took the side of the bourgeoisie and didn't pay attention to potential outcomes.
Marxist Perspective Regarding the Crisis (Social Concepts)
The discussion of the crisis from the Marxist theory of class perspective makes it possible to take a closer look at such concepts as civil society and race. Civil society is regarded as a construct bringing society to balance and ensuring that all groups’ interests are addressed (Neilson, 2017). Race is another social concept that can be applied as most of the city’s residents are Black. The poverty rate in this population is also the highest (Data USA, 2021). This group has the lowest access to proper living conditions (good neighborhoods), employment, and health care. This is the most vulnerable group that was the primary force empowering the civil society, which led to considerable improvements and crisis resolution.
The Crisis from Bourdieu’s Perspective
The Flint water crisis can be viewed from Bourdieu’s perspective based on the idea that classes are analytical constructs. Instead, different groups, with individuals joining and leaving these clusters, collaborate or find themselves in a conflict. There was no clear-cut working class in Flint, and the big business struggled for resources. However, workers, unemployed people, small business owners, big business owners, officials, scientists, and others were communicating and collaborating. These interactions helped the groups solve an issue that had adverse effects on all of them.
Conclusion
Marxist and Bourdieu’s perspectives can be both applied to analyze the Flint Water crisis. It becomes clear that classes are objective constructions, although they are not clear-cut. Workers, entrepreneurs, big business owners, merchants, scientists, and employees have diverse interests, and they may sometimes be in conflict. However, the needs of people pertaining to different groups can be achieved by collaborating. The Flint Water Crisis is an illustration of the conflict and its resolution. Although the focus was initially on the interest of businesses and economic growth at the expense of public health, people managed to force officials to make the right choices and address the water issue. The representative of different classes and clusters of society formed the civil society that became the power bringing the solution. The authorities had to implement appropriate measures to solve the problem. It is clear that civil society can be a supervisory force to ensure that officials make proper decisions.