Microsoft Corp. reported better-than-expected profits for the latest quarter Monday as strong demand for its Windows 95 and Windows NT computer operating systems helped fuel record sales.
The world's largest software maker said earnings rose 23 percent to a record $614 million, or 95 cents a share, in its fiscal first quarter ended in September, from $499 million, or 78 cents a share, in the 1995 quarter. Revenues jumped 14 percent to $2.30 billion from $2.02 billion.
The software giant's shares rose in after-hours trading after the company's profits exceeded expectations.
Microsoft's high end Windows NT operating system has strong acceptance.
"We shipped version 4.0 of Windows NT this quarter, and the momentum behind the product is outstanding," said Jeff Raikes, Group Vice President, Sales and Marketing.
"Corporate customers made the decision to adopt Windows NT server and workstations in record numbers, driving 19 percent revenue growth over last quarter in the U.S. and Canada."
Microsoft's results were considered a crucial measure of its progress since the year-ago period included the launch of the company's much-hyped Windows 95 operating system.
Microsoft's sales and earnings growth will slow from last year's pace of more than 46 percent but should still benefit from higher sales of personal computers and the growing use of Windows 95 and Windows NT.
Microsoft Chief Financial Officer Mike Brown said he expected the company's revenues to go up over the next two quarters.
Brown said in an interview that he thought the company's cost of goods sold could decline in the long term from the 10.9 percent of revenues just reported, already down from 16 percent a year ago.
"We'll grow a little bit in December and then a little bit more in March, I think," Brown said. "I'm very happy with the general revenue trend, and I was very pleased with the pattern of costs in the quarter."
The December quarter would be driven by holiday season sales, while the next quarter would get a boost from the release of the company's Office 97 business applications upgrade to one of its core products.