The difference between a person and a thing is related to independence and dignity.
Dignity should be perceived as an innate and inalienable trait of any person, regardless of social institutions, class, and experience. At the same time, dignity is not only an internal concept since it is something that can be given by one person to another, such as respect or favor. This means that the concept of human dignity may not always be strictly intrinsic. Concepts about the transfer or innateness of dignity can have a significant impact on medical practice. A doctor who believes that it is they who give dignity to other people by paying attention to them runs the risk of falling into misconceptions that distort moral representations. At the same time, a physician who professes equal human dignity and believes it is intrinsic is able to respect the patient’s autonomy. However, this, in turn, can create treatment dilemmas if patient autonomy conflicts with the specialist’s professionalism. In any case, a medical worker who professes human dignity as an inalienable value follows key principles of bioethics such as autonomy and justice more closely.
By the uselessness of dignity in medical practice, McLean means that talking about criteria for dignity in bioethics only distracts from the primary immediate goal of treatment.
A person can be determined by a higher awareness and cognitive ability, which determines the knowledge of their goal on Earth and moral criterion. However, some people with mental disabilities may thus actually not fit the criteria for being human. Consequently, their external dignity will be diminished by those who believe that their internal dignity is worthless. This is a terrible mistake in moral judgment and is very dangerous for medical ethics. Moreover, the question of human dignity arises in the case of embryos and embryos, which significantly complicates the issue of moral responsibility and giving dignity to a person in the case of an abortion procedure. Thus, the external dignity of a person comes from the field of social experience and the attitude of other people to a person, which is most valuable in bioethics and medical practice. The pursuit of dignity in each person can help a doctor make truly valuable ethical decisions and can help other professionals make them.