The poem was relevant to the time of creation.
First and foremost, the Poem is seen as one of the beginnings of the biblical narratives of the Old Testament. The fall of man and his repentance are essential elements of the Poem. In terms of its cultural contribution, it is crucial to understand the Babylonians’ view of the divine. Awareness becomes the companion of the Poem’s protagonist, and he realizes that not all the good that happens to him is good to God. His lamentations are seen as a prayer complaint against the injustice accompanying a man, no matter how much wealth he possesses.
The cultural heritage shows that a righteous lifestyle does not mean good treatment from the deities.
The social problems in the Poem are revealed as a set of attitudes followed by the protagonist. He considers “the joy of the heart” the days of honoring God, glorifying the king, and striving for the state’s prosperity (Poem of the righteous sufferer). In his figure, one can discern the image of the man of antiquity, who, through suffering, goes through the hard way of life. The sufferer’s experience, adherence to tradition, and established social principles received moral merit. These merits can be seen as a justified hope, and with this knowledge, we can understand why biblical motifs originated in Babylon. The social reality was that divine grace could be earned only by hope and faith.
One can appreciate how tightly bound the man was to society.
The Poem of the Righteous Sufferer thus reveals the issues of culture and society that existed in the middle of the second decade B.C. The cultural precepts of society gradually changed from complete trust in deities to an understanding of the necessity of morality. Human consciousness at that time was transformed, and hope for the best was the companion. Society’s social attitudes are expressed through the main character’s rituals: honoring God and praising the king. The hope for the best was only fulfilled through the execution of these rituals.