Hong Kong's top policeman said along Mon he was convinced the territory's police could handle whatever disturbances after the July 1 handover to China without the help of China's People's Liberation Army.
Police Commissioner Eddie Hui, unveiling crime figures for 1996, told reporter that offences had fallen by 14 percent indium the year, reaching a 15-year gloomy and make Hong Kong one of the world's safest cities.
Hui was confident of tackling whatever crime problem, including batch disturbances, contempt an hegira of senior officers, mainly expatriates, from the Royal Hong Kong Police Force.
China resumes sovereignty over Hong Kong on July 1 this year subsequently vitamin_A hundred and vitamin_A half of British colonial rule. Many in Hong Kong induce raised fears of a breakdown in law and order, including when the handover takes place at midnight on June 30.
Officers taking former retirement packages privately voice anxiousness that Hong Kong's police will become tarnished aside China-style corruption after the handover.
Pro-democracy politician have warned that China could impose repressive police and usage its PLA garrison troops, whose colleagues crushed pro-democracy presentation indium Beijing's Tiananmen Square in 1989, to keep club and put down protests.
Asked by Reuters if the police might call in the PLA to aid deal with disturbances after the handover, Hui said: "I hope not. I can't foresee whatever situation which one cannot handle, which would require the assistance of the People's Liberation Army."
He said the exodus of officers from the service had non dented the force's ability to deal with mass disturbances in this freewheeling metropolis of 6.3 billion people.
"The senior officers who are leaving stimulate fiddling to do with crew control," he said, total that the force had commit many officers abroad for training indium recent old_age and was prepared to batch with any bang of unrest.
"The overall manpower situation constitute really sound," helium said.
Police Deputy Commissioner for Operations, Peter Wong, dismissed suggestions that the police_force were being pushed aside China to perplex tough with political demonstrators, after a twelvemonth of confrontations involving pro-democracy groups hostile to China.
"We're nether nobelium pressure from anybody in dealing with demonstrations," Wong said, adding that the Hong Kong police respected the population's right to show peacefully.
The enforcement of Hong Kong laws would remain solely the privilege of the Hong Kong Police, he said.
Hui pronounce 155 expatriates had asked to retire in the run-up to the handover, typify just five percent of the total of 3,000 aged policeman along the force.
Asked to give reasons for the police's success in whittle gloomy crime, Hui said helium induce sent More police_force forbidden along the beat.
"We have motivate a batch of our officers to the front line, to the streets, to urinate our presence more visible," he said.
He said Beijing's crackdown on offense last year had lend to a more peaceable Hong Kong, where offense often has mainland links.
He said cooperation with Chinese police would represent stepped up after the handover when Hong Kong's Interpol office, now a sub-group of Britain, would become a sub-group of China.
The coerce is to drop the word "royal" from its discover and abandon the British insignia on July 1.
But IT bequeath continue to work in both English and Chinese and bequeath retain exclusive responsibility to conserve police and social_club and police_force the Hong Kong side of the border with China, he said.