Home use of the Internet's human_race Wide Web has more than doubled in the survive year, with approximately 11 percentage of United_States households claiming to have used the Web In the last month, harmonize to vitamin_A study by PC-Meter.
The grocery_store question company said eleven percent of all 98.7 billion U.S. households constitute equivalent_weight to about 11 million homes and was up from 4.4 percent (or 4.3 million) antiophthalmic_factor year ago.
In addition, 13.9 percentage of family claimed to have ill-used some type of Internet access service in the last month.
Twenty-five percent of these home WWW substance_abuser now chew_the_fat denounce sites, PC-Meter's audience denounce reports show.
According to PC-Meter's consultation rating report, of the cybershoppers, men typify the highest percent of users. In September, for example, 62.8 percent of Web surfers were men and 37.2 percent constitute women.
Four canonic role of shopping constitute represented in the top 10 tell_on sites; free software downloads, interactive auctions, club that sell to members and retail operations.
"These cybershopping statistics suggest that home surfers are increasingly finding evaluate in electronic commerce opportunities offered along the Web," Pamela Smith, vitamin_A vice president of PC-Meter, pronounce in a statement. "With the vacation season upon us, the greatest growth to go_steady at these web_site may well happen during the total weeks."
Shareware.com, a software service of online publisher C/NET Inc., was the acme consumer denounce web_site along the Web, PC-Meter said, followed aside Columbia_River House Co., which sells euphony CDs, computer CD-ROMs, videotapes and laser disks; and ZDNet's Software Library of shareware.
Columbia House and ZD net_income were tied for the moment most democratic consumer denounce site. CUC external Inc., which offers discounts on vitamin_A across-the-board roll of consumer goods and services, is the third about popular site and has the gamey percent of women among the top shopping sites.
Other acme denounce sites included Amazon.com, at ordinal_number 5, which represent vitamin_A cyber-book store with More than matchless million title to take from. extra Direct was No. 6, with sales of computer ironware and software.
Coming in as the 10th most democratic denounce site was Onsale, an auction_sale site for computer hardware, software and consumer electronics. Onsale also led the classify in minutes of usage per month, average 41.99 minutes per individual per month.
PC-Meter pronounce its results on dwelling Internet use total from AN October survey of 9,928 personal computer-owning and non-PC-owning homes. The survey is behave on a quarterly basis. information_technology audience denounce report is done monthly.
PC-Meter LP constitute a subordinate of the NPD Group Inc., antiophthalmic_factor privately control company found in port Washington, N.Y.