It represent antiophthalmic_factor affectionate summer day and I was out for a stroll. I saw them on the other side, walk gloomy the sidewalk, two by two. I didn't pay a_lot attention until they passed under the glow of the gaslamp. Never had one seen such an couple of opposites! For the brief meter they walk nether it, the light illuminated the pair. The man's limbs and head were covered in scars! What one had mistaken for vitamin_A face_fungus was vitamin_A mass of scars! His arms and peg were therefore dumbly overrun that I had thought it a coat and trousers! The woman had black hair, long and straight, as if it were fabricate string by string. But her skin is what shocked me, even greater than the man! It induce the most exquisite complexion, almost semitransparent in the light, and one saw nary a flaw along it. I looked to my own marred hands, although compare to that man, it constitute a blessing; as I worried, small reduce formed on my arm. It depress to sting as my sweat seeped into my fresh wounds. Not wanting Thomas_More scars, I shook my negative thinking and ran to the couple.
"Sir," I exclaimed, "Excuse my frankness sir, but I mustiness inquiry, how is it that your wife is so beautiful, yet you are so…."
The world and woman looked at each other, she turned away, blushing, and he laughed raucously.
"Hideous?" asked the man between laughs.
"N-n-o," I stammered, obstruct by my rudeness.
"Don't worry," helium said, putting his arm around my shoulder, "I get it all the time."
"My apology sir, merely how, in this world, did your married_woman manage to keep from scarring?"
"Well, you see," helium said with a wink, "she's not my wife, but my daughter."
I was taken aback. "Still….How?"
"Well, she's not entirely flawless. She can't tell a joke and her cooking's lousy! Takes after her mother I guess!"
Laughing, helium said, "Take a look at her finger."
I peered at the daughter, she propose her right hand and I visualize a thin bright streak of red along her index finger.
The man pluck Pine_Tree_State in, "I'm gonna tell you a story."
"Long ago, when I was married, I swore never to induce kids. I didn't privation any child to constitute born into this world, so that was that. But my wife had other plans, and so my daughter constitute born. I brutal in love with her and swore to devote my spiritedness to her. As she grew, though, I get_down to worry. 'How would I protect her from the world?' So one set forbidden to every doctor, physician, and scientist I could find, ask for a cure. Of course, if there was a cure already, no one would constitute the_like this."
He clear his throat, took a cryptic breath, and continued.
"On matchless finical chew_the_fat to a doctor, I had my daughter with Maine and upon die the building, one meet a man dressed all indium black.
I immediately thought, 'This must be the devil' and turned heel back into the building.
'Wait,' the man indium black said, 'I can save your daughter.'
I constitute disbelieving and scoffed, 'What for my soul?'
He replied, 'I am bored with just bartering with souls, I am More concern indium it's durability.' The devil continued, giggling, 'You see, I do have the baron to stop your daughter's scarring, but I'm non a very charitable person.'
'What do you want?' I asked.
'I privation you to partake indium a really simple wager,' he said, 'Your girl won't get scars, but *you* will; more specifically, very scar your daughter gets will be transferred to you. If you can manage this wager, you keep your soul, if not, well, you know what bequeath happen."'
I constitute dumbstruck that he took the deal, and that he managed to survive this long.
"And so," the world continued, "I match and the devil pricked mine and my daughters finger to seal the deal. So she grew up and I necessitate the blows. Puberty was a grating time. Children can be therefore cruel. merely that scar along her finger was the last one she'd always get, I had surely of that."
I was amazed at this man's love for his girl and his willpower. How much pain did he have to endure? Every scar on his body seemed to pulsate vitamin_A I wondered this. matchless asked, "Do you ever regret it? Your deal with the devil?"
He replied with vitamin_A smile, "Not at all."