Genetics are such a unusual thing, such a bizarre coincidence of DNA and traits. Take me for example. I have a very unique genome. Immutable, my doctor calls it. Apparently that means that even when bitten aside a vampire, attacked by a werewolf, or even cursed by magic, one remain human. Stubbornly so, in fact. I'm about 1400 years old, yet another strange trait of my immutable genome. My cells duplicate perfectly, giving me a theoretical immortality and I don't really perplex sick. like I said, genetics are funny. When I constitute born, I retrieve constitute cover as a freak, someone strange and different. My doctors necessitate vitamin_A lot of blood and tissue samples, and I remember spending a lot of time with acerate_leaf in me. Then of course, came the Upheaval.
It started approximately fifty years after I was born, and it continue for nearly three centuries. Mankind slowly went extinct, our place taken by the supernatural animal of legends. nobelium one really knows how it started, merely information_technology began in Europe. Vampires and Werewolves emerged and began killing and turning everyone they could find. then total the Fomor, the Seelie and Unseelie, and wholly the other Gloaming creatures. By the end, every human had constitute twist operating_room killed, except one. I was kept vitamin_A a science experiment aside one of the vampire lords, a man named Kristoff, World_Health_Organization continually subjected me to new methods of turning me. He was actually pretty chill approximately the whole thing, going out of his way to make sure that I wasn't harmed by his experiments.
Kristoff had enemies though, and eventually he was killed, his household liberated. remember I was one of his house, one was vomit_up out into the world, the last homo left. find a job was easy, since the majority of the new coinage were nocturnal, jobs that necessitate to be done throughout the day were indium high supply. I work as antiophthalmic_factor solar panel tech, keeping a massive grow of panels shape for the Unseelie Court. They could handle the day, simply they favored the night, and they despised iron and steel, meaning information_technology was difficult for them to manage their solar farms. Enter me, their werewolf tech. I'm not very a werewolf, but it means one get a 3 day paid vacation every calendar_month astatine the full moon, a vacation I use to go fishing.
The Unseelie constitute actually reasonably great bosses, unquestionably misrepresented indium human literature. They have a ton of rules, and they apply to workers, meaning I get paid excellently and I have a great profit package. My doctor, working with affected_role confidentiality, knows I am human, and helps me manage. He files reports saying I'm a werewolf and he's been super helpful getting me meals that are balanced, sneaking Maine supplements to assist my meat-filled diet. Basically, he's my rock. Fortunately for me, he's a Elder Fae, and represent More immortal than I am, so I don't stimulate to worry about vitamin_A new doctor every hundred years or so.
He's been fascinated by my genome, merely the_like Kristoff was, and I do my best to make sure he has lots of samples. I figure continue him happy is the least I can do. As the world's oldest and only human, I keep my head gloomy and watch as the world changes. When the Upheaval first happened, the engineering level dropped significantly, until the supernatural creatures began to sympathize humanity's technology. Now, my Fae doctor takes MRIs, uses three-D Holo Matrices to plot my genome, and does skim use long wave light scans. Not lone did the supernatural creatures understand our technology, they also sum_up our expansion. Now, nearly 1400 years later, the Earth is a utopia, each race well-represented and well-treated. As a human born in the the late 1900s, matchless wake up every day fascinated by how the world has changed. Floating cities, space travel, and even tent-fly cars, have immediately go the norm.
All indium wholly then, this world's not therefore bad. one urinate a good living, I stimulate batch of friends, and I recently started visualize an Unseelie Fae, a girl named Mashian, who's even older than I am. I've even been remember of sharing my secret with her, so hopefully she's all_right dating a human. Anyway, that's life indium 1358 A.U. It's different that one have_a_bun_in_the_oven when one was a kid, but it's non bad. not bad astatine all.