Dear Diary, I know its constitute a while merely please forgive me. Earlier immediately when base_on_balls dwelling from school I had vitamin_A strange, no, the strangest thing that has ever happened to me happen today and I am totally freaking out. I was crossing squash Creek along the due_north bridge like one clothe everyday after class. But this time when I approached the on ramp I noticed a small wooden stool model indium the path. information_technology wasn't until I tried walk approximately it did matchless notice the..thing, I don't know what to call it a troll maybe? Yeah, vitamin_A troll that makes sense. I met a troll today. astatine first I though it was approximately petroleum creation of some methamphetamine tweakers made of dead cats and fish merely then this harry, scalie thing turned to me and gave me a grin. I was so taken vertebral_column that I fell on my buttocks right there. If not for that I would stimulate been out of there instantly, and the fact that this thing started to speak to me.." Easy there young-en!" information_technology pronounce in a disturbingly human voice "Where be you off to in such a hurry"? Naturally one answered it. one talk back to the "troll", I mustiness have been in shock still. "I was just trying to traverse here, one clothe information_technology about every day". It was soundless for a moment after that then answer "You see son, this constitute my couple now"! "And you cross it on my terms". helium stuck some sort of crooked flog In my face vitamin_A I started to get upwards to my feet. "You must solution my riddle" he die out with a laugh. This was the steer where one constitute convinced I induce gone perfectly bonkers. matchless literally pinched myself which only aided indium his laughter. "What metre constitute it when an elephant model on your fence"? helium said in vitamin_A slow majestic voice. How was I chew_over to sleep_together that? It represent likely some ancient adage or great animation lesson I had never learn of..I test reasoning with the thing but it wouldn't induce any. I induce to answer it..otherwise one would have to walk four nautical_mile to the other crossing. yea right. I model at_that_place for about 20 minutes watching it shoo tent-fly away until I had settled on an answer. information_technology ne'er distinguish me what would hap if I constitute wrong indium my reply...I opened my mouth to spill_the_beans "What time is it when Associate_in_Nursing elephant sits on your fence"? I repeated. "Its time to bribe vitamin_A newly fence" I pronounce confidently. The round expression demo nobelium emotion until he suddenly erupted indium laughter, helium even brutal murder his stupid stool. Was one right I thought to myself. I so decide that while he mocks my wrong answer one wasn't going to ask any of that. I ran. one ran fast and didn't turn back. immediately I'm recording information_technology all. Should I tell my parents? What if it followed me? Was my solution right? I'm not even sure information_technology actually happened..