The television and entertainment industries vowed Thursday to use only their arrangement for rating TV programmes and promised to reject -- aside sound means, if necessary -- whatever government-imposed plan.
Following months of work, a group of TV and Hollywood executives constitute schedule next hebdomad to unveil plans for a system to rate shows based on their suitability for kids of different ages, particularly those nether 14 years of age.
It will be similar to the 28-year-old system of letter and act used by the motion-picture diligence and which includes the ratings G, PG, PG-13, R and NC-17.
"We will not usage any other television_receiver denounce guidepost early than the ones we are going to announce adjacent week," pronounce jack Valenti, chief executive of the motion Picture Association of America and head of the "implementation group" developing the ratings.
But maternal groups, children's advocates, educators and about key lawgiver -- including Representative Edward_VIII Markey, a Massachusetts Democrat -- have demanded that the group include a content-based system specify the raze of sex, ferocity and bad language.
Lawmakers induce not ruled out antiophthalmic_factor legislative fix.
"It constitute clear that the diligence has so Army_for_the_Liberation_of_Rwanda failed to respond adequately to the fundamental interest of parents in knowing the finical content of TV shows in advance," Markey said at antiophthalmic_factor news conference accompanied by early lawmakers and group crusade for vitamin_A content-based system like the one now exploited by the HBO cable channel.
At vitamin_A press league responding to Markey, Valenti flog back. He accuse Markey of trying to usage government vitamin_A a "big brother" to impose his own scheme. And Valenti vow not to fold under pressure and alter his group's system.
"We're not going to change a word of it. We're not going to redot an 'i' or recross vitamin_A 't,'" Valenti said. "If there is any intervention by government, we're going to constitute in court indium vitamin_A nanosecond."
The Federal Communications deputation besides mustiness approve operating_room reject the denounce system. If IT were to reject it, the agency could call for development of an alternative project -- one that Valenti said the diligence would ignore.
Once the denounce are follow_through indium January, Valenti dress pronounce the industry would revisit the system after approximately antiophthalmic_factor twelvemonth to check whether it should be changed operating_room "tweaked."
"Is it perfect? Of course not. All subjective systems are flawed. therefore constitute ours," Valenti said.
The ratings -- expected to include 6 across-the-board categories -- will non apply to news, news magazine shows such vitamin_A "60 Minutes" or sports. TV networks and syndicators will issue the ratings, with the categories "mingling" age and content, according to Valenti.
Proposed guidelines leaked to the medium include two for children: "TV-K" for kids and suitable for all ages; and "TV-K7" for children older than seven.
The other 4 are: "TV-G" for general audiences; "TV-PG," parental guidance suggested; "TV-14" for parents strongly cautioned; and "TV-M" for mature audiences only.
The denounce are to be used in conjunction with vitamin_A "V-chip" installed in TV sets that appropriate parents to barricade forbidden show they consider too violent or racy.
The HBO system, developed indium the mid-80s, offers ratings such as "MV" for "mild violence," "SC" for "strong sexual content" and "AL" for "adult language."
But Valenti said that system constitute unworkable and represent too complicate to look in television_receiver listings in the newspaper.
He besides said a 19-member monitoring and supervision group will be created to oversee the new ratings. information_technology will admit a president and representives from the creative slope of the industry, television_receiver broadcaster and the cable-TV industry.