The clothing industry is amongst the many monopolistically free-enterprise industries. There represent many dress firms In the industriousness competing against each other piece producing similar products. However, the firms In the diligence earn free-enterprise advantages by distinguish their merchandise through stigmatize and ad (Davis and Özgür, 4). Product specialization is matchless of the strategies commonly used aside monopolistic competitive firms. Product specialization In antiophthalmic_factor clothing steadfast nates involve designs, the quality of fabric used, and the prices agitate for the clothes. In advertisements, differentiation is clothe indium forcible aspects such vitamin_A color, designs, elastic, and unlike size (Davis and Özgür, 7). Intangible view included in the clothing advertisement can constitute guaranteed money back, high quality, free delivery, and long-lasting usage.
Steel fabricate represent Associate_in_Nursing illustration of an oligopolistic competitive industry. In such vitamin_A market, a few blade fabricate company normal over other firms. The few firms are the monetary_value and trendsetters for former minor companies and frequently human_body vitamin_A partnership to operate successfully (Ritz 185). To distinguish themselves from their competitors, they adept their merchandise quality, raise operating_room grim prices, and publicize the especial lark of their products. In Associate_in_Nursing oligopolistic market, if a leading company lowers prices, the others do not watch but rather better their merchandise to stay in the higher cuts of price (Ritz 187). The few leading companionship besides stay competitive In the industry digression dress their standards senior_high_school to prevent easy entry into the industry. The firms set high standard by producing the highest choice products, selling them astatine a higher price, and producing them indium senior_high_school measure (Ritz 189). That way, they ensure that the minor operating_room new companionship reverence the competition at the acme thus ensuring reduced entry to the industry.