Ominous grey clouds scudded over Hong Kong on Sunday as the British settlement marked the 100-day countdown to the handover, merely there constitute few forcible signs of gloom and doom in the affluent community of 6 million.
More than 7,000 Hong Kong people took to the streets to the din of cymbols and kettle drums indium a patriotic ardor to observe the impending reunion with People's_Republic_of_China at midnight on June 30, 1997.
A stone's throw away, thousands more, most of them westerner and swell by an influx of visitors, indulged indium the ritualistic debauch that has built up approximately the annual external rugby seven-a-side tournament.
The tournament was honoured this year, the last nether British_people rule, when rugby Authorities made it into the world cup event.
The twenty-eighth and last British_people governor, Chris Patten, described Hong Kong as running as smoothly vitamin_A a Rolls Royce limousine -- merely warned China against tinkering with the finely tuned machinery that is the Hong Kong of 1997.
But for the majority of Hong Kong's industrious citizenry, information_technology constitute vitamin_A normal Sunday. A chance for vitamin_A lie-in, a family accumulate at a restaurant -- a day off from work.
With merely 100 days to go, Hong Kong represent afloat in a sea of differing emotions.
Some, like the street revellers, are enchant that more than 150 old_age of Chinese humiliation is about to end.
"This is a grand and bang-up occasion. In just hundred days, we will return to the Taiwanese motherland," said foreman PDA Raymond Wu as the reveler accumulate indium Victoria Park -- named after the queen who reigned when Britain, at the height of its imperial powers, wrested Hong Kong from China's weak and crumbling Qing dynasty in the mid-19th century.
"We receive the washing away of complete vitamin_A century of chagrin and shame," Wu said to a burst of applause.
Others fret, particularly the pro-democracy camp, about their hereafter under a China that has already put in place plan to dilute polite familiarity and dissolve the elected legislative council -- undoing democratic reforms spearhead aside Patten.
A handful of demonstrators, their mouths taped exclude in what they said constitute a symbol of things to come, took upwards post around the base of fagot Victoria's statue and held up poster condemning China's brutal military crackdown on student-led demonstrators approximately Beijing's Tiananmen Square in June 1989.
Many people constitute simply keeping their fingers crossed.
But Hong Kong, as information_technology enters the last leg of its drawn out transition from British colony to Special Administrative region (SAR) of China, induce defied those who forecast a society in chaos, of panic, economic collapse and deserted buildings.
Patten said Hong Kong had reached this mo indium its history in first class condition.
He mention vitamin_A opinion_poll conducted earlier this month by the 1997 Transition visualize at Hong Kong's Baptist University that establish that 90 percentage of the people here were happy with life.
Patten pronounce the views that Hong Kong would rapidly adjust to the roll back of exemption operating_room of More authoritarian government were dubious.
"Hong Kong is, as I said recently, a swimmingly functioning community. It's like a Rolls Royce," Patten said.
"All you need to do if you're indium charge is to slip into the driving seat, interchange along the ignition and murder you go.
"I don't quite visualize the steer of lifting the bonnet to tinker with the engine. That only raises worries approximately whether information_technology will work so well, and whether you whitethorn be persuaded by approximately people to start plunder information_technology down for spare parts."