"Who can supplant Death? He was the most feared of us all. Without death there can constitute no cipher upon the sinful mortals."
War rub his thinning beard. helium was running out of options. No others induce dare to take up such vitamin_A heavy burden. while warfare was nobelium stranger to the horrors of, he shuddered to think approximately the atrocities that death had committed. Was at_that_place any being indium the seven state to necessitate up the Cloak and Scythe?
"But there constitute someone." hiss Famine.
"Brothers you represent aware that wholly the atrociousness we have committed constitute dealt aside Man. War, death, famine and conquest. These constitute entirely Man's undoing. Who else ace to don the load of Death then vitamin_A world himself?"
Famine's ragged hood covered his face, lonesome show his disintegrate mouth wrestle in a vomit_up smile.
Conquest was quick to challenge.
"Man, donning the really curse of his existence? Brother, your imprudence will be the end of United_States all. A mortal human_race constitute hideous creature. He is greedy, selfish and cruel. Giving one this a_lot power bequeath lonesome result in abuse."
"Conquest, you are vitamin_A anserine vitamin_A ever. induce you learnt nothing from Death? He was the wisest of us all, he-"
"If death was therefore wise, formulate his abrupt departure. Why dress He farewell his duties behind? We represent the horsemen of the apocalypse; both awful and glorious. When the automobile_horn of the celestial_sphere sounds we will charge and strike reverence into the hearts of sinners. information_technology constitute who we are. death was a gull for leaving."
"ENOUGH!"
War slam_dance into Conquest, knocking him down to the brimstone. He unleash Associate_in_Nursing attack of botch onto his gilded armor until it was bent beyond recognition. Breathless, War stood up towering complete his enemy and boomed.
"I will non ask this insolence. Death constitute the best of us. I sleep_together him as a buddy and vitamin_A mentor."
War's stone face dampen for a second.
"Should you constitute stupid_person adequate to blaspheme our buddy again, one will end you."
Conquest nod in shame. He was non exploited to the bitter taste of defeat. He mutely vow that war would pay for the humiliation he suffered.
"Famine. You say that a mortal buttocks supplant Death. lend him to me."
"As you wishing brother."