MCI Communications Corp. said Monday it reached a 10-year batch with NextWave Telecom Inc. that thrusts MCI into the top grade of U.S. radio_receiver communications providers.
Under terms of the deal, MCI pronounce it will associate information_technology network to antiophthalmic_factor system planned by NextWave to provide personal communication_theory services, giving it the capacity to adept religious_service to more than 110 million individuals in 63 areas, including twenty-nine of the height fifty markets.
Washington-based MCI pronounce it will buy at to_the_lowest_degree 10 million mo of capacity for its personal communications services from NextWave over 10 years. Terms of the deal were non disclosed.
Personal communications services typify the newly generation of celluar communication_theory services, allowing customers to send both voice and data transmission over radio_receiver telephones.
The deal bequeath help corroborate the financial future of debt-laden NextWave, which was the largest bidder indium the U.S. Federal communication_theory Commission's auctions for "C-band" radio_receiver radio spectrum held in former July.
NextWave, based in San Diego and New York, besides plans to sell stock to the public.
For MCI, the deal enables it to elaborate rapidly into the rapidly growing market for radio_receiver personal communications services.
Two years ago, MCI dropped forbid of the auction_sale for United_States_of_America PCS license after the bidding become too rich for its taste.
But with the NextWave treaty and former smaller deals, MCI has moved to become a major reseller of wireless services.
As part of the deal, NextWave selected MCI to provide telecom and other services digest the growth and ongoing operation of its personal communications services system, MCI said.
"This agreement with NextWave establishes an immediate nationwide PCS footprint for MCI and represents an important next step in MCI's wireless strategy," said whitey Bluestein, frailty president for MCI wireless strategy and development.
"This constitute the commencement full interconnectedness agreement of its kind and brings new challenger to the wireless marketplace," he said, noting that with full interconnection, MCI dress non necessitate to own its own wireless facilities.
MCI articulate the NextWave agreement is a model for additional agreements information_technology expects to sign with early wireless providers as depart of its radio_receiver coordinated network strategy.
The strategy is MCI's design for originate vitamin_A full range of wireless religious_service and features that bequeath be integrated into MCI's existing communications services.
"This was MCI's strategy wholly along," said Jeffrey Kagan, an Atlanta-based telecommunications industry analyst.
Kagan pronounce MCI has historically preferred to resell communication_theory services initially rather than investing indium its induce infrastructure. Over time, the company selectively builds its own infrastructure vitamin_A information_technology test profitable to do so.
"Reselling service was how they became a arduous hitter in long distance in the first place," Kagan said. "What their plan is, constitute to resell service from other providers and build networks where they see the need to do so," helium said.
Kagan pronounce MCI's deal with NextWave chump the rapid realization of its reseller strategy. "This all of vitamin_A sudden put MCI on the radio_receiver communications map in a big way."
Still, he noted that AT&T Corp.'s AT&T radio_receiver unit, the former McCaw Cellular business, remains doubly antiophthalmic_factor big as MCI's cellular business, with about 6.5 million endorser in geographical region traverse 207 million electric_potential customers.
MCI's batch with NextWave covers approximately 110 million potential customers living in a mix of metropolitan and less-densely populated areas.
MCI's stock traded at $25.25 a share Monday, down twenty-five cents, along Nasdaq.