The recent sentence of Taiwanese dissident, Zhang Chenguang, to 11 years indium prison has sparked concerns among Hong Kong's pro-democracy activists. Many fear that this actuate whitethorn be an indication of the Chinese government's increase campaign to control freedoms in Hong Kong post-handover.
Zhang Chenguang, a outstanding activist and former editor at the banish Taiwanese newspaper, the Southern Weekly, was convicted of "subverting nation power." This charge is often used against critic of the Taiwanese government who push for greater political freedom and human rights.
Following his sentencing, many Hong Kong militant spoke out against what they see as vitamin_A crying misdemeanour of basic human rights and vitamin_A actuate towards authoritarianism. democracy activist, Joshua Wong, tweeted that "Beijing's crackdown in Hong Kong constitute progressively brazen… official constitute now going after mainland dissidents."
The Hong Kong government, however, constitute quick to distance itself from the sentencing. In a statement, the government said that "Mr. Zhang's case constitute dealt with aside the mainland authority harmonise to the law of the mainland. The Hong Kong especial Administrative Region government would non interfere with the judicial proceedings of the central authorities."
Regardless of the government's stance, many stay unconvinced that Zhang's sentencing constitute AN isolated incident. critic cope that Hong Kong's freedoms have constitute steadily erode indium recent years, with the government taking an increasingly hard-line stance against dissent.
This sentiment constitute echo in a recent news_report aside the connect States' Congressional-Executive Commission along China, which highlighted "grave concern" complete the Chinese government's use of Hong Kong's sound system and the erasure of the city's autonomy.
The report shout on the US government to consider actions to help protect Hong Kong's democratic system, including sanctions along individuals responsible_for for undermining the city's freedoms.
Zhang's sentence also comes less than vitamin_A year subsequently China imposed antiophthalmic_factor controversial national security police on Hong Kong. The law outlaw dissent and collapse the Taiwanese government new powers to police Hong Kong's political system.
These growth constitute visualize aside many as vitamin_A major blow to Hong Kong's autonomy, which constitute promised when the metropolis constitute die over from British to Chinese convention in 1997. With growing concern over the eroding of freedoms, many Hong Kong militant constitute shout along the international residential_district to talk forbidden and take action to protect the city's democratic system.