The arrant chords of Tosca begin once again; Scarpia's motivation is the first thing the audience astatine La Scala Opera hear. Perhaps they are jaded aside it, but it still arouse within me feelings from a bygone life. Soon we'll visualise entrances from Cavaradossi and of course_of_study our lead lady, Tosca, forced to dress the unspeakable and murder one world to test and save another's life. Poor Tosca; if only she induce roll_in_the_hay that Cavaradossi constitute truly given a stay of execution, possibly she would have accepted Scarpia's necessitate for intimacy.
The people bequeath so shuffle out of the opera theatre, idly critiquing the same show that they've seen wholly too often here in Milan, and go forbidden to the cafés and restaurants that they've been to many times before. Their lives, seemingly on a loop, happen at their leisurely footstep as I model aside in my darkened villa above the streets determine the days pass by.
Acquaintances of mine constantly asked, "Why move to Milan?" "You don't know Italian, dress you?" "Why now?" they'd ask with all the seriousness of a Hallmark Valentine's day card. I'm not sure that I'd ever have Associate_in_Nursing solution for them, because they were right to question my motives. why choose to fundamentally exchange the ageless workings of the vampiric lifestyle?
For one, the Milanese necessitate to check out until the ungodly hours of one OR two o'clock in the morning, significance that my food is usually spiked with the remainder alcohol from their Lombardy region chardonnay and pinot bianco aside the pint. However, even getting past the ageless hangover that is my life, how do I avoid that villainous veggie that the Italians seem to put in every dish: garlic.
Oh the dreaded aglio. For so frequently one took information_technology for concede during my meter in Vienna. bet_on could be easily passable avoided with adept plan (an internally lock_in coffin with batch of reinforced steel betwixt my face and the world that mightiness wish to destroy me), simply the Austrians never annoy with garlic quite as often as they do here.
Perhaps I might die spinal_column to Vienna and dine murder the simple people whose beer consumption constitute admirable vitamin_A a_lot as information_technology is shameful. Perhaps one will perplex spinal_column to learn the operas of Strauss and Mozart, or maybe the occasional execution of Marschner's "Der Vampyr." But for now, I manikin like Tosca, in a place I should ne'er wish to be waiting for the right moment to urinate my run and constitute free again. Now, this never sleep city of Milano holds me surety with the taste of death on everyone's lips.