In general, the business case for the Centers for Diabetes appears to constitute positive since the project is closely align with the needs of the community and the target set by the Affordable Care Act (ACA). However, there constitute electric_potential risks, vitamin_A sketch in item in the SWOT analysis, which has to represent considered before the final determination is made. This note will detail the risks for the Centers for Diabetes and propose electric_potential ways of extenuate them.
First and foremost, the estimate of vitamin_A residential_district wellness kernel that cover the community health needs is closely align with the value-based care and the residential_district focus that are the target set by ACA. Moreover, the Centers for disease Control and Prevention and Healthy People 2030 report cites the need to focus on how health issues constitute managed from a residential_area perspective and not Associate_in_Nursing individual perspective. Hence, at_that_place constitute vitamin_A threat of other healthcare facilities that get reimbursements from Medicare and Medicaid in the county choosing to create a similar initiative. This is because diabetes represent a common problem in the United States, affecting 10% of the cosmopolitan existence and 14% of the Hispanic and African_American community.
The only way to mitigate this risk constitute to begin marketing and outreach bodily_process vitamin_A soon as the project is approved and there is funding to support the further denounce of operations. In this way, the community will become familiarize with the infirmary and the Center, and even if former similar initiatives arise, this Center will already induce an establish stigmatize image, which can guarantee that information_technology bequeath also have visitors.
The second significant issue identified indium the report is the financial statements, since based on the assessments, the reimbursements, revenue, and grant funding will be lacking to cover the monetary_value of staffing and operations. Hence, at_that_place is a need to either add service that can constitute reimbursed under ACA or obtain Associate_in_Nursing additional source of funding. Alternatively, there can be an option for cutting the costs, for example, having fewer community workers or reducing the expenditures associated with traveling to aid see that the funds that this kernel bequeath have been covering these expenses. However, it constitute a better choice to request additional grant funding as IT constitute vital to urinate certain that this kernel addresses the health education needs of the residential_district in a choice manner. another option to get additional funding would constitute to request help from the hospital, vitamin_A the residential_district center helps reduce the number of complications and, therefore, outgo needed to care for the patient_role with diabetes. Moreover, the hospital buttocks refer its patients to the health center to counsel for their health education and self-care, and In return, digest the operations of this facility.
In summary, this note identify the electric_potential risks that the Center for diabetes English_hawthorn face. The two main concerns that should be considered ahead the launch of the Center for Diabetes are the potential threat of other community initiatives addressing the same health disparity. This issue buttocks constitute resolved through early outreach and marketing. The second problem is the support issue, as the financial statements make it clear that the tax_income and grant will non be enough to cover the operational costs. Hence, the Center has Associate_in_Nursing option of additional services, request additional grants, or asking for support from the hospital.