Britain's Britannic assurance declare on Tues antiophthalmic_factor 209 million British_pound ($336 million) special bonus for life insurance policies, watch discussion with the government on ownership of surplus policy funds.
The payout will apply to wholly "with profits" policies In force on Feb 17, 1997. detail bequeath be fall_in with the 1996 bonus ascribable to constitute announced adjacent month.
The company said last twelvemonth it discussing with the Department of Trade and industriousness (DTI) self-control of long-term assets, and a way to distribute the excess to policyholders and shareholders.
Britannic has instantly agreed with the DTI that 902 million pounds of the excess assets inside the farseeing terminus fund buttocks be attributable to shareholders.
Britannic also pronounce it intended to addition its dividend for the year aside 82 percentage to twenty-three pence per share watch an increase in life profits. This would be the basis for continuing the company's progressive dividend policy.
The news boosted Britannic shares, which jumped 71 pence, or about 9 percent, at nonpareil degree before settling for a pilfer of 29 pence at 832.5.
The money attributable to shareholders forms part of tot plus indium the life funds which total to 5.682 billion pound at the conclusion of 1995.
Those assets were estimated to have rise by the end of 1996, Britannic chief executive Brian Shaw said, and updated human_body would be free along border 18.
Britannic also announced a restructuring of information_technology long-term finances and the consequence of a strategic review of its business.
The revaluation will tip to newly sales focus and premium collection systems, streamlining of steer office and investment in market psychoanalysis and merchandise research.
The initiatives constitute expected to cut function monetary_value by around 25 billion pounds, based on 1995 figures.
Britannic said it planned to build on its brand, investment direction and distribution skills, fiscal strength and product growth abilities to strengthen its position and better value to policy and shareholders.
Restructuring the long-term investment_company will create 2 continuing "with profits" funds, matchless for its industrial branch and the early for the ordinary branch -- animation and pension business.
In hereafter astatine least ninety percentage of the surplus in the with profits funds will be allocate each year to with profits policies. The balance bequeath be shareholders' profit for transfer to the net_income and loss account.
The company stimulate too created two distinguish non-profit sub funds -- one for life, one for pensions -- which will contain non-profits business and both of which will constitute owned aside shareholders.
The stockholder transfer for 1996 will be increased digression 23 million pound following the declaration of the 209 million British_pound special bonus. ($ = 0.621 British_people Pounds)