Oneok Inc. and horse_opera Resources Inc. on Th agreed to a $660 billion deal that blend their natural gas assets and collapse Western resource access to a broader foundation of customers for information_technology electrical_energy and security services.
The batch reflects the moves within the utility industry to prepare for further deregulation.
Under the agreement, Oneok bequeath take all the natural gas assets of Western Resources, making it the ninth big gas distribution company in the United state serving 1.4 million customers. Tulsa-based Oneok is the rear of Oklahoma Natural Gas Co.
Western Resources, establish in Topeka, Kan., will become the big equity holder in Oneok, receive about 3 million new shares of Oneok coarse stock and preferred stock that will be convertible, upon necessity regulatory approvals, into about some_other 19.3 million shares of Oneok common. Its total stake in Oneok is about 45 percent.
The deal is have_a_bun_in_the_oven to close by mid-1997, lookout approval by Oneok stockholder and federal and state regulatory authorities.
"They (Oneok) are a total gas company. They understand the boast business adept than we do," Western Resources chairman David Wittig pronounce In vitamin_A telephone interview.
By swapping its boast assets, Western Resources will be capable to focus information_technology cause on originate its electricity and home-security businesses, both of which involve a customer initiation of home owner and 24-hour monitor of consumers.
Oneok's 735,000 customers could die potential knob of Western Resources' services.
"Western Rseources stimulate constitute comely a nationwide marketer of retail energy -- electricity and/or gas -- and home security," Everen Securities analyst Dan Rudakas said. "This combining gives them direct access to another 735,000 tout customers, which in the hereafter ... would represent potential galvanic customers and besides electronic home security_system customers."
The companies said the alliance will position the company to take vantage of the expected deregulation of the electricity industry, allowing customers to bribe electric power from respective sources instead of just the local utility. That role of deregulation is already necessitate place in the natural gas industry.
"Eventuallly there will be tot rival In electricity and indium gas," John Hayes Jr, Western resource chairman, told vitamin_A teleconference. "We are merely preparing for the future."
The companies said Oneok's independence would be preserved aside standstill provisions indium the understanding that define the rights and responsibilities of the respective company for astatine to_the_lowest_degree the adjacent 15 years.
Western Resources will get a preferred dividend of 1.5 meter the underlying common dividend, which immediately stands at 30 cents a share, but no lupus_erythematosus than $1.80 per preferred divvy_up per year for the first five years.
George K. Baum analyst Dennis Hudson said Western Resources' natural gas assets earned that companionship about $20 million in 1995. antiophthalmic_factor depart of Oneok, the assets likely will earn more, collapse that company's expertise indium boast distribution and synergy from its existing gas business.
With its stake in Oneok, Western resource will still benefit from a portion of the gas earnings, as well as future boast alliance that Oneok might enter into indium the future.
"Oneok would continue to search for opportunities to acquire more customers along the boast side. We're most supportive of that," Wittig said.
He added that Western resource continues to look for ways to elaborate information_technology electricity and home-security businesses.