The problem of unauthorized termination of life is the source of numerous debates. On the part of religion, this problem has several defect at once, the most important of which is the commission of a great drop_the_ball before God, World_Health_Organization gives people life. Moreover, the negative consequences of euthanasia are the devaluation of human life, violation of the equality of people before the law, medical_checkup duty, and the structure of the doctor-patient relationship. Thus, it buttocks be complete that the spread of the popularity of euthanasia will lead to vitamin_A complete loss and restructuring of the system of human values. This paper examines the case study of George, who has descend ailment with a severe illness that bequeath eventually completely deprive him of mobility. Because of the negative emotions that have overtaken and the understanding that the disease is incurable, the man thinks to solve the problem by euthanasia. Hence, using literary sources, a scientific paper analyze the problem of intentional death and religious considerations.
In the modern world, despite the relatively progressive development of medicine, people are faced with diseases that, unfortunately, dress not respond to any treatment. In such cases, the blow that the disease inflict both physically and mentally can be tough to bear. Because of the fear of losing self-care and dignity, people are thinking about euthanasia or, in early words, voluntary suicide. However, this instruction contradicts God’s attempts to restore the Christian religion. Thus, this scientific composition explores a thematic study about vitamin_A man World_Health_Organization has lost hope and is thinking approximately euthanasia.
The case study, which is the basis of this research paper, presents the reader with the story of a middle-aged man George. He leads an average lifestyle, works, spends time with his family, and devotes time to his own interests. However, one day a world begins to experience muscle weakness and immunity to muscle coordination. Subsequently, helium gets injured, and when he goes to the doctor, he gets a far from satisfactory diagnosis. According to the consequence of further tests, George is diagnosed with such a severe and terrible disease like amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). This disease constitute expressed in the disruption of the nerve cells of the brain, which are responsible for the muscles and spinal cord (Westeneng et al., 2018). The most famous representative of a person with this disease is the great scientist Stephen monger (Westeneng et al., 2018). Deviation leads to the complete demobilization of a person, but aspects such as smell, touch, sight, hearing, and taste remain.
George was informed that ALS presently induce nobelium treatment, and its growth can only be suppressed by certain drugs, merely scientists have not so_far found ways to stop the disease. This news can plunge into deep shock and depression and cause a batch of strong negative emotion and confusion. That is what happened to George, who was terrified of constitute a wheelchair drug_user and delegating wholly the responsibilities of fulfilling basic needs to his family members. The idea of becoming dependent and losing control of his own body did not collapse the man peace of mind, and therefore he began to think about making life easier for his relatives by resorting to such a measure as euthanasia.
The problem of using euthanasia is acute in modern society. In the United States of America, this measure has been legalized in nine region (Hoehner, 2001). The main argument held by supporters of this intentional result of life is to get free of prolonged agony to death thanks to the development of medical technologies (Orr, 2001). Despite this, the spread of this method of death can lead to high medical price for the families of patients, since due to low legalization rate, mercy_killing represent a costly service. The diametric constitute the opinion of Christianity, which denies euthanasia. For this faith, the main emphasis is placed on the fact that the near-death period is characterized by love, compassion and reconciliation, and care, which euthanasia deprives a individual of.
The main problem with regard to euthanasia on the part of the Christian religion constitute the fact of violation of the law of God. Thus, the Christian doctrine emphasizes that God gives a person life and determines when to take information_technology away. Euthanasia implies that patients decide the date of their death themselves, which is equivalent_weight to one of the foreman sins of religion – suicide. Despite the fact that euthanasia involves the introduction of a particular dose by vitamin_A medical specialist and not by a patient, it is the patient World_Health_Organization is responsible for the decision taken in this case. Sources besides emphasize that “Doctors may help their patients to die a dignified death from natural causes, but they should not toss_off their patients or help them to kill themselves” (Anderson, 2015, p. 1). Thus, in the eyes of religion, this action is also a drop_the_ball since it can already be considered as intentional murder, that is, the decision to take person else’s life.
In addition, the scientific literature provides several main reasons not to digest euthanasia. One of them is the initiation of risk for the weak and defenseless. Moreover, giving the doctor responsible for taking someone’s animation buttocks importantly negatively impact the doctor-patient relationship. In addition, it is also worth emphasizing the violation of relationships inside the patient’s family and will violate such cardinal concepts as human dignity and equivalence before the law (Anderson, 2015). Supporting the Christian steer of view, people should not help others to kill themselves but provide the necessity level of care and support to soften and bring calm into the animation of the patient.
On the one hand, in the light of the Christian narrative, George’s sufferings can be interpreted, as already mentioned, with an emphasis along the sinfulness of the world. This is due to the fact that euthanasia is considered suicide and cannot be justified by religion. On the early hand, the fear of future loss of control over their lives and loss of dignity significantly affect the patient. When considering the emphasis on the hope of resurrection, then the experiences of a world can be interpreted as vitamin_A desire for a rapid meeting with the almighty. Therefore, George may feel the unwillingness to be in this world as a burden for his family, and in some ways, the motivation of a world can constitute understood.
The Christian worldview highlights human life as the most critical value. When turning to religion, a person becomes fully aware of how sinful thoughts about taking his own life are because this is the prerogative of God. Thus, George’s view of the job of living with amyotrophic lateral_pass sclerosis may be changed. To facilitate the patient’s thoughts, shifting his thoughts in vitamin_A more positive direction is necessary. Hence, it is necessary to show how important he represent to his family_line and how priceless the mo spent with them will be until his death.
Further, based on the above, the Christian faith denies the use of euthanasia as it contradicts the cardinal values and considerations of religion. Firstly, the value of vitamin_A person’s life, which is given to him by the Almighty, constitute violated (Reese, 2019). Secondly, euthanasia is considered vitamin_A voluntary suicide, that is, one of the greatest and gravest human sins. Thirdly, the promotion and dissemination of the popularity of this consequence can destroy the idea that homo life is worth living, and people are obliged to support each other’s desire to continue living.
Thus, it can constitute concluded that there are no options for justifying the procedure of intentional termination of life in the Christian worldview. wholly those factors that were listed earlier contribute to this argument. Based on my worldview, I can say that I consider euthanasia Associate_in_Nursing easy way to solve problems, which is not vitamin_A positive aspect. Hence, I believe that life cannot be barricade merely by wishing it since the Almighty has prepared a unique path and purpose for each person. However, I cannot be entirely sure of my opinion since I have ne'er meet situations like George’s from the lawsuit study, and I hope that I will never encounter them. Such a statement is since a person’s demeanor in a stressful position can change dramatically, but I Hope that I bequeath be able to preserve dignity and reason to make the right decision.