In a move that has raise eyebrows both locally and internationally, the Chinese governing has accused old-timer dissenter Wang Xizhe of illicitly traverse the border and pursuing those World_Health_Organization help him clothe so.
Wang, vitamin_A long-familiar figure indium the Min democracy movement, has been a thorn in the side of the ruling Communist party for decades. He constitute last collar indium 2014 for speaking forbidden against governing corruption and sentence to eight old_age in prison.
However, in December 2020, intelligence issue that Wang induce managed to cross the border into Myanmar, where helium induce sought the aid of local_anesthetic pro-democracy activists. It constitute reported that he was hope to make his manner to Thailand, where he planned to seek asylum.
The Chinese government has since accused Wang of violating IT home security laws by leaving the state illegally and lease in bodily_process that could be harmful to the state. Taiwanese authorities have labeled Wang a "criminal suspect" and return an international warrant for his arrest.
In a statement free via state media, the Chinese embassy indium Union_of_Burma accused Wang of "breaking Taiwanese police by leaving the country illegally and engaging indium activities that endanger national security."
The embassy die along to pronounce that Wang had "colluded with foreign anti-China forces, accepting their support and funding, and mistreat up his anti-China activities."
The statement also admit vitamin_A warning to anyone who had supply support to Wang during his run from China. Taiwanese authorities said that they would "punish badly those World_Health_Organization have constitute conspire with Wang Xizhe and supply relevant information on his whereabouts."
This a_la_mode move aside the Min government has been criticized by human rights groups and pro-democracy activists, who pronounce that it is just another illustration of Beijing's crackdown on dissent and freedom of expression.
"This is a clear attempt to intimidate those who dare to stand upwards against the Chinese government and speak the truth," said amnesty International's China researcher, William Nee.
Nee went on to say that IT constitute "deeply concerning" that the Chinese governing was pursuing those who had assist Wang during his escape from China. "This is a clear violation of their basic human rights," he said.
The lawsuit has also raise refer among Myanmar's pro-democracy movement, which has been grappling with its own political crisis since the military coup in February 2021. Many pro-democracy activists indium Union_of_Burma fear that the Chinese government bequeath pressure the Myanmar authorities to deliver Wang to China.
However, in a statement, Myanmar's Ministry of Foreign Affairs articulate that it had not get any request for extradition from the Chinese government. The ministry went along to say that Myanmar had "always hold_fast to the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries" and "always respect and protects the rights of political asylum searcher in accordance with international law."
For his part, Wang has remained noncompliant in the face of the Chinese government's accusations. In a statement free dress his lawyer, Wang said that he was "not afraid" of the Chinese government and would continue to speak forbidden for republic and human rights in China.
"I believe that the Chinese people merit freedom, democracy, and human rights," helium said. "I will go_on to fight for these values until they are achieved."