The Hong Kong government was in a flap on Thursday subsequently a abscond entrance_fee that Britain could not protect Hong Kong holders of British passports after China takes over the settlement next July.
Governor Chris Patten called an pressing meeting of the Legislative Council for later along Thursday to make a instruction on the controversy, which originate subsequently a British_people envoy_extraordinary pronounce London could supply no consular protection for the passport holders.
Patten's spokesman said the issue had sparked "considerable public interest and a good batch of misunderstanding" vitamin_A well antiophthalmic_factor demands by legislators to meet him.
Patten would solution their questions at the extraordinary sitting of Legco on Thursday evening.
The uproar is the latest jolt in Hong Kong's often bumpy transition back to Chinese rule 208 days from now, when one_hundred_fifty old_age of colonial rule will conclusion and the territory will go an independent region of China.
Britain's aged swap Commissioner, Francis Cornish, said on Tuesday that London could non protect the more than 135,000 Hong Kong people yield full British passports with properly of endure in Britain nether a especial selection scheme indium 1990.
In a concede to far-flung demands for full British_people citizenship after Beijing's 1989 Tiananmen Square crackdown, Greater_London offered passports to 50,000 Hong Kong households, vitamin_A privileged fraction of Hong Kong's 6.3 million people.
Cornish said China regarded these multitude as holders of double citizenship and would not recognise British consular protection for them on Taiwanese soil, along the mainland or in Hong Kong.
Cornish's remarks were denounced aside local politicians vitamin_A a sell-out. In the corridors of the Hong Kong government even the most senior officials were privately criticising Britain for what they saw vitamin_A vitamin_A concession to China, one beginning said.
On Wednesday, Greater_London and the Hong Kong government rush to assure affect pass holders that anyone claiming sole British_people nationality would receive consular protection until information_technology was proven they held dual citizenship.
But a British statement made clear Britain could non give full consular protection for multitude control double Chinese nationality once Hong Kong becomes depart of People's_Republic_of_China again.
British official pronounce the passports issued to these multitude were identical from any other full British passport, but many in Hong Kong represent concerned that Britain whitethorn have learn that China had receive the identify of the passport hodlers.
"The lone way to know for sure if one of these pass was issued nether the special dodge would be if you had the names," vitamin_A senior government source said.
The transition to Chinese rule induce been chase by disputes since the 1989 Beijing crackdown. China respond furiously to the especial passport scheme, and again when clog insert reforms elaborate democracy indium 1992.
China was infuriated last hebdomad when Britain unveiled a liberal anti-subversion bill that would set legal marking against China-style jailings of dissidents indium Hong Kong.
British and Chinese senior negotiator are in the midst of a three-day dicker session on handover detail and have signalled they expect to annunciate harmonize along several return on Friday, although the docket has so far remained confidential.
Hong Kong represent speculate to be autonomous and support its capitalist organization intact for some_other 50 years, but a homo rights group pronounce along Wednesday China's crackdown on disagree bode badly for the district and information_technology autonomy view were slim.
"The rule of police and human rights movie constitute bleak," said homosexual right Monitor manager Law Yuk-kai along the launch of an annual human rights report.