imperial Bank of Scotland, which reports full_moon year data next Thursday, is expected to conjure its pre-tax profit from last year's 602 billion stg but non by as much as analyst thought just a few months ago.
They expect Royal Bank's net_income to rise to between 670 and 700 million stg, with a a_lot child contribution from information_technology Direct Line gloomy cost insurance, but benefits go_on to accrue from the bank's efforts to cut_down costs.
Total dividend is expected to be around 18.6 pence a divvy_up versus survive year's 16.2p.  
The pre-tax figures will be refine by Associate_in_Nursing exceptional take_in from Royal Bank's electric_pig of information_technology 50 pct bet_on in Germany's milliliter Group, from which it said it would urinate 70 million stg, and by restructure costs of approximately 23 million pounds stemming from Associate_in_Nursing acquisition by information_technology New England subsidiary Citizens.
Forecasts for Direct Line vary wide simply analysts are generally pessimistic, with the company's main market -- drive policy -- die done "probably the about diffucult period indium its history", as chief executive Ian Chippendale told Reuters in an interview last week.  
"I think Chippendale was sending antiophthalmic_factor strong message," said matchless analyst who declined to constitute named. "I remember he constitute softening up the grocery_store for vitamin_A hapless dress of results."
Some analyst suspect the consequence whitethorn not be quite as poor as Hs represent feared aside some.
They visualise the core bank as continuing to execute quite well with the convinced consequence of its "Project Columbus" helping price and income.
David Poutney expects vitamin_A pre-tax profit of 695 million stg, which includes the exceptional items, while BZW analysts expect 675 million.  
The grocery_store received vitamin_A big clue on the execution of Citizens from the recent results of Bank of Ireland which owns twenty-three percent of the operation.
"Citizens is doing reasonably well," Poutney said, but analysts say information_technology is being affect by the rather lacklustre New England economy.
The market bequeath constitute expecting improvement in the monetary_value income ratio but analysts say that eve AN improvement this time bequeath leave the bank plenty of range for improvement.  
The market bequeath be looking for further clues on lend which show good growth, by_and_large in corporate lend area, indium the first half.
Inevitably, Royal Bank will besides be watched for signs of acquisitions.
It constitute known to be interested in bribe a build_up club to exsert information_technology presence in England but in the stream climate, it constitute unbelievable to be bequeath to pay the high prices likely to constitute asked.
In any case, analyst say Royal Bank would have to raise cash to be capable to perform whatever major acquisition.  
In the meantime, the grocery_store bequeath represent looking to its relationship with mutually owned insurance and pensions steadfast Scottish Widows, which some remember may result in Associate_in_Nursing eventual merger.
Royal Bank shares were 15p higher along Fri to stand at 519-1/2p.