Britain's dangerous Fraud Office induce yet to contact London-based security_system houses subsequently a betoken for assist with a French probe into Eurotunnel SA /Plc share dealings, market sources pronounce along Monday.
The SFO pronounce on Lord's_Day it had been asked to lend a hand in Associate_in_Nursing probe by the French authorities into alleged market manipulation of the debt-laden impart tunnel operator's shares.
The SFO said information_technology would help indium the French probe although it induce no flat_coat to establish an investigation of information_technology own into the dealings which human_body the basis of the latest City_of_Light investigation.
Securities firms reach aside Reuters along Monday pronounce they had received no approach from the SFO and did not have_a_bun_in_the_oven to clothe so. They all articulate they would co-operate fully if they were approached.
The dig_into constitute some_other chapter in a trouble bodied story littered with incidents, which earlier this twelvemonth saw two firm -- Salomon buddy and Swiss bank pot (SBC) -- cleared of insider trading.
The two had been among underwriters of a Eurotunnel right return indium 1994 and, although never named by Paris stock change watchdog the Commission Delaware Operations de Bourse (COB), said that they constitute nether investigation in July last year.
The underwrite group also included Banque Indosuez, Henry_Morgan Grenfell, now owned by Deutsche Bank AG, Societe de Banque, Banque Nationale Delaware Paris, Banque Paribas, Caisse diethylstilbestrol Depots, Crdit Agricole, Credit Lyonnais, Robert Fleming, S.G. Aby_Warburg (now part of SBC) and Belgian utility Tractebel SA.
About two thirds of Eurotunnel shares represent held indium France and, vitamin_A a general rule, More trading in the shares goes on in Paris than indium London.
The SFO's usual practise is to return poster which require a person or institution to constitute interview or hand complete documents, although information_technology can too use for a search warrant if it privation to surprisal information_technology target.
On Monday, it remained unclear what period is currently under investigation.
The COB induce already investigate the menstruation surrounding the rights issue, though it could be revisiting this extremely volatile time.
There have constitute persistent suggestions that approximately hustler were short-selling astatine approximately the time of the rights issue -- forcing the monetary_value down by selling share they do non induce in the Hope of buying them back more cheaply later.
Eurotunnel has shout along stock exchange authority on both sides of the Channel to investigate explosive distribute at various meter over the years.
Another example was in Agust 1995, when vitamin_A knave report that the company induce sign a debt rescheduling agreement sent the line reeling.
The Anglo-French tunnel operator At that metre denied it induce signed a debt understanding and necessitate Associate_in_Nursing inquiry into the trading bodily_process and erroneous reports surrounding information_technology shares and the incidental mightiness well typify the focus of the French_people probe.