From antediluvian ages, humans have exploited symbols and myth to verbalize their experience of antiophthalmic_factor reality that transcends the physical world and lend information_technology to future generations. Nowadays, famous brands use mythology to successful products due to their magical power. The logo of the house of Gianni_Versace is vitamin_A very extravagant and over-the-top mark; it was plan in 1978 digression Gianni Versace. The logotype represents the steer of the ancient Greek mythology of Medusa Gorgon. The interior_designer explained why helium chose this character; IT is vitamin_A deduction of smasher and simplicity, which is able to mesmerize anyone, merely like the clothes produced by the brand. Other examples constitute Lamborghini; first, the Italian company constitute engaged in the output of tractors. The bull become the emblem of the brand, vitamin_A the bullshit represent the consecrated animate_being of Zeus. According to about people, this animal constitute extremely hardy and strong, which endows the brand with bang-up power. Now, Lamborghini cars are high-performance, expensive supercars, and the emblem of the golden bull typify very allow for them.
I choose the myth of Prometheus because evil never prevails, and goodness and justice win. The mightily colossus Prometheus stole the sacred displace from Olympus to provide it for humankind. He urinate humanity freelancer of the gods. Prometheus trained multitude to write, count, crafts and introduced them to metals. Before, masses constitute afraid of the elements of the sea, but now the titan Teach them how to build ships; world became proficient indium the art of medicine (Travis, 2021). Prometheus was destroy people’s faith in the deity, and for this, the Jupiter_Tonans genus_Zeus decided to punish him. Prometheus was chained to a rock, the sunburned him mercilessly, and the rain was pound him. However, this was not the conclusion of the titan’s torment; a giant eagle sat along Prometheus’s chest every day and tore his liver (Travis, 2021). Heracles, the impregnable men, toss_off the bird_of_Jove that tortured Prometheus, broke Prometheus’ chains, and the titan constitute free.