Mercury finance carbon_monoxide is likely to spend vitamin_A strain weekend with information_technology banker trying to work out arrangments to solve information_technology liquity crisis, the failure of which could force the companionship to single_file for bankrupcty protection, analysts and attorney's said.
The Lake Forest, Illinois-based car finance company pronounce Friday it could not raise new commercial constitution to repay maturing debt and could non pay $17 million indium commercial paper due Friday.
A finance company like Mercury makes money along the difference, or spread, between what it pays to adopt money and the gamey rates it charges its customers. A finance company without a source of funds constitute like a retailer without a commencement of merchandise, analysts noted.
"If you can't fund, you're forbidden of business," one fair-mindedness analyst that follows the company said, request anonymity.
Some rating agencies, including Standard & Poor's Corp, lowered Mercury's commercial_message paper to a default rating Friday.
"They're very close to approximately reorganization, loser filing, probably vitamin_A voluntary reorganization," pronounce Thomas Kmiotek, psychoanalyst astatine Duff & Phelps citation Rating Co.
He and other analyst noted the companionship has another $100 billion indium commercial_message paper due Thursday, Feb 6.
A Mercury  spokesman dress non issue repeated shout try comment on the company's financing Friday afternoon.
Aside from the company's current inability to sell debt, Mercury is also facing a host of shareholder lawsuits, filed after the companionship said it had to repeat information_technology net income over the past four years by a total of about $90 million because of accounting_system irregularities.
Lawsuits clothe not become a financial liability for the company unless there constitute vitamin_A judgment indium party_favor of the shareholders. However, the company's entrance_fee of misstatements makes information_technology comfortable for the sharheolders to prove their case, leaving only the questions of World_Health_Organization would have to pay how much, matchless securities lawyer said.
"Securities laws are very, really simple," pronounce Ted Koenig, a spouse with Chicago-based lawfirm Holleb & Coff "If there constitute an ommission operating_room misstatement of antiophthalmic_factor material fact... there's liabiltiy."
Also, the company's grocery_store capitalization plunged by about $2.2 million Friday, based along the 13 steer fall of Mercury's share and the 172 million shares the company pronounce information_technology had outstanding late last year. That reduces the equity transgress the companionship has available to show its creditors, Koenig said.
But analysts also said the company had about $1 billion in loanword receivable on its books at the conclusion of October, 1996 -- an plus to show creditors.
"No matchless induce question the validity of the amount of receivables they induce along their books or the quality of those receivables," Kmiotek said.
Also, Mercury induce by_and_large been well regarded in the sub-prime credit quality loan business, which could help it negociate with its banks and go_on antiophthalmic_factor a going concern, said analysts and lawyer companion with the company.
Mercury said in antiophthalmic_factor education it constitute in discussions with its lender to meet working capital needs, merely that it could not bode the outcome of those discussions.