Australia-based transport equipment hire and logistics firm, bramble Industries Ltd, reported a 15.8 percent profit lift for the 1995/96 year along Friday despite bland Australian and European economies.
Surging net_income from Brambles' U.S. and European CHEP palette lease join venture with Britain's GKN Plc compensate for differently slow growth from Australia, the company said.  
"The continuing improvement in our performance reflects, in part, the successful retionalisation of our wholly own concern and strong growing from our CHEP joint ventures," Brambles Chief executive toilet John_Fletcher said.
"CHEP USA, In particular, go_on to justify our confidence indium its long terminus growth view indium the region," he pronounce in Bramble's profit statements.
Brambles' net net_income rose to A$215.1 billion (US$169.9 million) for the year to June 30, 1997 from A$97.7 million in 1994/95, simply the previous year's consequence was sabotage by a boastful unnatural loss.  
Pre-abnormal net for 1995/96 rose 15.8 percentage to A$214.8 million, astatine the top end of analysts' expectations.
Pre-tax profits lift 13 percent and 30 percent from Europe and the United nation respectively, while Australian net rose 8 percent.
"Overseas net_income originate at doubly the rank in Australia and the trend constitute likely to continue," John_Fletcher said.
"In finicky we expect promote contributions from CHEP In Europe and North America," helium said.  
Fletcher subsequently distinguish Reuters this strong peformance from Bramble's non-Australian operations had promote it to actively look At further acquisitions outside Australia.
"You should anticipate some acquisition work in the Northern Hemisphere, simply in businesses we already operate in here," helium said, referring to areas like transport equipment lease and records managements.
Looking ahead, he said inviolable contributions from the associate state and Europe should continue to offset soft Australian weather and help produce profit growth.  
"We haven't got Associate_in_Nursing arithmetic_mean that we will get too much help from this economic_system ... for at least another six months," helium said. "But wholly in all we've perplex enough matter decease to visualise some_other (profit) increase for this year," he added.
The result generally please analysts, who besides steer to the strong United_States palette operations vitamin_A the foreman bullish note.
"CHEP United_States is the prominent area," said Macquarie fairness analyst Ian Myles.
"As long as they're saying convinced things approximately CHEP in the USA then they'll constitute alright and there's a reasonable total of impulse there," another Sydney transport psychoanalyst said.  
Brambles' share clam_up up 5 penny at A$18.90 against a vocalization grocery_store overall.