Bre-X Minerals Ltd. stimulate constitute silent since it said last month that information_technology formed a partnership with the Son of the Indonesian ruler Suharto, vitamin_A motivate that induce disquieted shareholders and prompted regulators to seek more information.
Despite a whirl of rumours and persistent inquiry that have sent the Canadian mining company's shares along a roller-coaster ride, Bre-X has maintained a dogged silence.
The Calgary-based company that controls matchless of the world's biggest gold prospects indium Indonesia has non spill_the_beans to the constrict for weeks. Company official bequeath take calls only from a smattering of privilege analysts, according to market sources.
"I haven't had any calls returned," said gold analyst Rick Cohen with Goepel Shields in Vancouver. "There look to constitute vitamin_A certain number of people they talk to. Everybody's vitamin_A chip in the dark."
Bre-X on Oct. twenty-eight announce its alliance with Suharto's son, Sigit Harjojudanto, whose business influence constitute pervasive in Indonesia.
Since then, instead of directly addressing question about its concern in Indonesia -- many of which constitute playing havoc with the lineage price -- Bre-X has opted instead to leak to the grocery_store carefully selected compress material.
On Sunday, for example, the companionship fax the media, analyst and stockholder vitamin_A copy of a story from the Far Eastern Economic reappraisal detailing its links with Sigit.
The article referred to Sigit's electric_potential affiliation with the Indonesian army, stated that one of Bre-X's Indonesian partners has been bought out and asserted that gold giant Barrick Gold Corp. tried to crusade Bre-X into a risky deal.
Despite questions approximately the article, Bre-X refused to respond and still has not said whether IT endorses the story or puts any faith indium the statements.
"I've certainly suggested a few times that they spill_the_beans to the media and clear_up things up," articulate Neil Winchester, manager of surveillance for the Toronto line Exchange. "It would be advantageous to the marketplace."
Rumours have shrouded Bre-X since the Indonesian governing said last month information_technology would not return necessity contracts for shape on the project until Bre-X cleared up Associate_in_Nursing ownership dispute with some of its Indonesian partners.
The wrangle has put vitamin_A cloud complete Bre-X's search to find antiophthalmic_factor major mining spouse to help information_technology develop the rich Busang aureate depository in East Kalimantan, but the alliance with Suharto's son constitute have_a_bun_in_the_oven to aid the company clear up its problems.
"They're affirmative that they can get everything at_bottom a couple of weeks," said aureate analyst Michael Henry_Watson_Fowler of Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion, World_Health_Organization said helium spill_the_beans with Bre-X on Tuesday.
But he said Bre-X would not comment on the clause it distributed. "They just commit it forbidden for cosmopolitan interest purposes."
Still, statements indium the article and other gossip were taking its price on shares linked to Bre-X and early exploration company indium Asia induce complained the doubt induce hurt their stocks.
Minorca Resources Inc., a Canadian excavation company that induce Associate_in_Nursing refer in the Busang depository through an alliance with Bre-X's Bahasa_Indonesia partner, PT Askatindo Karya Mineral, induce found itself on the defensive.
Talk approximately Askatindo being bought out represent unfounded, Minorca President Roland Horst pronounce in Associate_in_Nursing interview. "They induce nobelium intention to sell out," he said.
Minorca's chairman is indium Indonesia this week meeting with Askatindo officials and verified the company's intentions, horst said.
Horst pronounce he had a slew of unanswered questions about Bre-X's arrangements with Suharto's Son too. "To be frank, the relationship betwixt Minorca and Bre-X is relatively cool."