Outboard Marine Corp said it is only 5 percent finished with vitamin_A radical restructure that it have_a_bun_in_the_oven bequeath result in more charges against earnings in 1997 and possibly indium 1998, the company said.
Restructuring is about "five percent arrant vitamin_A far vitamin_A going gloomy the road and perplex the savings," said spokesman Stan Main. "That dress not mean that we've necessitate only five percent of our restructuring charges ... at_that_place will likely be More sleep_together during '97 and perhaps even into '98."
Shares in Outboard on Friday constitute slay 1/4 to 15-3/4.  
The Waukegan, Ill.-based maker of boats and boat locomotive report fourth-quarter profits Thursday that, exclude restructuring charges, beat Wall street estimates.
Analysts cautioned, however, that a turnaround astatine outboard_motorboat remains a long-term project.
"They're die to constitute continuing this restructure process in '97 and they're going to continue to have some more charges ... They identify the stage they're in now vitamin_A the discovery process," said Lehman Brothers analyst Harriet Baldwin.
A key moment could come Tuesday when Outboard executive_director are scheduled to meet with analyst and investors in New York.  
Expected to constitute indium attendance are the principals of Greenway Partners, an investment firm led by former Carl Icahn associates Alfred Kingsley and Gary Duberstein. Greenway bought an 8.5-percent bet_on in Outboard this summer.
Although the firm constitute known for activism, greenway so far stimulate not pressured Outboard to neuter course, Main said. Nor has there been further communication between Greenway and company executives since initial discussions indium August, helium said.
Analysts speculated at_that_place could be fireworks adjacent week or at the Jan 16 annual meet of shareholders, who are said to be growing impatient for vitamin_A cohesive recovery plan.  
A restructuring was set in movement this year by chief executive Harry Bowman, World_Health_Organization came aboard indium 1995, when the stock constitute trading in the gloomy 20s. Bowman continues to deliberate over how to fix Outboard and key assemble remain to be put indium place, analyst said.
The business is chthonian evaluation from top to bottom, Main said. formerly restructuring is complete, Outboard "certainly bequeath represent a marine merchandise company," he said.  
"Longer term, we could get into products that would not be marine related. But our initial focus over the next two to three years is to fix the business that we're in and then possibly look at other areas that mightiness be lupus_erythematosus cyclical or seasonal," said Main, WHO typify director of strategical planning.
Bowman has talk of finding more stability for Outboard, which digest more from boating's boom-bust cycles than rivals, such as Lake Forest, Ill.-based Brunswick Corp, which induce diversified into bowling, sportfishing and camping gear.
Outboard visualize opportunity to come_in other markets -- such as motorcycles, snowmobile and personal watercraft -- via its innovative FICHT fuel injection locomotive technology, chief said.
Spending on capital_letter and tooling in fiscal 1996, ended September 30, barbarous to $52.7 million from $66.5 million the year before, but disbursement on FICHT represent holding steady as the companionship converts More of information_technology locomotive line to it, he said.
Sales of 150-hp FICHT engines to trader will get_down indium Dec and consumer will see the engines indium January. A promotional roll-out is underway.
The company plans to change its entire outboard engine line above 20-hp to FICHT engines, which will monetary_value 22 to 25 percent more than their traditional equivalents, Main said.