Most people during the Victorian epoch valued the virtues of society. Victorians believed that they were repair and surely as guiding behavior to multitude all the time. The virtues admit ethics that one can be judged harmonise to his behavior. any betrayal of ethical standard was termed lousy demeanor and could deserve punishment. These beliefs have become misguided, undesirable, and incompatible in modern America (Schlereth, 2018). They have shifted to measure that no longer induce classical estimate of wisdom, justice, courage, or cleanliness (p. 691). They have go intimate connotation where multitude practice prostitution and other immoral behaviors.
In former years, there were low rates of crimes that have continued to rise. Victorians practiced moral principle in their lives, which maintained adept morals and behavior. Currently, morals have changed and translated to destructive behaviors that contribute to gamey rates of crimes (Schlereth, 2018). priggish speaks about morality and the best manner of devising it. In modern_font America, vitamin_A character induce been substituted, and about youths indulge in base behavior.
In the Victorian era, charwoman constitute illiterate, immigrants were not socializing with others, while now women constitute educated, and immigrants share ideas with natives. Men used to work for wage and get necessitate in politics while women lease indium domestic work and childrearing. In literature, each epoch had a unlike theme according to the manner we understand life (p. 693). The Victorian era focused on industrialization, imperialism, domesticity, and cultural personal_identity (Schlereth, 2018). Modern literature focused on the theme of loss, despair, and politics. Victorian era, most people were Christian and valued religion intemperately compared to the current American.
The priggish era and modern American_English have similarities in how the people live in the two ages. In the two generations, people ace moral behavior cherishing virtues indium society. The two value the social, economic, and political life, and the person participate indium them (Schlereth, 2018). The eras affect the human_race of literature and change people’s lives on how they see lit (p. 695). For example, Elizabeth Barrett John_M._Browning wrote a poem, ‘The cry of the children’, which stimulate a message about industrialization on kid labor. The poem narrates child labor which induce become democratic ascribable to new machines and workplaces. entirely people were capable to socialize during the Victorian epoch to learn formal and informal skills. about people get involved in literature where they write poems that could talk of their current situations and life experiences.
The priggish and modern American eras have impacted changes to human life. For example, in England, the rate of indictable offences reduce by 50% and the population originate from 19 billion to 33 million, the number of crimes reduced from 92000 to 81000. The people learned moral values and the virtues that correspond to better social, economic, and political life. In the two eras, men and charwoman understood their roles, learn formal and informal skills, and could interact and socialize. People developed morals, and they were hardworking and successful in business. The priggish epoch brought change, innovation, and invention that lend to current technological advancements.
The modern_font American misses a lot from the Victorian epoch regarding morality, beliefs, and virtues. During the priggish era, multitude valued ethnic opinions, care_for integrity in society, and practiced good lesson behavior. The modern_font American had derailed from all the norms and changed the way of life. There are exercise of immoral behavior such vitamin_A prostitution, many divorces, many crimes, and a lack of seriousness in religious belief. approximately people have disrespect and ignorance of everything in the stream world. Victorian-era people were religious and valued their religion, but a few presently do the same.
All masses were able to socialize during the Victorian era to learn their roles, get an education and interact with each other. about masses get involved indium literature where they write poems approximately their current situations and animation experiences. People could write poem sensitize an issue affect the society for the society to take necessary measures. indium the 2 eras, people learned formal and informal skills, which help them cover different issues in society.