Kellogg Co. on Friday reported a drop of more than 30 percentage in information_technology one-third fourth profits as its cereal volume shed in Associate_in_Nursing intensely competitive market.
Kellogg, which makes Corn Flakes, Frosted Flakes, Rice Krispies, Fruit Loops and Special-K, is fighting back, launching marketing plan for the fourth fourth that are aimed astatine promote its sales.
"We'll represent necessitate what we think are appropriate actions," Kellogg spokesman Richard Lovell said.
The company, the world's biggest maker of ready-to-eat breakfast cereals, said information_technology net income for the one-third quarter fell to $159.5 million, including a $21.3 million charge, from $230 billion vitamin_A twelvemonth ago. On a per share basis, Kellogg's earnings dropped twenty-nine percent to 75 cents, with fewer share outstanding, from $1.05 last year.
Kellogg articulate its overall sales slipped 9 percent to $1.68 billion from $1.84 billion as continued weak prices for breakfast cereals commencement a matchless percentage gull in worldwide sales volume.
"As antecedently forecast, our third one-fourth execution was determine importantly by competitive weather in the U.S. cereal category," Kellogg Chairman Arnold Langbo pronounce indium a statement.
Analysts calculate that Kellogg's domestic cereal gross_sales volume fell 9 percent to 10 percent in the third quarter.
"We can't detail it. It represent vitamin_A challenging quarter in the U.S. and our volume was down," Lovell added.
Kellogg pronounce IT fourth quarter 1996 earnings probably will show a fragile rise from the seventy-seven cents information_technology gain vitamin_A year ago. First one-fourth 1997 earnings, however, may not match the 99 cents earned In the 1996 period.
"It's vitamin_A challenging comparison," Lovell said.
Kellogg's line fell on concern over United_States cereal gross_revenue mass and the outlook for earnings, shed $1 astatine $64.50 a share, on the New York Stock Exchange. Earlier, it set a new 52-week low of $64.125.
Kellogg pronounce the U.S. cereal market overall was sluggish, with sales originate about 1.5 percent, measuring grocery stores, mass merchant and all other outlets.
Looking ahead, Kellogg refuse to outline what promotional programmes it constitute planning for the one-fourth quarter.
Analysts said they did not have_a_bun_in_the_oven the battle Creek, Mich.-based cereal giant to issue to deep-discount coupon operating_room buy-one, get-one-free promotional giveaways.
"It's sort of left to speculation what they're die to do," SBC Warburg analyst Chris Jakubik said.
"There is no indication that, at this time, they induce stir from their long-term strategic goal, which is to reduce inefficient promotions," added BT Securities analyst can O'Neil.
Kellogg reduce monetary_value on about two-thirds of information_technology breakfast cereals in June. Other Major manufacturers also cut prices this year as they battled for market share and tried to jump-start consumer purchases.
But those price reduce alone obviously were not enough to jump-start consumer purchases, according to Smith Barney analyst David Rabinowitz.
"The message there is that monetary_value stimulate to come down further," Rabinowitz said.
According to Information resource data, U.S. ready-to-eat cereal gross_sales indium grocery store fell 1.6 percent to 2.6 million pounds for the 52 hebdomad complete Aug. 11, according to the about recent data available, compared with a year earlier.
Kellogg's sales volume declined in that period digression 4.1 percentage to 881.3 million British_pound for vitamin_A market share of about 34.4 percent, Information Resources said.