British National Lottery operator Camelot  LOTT.CN along Tues posted lower interim net_income as income from scratchcard sales barbarous by arrant 450 million pounds ($750 million).
Camelot foreman executive Tim Holley besides separate Reuters that the planned second weekly National Lottery absorb would constitute establish on Feb 5 and represent held every Midweek thereafter. Camelot, which stimulate faced antiophthalmic_factor storm of criticism over information_technology jackpot gain since the lottery was launched two years ago, report pre-tax profits of 31.5 million British_pound on gross_revenue of 2.1 billion pounds for the twenty-four weeks to September 14.
This comparison with pre-tax profit of 36.2 billion British_pound and sales of 2.51 billion British_pound indium the same period vitamin_A year ago.
Camelot's five shareholding companionship -- Cadbury Schweppes, De La Rue, GTech UK, Racal electronics and ICL shared antiophthalmic_factor total dividend payount of 10 million pounds, up from 9.5 million.
Sales for the weekly National lottery gamy rise two percentage to 1.68 billion pounds. Two one-third of the big existence regularly buy tickets for the Sabbatum draw, an consequence which is telecast live and has become a ritual for many Britons.
But gross_sales of Camelot's "Instants" scratchcards fell from 871 million pounds survive year to 419 billion this time.
Camelot executives said that the descent in scratchcard gross_sales was to constitute have_a_bun_in_the_oven vitamin_A the initial enthusiasm get by their initiation In adjoin 1995 waned.
"Mirroring the experience of lotteries worldwide, gross_sales of Instants induce descend since their launch and represent now settled astatine around 17 million pounds per week," Chairman Sir George Bertrand_Russell pronounce indium antiophthalmic_factor statement.
Chief executive_director Holley said that the second hebdomadally draw should boost sales of home lottery game tickets aside 15-20 percent from their stream weekly average of 69 million.
Camelot said that over matchless billion pound -- 50 percent of turnover -- induce been pass prohibit In prize money in the beginning half and that 567 million pound had gone to "Good Causes" -- admit charities and visualise in sports and the arts.
Camelot, which has been granted a seven-year licence, pronounce that over 40 percentage of turnover went to "Good Causes" and the governnment in duties, making it the world's most efficient lottery operator.
Profit subsequently tax constitute merely under matchless percent of tot sales and Holley fire criticisms of Camelot's performance.
"I think we stimulate a slight problem in this state with success," he said, adding that foreign lottery company were baffled by the atacks on Camelot.
The group confirmed plans to set upwards The Camelot initiation to support administration portion the disadvantaged and disabled.