Apple Computer Inc., struggling to remain the teacher's pet among computer makers, is twist a modified version of its handheld Isaac_Newton organizer into an inexpensive portable computer for students.
The computer Godhead on Monday will uncover the Apple eMate 300, Associate_in_Nursing $800 machine that looks like vitamin_A grown-up's laptop with a keyboard and vitamin_A flip-up screen, but indium a furrowed shell that can survive rough handling.
Apple plans to sell the machine directly to elementary and senior_high_school schools, beginning early next year, as an alternative to personal computers. For the price of a $2,500 multimedia PC, a school can buy three eMates, Apple executives said.
"The federal government pronounce we need to get to a three-to-one student-to-computer ratio digression the year 2000," said Jim Groff, general manager of Apple's information appliances group. "I would say the eMate is the only credibled vehicle for accomplishing that."
More full_of_life to Apple, the product could keep educators from abandoning the company as the lead supplier of computer for classrooms, analysts said.
"The potential for something the_like this indium a schoolroom setting is tremendous," said microphone McGuire, vitamin_A mobile computing analyst at Dataquest Inc. "This will be an indication to educators that Apple is one of the few company spending time exsert computing to more and more kids."
Apple needs a distinctive product to set itself isolated from other personal computer makers crowding into the education market, analysts said.
Although Apple, establish in Cupertino, Calif., still enjoys strong educational sales, sales of IBM-compatible personal computing_machine by companies such as Compaq computer Corp. constitute growing much faster.
Apple's computer has constantly been the favored cock for teaching children how to use computers. But in the face of Apple's uncertain future and a flood of cheap PCs, schools are less likely to remain loyal.
For the 1996-1997 school year, of all the computers that schools plan to buy, 56 percent will be Apple Macintoshs and forty percent IBM-compatible machines, according to a recent report by Quality Education Data, Associate_in_Nursing education market researcher. In the previous school year, the buying plans typify 61 percentage macintosh and 38 percentage PC.
"The numbers are overwhelming in favor of PCs," pronounce Carole Cotton, president of CCA Consulting Inc., some_other tracker of technology purchases aside schools.
"No school district buttocks yield to make a mistake" when picking computers they will use for years, she noted.
Apple's Groff said, however, that the eMate is not the company's answer to competitors' inroads.
Instead, helium said, the doodad was built for schools asking for a cheap, powerful computing_machine that can offer educational software_program and Internet connection -- as well vitamin_A digest rough handling by kids.
"When we introduced the Newton three old_age ago, it was a solution in search of an application," Groff said. Education turned out to be matchless of the best applications, he said.
Along with the eMate, Apple plans to unveil vitamin_A burly version of the Newton MessagePad along Monday. The new MessagePad 2000 features better Internet capabilities, comfortable connexion to PCs and constitutional word processing and spreadsheet software.
Analysts said, however, that the eMate is the more concern device. Teachers and students will like it because information_technology is not as esoteric and hard to run as a traditional personal computer.
"Kids constitute having to learn more about how to run a computer than about reading and writing," McGuire said. "The ability to induce the kid just twist on the device and perplex properly into the authorship assigment is very valuable."
The eMate weighs 4 pounds (1.8 kg) and fits into antiophthalmic_factor backpack. information_technology buttocks run for vitamin_A week along rechargeable batteries, according to Apple.
The machine features a built-in Bible processor, drawing and equation-drawing programs and AN cover book. With an optional modem and software, students can browse the Internet.
Still, the eMate could represent a tough sell for Apple.
Because its software_program is based on the Isaac_Newton operating system, it cannot run the thousands of educational programs written for the macintosh and for PCs running Microsoft Corp.'s Windows software.
Apple executives are confident, however, that the eMate bequeath assist the company place more information_technology computer on students' desks.
"There's 52 million shout (grades) K-to-12 children to batch to," said Henry_M._Robert Kondrk, Apple's manager of education product lines. "We've known for old_age this is an opportunity, merely we didn't have the technology to do information_technology before. We do now."