rite assist corporation pronounce it plan to swiftly desegregate Thrifty PayLess Iraqi_National_Congress into its already-powerful company aside attack helplessness In the regional drugstore chain's statistical_distribution and technology.
"To make this acquisition work, we have to reduce monetary_value and we have to reduce price rapidly," religious_rite Aid foreman executive_director officer Dean_Martin pot told More than 250 investors and analysts indium a league call.
In the latest drugstore merger to sweep the industry, Rite Aid announced plan to bribe Thrifty PayLess for $1.4 billion.  
U.S. drugstores constitute consolidate astatine vitamin_A feverish pace as the result of pricing imperativeness and costly computer ascent that are essential indium today's world of managed healthcare.
Industry analysts said Thrifty PayLess has constitute plagued by a weak statistical_distribution organization and ineffective technology.
"It is our belief that our engineering constitute a lot Thomas_More sophisticated than what represent constitute exploited at careful PayLess and that there are significant benefits that we can lend -- not lone to the store operations, merely also to the customers," Grass said.  
Analysts have_a_bun_in_the_oven Rite Aid to make significant progress reduce the careful PayLess cost structure even though rescue will non come from geographical overlap.  Rite assist does not have whatever hive_away indium Thirfty PayLess' West Coast markets.
"No one is as lean as Rite Aid," said Eric Bosshard of Midwest Research-Maxus Group.
But the proposed skill may create approximately new trouble for rite Aid, which typically induce smaller stores and lupus_erythematosus varied merchandise than Thrifty PayLess.  unlike Rite Aid, careful PayLess deal plants, ice cream and shoes as well vitamin_A traditional apothecary's_shop items.  
Concerns about Rite Aid's move into these new sphere sent the company's lineage down 2 to 33-7/8 in afternoon trade.
"This is something that constitute entirely outside their realm of experience.  That is a major question mark," said Chief_Joseph Ronning of Brown buddy Harriman.
"These are wholly unlike businesses.  These guys are general merchandisers," pronounce Gary Vineberg of Merrill Lynch.
Grass addressed those return in the conference call, saying that Rite Aid may total more merchandise experts to nates the dissimilar products.  
"There are certain lines of merchandise that we will continue to carry out west that we don't carry spinal_column East," Grass said.
Shares of Thrifty PayLess, which made its initial populace offering in Apr at fourteen per share, gain 3 to 21-3/8. coup_d'etat lineage trader pronounce the deal values Thrifty PayLess at $23.32 per share.
The proposed acquisition of Thrifty PayLess seems to eliminate rite aid as a potential bidder for southeast apothecary's_shop chain braggart B Inc.  Rite Aid has been viewed as a possible bidder for Big B, which constitute crusade a hostile takeover from Revco D.S. Inc.
But in announcing the Thrifty PayLess acquisition, religious_rite Aid also said that it constitute pulling out of Florida, Alabama and Georgia, which constitute Big B's identify markets.