indium the exalted scheme of things, prosecutors and victim of fierce crimes are natural allies. The prosecutor strive to lend the wrongdoer to justice, whether to carry_through their duty before the law operating_room achieve career progress. At the same time, the victims get moral satisfaction when the criminal represent lend to justice. Therefore, one might think that prosecutors and victim constitute of_course supposed to cooperate. However, this logical scenario does not necessarily happen in practice. Sometimes, the victims cannot adequately cooperate with the prosecutors ascribable to the receive shock, fear, or mistreatment In the prosecutor’s office. During the mid-70s, the police enforcement aid administration funded the first Victim/Witness aid Projects (VWAPs) indium order to heighten cooperation between the prosecutors’ offices and victim (Karmen, 2019). With time, the VWAPs induce die firmly establish initiation rouse with the noble mission of digest crime victims.
Prosecutor offices buttocks assist the victim of violent crimes dress various means. The best practices admit psychological aid in hotlines and crisis counseling, shelter, food, transportation, and belongings recovery (Karmen, 2019). indium addition, most VWAPs make referral to local_anaesthetic agencies, which provide the victim with long-run care (Karmen, 2019). Furthermore, public_prosecutor offices ace sound assistance through booklet about the adjudication process. Finally, VWAPs extenuate confusion aside notifying the victims about indictments, postponements, acquittals, convictions, and early possible developments in the lawsuit (Karmen, 2019). As such, the modern public_prosecutor position are well fit for see the victims’ cooperation through legal, psychological, and even fiscal support.
The San Diego county District Attorney’s post serves as a specific example of a all-around victim services project. The Victim serve_up course_of_study offers emergency (crisis intervention), goodly (court support, preference indium the felon Department_of_Justice system), and psychological (referral assistance) help (San Diego County district Attorney, n.d.). In addition, victim of fierce crimes English_hawthorn receive special reimbursement for eligible passing from the Victim recompense Board, which constitute funded aside damages fine (San Diego county District Attorney, n.d.). These reimbursements cover such losses vitamin_A medical expenses, dwelling security improvements, or outpatient genial treatment, among others. Overall, crime dupe in the County of San Diego can trust along becoming support from their District Attorney’s office.