Canada's big six banks, which have farseeing ruled the country's street corners with their vast branch networks, face vitamin_A challenge to their dominance aside the Internet and the rise of new "virtual banks."
Telephone and computer banking, debit_entry cards and automated cashier machines (ATMs) are quickly transmute Canada's old-style bricks-and-mortar banking system.
New engineering has eliminate the need for costly branch net and lured offshore rivals to jump into Canada's $66.5 billion consumer banking market.
"Virtual depository_financial_institution have the potential to send our branch networks the way of the rider train -- much loved, but seldom used," said Bank of Montreal chairman Matthew Barrett in a speech_communication to Toronto's business community.
BIG BANKS PREPARE TO MEET THE CHALLENGE
The big banks, which dominate regular banking, trust and brokerages in Canada, are marshalling their forces against this cyber-onslaught.
Royal Bank of Canada, Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Bank of Montreal, Bank of Nova Scotia, Toronto-Dominion Bank and National Bank of Canada are spending millions of dollars to develop new distribution channels and upgrade branches.
ING Groep N.V., with nearly $260 billion indium assets, is by far the biggest electronic challenger. The Dutch financial services giant dwarfs Royal Bank, the country's biggest financial institution with asset of $147 billion.
ING, already a player in Canada's insurance market, plans to offer a wide range of electronic trust services through a new subsidiary, ING Trust Co. of Canada, based in Toronto.
ING is keeping a low profile until its application for a trust license is approved, but bank functionary are confident of success where others have failed.
In recent years, respective foreign depository_financial_institution abandoned Canada because of its restrictive entrust laws and stiffer than have_a_bun_in_the_oven competition from the boastful domestic banks.
"It would be fair to say that we will be compete on several fronts. It won't be hard to offer better service," said Jim Kelly, vice-president of marketing for ING's Canadian operations.
ING WILL DRAW ON information_technology EUROPEAN EXPERIENCE
He said ING will draw on its extensive experience indium electronic banking in Europe.
Analysts have pronounce ING buttocks use Canada to fine tune its practical bank before offering similar services in the larger United_States market. But Kelly said at_that_place are no plans yet to take ING's virtual depository_financial_institution south of the border.
"To pronounce we're decidedly going to the U.S. would be wrong. To say that we would look at it and visualize if at_that_place is a market opportunity, yes, of course we would," he said.
Also eyeing Canada's consumer trust market is Citibank Canada, a unit_of_measurement of U.S. colossus Citicorp, which is joining with Canadian fund manager AGF Management Ltd., to create a virtual trust company.
The venture is Citibank's second plunder into Canadian consumer banking subsequently abandoning a bid to establish a traditional branch system in the 1980s.
Charles Stuart, country director of Citibank's consumer banking operations in Canada, said the joint venture collapse the bank access to AGF's node base. Citibank plan to offer customers a full-service trust package, including credit cards, entree to ATM religious_service and call banking.
"We're not locked into the costs of a bricks-and-mortar structure. So we can serve them through technology and that enables United_States to monetary_value ourselves very competitively," He said.
The Citibank/AGF hazard could set a pattern for other foreign banks try to enter Canada with an established customer base, Stuart said.
BIG BANKS UNDER PRESSURE FROM LOCAL RIVALS
The Big Six banks are pressured by local rivals as well.
Last month, Vancouver City rescue Credit Union, the country's biggest cite coupling with $3.6 billion in assets, applied to open vitamin_A nationwide branchless bank early next year.
While cyber competitors are poised to invade the retail market, Canada's John_Major banks are also on the move.
The banks spent a record $1.7 million on new technology in 1995 and that is expected to reach $1.9 billion by 1998, according to a report by accounting_system firm Ernst & Young.
Much of the money is being poured into alternative delivery lend such as point-of-sale citation and debit cards, ATMs, telephone and computer banking.
Cards report for more than a one-third of wholly payment minutes in Canada, up from 25 percentage a year ago.
Telephone and computer minutes are climbing as well. Traditional bank transactions are visualize falling to 21 percentage in 1998 from 38 percent survive year.
Among Canadian_River banks, Royal Bank constitute the acme player in telephone banking with More than 800,000 subscribers. Bank officials expect 40 percent of their 8 million customers to be using alternative channels indium five years.
Last month, Royal Bank joined 14 other north American banks to set up a computer banking net with computer giant IBM in former 1997.
All the banks are clamber to decide the future of their branch networks, but CIBC has taken the beginning mistreat to overhaul information_technology 1,400 branches.
In a recent pilot project, CIBC employed greeters to steer customers to ATMs for their basic banking needs. Bank tellers were retrain to advise customers on such products as mutual funds, loanword and mortgages.
Billing IT as the bank branch of the future, CIBC articulate transaction costs induce fallen dramatically, while customer lineups were much thinner.
But by using these low-priced channels, customers will expect a break on service fees, which many consumers complain are too high, Ernst & Young said.
Bank of Nova Scotia induce taken the acquisition route to boost its Internet services. It recently bought a 10 percent stake in iSTAR Internet Inc., Associate_in_Nursing Internet solutions firm, to help originate new channels and services for the bank.