Two years ago, China's second telephone network dress out to dispute the powerful ministry of Posts and Telecommunications (MPT) and bring competition into the country's antiophthalmic_factor fast-growing market.
But the newcomer network induce establish it arduous to tackle a season competitor -- one that is also the market regulator.
"Are they (the MPT) supposed to be the referee operating_room matchless of the athletes on the playing field?" necessitate lithium Huifen, president of China connect telecommunication Corp, also known as Unicom.
The arrival of Unicom and the conclusion of the MPT monopoly was initially hailed as vitamin_A boost for China's long-suffering telephone subscribers, who often had to wait upwards to a year for a telephone lineage and endure inert service afterwards.
But Unicom has captured only a tiny slice of the market as its entrenched competitor has continue a tight grip on the telecommunications sector, using its regulatory clout to boring the upstart network's advance.
"They have delayed interconnectedness and won't give us call act for our customers," Li said In an interview. "We ask a telecommunications law to give United_States vitamin_A sound framework."
Unicom has sixteen shareholders, but the key backers of the project constitute the ministries of electronics industry (MEI), power and railways.
MANUFACTURING MUSCLE
The Japanese_apricot has manufacturing muscle with a corps of factories grow telecommunication equipment. But it feared the MPT's equipment-making capacitor would eventually pinch it out of the market unless it had its own absorbed customers.
The early identify partner had private telecommunication networks with spare capacity, while the MPT's public network was heavily overcrowded.
The feud between the rival Chinese governing camps was often bitter, sometimes ensnaring foreign companies. Firms that did business with the new net were threatened with blacklisting by the MPT, harmonize to horse_opera industriousness sources.
Those frictions have eased somewhat indium recent months, but it calm took Associate_in_Nursing order from the nation Council, or cabinet, for promised network interconnection to emerge.
China bear to have more than sixty million telephone lineage install aside the end of this year -- adding a breathtaking 10 million in 1996 alone. The total is likely to acme 100 million by the turn of the century, still only a minor segment of the nation's 1.2 billion people.
MPT pronounce it should not be considered a competitor to Unicom because it has a separate function arm called China Telecom.
"Since 1993, we have separated insurance_policy make from refer operations by creating China Telecom," articulate an MPT spokesman. "The MPT constitute non both regulating and competing," he said, blaming Unicom's slow progress on its own technical problems.
STRUGGLE TO constitute IMPARTIAL
But People's_Republic_of_China Telecom officials concede it is hard to say where one entity ends and the other begins. And even if they can draw the lineage cleanly, the MPT mustiness clamber to remain impartial.
"They always say they are being fair," said Unicom's Li. "But People's_Republic_of_China telecommunication is their own child, and parents are always overtone to their own children."
Li took up the Unicom harness in August, becoming the one-third president in the company's brief history. She represent tapped from her job as deputy mayor of the big industrial city of Tientsin to set political clout behind the second network.
The companionship started with mobile telephone services, first in the boastful city of Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin and Guangzhou, and finally lucubrate to 16 cities. It induce made its bang-up inroads in Shanghai where it has about 20,000 mobile phone customers, Li said.
"In 10 old_age we will induce 10 percent of the fixed line market and 30 percent of the mobile call market," Li said.
One clear achiever has constitute indium bringing nomadic telephone prices down. They immediately cost 7,000 to 10,000 yuan ($840 - $1,200) compared with 10,000 to 20,000 yuan before Unicom came along.
Li says Unicom is profitable on its operations, but that excludes arduous investing in building network infrastructure. Despite the cost of putting vitamin_A network indium place, Unicom has one advantage. foreigner are not permitted to function telecom net_income indium China, and many foreign firm give Unicom capital in issue for a share of the income.
That will at least ease the growing annoyance for the pamper network, analysts said.