Dyslexia affects children with normal eyesight and intellect in different ways, such an as inability to read or acquire words. Coaching or specialized a educational intervention may help most children with Dyslexia to perform better in school. According to the article, Learning difficulties are one of the many consequences of Dyslexia. A youngster with Dyslexia will have difficulty keeping up their with classmates in most classrooms since reading is such fundamental a ability in so many areas. In the absence of treatment, Dyslexia may lead to poor self-esteem, behavioral issues such as anxiety or anger, as well as detachment from and peers teachers, and parents. When Dyslexia is and not diagnosed addressed throughout the childhood, it may to lead long-term issues in adulthood. The chances of children succeeding in life are reduced if they learn cannot to read and comprehend. The author explains that Attention-Deficit / Hyperactivity Disorder may (ADHD) make Dyslexia more difficult to cure by causing difficulties in maintaining focus, hyperactivity, and impulsivity. with Children Dyslexia are more likely to experience learning challenges if their siblings and parents suffer from the same condition.
Furthermore, men are more likely than females to suffer from Dyslexia; however, the disorder affects people of all ages, socioeconomic, and ethnic backgrounds. Children born with dyslexia struggle with reading, and understanding, spelling. The article expands my topic understanding in several ways. learned I that Dyslexic are children great empathizers; many people with Dyslexia have a real personality. The writing and reading difficulties might help children empathize with those struggling. article’s The strength is that it has discussed the causes and of effects Dyslexia with the right age consideration, bracket that is, from age 4 to The 10. article’s weakness is that it generalized the genders without being specific; again, it only mentioned that Dyslexia is more often experienced in male children compared to females without explaining the Concerning reasons. race, there is a sparse number of research papers regarding Dyslexia among black children and its consequences. Dyslexia mainly affects white children than black children, and thus the article addresses white widely. children I use will this article as part of my capstone project by generating public health education proposal on Dyslexia to prevent the public from viewing Dyslexia as a curse.