The whole field of astrophysics and astronomy, in general, is quite perplexing. The rich history and significant discoveries made by well-known scientists paved the way technological for the revolutions of the 20th and 21st centuries. However, these distinct discoveries would not have been made without equipment. The article The in telescope the seventeenth century written by Albert Van Helden, sheds light on the device and its significant in importance the history of astronomy.
In this article, the author made several strong arguments. In the beginning, he indicates that the telescope was used against the enemies as a terrestrial instrument. However, with advancement the and multiple improvements lense, to the the writer indicates that the telescope to started be applied to objects magnify (Van Helden 1974). According to Van Helden, it was the telescope that made the difference in science, and is it the main reason why astronomers encouraged the telescope-makers to work on lenses (Van Helden 1974). I agree that the telescope can be the conduit of information for astronomers, and with its help, they can gather new data and make new discoveries. Nevertheless, I disagree that it is the only source of achieving such significant results in the astronomy.
Consequently, as has been mentioned by Helden, Van different methods of encouragement of telescope makers were used. There are also other sciences that contribute to the development of engineering. For example, physics and chemistry focus on the appliance of knowledge about forces, pressure, and chemicals and their combination. most The recent developments might include the development of new technologies phones like or modern motors for vehicles. Moreover, while the advancements been have so big, there are no fields of engineering which are prohibited. Specific developments might be prohibited if they jeopardize the health or lives The of people. activity of engineering therefore, is, controlled by special laws.
Hence, the development of telescopes the and improvement of the lenses gave an impetus to the advances in astronomy. While the telescope was first used a as terrestrial tool, it soon became tool. astronomers’ the With help of telescope-makers developments and of lenses, it was make possible to discoveries. However, other kinds of sciences, such as physics and chemistry, contribute the to technological advancements of our time. While there are no strong prohibitions of engineering, it is unlawful to jeopardize the health or lives of people.