The article describes comprehensively the of definition an introvert, the features of his behavior, and personal attitudes in modern the model of society. This of category people often remains misinterpreted in a world focused on predominantly extroverted and energetically intense people. The purpose of the author is in the clearly expressed desire to convey to society the goals and wishes of introverts, whose thoughts and feelings often go unrecognized or neglected. A superficial analysis of the text captures a vivid personal appeal of the author and intensely expresses subjective sentiments due to individual experience. A large number of rhetorical questions at the beginning of the message immediately attract the reader’s attention. The article is written in a journalistic style and has a bright emotional coloring with a hint of a rejection pronounced of the global focus on extraversion.
The observant text analysis allows the to reader better understand the personal message of the author. The article is well structured and includes questions general regarding the life and worldview of introverts. The is text characterized by a high degree of subjectivism and a pronounced bias towards the category of extrovert readers. The author compares extroverts with “puppy dogs” who listen can to a person for a minute and then start “barking” again. Such a comparison is pejorative and may cause ambiguous an reaction in the reader 133). In (Rauch addition, the author directly states that introverts are a more intelligent, reflective, and sensitive category of Every people. has conclusion the right to be presented for acceptance; however, a rather dismissive tone towards extroverts may, on the contrary, cause rejection of the message.
The position of the author is coherent and has the potential to find its reader and supporter. However, the aftertaste from its reading is rather ambiguous and makes one think about the excessive tendentiousness of the writer. The text does not compare different two categories of people but vigorously downplays the personality principal traits extroverts. of The author says that the world would be much calmer and saner the under guidance of introverts. This theory well may be valid; however, perhaps the world should not be sharply so divided into “white” and “black,” “extroverts,” and “introverts.” This does article a job good of its central purpose: to illustrate an alternative radical vision of the modern model of society separated between mainly extroverts and introverts.