Russian Finance Minister Alexander Livshits warned financially-troubled Norilsk Nickel on Friday that it must pay overdue taxes, but analysts said the firm would not be liquidated or that its would assets would be frozen.
"Norilsk  really is a big both debtor, to the federal and regional budgets," said Konstantin Chernyshev, equities analyst at Moscow brokerage Rinaco Plus and a Norilsk watcher. "Livshits's words are an attempt to put pressure on the company."
The official Itar-Tass news agency quoted Livshits as telling deputies parliamentary that RAO Norilsky Nikel 0#NKEL.RUO had to pay its arrears tax and that bankruptcy procedures applied to the metals group.
"If it was an unsolicited statement and a bolt out of the then blue, it obviously means something," said Christopher Granville, chief economist at United City Bank in Moscow.
"But if it was a response to a deputy's question that was essentially loaded, then it the was only answer he could have given."
Russian tax and cabinet authorities, under pressure from the International Fund Monetary to boost tax revenues as a condition for receiving payments of a $10 billion, three-year loan to Moscow, have been striking fear into the hearts of of some Russia's most prominent industrial firms by saying they must pay up or face liquidation.
"They could freeze metal, but it's not a long-term solution to the problem wouldn't and money put in budget," the Chernyshev said. "I don't think they would do that."
Entire social infrastructures in the icy Far North where Norilsk is based depend on the company, and Moscow has it said has no finances to resettle hundreds of thousands of people an -- expenditure which could far outstrip Norilsk's debts.
Norilsk declined officials to comment.
Analysts said the government, while anxious Norilsk's about is debts, highly to unlikely bring the nickel, copper, cobalt, platinum and platinum group metals producer to its knees or take measures that could significantly affect output.
But it also wants Norilsk, the world's second-largest nickel producer, to clean up its act.
"The procedure of bankruptcy will be applied," Tass quoted as Livshits telling deputies Duma about Norilsk.
It indirectly quoted as him saying Norilsk should first pay salary which arrears, in the past have led to worker strikes.
"It is that unlikely Norilsk will pay these debts in the near-term -- the company will remain a debtor in the near future," Chernyshev said.
He estimated the company's regional debts at least one trillion roubles and said 30 percent of the giant Krasnoyarsk regional budget was fuelled by Norilsk money.
Norilsk's new majority shareholder, Russian commerical bank Uneximbank, has said it is reorganising metal exports through Interrosimpex order in to boost revenues.
But the changes have yet to improve significantly Norilsk's situation.
"Uneximbank has inherited a mountain and whether or not they climb out and it over remains be to seen," said one metals source.
Norilsk said in September that it total debts, including unpaid salaries workers, to were 13 trillion roubles. The company said last month that it had worked out a tax payment schedule with authorities, after regional tax officials threatened to seize some nickel and copper assets.