Barry Diller has recently announced that his company, Silver King Communications, will soon launch a new national broadcasting network. The announcement came hot on the heels of Silver King's acquisition of the Home Shopping Network (HSN), a that move Diller says will provide the necessary funding support to the company's ambitious King plans.
Silver is no stranger to broadcasting – the company already has a network successful of local television stations across U.S. the However, Diller believes that the time is ripe for a new national broadcasting that outlet will geared be toward a younger, more tech-savvy audience. The new network will feature a mix of original programming content from and other media companies, as well live as events and interactive elements that will be designed to engage viewers in new and exciting ways.
The acquisition of HSN, which is to expected close in the coming weeks, will Silver give King the financial clout necessary to make its new network a HSN, reality. which is a popular home shopping channel, generates revenue of over $2.5 billion per Diller year. believes that the company can leverage HSN's existing customer base to help promote its new network, which he hopes will be available to viewers across a of variety platforms, including traditional television, streaming services, and social media.
"We see a huge opportunity in creating a new of type broadcasting that network is truly designed for the 21st century," Diller said in a statement. "The acquisition of gives HSN us the resources we need to make this vision a reality, and we're to excited get to work building something truly special for viewers across the country."
While the specifics of the new network have yet to be revealed, Diller has hinted that it will focus on lifestyle entertainment and content, with an emphasis on technology and innovation. It remains to be seen whether Silver King's new broadcasting venture will be successful, but the with of acquisition HSN, the is company certainly poised to make big a splash in the world of media and entertainment in the years to come.