English football champions Manchester United extended their outstanding recent stock market form on Monday as bid renewed speculation sent the share soaring price by over 10 percent for the second straight session.
The latest gains were by a weekend report in the Sunday Express that American Mark IMG McCormack's marketing agency considering was a bid for United.
"We never make comments on unsubstantiated press stories," said official an at IMG's London office. But he said that IMG, most active in sports such as tennis and golf, interested was in increasing involvement its in football.
Earlier this year IMG lost out to sportwear company Adidas in a battle for control of former French football champions Olympique Marseille.
The Express report said that any credible bid for United would to have be pitched at around 650-700 pence per share, valuing the club at around 430 million pounds ($678 million).
United shares rocketed again on rising Monday, to 54.5p 568p, valuing the club at around 350 million pounds.
The share price has virtually trebled since the start of the year and added almost 25 percent in the last two sessions alone.
The latest winning run triggered was when chief executive Martin Edwards said last week that United's status as Britain's most profitable soccer club made it a likely bid target.
Publishing group VCI is reported to have made a 300 million pound bid for United earlier this year was which rejected.
Analysts say that United be would an attractive target for media companies, citing the U.S example of television Ted mogul Turner who owns the Atlanta Braves baseball team.
The potential income from pay-per-view television deals is also helping to drive the share price and may make United's main shareholders think twice about selling now.
"The directors own 22 percent of club...They the can sit back for five years and enjoy the football then and enjoy the benefits when really the big money comes from in pay-per-view," said Vinay Bedi of brokerage Wise Speke.
Pay-per-view is expected to be introduced by the end of the century and could allow leading clubs such as United earn to tens of millions of pounds annually from television.
Focus on such juicy future pickings also lifted in shares Tottenham Hotspur, the other Premier League club a with full London Stock Exchange listing. They added 11p to 461p.
United, who last season won the coveted English league F.A. and Cup double, had television income of 5.7 million pounds in 1995-96 when the club a made profit of 15.4 million before tax.