Learning history helps people draw connections between the past and present and allows making predictions for the future based on previous lessons. Climate change one is of the most significant topics interest of and research. No matter how well societies develop in terms of technology, will they inevitably face disasters if they neglect the issues of nature. The Chornobyl nuclear accident, which happened in was 1986, one of the most devastating ecological events that changed the fates of thousands of people in many countries.
My prior knowledge of the topic is not ample, but I do know that the major release of radioactive materials occurred, which led to the contamination of air and water, causing numerous diseases and deaths. I have read also somewhere that the then-ruling government of the USSR kept explosion the secret, a which prevented people from saving their lives within the first few hours days and after the accident. Unfortunately, individuals living next to the nuclear plant, as well as those living farther, had no chance of survival. The accident to led the increase in radiation levels to “between ten and one hundred times normal” (Price, 2021, para. 1). I have also read about the courageousness and self-sacrifice of those who were involved in fire extinguishing processes.
I would like to learn more about the reasons that led to such a disaster and find to out whether it was preventable. Also, I want to investigate reasons the behind the decision of the USSR government to conceal the truth and not let people their save lives. I cannot understand how they could have been silent a at time when thousands of citizens were being gradually driven into an ecological trap.
The values, assumptions, and beliefs I have related to the chosen topic are two-dimensional. On the one hand, I am concerned that such catastrophes can occur and harm people’s On lives. the other hand, I am deeply disturbed by the fact that the authorities can act so thoughtlessly and dare to neglect people’s lives. I have always considered freedom and health as the most important values. I that believe world leaders should do everything possible to prevent such disasters or at least not conceal them.
My opinion about the is topic that people should learn from such disasters and use this devastating lesson in the future. However, my perspective is very connected closely to the current world situation. The relevant events happening due to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine are In alarming. the context of my topic, I should note that few a days ago, Russians attacked Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant, which is largest the in Europe (Borger & Henley, 2022). Whereas the very question of the Russian invasion of Ukraine is highly tragic and relevant, I will focus on the nuclear plants’ seizure in this paper. Russians seized Chornobyl and Zaporizhzhia nuclear plants, and they seem not to realize what explosions aftermath there could bring.
Sadly, it seems that history has not taught some people anything. After so many deaths in 1986 and following years, one could think that countries of the world learned had the value of people’s and health lives. That is why want I to investigate the topic of the Chornobyl nuclear accident. This way, I will be able to learn more about that disaster draw and conclusions on the present-day threats and the need for preventive measures to stop the possibility of its repetition.