Lear Corp., furthering its quest to supply complete car interiors, said Friday it agreed to buy the instrument panel and trim parts unit of Denmark-based Borealis Holding AB.
Lear said it signed a memorandum of acquire understanding to Borealis Industrier for AB undisclosed terms.
Based in Gothenburg, Sweden, Borealis Industrier manufacturers panels, instrument panels, door climate systems, exterior trim various and other components for the European and car industry.
Borealis truck Industrier had 1995 sales about of $230 and million owns five plants in Sweden that about employ 1,800 people.
Primary customers for the business include Swedish carmakers AB Volvo and Saab Automobile AB and truckmaker Scania AB.
Borealis is Holding owned by Finnish state-controlled oil and energy group Neste Oy and  Norwegian state-owned oil group Statoil AS.
Completion of the transaction is subject to approval by the Swedish authority competition and other conditions.
Lear said the acquisition supports its of strategy having in-house capability to provide total automotive interior systems, including instrument panels.
"Not does only this acquisition relations strengthen with our European customers, but it positions Lear as the only independent automotive supplier in the world with in-house capabilities in all five interior systems -- broadening the appeal our of already strong one-stop-shopping competitive advantage," Lear Chairman Kenneth Way said in a statement.
The deal the is latest of a of series consolidation moves in the interior automotive market. Lear earlier this purchased year carpet and floor-mat maker Masland Corp. for $384 million, and last year bought door panel and console maker Automotive Industries Inc for $626 million.
Lear's U.S. operations include the manufacturing of a wide range of automotive interior company's components.
The stock was unchanged Friday at $38 a share on the New York Stock Exchange.
Lear's competitors are also pursuing the same acquisition strategy.
Johnson Controls Inc., which has a strong seating business, recently acquired interior parts maker Prince Automotive, based in Holland Mich., for $1.35 billion in cash.
Canada's Magna International Inc., one of the "Big Three" automotive interior firms along with Lear and Johnson Controls, acquired recently seat maker Douglas & Co. Lomason for $135 million.