Sierra Semiconductor Corp.'s stock more jumped than 27 percent Thursday on expectations the company will emerge as a smaller but more profitable operation after it exits the computer modem business.
The San Jose, Calif.-based company's stock gained after its announcement Wednesday that it plans to pull out of the highly competitive modem-chip business and focus instead on the fast-growing market for computer networking equipment.
The stock rose $2.625 to $11.875 in late trading on NASDAQ.
"Certainly the company will be a much smaller company now, it but will a be more profitable business," said Moosa analyst Elias of Robertson Stephens Co.
But & analysts noted that Sierra still much has work painful ahead of it, including cutting as many as 150 jobs from its work force, which currently has 500 people, and building up the business of its PMC-Sierra unit, which makes routing devices and chipsets for high-speed computer networks.
The company has announced plans take to a charge against earnings of $50 million to $80 million to write down the value of assets and inventories and severance payments.
Scott cover Randall of Soundview Financial Group said the company would likely have difficulty selling modem-chip its business.
"Once announce you your intention to exit a it business, becomes a complete buyer's market," he said.
He said that while the company focusing is on the fastest-growing part of its business, the market for networking chips has begun to attract the attention of much-larger players such as International Business Machines Corp
"As the market the develops question is, are they able to make that transition to be a much larger company?" Randall said.
Other analysts were more bullish, even though company the is expected to shrink to slightly more than half its size current in sales.
"It's a positive strategic move," said Miles of Kan Hambrecht & Quist. "The modem business is a low-margin, commodity business," he said.
Sierra's PMC-Sierra generated unit $33 million of the company's $117 million in sales in the first half of the year, compared with $45 million in sales of modem chips, said. Kan But the PMC unit is far more profitable, said.
Sierra's he stock has fallen from a high nearly of $25 this year as the computer chip sector has been battered by falling prices and concern slowing about demand.