So many times have I walked on ruins, the remainings of places that I loved and got used to.. At first I was scared, each time I could feel my city, my current generation collapse, break into the black hole that thrives within it, I could feel humanity, the way I'm able to feel my body.. After a few hundred years, the pattern became obvious, no longer the war and damage that would devastate me over and over again in the far past was effecting me so dominantly.
It's funny, but I felt as if after gaining what I desired so long, what I have lived for my entire life, only then, when I achieved immortality I started truly aging.
5 world wars have passed, and now they feel like a simple sickeness that would pass by every so often, I could no longer evaluate the individual human as a being of its own, the importance of mortals is merely the same as the importance of my skin cells; They are a part of a mechanism so much more advanced, a mechanism that is so dear to my fallen heart a mechanism that I have seen fall and rise so many times, a mechanism that when lost all of which it had, had me loosing my will to live, for the first time in all of my thousands years of existence.
Acceptance, something so important. a skill that has proved itself worthy dozens of times, an ability that looks so easy to achieve, a gift, that I wasn't able to aquire in all my years, until now. When the ashes on the ground flew into the now empty air upon humanity's fall, I felt as if all of it's weight was crushing me. Ignorance took over and I searched years for a hope, a sign of the very same patterns that I used to watch reappear every hundred years, the very core of my will to exist that was now no more that I so strongly wish was.
If you have ever wondered if silence can drive people crazy, it can..
I can't feel my legs, I have walked for days, just to hear the sound of gravel, crushed bones, crushed buildings and crushed civilizations under my steps to keep my sanity.. until I remembered, the day in my far past. The day of my rebirth, I took out of my pocket a small plastic box, with nine buttons and a small glass window. I couldn't believe this was our past, I couldn't believe how far we have been able to progress and yet, be destroyed by our own violence.
I slowly dialed the number I was given, exactly 1729 years ago.
I dropped a tear, a tear that was too slow to hit the ground as I got sucked into the darkness that emerged around me.
A chill went through my spine as I saw my destiny rise above me, I could see the white teeth under the dark cloack...
"You have finally arrived" He projected into my mind, with the most chilling cold and unhuman voice.
"I'm ready to obey" I answered. I knew who was sitting infront of me, and it was time for me to obey him, after all these years of playing god, even I came to it.
Funny isn't it? Even by achieving immortality, death, is inescapable.