For years we had been warned.
Since the 40's a sparse few had seen the pattern and tried to warn us.
Nutjobs we called them, conspiracy theorists.
It was supposed to be a day of celebration, the republicans and democrats had been swept away in the election by the newly formed 'unionists'.
It was at the Swearing-In Ceremony that they chose to strike.
Close to a million were gathered to witness the ceremony, when our newly elected president 'Dave Johnson' ripped his facial mask of and revealed his true, reptilian face.
"Sstupid little monkeyss. We have played you from the sshadowss for decadess. Now, it iss time for uss to take our rightfull place ass your overlordss!"
Scream of joy quickly turned to screams of terror as reptilians revealed themselfs everywhere you looked.
Every guard and secret service member present had thrown off their masks and were holding their guns towards the crowd.
"Do NOT ressisst uss! We have ruled you pathetic ssociety for yearss! we have replaced every leader! We have-.." the sentence was cut short by an ear deafening boom.
"Anthony, what iss that?! what iss going on?!!"
Dave could only hiss at fellow reptilians as a large alien ship was currently hovering far above them and was sending waves of what appeared to be odd looking silver chariots towards the gathered crowd.
The reptiles, not knowing what to, simply watched along with the crowd as a giant holoscreen appread in the sky.
The creature that appeared tall, sleek and had grey, almost silverish skin.
'Organics of Joo'el. We must utilies your planet to halt the Grox advance. This process involves destroying your planet, thus killing you, sorry.'
"You have got to be sshitting me!, I've only been their ruler for 5 minutess and thiss sshit happenss!!"
'Defecation is irrelevant, local warlord.'
"That'ss not what it meanss!!"
Daves scales had gone from green to red during the announcement and it was only getting worse as he continued to yell at the image in the sky.
"We sstayed hidden for yearss for thiss to happen! We won't let you take thiss planet when we are on the brink of victory! You silver spoon!!"
'Consent is irrelevant, local warlord. Gobal distribution achived, commencing planetary modifications, please remain calm.'
The silver chariots, seemingly ignoring Earths inhabitants, began to spread out and cut into the ground with lightbeams.
Seconds later, an earthquake hit, and something surfaced with it.
Most chariots managed to dodge in time, but those that didn't were smashed by giant constructs emerging from the earth.
The golems were covered in lines emitting the same yellow light that came from their eyes.
At their full height, they were at least 30 storys tall.
Every chariot retreated to a safer distance.
"The fuck iss thiss?!!"
'Reproduction is irrelevant, local warlord.'
"SSHUT UP SSILVER TURD!!!"
A bellowing voice shook the ground. Forcing those on the ground to cover their ears.
{We have lain dormant for aeons. We have waited, we have awoken.}
'We must utilise this planet to-'
"WE KNOW!!!"
{We have waited for-}
"I DON'T CARE!!!"
Dave had actually managed to outshout the booming voice from the ground. More than that, anyone near him could see steam rising from his glowing red scales.
"We have worked for thiss moument for generationss! I will not let it be ruined by ssilverware, or dirtpiles, or anything elsse!!"
Just as Dave had finished, a rift in space above him opened, allowing a small spaceship to pass through before closing.
The spaceship, no bigger than a small car, was hovering 20 feet above Daves scalely head.
{Oh oh}
'Oh no, an Arbiter has arrived.'
"The fuck iss an Arbiter?!"
'Reproduction is still irrelevant.'
"SSHUT UP!!!"