I stretched my legs for a moment as I pulled myself out of my beat-up old Toyota, and sighed deeply. The twelve-hour road trip from Connecticut to Kentucky had been, as usual, gruelingly uneventful, but I was glad that I had made the journey. The annual family events that my Aunt Stephanie threw were always legendary, and this year would be no exception. Family members were flying in from as far away as Italy to attend the party. As a broke college student without the funds to travel by plane, I had wrongly assumed that a boring, solitary road trip might help me "find myself" or something, but as usual, indie films had lied to me.
It didn't matter though; I was very excited for the day's upcoming events. There was always a "theme" for Aunt Stephanie's bashes, and this year's theme was pirates! I took a few long strides over to the back of my car, and enthusiastically popped my trunk open. My Jack Sparrow Halloween costume from 2003 was still in pristine condition, minus several small whiskey stains on the frayed, off-white collar. My plan was to surprise all of my aunts, uncles, and cousins with my detailed, meticulous shabby getup, and carefully honed drunken pirate dialect. My secret goals were to a) win the inevitable costume contest over my cousins, and b) insist that my prize be a beautiful bottle of bourbon.
I grabbed my carefully folded pirate clothes, slammed the trunk shut, and scrambled into the backseat of my Toyota to change into my gear. My car was parked in one of the abandoned lots that sprinkled my aunt's rather isolated countryside neighborhood, a few blocks from her house. I took the time to fluff my ruffled cuffs, and adjust my multiple scarf-belts. After applying thick kohl eyeliner (thanking the gods for that theater arts class elective in high school) I was ready to go.
I hopped in the front seat and drove the rest of the way to my aunt's house. Two blocks away, I could already hear the Top 40 music blaring from the backyard of her huge Kentucky dwelling. I even thought I could hear the joyous cries of the partygoers as I pulled into her half-mile-long driveway. My car approached the makeshift parking lot of my relatives' cars, which were strewn rather haphazardly across Aunt Stephanie's giant front lawn. I opened the window and honked, but received no reply--evidently everyone was in the backyard, enjoying the event. A summer breeze wafted towards me through my window, and my heart pumped with excitement. I gave myself a final once-over in the rearview mirror, and realized at once that something was missing. *My eye patch*, I thought hurriedly, and reached over to pull open the glove compartment, where my fancy, black and gold-lined eye patch was being stored. I pulled it over my head and let it go over my left eye. It hit my closed eyelid with a satisfying *snap*. I was ready!
I jogged through the summer heat towards the front door. Before my hand even touched the doorknob, I realized that something was off. The door was unlocked, and as I turned the handle, I shouted out "Hello!" to an empty abode. But all I heard was the loud backyard music echoing through the vacant living room, combined with the cries of joy, ringing even louder in my ears. Everyone must be having a *really* good time, I thought, as I strode through Aunt Stephanie's modest home. I strode across the carpet, trying not to stumble over the furniture with my newly obscured vision.
"Arrr, matey!" I practiced to myself as I approached the sliding back door, and smiled wide as I slid open the door and raced into the backyard. "ARRRR MATEY!" I yelled to the backyard in general, with my eyes closed.
When I opened my right eye (the left eye covered by my pirate patch), I thought for a second that I must be having a flashback nightmare from all of the whiskey that I was prepared to consume at the party. My brain couldn't even begin to process what I was seeing. Slowly, my hand gripping the hilt of my fake sword for protection, the neurons fired in my head, and I started to attach names to the faces before me. *Billy Bob, Aunt Stephanie's oldest son. Face-down in the dirt being pegged by Uncle Ferb, his stepfather. The contorted look on Billy Bob's face as he moans in ecstasy. No, this can't be happening. * My terrified eye traveled up Uncle Ferb's arm, his wrist, his hand, which was half-deep into my cousin Julia's kittty. Julie had a tank top on, but nothing on her bottom, and she was seated in a chair as close as possible to her father and brother's position. Her head was thrown back, and she was gripping the chair as hard as I was gripping the hilt of my sword.
My feet stumbled backwards into the house, and before I knew it, I had tumbled over my aunt's leather couch. I was in the living room. I started to retch. I crawled on all fours into the kitchen. I leaned against the fridge, breathing hard, my stomach dropping painfully. Minutes passed. I started to think it was possible that no one heard me. But I couldn't walk back outside. I could barely breathe, and more than anything I longed to shut everything, including reason, out of my unyielding head. I turned and stared blankly, without seeing, the platters of food set out for all of the incoming family guests on the kitchen table and counter. Suddenly I spotted something that made me have a physical reaction. I reached towards the counter and grabbed the thick glass bottle of bourbon. My eyes, now filled with confused tears, focused on the label. It read *Costume Contest Winner, from Aunt Steph! * I could barely feel anything as my hands struggled to twist open the bottle. I lifted my head to drink, and the rest, I don't remember.
When I opened my eyes, a splitting headache was there to greet my senses. I was in darkness, nestled in a bed that I immediately recognized was in a bedroom in Aunt Stephanie's house. I scrambled to get my body up, out of the room, out of the house, away, but my legs were slow to cooperate. A light flicked on, and my forehead instantly started to throb.
"Hey", said a soft voice. It was my Aunt Stephanie. I squinted at her and barely managed to nod silently. She smiled, and then she laughed. "You--u lush! Don't worry, I won't tell your mother."
"I --" I stammered. I wasn't sure what to say. I decided to avoid most subjects I would have brought up. But my aunt was still chattering.
"You silly goose, I think you got the time wrong for the party. You were a couple of hours *early* for our party. The family was still setting up."
She paused, and gave me a nudge. She whispered, "You know, part of me thinks that you came by early on purpose just to get a head start on the booze. I know how you college kids are." She winked and continued. "Your uncle and cousins were hanging out in the yard, and we didn't hear you come in over the music. I was out there too, because Scottie had escaped again and I was looking at her in the woods, that rascal dog! But I found her after a minute. And when we all came inside a while later, we found you passed out on the kitchen floor, and we all had ourselves a good laugh!"
I sat there, still squinting in the too-bright light, utterly confused. For appearances' sake, I decided to smile a little and nod.
"Well", said my aunt, patting my leg affectionately, "Come down when you feel ready and join the party. Everyone's here! And when you're ready, we have your eye patch for when you want to be a pirate for us." Aunt Steph giggled like a little girl, and added, "You know, when I was younger, my mom used to tell me that I was magical, and if I hold my hand over my left eye, my right eye could see all the wrongs of mankind. How bizarre, now that I think about it. But I guess if you wear an eye patch all the time, I imagine you'd have a weird, permanent sin-vision." She shrugged, and stood up, walking towards the door.
My heart rate sped up at this impossible statement. I was too old to believe in superstitious stories like this, but if that were true, it was the only way that my aunt would be ignorant of the sexual interrelationships of her family. My heart burned for her, and my stomach felt sick, as I allowed myself for a few moments to believe that my eye patch had somehow revealed the truth of this family to me. How could Uncle Ferb and my cousins betray my poor Aunt Steph this way?
I stood up angrily and walked to the door, ready to have it out with my uncle and cousins in front of everyone. I heard voices and put my eye to the crack. It was my left eye this time, but I could still see the truth. My Aunt and Julie stood in the unlit hallway.
"Could you hand this back to your cousin when he gets up? He's in Billy Bob's room," said my aunt in a low voice.
"Sure", purred Julie. My aunt kissed her deeply and smacked her ass, and then made her way downstairs to the party.