It has been fifty years since the inaugural re-distribution. Tomorrow we will go through another one. We'll see how this great experiment has played out over the last half a century.
This process has been carefully studied, so I don't think there will be any surprises. There have been some unintended consequences, both immediately following the last re-distribution, and the days leading up to this one.
As expected, there was a combination of despair and joy as those that were once wealthy saw their wealth disappear from their grasp, and as those who had little suddenly had a lot.
There were riots when those who had grown accustomed to the lifestyle their wealth had provided were suddenly thrust into a life of poverty.
Some had worked all their lives for their wealth. Others had inherited it. It was those that had inherited their wealth that started to riots. Those that had build up their wealth through their hard work felt some hope that they might be able to do it again. Though there were definitely people in that group that were just to tired to try again.
And then there were those that suddenly received a great sum of money. They had gone to bed on the eve of the re-distribution poor, and had woken up wealthy beyond their wildest dreams. Obviously, there was much celebration in this crowd.
Finally there were those whose lives didn't change much. Their net worth had marginally changed in one direction or another. They may have been upset that they didn't get more, but that was tempered by the relief that they hadn't lost much.
As the dust settled on the first re-distribution a few things started to happen. The biggest of which was the utter lack of motivation on all sides.
Those that suddenly received a windfall hadn't had any training on how to manage their new found wealth. Many of them squandered it on frivolous purchase, enjoying the things that had been out of reach for them in the past. It's the common story of lottery winners. In a short amount of time they were back to where they were before.
The previously wealthy were able to re-capture some of their wealth from the luxury commerce that the newly minted wealthy were generating. But a lot of them also recognized that in fifty years they would be back to that precarious position. The memory of losing everything they had worked for made it difficult to risk spending their lives pursuing wealth when it could all be taken away arbitrarily.
So they stopped starting businesses, they stopped trying to invest their money wisely, and as a result there were less employment opportunities. The tax revenues went down in cities all over the world, so infrastructure started to suffer.
Everyone felt the tenuous situation they were in. Knowing that regardless of what they did, in fifty years all the wealth would shift again, and it was only chance that would determine who end up wealthy. And there isn't any reason to try and accumulate wealth or build anything of substance, when it will all be randomly assigned to someone else in the not so distant future.