Johnny's knife sang as its blade pierced the rapist's gut. Blood spurted onto Johnny's cerulean mohawk and pierced face as Katherine, her shirt in tatters, watched on.
Above the three mortals, invisible to all of them, were three beasts. The first was a blood-red hellhound. fire burned in its six eyes and it lashed its twin tails as rows of serrated teeth tore furiously into the rapist's guardian. Floating above the Rapist was a black Ram; its coiled horns twisting gruesomely into the hellhound's fiery skin. Its hooves kicked and writhed as the dog's flaming claw slashed open the demon's belly and eviscerated its entrails. Standing next to and consoling katherine was a lamb. Ascalon's Three eyes peered worriedly at her charge as she whispered prayers.
Johnny's knife stabbed its last as the hound tore the Ram's head off. With a heavy sigh, both possessed and demon fell back into the underworld. Johnny dropped the knife and stumbled back into the alley wall, his legs buckling beneath him as he trembled under the weight of his justice. Katherine crawled over, leaning against the wall next to her good samaritan.
When the two caught their breath they talked. Thanks, forgiveness, tears, names, life, even God was mentioned. Ascalon eyed the Hellhound suspiciously. It was licking its wounds above Johnny when three of its eyes drifted down to the lamb. All six widened in shock.
"Ascalon?"
Demon voices don't change. Their appearance does; It fluctuates with their power and sin, but an angel's voice never wavers. So it was that after 600 aeons Ascalon recognized her old friend.
"U...Uriel?"
"It's been a long time."
Ascalon's third eye slammed shut as her remaining two glowed with rage.
"I never thought I'd see you again." Uriel continued.
"Don't talk to me, Blasphemer! You betrayed HIM! You betrayed me!"
"Ascalon you know why I did it. I explained it to you but you were so deep in that tyrant's pocket you wouldn't listen."
"You dare to call HIM a tyrant? You, who worship The morning star?!"
"He's lied to you, Ascalon. Or at least he would, if he didn't rewrite the truth every time he needed to. Hell is nothing like that. I joined Lucifer for my own reasons. How conceited Jehovah is! To actually think that separation from him was a punishment! What do you think we were fighting for?
"DON'T YOU DARE TAKE HIS NAME IN VAIN!"
"Ascalon, calm down. I understand that you're-
"You understand?! How could you possibly?! You betrayed me. I saw Michael himself cut you down at the battle of Jupiter!"
"Ascalon that-"
"You're despicable. how could you be so selfish? I thought I knew you. I thought-"
"DO YOU THINK I ENJOYED IT?"
"...What?"
"I saw you too. Do you think I took pleasure in your anguish? Did you think I reveled in throwing aeons of joy away?"
"Of course! Only a demon-"
"I may be a demon, Ascalon, but I never stopped being Uriel. I don't know how you deal with it. How can you call it free will if he makes all the choices for you?"
"Freedom is the liberty to do what you were meant to."
"I envy you, Ascalon. I'm glad that you can live with a given meaning, but that's just not enough for me. It never was."
"How can't it be? HE's infinite! You could come back with me. Please, HE'll forgive you. HE'll solve your problems with a snap of the fingers. Things can be like they were..."
"Isn't the demon supposed to tempt you? I appreciate it. I love you, And I almost love him, but his existence is simply too constricting on mine."
"...I'm sorry."
"I'm sorry too."
The flames consuming the lamb and the hound died, as the two looked at their charges. Katherine and Johnny were calmer now. Sirens wailed in the distance as the two spoke of life.
"Mass every Sunday, volunteers, cares for others..." Uriel said, "She's a fine Christian woman."
"Yes." Ascalon responded. "I'm very proud of her."
"Johnny ain't that bad either. He's a rebel, and he can be a little shit sometimes, but he knows what he believes in."
"He killed a man at 17. He'll carry that for the rest of his life."
"I know. But don't underestimate the strength of sinners. They carry burdens the saints couldn't dream of."
"The best saints were the worst sinners, you know."
"Yeah, but then they got help from the man upstairs. Sinners like me and Johnny have to carry it alone."
"Why?"
"Because it's the only way we know how."
Police arrived. Katherine was given a blanket and hot cocoa, while Johnny was slammed into the hood of the cruiser and cuffed. Katherine threw the cup away and started beating on the officer.
"Oh no, KATHERINE! STOP!"
"You know Ascalon, maybe you should let her."
"But she's sinning!"
"For another person? Did you ever think that maybe Grace is a more meaningful sacrifice than a life?"
"Don't be ridiculous."
"Hey, I'm just saying. Maybe if Jesus had given his perfection instead of his life, he could understand these humans."
"HE understands them more than you or I ever could."
"But can he do it without cheating?"
Ascalon was silent.
"Hey Ascalon?"
"Yeah?"
"I know we disagree about Jehovah's methods, but I still consider you my friend."
"Hate the sin, love the sinner."
"In Hell we say, 'Keep your friends close, and your enemies closer,' but same thing really."
the lamb laid down with the lion as Katherine was pushed, smiling, into the police cruiser with Johnny. Uriel sat down next to his friend, both tails wagging. Ascalon's third eye opened.
"I love you, Uriel."
"I love you too, Ascalon."
"We should probably follow them. They'll need our guidance."
"I've got dibs on her left shoulder. You can sit on the right."
All three of Ascalon's eyes rolled, just like they had 600 aeons ago.