At first he was confident he was mad. What other conclusion could possibly be drawn from such absurd circumstance? His wife and daughter were taken from him, ran off the road and pinned beneath the twisted wreckage of their cramped two-door sedan by a careless drunkard who quickly fled and left the two for dead. He and his son were driving separately, happy after a family night out, unaware that a mother and wife, a sister and daughter, were about to be unfairly stolen from them. He didn't take the news well. He didn't heal like others in similar situations had, and his heart was pieced back together haphazardly as he went through his day to day mechanically rather than with any purpose. And his son suffered because of it. He was left agonizingly ignorant of his child's suffering until one day...
...A melody. A soft, sad, tinkling sound, similar to a music box as it winds down and slowly stills. The song tore him from his passive stupor, and his subdued demeanor turned to confusion, then panic, and finally anger. He searched for the source of the sound, tearing up cushions, pulling out drawers, overturning furniture, desperate to find the source of the sound to disprove his insanity. His son looked on, frightened at his broken father's sudden outburst, the soft music growing in intensity, the gentle tinkling sound transitioning into an anxious melody with bellowing bass and frantic percussion. The song was deafening, and he ran from his home, leaving his son and the song.
He fled to the streets, confident the air would help him get his head straight. He hadn't grieved properly, he'd held everything in and now it was finally surfacing, that had to be it! But as he walked, he moved past strangers, and with every one of them, a new song surfaced and assaulted his fragile psyche. A woman with a sallow sunken expression rang out with an erratic rhythm, a lazy guitar with a resonating bluesy twang. A man confidently posturing with long strides and a bright expression curiously crying out with a sorrowful violin, the melody drawn out and oozing emotion betraying the man's expression. A couple walking hand in hand, smiling and radiating their happiness outward, their individual sounds merging into a beautiful song that accentuated each others, the melody expressing the joy that their smiles only hinted at.
He walked. He listened. He was still panicked, but at the same time he was fascinated with this new gift. He was still confident he was mad, but the idea was less alarming now. Every song, regardless of the emotion they conveyed, they were all so beautiful. He returned home after a while, his son's melody again weak and sorrowful, seeing his father causing sharp sounds of panic to emerge as he stared with wide eyes, cautious of another outburst. He embraced his son, something he hadn't done for a long while, and the song shifted again, the pained melody beginning to warm but still hesitant, the bass and percussion subsiding and transitioning into a clumsy guitar, as if uncertain how to make the melody work, an unfamiliar song with an unfamiliar instrument for a now unfamiliar emotion.
Time passed, and his gift grew. He learned to interpret others emotions through the songs their hearts produced, his son's most of all. He worked hard to ensure his son was smiling and happy, the rhythm produced by him every day jovial and bright. He learned who to embrace and who to avoid, learned who was lying from erratic climbs and dips in an otherwise consistent melody. He learned what to say and to who, monitoring the shift in their cadence, and using this knowledge to steer conversations to happy conclusions. He made it his duty to make others happy, because for some reason, he still hadn't found out how to do that for himself.
He met Tiffany a year after he'd discovered his gift. He was confident in his interpretation of everyone he met by now, developing a sort of musical emotion theory that helped him and others. He was leaving work, his son staying the night at a friends and giving him the rare opportunity to be lazy at meal time. He stepped into the diner and took a seat in the back where the music resonating from the other patron's was quieter, intent to eat and read and keep to himself for a change...
It was jarring. A deafening sound filled his head, a loud static that caused him to glance around for a TV or radio, thinking it impossible for any individual to produce this noise. It wasn't like the melodies he had grown accustomed to. He had encountered all sorts of people over the course of this last year, people who were openly grieving, others that were hiding their hurt, and even more on the opposite end of the spectrum living happy and exciting lives. The songs they made were each unique and drastically different, but they were all beautiful. This however...This was wrong.
He glanced up, discarding his book onto the table as he peered outward past his furrowed brow. His head throbbed painfully, the static sound filling his senses, drowning out the soft melodies from the others seated on the opposite end of the diner, ignorant of his dilemma. He glanced person to person, studying their expressions for something that might explain this noise that was ailing him. He considering standing and running out, escaping from the agonizing sound, but curiosity kept him rooted in his seat...And then he saw her.
A woman stared back at him, blocking the door to the kitchen with a pot of coffee clutched in her hand, trembling as she stared at him with a confused expression that mirrored his own. Her eyes were distressed as she forced herself to move forward towards him, reaching his table and moving to fill his cup before stopping, losing her confidence that she could pour with her trembling hands. She set the coffee pot down, staring at the lacquered finish of the table top, drawing in shallow breaths as she struggled to convince herself...
To look him in the eyes. And he looked back. They stared, and curiously, the static subsided. The soft sounds from the other customers returned, but compared to the racket the static produced previously the silence was deafening. They stared at each other, their eyes wide and their expressions shocked. He didn't even consider how strange he must look to her or to anyone else looking on, he was so taken back by the sudden stillness that all he could do was look on at her in stunned reverence. Caught up in that moment, he managed to take the time to admire her; her pristine complexion, her plush lips, her frightened but fascinating eyes.
Without a word being spoken, she sank into the seat opposite of him, and they stared for a long while. When he finally spoke, it was an incomplete question, but her response was absolute.
"Did you...Did you hear..?" He struggled to find his words, but her eyes widened again, the shock clearly visible on her face. She was like him. She could hear and interpret the melodies of the heart, could confidently steer a conversation and leave others happy and better than they were before...But her own heart, there was no song to convey the emotions she felt and the life she lived. And from the expression she gave him, he must have given off a similar sound. He was broken. She was broken. But somehow, meeting each other here, looking into each others eyes, that noise subsided.
That was the night they met. They didn't speak much, the shock making them incapable of exchanging much more than a few words. But they had introduced themselves to each other, and while not vocally explained they left knowing they had met someone like themselves. He returned the next day. And the next. And many days after that until eventually he mustered up the courage to ask her out to coffee when she wasn't working and they could actually have a conversation of substance.
She had lost her husband. Lost her reason for living, just like him. She discovered she was able to hear the songs of others when her sister became frustrated with her living as a shut in. It developed from there, and like himself she had learned to utilize this talent to help others, helping them make more of their lives since she found her own so empty. They talked about their past. Talked about their families and how they had fallen apart. And talking to someone in a similar situation helped them begin to heal.
And then, he heard her song. Cautious notes on a piano. It was the most beautiful sound he had ever heard.