Note: I just watched Episode 1 of Season 4 and haven't read any of the books, so I don't know what happens after that. Please no spoilers! This is also my first WP post, but constructive feedback is welcome. Also, just for fun I tried to do an unofficial screenplay format, hence the weird capitalization.
---
Fade in to a mound of swords, tips facing us. We hear footsteps on stone, slowly getting closer. Meanwhile, the camera zooms out until we recognize this as The Iron Throne. Camera sweeps around the throne, until we are in front of middle-aged DAENARYS sitting on the throne, face blank.
After several seconds, in addition to the footsteps we now also hear the jangle of a maester's chain. Both sounds then stop, and we hear an aged but familiar voice, "Your Grace..."
The camera turns to face SAM, in full maester garb. We see him approaching the camera for a few seconds, and then switches to a side view as he stops at the base of the stairs. DAENARYS nods and SAM climbs the first set of stairs towards the throne and stops.
Looking from behind SAM we see DAENARYS in the throne which towers above her head. To her right stands SIR JORAH, after all these years, he's still protectively looking over her. The Hand of the King's medallion hangs from his armor.
SAM: I've just received word from The Wall. It's still holding, but they don't think it'll hold much longer. Attacks are growing in frequency and the summer heat slowly melts the ice.
DAENARYS: What do you advise, Grand Meister? Can we do anything?
SAM: Not yet, but I've heard rumors of an ancient text which tells of a weapon greater than any the world has ever known. I was reluctant to seek it out because it involves...
A look of extreme discomfort crosses his face, almost wincing as he speaks the remaining words.
SAM:...blood magic.
DAENARYS: As protector of the realm, I must do everything in my power to defend my kingdom against the army of White Walkers. You must seek the RED WOMAN at once, perhaps she knows of this text.
JORAH, disapprovingly: Khaleesi...
DAENARYS: I hope to not need it. But if the wall may be breached, we must be prepared. In the meantime, my smiths work tirelessly to make swords and attows of Dragonstone, and convoys arrive weekly at Castle Black with these weapons and reinforcements. And Jorah, you must stop calling me that. I am...
She stands, the room quiets and the theme song plays in the background, growing louder until the end of her sentence.
DAENARYS, thundering: Daenarys Stormborn of House Targaryn, Queen of The Seven Kingdoms, Grandmother of Dragons and Protector of the Realm.
Still facing her, we hear
JORAH and SAM (in unison): Yes, my queen.
Fade into the next scene.
----
We see a green, lush, almost idyllic island at dusk. The sea is an unusually bright blue, which would be concerning if we didn't remember it as its namesake, The Sapphire Isle. This is Tarth.
The camera pans upwards until we see a small group of children playing with wooden swords on a grassy field a ways from the beach. A woman stands in front of them, a sword fighting teacher. The camera continues upwards. We see a small castle, with a balcony over the field. Two figures sit on the balcony, indistinguishable. The camera glimpses a reflection off a golden hand.
Cut to a closeup of JAMIE and BRIENNE watching the children below. They are both old, in their fifties. We can still make out JAMIE's unadulterated good looks, and BRIENNE still...not so much. But she still looks as if she could kill you on a moment's notice. They occasionally look towards each other and smile as one of the children playfully falls and over-exuberantly feigns injury.
We hear in the distance, and from JAMIE and BRIENNE's perspective we see the field and the glowing water behind.
ARYA: Alright, that's it for today. And remember, what do we say to Death?
CHILDREN (in unison): NOT TODAY!
The camera shifts to a closeup of ARYA and follows her movements.
ARYA: Now inside, it's getting dark.
The children drop their swords and run to the castle. ARYA sighs and collects the swords. She walks to a nearby house and throws the swords into a shed. Through the window, we see Needle, framed and mounted on her office wall. How did she end up here, doing this? She would never know.
Fade to next scene.
---
I had to stop here today, but I have an idea for the storyline which I'd like to write if anyone's interested in me continuing.