I plopped into my seat next to Greg. He turned his head, glancing over at me, even though he wasn't surprised that I would sit there. Greg was a middle aged man with a balding head and a sort of jolly persona. Nothing about his life was jolly though.
He quickly looked back down at his phone, typing furiously and muttering under his breath.
"I've tried it all, Jim," he finally said, shaking his head back and forth like a madman. "Novelty accounts, memes, well-informed posts filled with information (we both looked at each other and chuckled), but I just don't know how to break out."
I nodded my head and motioned to the bartender. He was one of the lucky few that got karma rich. I sighed. I just didn't have it, and the most frustrating thing was I didn't know what to improve on. Getting karma was some sort of weird skill that will always remain unattainable.
I ordered a drink and then pulled out my phone, letting the back of my hand to rest against the sleek wood of the bar. I looked back over at Greg, still shaking his head and muttering. No family, no money, no faith. I didn't want to end up like that.
I knew what to do.
I pulled out my phone. I sent a text post on the subreddit that gave me the most karma of them all (me_irl, they'll upvote anything) saying thank you for supporting me but that's it. I'm going die.
And to my surprise, after a few minutes of self-loathing reflection, my karma count went up and up. Countless replies of "me too thanks" flooded my inbox. I couldn't believe it, I was rich!
"I did it!" I shouted. "Top trending post on me_irl with only 200 upvotes and in ten minutes!"
I was laughing. I was crying. The faces seated at the bar were a blur, I felt Greg's congratulating hand on my shoulder, "free drinks on the house! ", "me too thanks! ", my life flashed before my eyes, a life with an infinite amount future of possibilities.
------------
I slowly pressed submit. This was my last chance of success. Of Karma. Of a successful life. I close my eyes and hope that the people of Writing Prompts will upvote my story and save me.
E: minor text fixes.