*whoosh* That's the only way I can describe it. A sudden rush of air, with a sound like the beating of huge wings. Then, while I blinked at the sound, there were two men in my apartment. Each was sharply dressed in a suit and tie, one wearing grey and white, the other black and white. The one in grey was taller, well-built, like a football player or warrior. The other, in black, was slighter and more lithe, with the thin build of a distance runner or gymnast. Each had eyes that shifted from pools of liquid gold to molten silver, endlessly shifting back and forth. The one in grey had close cropped, yet stylish dark hair, and his companion had longer hair, straight, down to to his shoulders, and pure white. I gasped and backed away with a start, getting off my knees and pushing against the nearest wall.
"Wh- who are you?! How did you get here?" I stuttered, trying to get the words out. I tried to sound tough, but it came out with a mousy squeak.
"Well, brother mine, I guess he wasn't expecting us..." The shorter of the two spoke first. He voice sounded like smooth jazz, with a lilt in odd syllables and a hypnotic musical quality.
"Indeed, it appears not. Strange really, considering we're here because he asked." The taller man's voice was a crash of waves upon a rock. Powerful, commanding, the kind of voice you couldn't ignore, even if you wanted to. he spoke again before I could respond.
"We're here because our father sent us here to answer you for him. You asked him a question, right?" His gaze burned into me with an intensity that made it hard to breathe.
"You--you're father? I didn't ask anyone anything. Just, please, don't hurt me." Staring into those eyes, my false courage gave way and I settled for pleading.
"Yes, yes you did. You asked him what the meaning of life was. He's too busy to handle questions like that himself, but he sent us to answer for you." The tall man looked amused, with a slight smile on his too-handsome face.
"I...I didn't! I swear. The only time I ever asked that was when I was...praying..." Then it dawned me, smashing into my conscious like a wrecking ball. I prayed...Then these men showed up, in a rush of wings. They were talking about their Father. Wait, these were angels! God heard me! He answered my prayer.
"Ah, there it is. Now he understands you, brother mine. I suspect he now knows what we are, if not who." The shorter of the two seemed more serious than his brother, less flippant and frivolous.
"Ah, terribly sorry about that, mortal. I am Michael, and this is my brother Lucifer." Lucifer?! Like the Devil? I glanced fearfully at the smaller one, and then back to the liquid metal of the taller one, Michael, he said his name was.
"Haha!" He barked out a laugh. "Luci, that will never get old for me. They are all so afraid of you!" Lucifer looked more sullen now, bordering on upset. "Oh don't be so upset, brother. He couldn't possibly know." Lucifer seemed to calm a bit, looking less angry and more resigned. I tried to finally find my voice.
"Sorry, but isn't he the bad guy?" I was trying not to look at Lucifer, afraid he'd take my soul or something equally bad.
"You mortals, always so obsessed with him being the Fallen. That was your story, that you invented and believed. He has always been my brother, nothing more or less." Michael seemed to be losing his patience now, irate on behalf of his brother, it seemed.
"The task, brother mine. He didn't pray for a history lesson." Lucifer seemed to be the responsible one, keeping his brother on target.
"Ah, yes! The task! You asked our Father what the meaning of life was. He sent us to tell you! Would you like to know?" I desperately tried to nod yes, how could I say no? The fundamental human question! I was going to know the meaning of life!
"42." Michael's voice was completely deadpan, and I stared at him in shock for a moment. Like the book?! Seriously? "No no, I'm kidding. Sorry. Your Douglas was was so fascinating. He really is a wonderful storyteller for your universe."
I breathed a sigh of relief. That would have been an awful answer, one that I couldn't say I would accept, even if true. Wait, my universe? I kept my mouth shut and let him talk.
"No mortal, the answer is infinitely more complex than that, but also infinitely simpler. The answer is that your life is the first life of the entire universe. It's also the last life, and every life in between. This entire planet, and all the stars and galaxies around it, are a playground created for you. Endless entertainment, so that you may never tire of its wonders." His voice sounded so reverent, as if he was describing God Himself.
"Our Father created an infinite number of playgrounds, for his infinite children, you mortals, to play in. When you die, you are born again as someone else. This whole universe is just you, at different points in time and space, endless living the greatest adventure than anyone will ever have. The meaning of life, mortal, is to enjoy, until the end of time and all things, the paradise our Father built for you."
My breath caught, and I suddenly let out a massive exhalation, as my body finally caught up with the magnitude of what he was saying. All of this, was for me? Or did he just mean humanity as a whole.
"Is this universe just for me, or were you saying 'you', as in humanity?" It seemed wrong to question more after such a revelation, but I couldn't stop myself.
"It's all for you, Jacob Ralph Habegun. This whole universe was created for you to live and explore and enjoy. All of it. All things and people, are so that you may know his creation and never tire of it." Michael sounded a bit jealous now, as if I didn't deserve my universe. He was probably right though, I didn't deserve it...
"Michael..." Lucifer's tone was half warning, half sympathy, as if he understood Michael's jealousy, but cautioned him against it. "Come, brother mine. We have delivered Father's message. We're done here."
"Wait! Does that mean there is no Heaven? When I die, am I just reborn? If so, then what about religion? What about good and evil, heaven and hell?" I rushed the words, trying to get more answers before my guides left.
"You must figure that out for yourself. After all, you started the first religion, and heaven and hell were your ideas. No other universe has them, at least not like yours does. Find your own truth now, Jacob."
There was another rush of wind and when I blinked again, my apartment was empty. I had it though, everything humanity, by which I meant me, had always sought to attain. Everything that we ever searched for. The meaning of life.