A boy rests his head on his pillow and stares at the ceiling. The day had been uneventful, and he had no joy to experience. He closes his eyes in an attempt to sleep, but hears a thud in his closet. He walks to it. "Who interrupts my sleep?"
A deep voice answers, "If you were asleep, your ears would not be working."
The boy smiles, "Clever...Can you make me smile?"
A few moments pass. "Are you not afraid of me young boy?"
"No." The boy answers nonchalantly. He truly felt no fear, but he felt curious and excited.
More silence fills the air before the being in the closet answers. "Thank you, most that I have encountered flee before they even answer...No. I cannot make you smile young boy."
The boy scoffs, and returns to his bed. Attempting one more time to close his eyes. Then he hears a voice underneath him. The boy felt curious and excited once again. "Who dares interrupt my sleep!"
"I am sorry." A raspy voice of a man bellows. "I have lost my pillow, and I have not slept for 5 days. The longer I do not sleep the grumpier and clumsier I get."
The boy rolls his eyes and decides to try and rest again. It frustrates him that despite two beings hiding in his own room, the day was still uneventful. Thoughts race in his mind, and an idea forms in his mind.
"Sir, I might know where it is!" The boy exclaims.
"Oh thank you!" A reply sounds from below him.
He walks over to his closet. "Someone below my bed just told me that you are a bore to talk to."
"A bore? Why...tell them I am sorry for being a bore." The voice in the closet replies. The boy gets frustrated. The boring day must end here.
He stands and thinks, there must be a way to be entertained. "He told me that he'd rip you apart once you fell asleep because of how boring you are!"
"What!? Well I'll will kill him first in his sleep before he kills me!" The voice replies with anger. "Will you help me young boy!"
The boy lit up inside. "Yes. I will tell you when to strike. I will exclaim the words *Masaya*."
He went back on his bed and talked to the voice below him. "The person in the closet tells me he ripped your pillow into pieces! He wants you suffer!"
"He will pay for his treachery then! Young boy, will you help me bring justice to this fool!?" The voice replied with rage, shaking the bed.
The boy answered, "Yes! Once I say *Masaya*, it is your time to strike!"
The boy set a pillow for his head, excitement was tingling his body. He waited for a few moments, "*Masaya! *"
The two beings jumped out from their places and ripped each other to shreds. Nothing was left of each other.
The boredom was gone, the day had ended gleefully.
The boy smiled and slept soundly.