**NSFW** (in case anyone needs the tag with this thread...)
& nbsp;
Year one, and they're already trying to repeal the law. Too many innocent little housewives with rape fantasies in the voting public.
Thank God it only applies to persons over 18. What a horror *that* would have been.
There's a lot of sickos in this world.
Yeah, they're trying to repeal it, but for now the law is the law, and I have to participate. I've tried so long to hold it off - to fight it. But I follow the rules. I do what I must.
My friends and family are gathering in the living room. I try to be extra nice to them. Most people don't have friends anymore, after Fetish Day - one way or the other.
Kyle, my brother, is my closest friend. He's the only one who knows my fantasy, my little fetish. He has tears in his eyes. "Please," he says. "Please don't do this."
"It's the law, little brother," I tell him. And he nods and walks sadly over to the corner nearest the door. If he tries to run, I'll have to catch him. I don't want my baby brother to live out his life in prison or on the run from the law.
"Heya, Mike!" When Bill walks in, it feels like the room done shrunk to about half its size. I've always had a strange fascination with Bill. For his fetish day, he just watched everyone else, running around in a purple tutu.
"Don't knock it till you try it," they say. The motto for Fetish Day.
My friends are gathered now - only the men. For my fetish I asked the womenfolk not to come. They aren't what I want. What I need.
Now that the time is approaching, I'm nervous. My hands are trembling. I can feel the excitement building though. The anticipation.
I command them, as is my right under the law, to strip down to nothing but their watches and their socks. I like socks. They cover feet, and feet are ugly things.
The human body, though, is beautiful. They stand before me, bodies and souls bared. Mike looks intrigued, and Kyle is in tears. I try to ignore Kyle. I am so turned on right now.
Bill can't seem to take his eyes off the evidence of this.
He looks kind of pissed, really. Well, it can't be helped. The law is the law.
I lead my boys over to a group of chairs in the center of the room, and start handcuffing them to the rails. One by one. Slowly. This is my one chance, and I want it to last.
My breath comes in short, shallow gasps. It's almost too much to bear. At least my hands aren't trembling any more. They know what I want to do.
I turn out the lights. There's just enough seeping in through the curtains for me to see the men in front of me. Dark enough for their eyes to shine.
I check their bonds again, making sure everyone is secure, making sure no one can move. I check Kyle's more carefully than the others.
With everyone secure, I begin to remove my clothes, one piece at a time. I stand before them in all my flabby glory, letting them drink in the sight, and wonder.
And then I pick up the knife.