"Overpopulation"
The man in the blue suit clicked a small remote in his hand and the screen filled with images of starving children, their eyes like rough marbles pushed not quite far enough into their heads, fantastic, horizon-filling cities that smoked and glowed like a dying fire, and, of course, the typical image of the Tokyo metro with passengers being crammed through the car doors by impassive uniformed men.
"It's reality. A horrible one. The time has come to rectify it, and the hour for half measures is past. We're in a position to possibly," The man in the blue suit paused, dipping his chin in a show of humility, "save humanity from itself."
The boardroom was silent. Smoke from various cigarettes and cigars drifted over the massive tabletop. Rain pattered on the window panes.
"Mental projection, physical control." The man in the blue suit clicked his controller again, and now a video of a man walking appeared on the screen. Waves emanated from an unknown source and struck him. He stopped in his tracks.
"This is a rough draft of what every man, woman, and child on earth will see. We can tweak the language, of course." Click.
The screen faded to black and a few crisp lines of text in a modern font appeared.
'Your free trial of Life has ended. Payment, in full, of one life must be completed within five minutes.'
The man in the blue suit clicked again. The screen flicked to a scene where the same man was now standing on a city street. He blinked his eyes, staring at the people around him. An old man sat on a bench, waiting for a bus. The original man's face became distraught. He stared at the old man, perhaps trying to judge just how old he was. His face changed, and his fist clenched. Suddenly, a man walking on the street behind the old man on the bench turned and wrapped his hands around the old man's throat. A car accelerated, jumping the curb and crushing several people against the wall of a building. A crash of glass was heard and the body of a woman fell down into the street, her head cracking open on the pavement.
The man in the blue suit clicked the button again, stopping the video.
"I think you get the idea. Total chaos for a few years. Maybe even a decade. But then we can rebuild- start over with the knowledge we should have had the first time. And the best part is-" He leaned onto the table, looking at each of the attendees in turn. "You all are exempt from the whole thing."
There was a slight pause. A cough.
"All those in favor?"
A chorus of 'Aye'
"All those opposed?"
Silence.