He sat back in the chair, looking at the monitors behind me. Four of them were mounted a foot below ceiling height, all screens showed employees working. I glimpsed out the window to see the rows of cubicles, all with short walls so that the owner of this CPA firm could watch the employees constantly.
*What a controlling bastard. *
I was here for a contract job, working only for tax season. The owner said that would give me the place of honor right outside the office window that overlooked the cube farm. *Place of honor, my ass. *
"I've decided that the best way to verify that a potential employ will --" he paused and steepled his fingers in font of his chin, like a smug villain in a cartoon, "--fit in, is to give them a personality test. Do you have time to do that?"
I wanted to tell him where to shove it because there was no way I wanted to work for him, but instead I nodded eagerly. "I've done those before. Sure."
"This test is put out by a group that specializes in management." He named a certain religious group that I knew valued subservience. "They're the ones who score it and then send me back the results. Not a lot of people pass it."
*Just great. * I nodded and smiled like a bobble-head. God, this was getting old.
He handed me the test, told me it was timed, and watched me like a hawk while I filled in the little bubbles. I didn't answer honestly, as he'd insisted, but instead drew from my knowledge of what the religious group valued. Test complete, he smiled smugly and told me that he'd get it scored and let my recruiter know if he wanted to proceed.
I hadn't even gotten home before my recruiter called. "I don't believe it! I've sent him fifteen people and no one has passed the personality test! He wants to make you an offer."
I laughed. "I'm going to decline, Bob." (His name really is Bob.)
Bob was shocked. "But he wants to offer you a job."
I explained that I lied on the test. That I'd known he was looking for a blind follower and that wasn't me. I'd just passed the exam to see if I could.
Bob fell silent, mulling over my statement. "So, if I was going to tell someone how to pass the test, what should I tell them?"
"Tell them he wants blind obedience and they should taylor their answers to that. Tell them he's going to watch them constantly and probably counts the pens every night to make sure they don't steal any."
"Oh," Bob grunted. "Sound like the job, if they got it, would really suck."
*No kiddin. * "Find me something else Bob."
It's three years later and Bob told me recently that he still has never found anyone who wanted to work for the guy.