Summit Street is mostly empty in the fading twilight. This is the rough part of town, where the homeless guys huddle around a fire in an old metal garbage can and compare their goods after a long day of scouring the city for spare change and recyclables. A ragged man is clumsily weaving among the trashcans and streetlights toward the group of men holding their threadbare gloves out to the fire in an attempt to get warm. They ignore him; he's probably one of the drunks who frequently get lost on their way home from the seedy bar one street over.
When he finally reaches the group, they all make a point of avoiding his gaze, until he makes an inhuman sound: half gargle, half yelp. He tries again to speak, slowly forcing out the words "help, please, help." They stare at him as he produces a folded up picture from his pocket, obviously printed from a printer that needs a new magenta ink cartridge. With some obvious discomfort, and a few intermittent coughs, the man quietly says, "This man killed my son. Have you seen him?" They all study the picture silently. The printed face is clean-shaven and handsome; its owner is wearing a suit probably more expensive than what most people make in a year. He is smiling at the camera, but the smile doesn't extend to his eyes. Those are blue and icy, calculating. They all say "no, sorry" and turn away – all except one.
Glenn doesn't recognize the guy, but knows the sorrow of losing a son, and looks up to say something comforting. That's when he sees the man's eyes: a familiar icy blue, but no longer cold and calculating. Now they are sad and confused. This man has a scruffy beard, is caked with dirt, and has scabbed-over gashes on his face and hands. He's wearing old, worn hiking-gear, but he is definitely the man in the picture.
Glenn takes the picture, and unfolds the bottom part of the page. The news headline reads "Hiking Disaster: Local Businessman and Son Fall From Faulty Rappelling Rope, Son Dies." Glenn hands the picture back to man, who is now looking at him with hopeful desperation, and says "no, sorry," turning back to the fire.