"I'm so sorry, she didn't make it through the night." I never knew how powerful words could be. How ridiculously terrible. How they can completely destroy someone's life. 7 words determining how the years to come will be for someone. I wonder how they feel while they wait for us to come up to them. While they sit on those little benches stapled to the wall or crammed in those tiny rooms around a rumpled bed. Or even standing in a hallway endlessly pacing back and forth, like they're trying to carve their fear and worry into the tiled floor.
I was going to stay with her all night you know? But that's not how how it works. Someone else needs the bed. Maybe someone who still has a chance or maybe someone who's just going to be carted down like this poor girl. I stayed with her until they came to take her downstairs though. Everyone else had left. I guess I just didn't want to accept what happened. I mean, I became a doctor to help people. Here's the non-living proof that I had failed. Ha! Get it? Non-living! Gallows humor, I guess.
How did everyone find the strength to go on? I'm so drained and it's only 1 am. Still have another 7 hours on the clock. When they came to roll her body out, I looked at the black bag and wondered, "Why do we do that?" Cover them up so we can't see the person anymore. It's like they never existed. All that's left is a misshapen black bag with a serial number. The orderly had headphones in and tossed her inside the bag without any ceremony. Didn't she deserve better? A solemn moment? Not a twenty-something head banger treating her like cargo to be rolled around.
They called the family shortly after she was rolled out. They were on their way right after the call. A pre-funeral procession. I was left with the task of telling them what happened. She was my patient after all. My attending thought it was time I had one of these conversations. Hooray. No more safety net. Sink or swim...sink or swim. It kind of felt like that, like I was drowning. It was suddenly hard to breathe and I felt the panic rising in my chest. How was I so sweaty all of a sudden?
I didn't get long to stew in this medley of terror. One of the nurses at the station nearby let me know the family was downstairs, waiting in the hall on the first floor. So I took that eternal elevator ride from the third to the first floor. Hoping it would have a malfunction. Then I'd be spared the task of having to tell them this news. It was weighing me down like Atlas' great burden and crushing my spirit. But the doors opened and I stepped out, looking quite the "professional" in my crumpled scrubs and messed up hair.
This memory will be forever fixed in my mind. I turn to the right and see the family, the dad pacing and the mom clutching the two younger siblings tight to her chest. They look at me and I see something that breaks my heart. I see their eyes and I see in them the deluded hope that what they heard on the phone was a mistake, an error that the good doctor is here to correct. How can they not realize that I'm about to pass to them the most Herculean of burdens? They carefully study my face and when they see what's behind it, a part of them dies. Their hope blinding and then gone in a fleeting moment, like a dying star in the night sky. Their eyes water, the mom hugging her kids even tighter as though her grasp is a shield protecting them from the truth. The dad clenching his fists so tight, they start to turn as white as the bone within them. Their hope is gone and I open my mouth to say "I'm so sorry, she didn't make it through the night."