There is actually a moment – singular and separate from all others – that one can point to in the timeline of a life and say, "There. That. That is the space between living and, well, not quite so much of it."
However, nobody actually takes the time out of their own days to make this sort of announcement about anyone else, because they tend to collect terribly disparaging looks when engaging in that sort of behavior. With a furrowed brow and pinched lips, most listeners eagerly attempt to physically engrave into their faces the signs of their mental efforts to reject all that the one pointing out that slippery ‘ moment'is endeavoring to assert. No one wants to believe that the life can leave someone's eyes before they hit the ground.
It is, however, a pinch more kosher to point out that someone may have been dead living after they have actually hit the ground and been summarily buried.
As family members and loved ones dig through the rotting remains of a life in the house, apartment, shack, nook, cranny, or wherever the recently deceased had spent the final years and months of their life, the habits and traditions of their existence emerge through pictures, clothing, colognes and perfumes, books, letters, terrariums, wrappers, receipts, loose nails, and scuffed floorboards. In death, a spotlight is shot directly onto the structural foundations of a person's lifestyle, making it near impossible to ignore when obvious and terrible patterns emerge.
"It feels wrong to even be saying this, but I just don't see… there isn't… I mean, what was he doing for the past thirty years?"
"Did she ever get out of that chair? Did she ever move?"
"That last while he seemed fine, but, thinking back on it, I can't remember anything we spoke about. We had conversations, but we never talked about anything that – and I hate to put it this way, you know – mattered. We shot the breeze, yeah, but it was… it was scripted, not improv. There was the weather, the kids, the economy, but he was nowhere in the middle of it. He used to make me laugh my lungs out at every other word when we were kids, but at some point he stopped saying surprising things, charming things, personal things. He stopped, and I'm not sure where, but it was a long time before all of this. The cancer didn't do it. It was earlier. Much earlier. I swept it all under the rug, because I didn't know what else to do. He wasn't sick then. He was fine."
"I know it sounds callous, but I couldn't be sad at her wake. For the life of me, I couldn't figure out why at first, but then I realized I had already been mourning her death for years now. She wasn't there anymore. You saw it too, right? That spark she always brought to the table had been ashes for a while. The lights were on, somebody was home, but they wouldn't get up to answer the door no matter how many times I knocked. God, it hurt to see her all the time, but not be able to reach her. Goddamn. It was done before it was done, you know?"
It is okay to talk about those that died while still alive when actual, physical death is there to muffle the implication. It becomes acceptable to ruminate on how the dead were living at one point in the past with their nails in the soil, burying dreams, loves, aspirations, friends, children, and, that somewhere along the way, they lost the ability to lift their head up and gaze forward. Somewhere along the road, the focus on living gave way to a slow, loose descent towards an end.