"It's about that time sugar." the young waitress said to the man sitting across the marble counter from her.
Laying his fork down onto the white folded napkin he inquired, "Time for what, hopefully my check." he chuckled to himself.
"You havent heard of her? The lady from uptown who walks down here everday." she said twisting her hair, leaning on her right arm.
She was referring to the humble, pile of a lady who strolled their rural town everyday. Hunching over a wooden cane, she frequented the businesses on the main drag here. At the shops, always looking and touching everything, at the restaurants ordering her food. Never touches the served meal. Barb was what everyone knew her by.
"You mean that ol' bag that drifts down these streets, with white long hair?" pointing towards the window. "I heard that lady used to have quite a bit of money." he stated.
"Ya thats her...and that's her famous rumor." the waitress said twisting a red gloss smeared smile. "Oh look there she is now." she quickly said whispering to the man.
The handle on the front door turned and pushed out, and a short statured woman, hunched over, strode slowly through the door. Wearing a red knit hat that looked homemade, her white hair curled out into tiny half-circles around the brim.She wore an emotionless face.
Quietly at the counter the man begins, "I wonder what she is gonna order today Carla?"
"Oh, she always orders the same thing," stretching closer to his ear she whispers," A bowl of tomato soup."
"Tomato soup?" his eyes widen." 59 cents at the grocery store, and she comes *here* and pays 4 dollars for it?"
"That's right sugar." She said. "Lemme go get her order real quick."
She walks down the aisle to where the tired, return guest was sitting.
"What'll it be today barbie?" pulling out her notepad and paper, already writing *tomato soup* on it.
The old women cleared her throat in a dirty gust, and began to speak. "It's so hard to choose here! Everything looks good." Running her finger down the page on the menu.
"Well you can have it all, if you got the money to do it." she jokingly said. "Maybe if we hit the lottery huh Barbie?"
"Ya maybe so." barb mumbled. "Well after a long thought about it, I think I'll go with the.." pausing, "tomato soup!"
"That sounds excellent dear." Licking her finger, and walking towards the kitchen to ladel the soup out of the pot.
The man at the far end of the counter turned on his stool to face to lady a few seats away. "Hey there barb." he blurts, "What did ya decide on?"
Raising her head and tilting it to see him, she answered, "Well, I heard through the grapevine the cook here makes the best tomato soup!"
"You know," crossing his legs, "That's what everyone always says. 'Guess you picked the right thing."
The waitress returned with the steaming red soup, swaying in a white cup.
"Here ya go, hot off the presses." As the she pushed the soup across the counter towards barb.
"Thank you miss.." looking around distressed, "but uh.. I'm gonna have to pass this evening."
*She always does this* the waitress sullenly thought. *Why even go through the motion. *
The lady struggling to lift off the stool and stand, turned around and mumbled, "I'm off to the nieces, you know how kids are...never can wait around."
She limped towards the door, turned the knob and briskly left the restaurant.
"What was that all about?" the man speaking down the counter.
"Oh you know, that's just how she is. Always orders, never even touches it though." Placing the cup in the bin under the register.
Grabbing her the wet rag in the bucket on the lower shelf, she notices something out of the corner of her eye laying on the counter.
"Oh my i think she forgot something!" worriedly she said.
She bent over to see what it was and noticed a gold bracelet laying on the table. A diamond in the middle of every connecting piece.
As she picked it up, a tag on the bracelet flopped over into her hand.
It read, *To carla, My beautiful daughter. You always used to love the Tomato soup i made for you. Thanks for returning the favor. *