"But Sir..."
Bart put down his coffee and massaged the bridge of his nose. On his desk, the morning paper sat, as of yet unread. His vacation days were few and far between, and Bart liked to ease into his day whenever they occurred.
Home phone numbers were reserved strictly for emergencies.
"Miss Simmons..." he closed his eyes, picturing the look of agitation that his secretary usually made in these sorts of conversations. "Have I stressed to you exactly what I had planned for today?"
The woman on the other lined sighed patiently. "Yes...*Sir*...but-"
"I was planning to spend the day with my family," Bart scratched the beard on his chin, "My granddaughter Jesse just turned five years old. We were going to take her to the amusement park."
Another sigh of muffled agitation. "I'm terribly sorry, Mister Cubbins."
"Are you aware of just how rare it is for me to even *get* a full day off work?" the old man said, now in full rant mode. "I used to work for the most powerful man in Didd, and damn it all if I didn't appreciate the opportunity to do good work."
He could imagine his secretary's growing impatience on the other line, but the old man slowly rose out of his recliner, grabbing his cane and getting shakily to his feet, the house's cordless phone in hand.
"I could have stayed in that dead-end job for the rest of my days, but damned if I didn't decide to make something of myself! So I spent the next thirty years building this company from the ground up. It was a whole lot of hard work for very little reward, so I don't think it's so much to ask for a moment of peace and quiet every now and again."
He heard the sigh on the other line indicating the end of his secretary's patience, as many of his employees made when he went on such tirades, and he relented.
"So please, my dear, tell me," he said, sitting back down and idly glancing at the paper on his desk. "Tell me what urgent matter demands my attention today."
"W-Well..." Miss Simmons sounded uneasy. "You may want to be re-thinking your plans today, Mr. Cubbins..."
The old man Bartholomew rubbed his eyes as took a second glance at his newspaper, and nearly dropped the phone, before shaking his head, thinking he must have been seeing things.
"What was that now, Miss Simmons?" he asked in a shaking voice.
"Sir..." Miss Simmons said hesitantly. "Have you taken a look outside today?"
Mr. Cubbins blinked and rose once again from his chair.
It couldn't be...
He hobbled shakily to his window and drew back the curtains, and then he saw the green sludge that fell from the sky.
Then he began to laugh.
Thirty years, and Derwin was still making the same old mistakes.
"Sir?" Miss Simmons said on the other line, not hearing him fully as the phone dangled limply in the man's relaxed arm.
Bartholomew put the phone back to his ear. "Thank you, Miss Simmons, that will be all."
"B-But Sir!"
He hung up the phone and placed it back into the receiver on his desk, before making his way out of his study and towards the back patio where a man, a woman, and a little girl were staring out the door in awe.
"Look grandad!" the little girl said in excitement as she ran towards him and grabbed his hand, urging him forward and pointing at the globules of green that were now splayed across the lawn. "Have you ever seen anything like it?"
The old man let out a breath, giving his granddaughter's hand a loving squeeze.
"Once, my child..." he said, shaking his head. "Once..."