She cried, the way she had when she when I first saw her. Tears cascaded from her eyes, her cheeks were red and a small amount of snot dribbled down her upper lip.
*I love her. I love you. *
Those were the first thoughts that came to my mind when I saw her. When she emerged from the womb and I set my eyes upon her beautiful face for the first time. I had cried too.
*I love her. *
It was soft in my hand, unrightly so. Something so simple has no right to be so powerful or wrong.
Her fit continued. Her legs and arms kicked out as she lay on her back. Her cries became louder, more intense, a sound that once drove me mad. She was a crier; she wasn't like her brothers who slept through the night just after three weeks. Growth spurts, teething, hunger, all of it would send her into a spell.
But she had grown up tough. I'll never forget when I saw her fall on the bike for the first time. The logical part of me let go, it pushed her away from me as the two wheeled vehicle moved across the pavement. But the fatherly side of me screamed. It shouted and pounded at the confines of my mind as I let go of my little girl. She wobbled and fell. It was my fault. The fatherly part of me took over and I raced towards her.
She was holding her knee and grimacing. Her eyes had begun to water but she hadn't started crying. I went to pick her up and she stopped me.
"I wanna try again, Daddy."
Softball had been the same. Countless days we would come home from games and she'd have an icepack or bandage on some burn she got from sliding into a base. She wasn't the best, far from it actually, she was small and not as athletic as the other girls. But she had gumption. She had vigor. She was tough.
*I love her. I love you. *
And here she was, back as a babe before my eyes.
"*To enter paradise you must be cleansed." * God's words echoed in my mind. I stood on the precipice of eternity, hell in one hand, heaven in another. "*Cleanse yourself of your most wicked thought and you may enter, my Son." *
She lay on a bed before me, her fit was about to reach its climax. As an early father the thought has crossed my mind, if only for half a second I wanted to be rid of the crying. I wished to sleep. Half mad, half sleep deprived, I wanted my independence back. But it was only for half a moment. It was only for the briefest of seconds yet it now defines my eternity.
The logical part of me told me it was not real. Told me that this was simply a test, no different than what Abraham had gone through. It said to do it and be done with it. To join my parents and brothers. To see my wife again.
But the fatherly part of me was ashamed, it screamed wrestled with the very real thing in front of me. It tore at my conscious and pitied what I knew I had to do.
The decorative pillow was in my right hand, it was small yet held giant repercussions. I knelt next to my crying daughter and lifted the pillow to her face. I started to cry with her.
*I love you…*
A flash of light, yellow and red, then nothing. I held her in my arms for the last time. The clouds and sky shot up before me but I did not move, the universe was moving for me. The world cascaded towards me, then
everything went dark.
---- -
"Push!"
"I see the head now, you're almost there, Dear. Keep pushing!"
She cried out and gave what little she had left.
"There you go, almost there!" I gripped her hand and told her it was going well. I told her I was there, and that she was almost done. She wasn't listening though. Thinking back on it, I think I was more talking to myself than her.
Then the room was filled with something queer, a new sound added to the chaotic cacophony: a baby's cry.
"It's a girl!" the nurse exclaimed. She swaddled the baby in a blanket and extended her to me.
"Here," she said, "Congratulations, you're a father."
I eyed my baby girl. My beautiful Olivia. She cried, tears cascaded from her eyes, her cheeks were red and a small amount of snot dribbled down her upper lip. I smiled.
*I love you. *
----
** (*Like my writing? Check out more at nickblakeslee.com*) **