"Disengaging from primary module. Do you copy?"
"Copy, Solo 1. Confirm separation."
"Separation complete."
"Looks good. Ready when you are, Commander."
"Roger that. Engaging thrusters."
Gazing upon the comet, Commander Harrison felt consumed by his awareness of its gravitational pull as he had for many months in this mission. Everything had centered around this grand celestial meeting. Now finally up close, the comet looked more lovely than he had imagined. The pull was so much stronger now, defying his most basic fears. Those deadly gaseous streams whirled off the comet's surface, in a dance both beautiful and terrifying.
Harrison's approach was precise and controlled. Thrusters on full, his craft shuddered through clouds of fine carbon capable of eroding its metal skin. As he approached the thin atmosphere of the comet, he had to swerve to avoid a hail of icy projectiles the size of golf balls. The maneuver drew him toward the comet's sunlit side, where more gaseous jets bubbled through the comet's surface. Suddenly the sun blazed golden through his screens, blinding him for the instant before his eyes snapped shut. He eased back on the throttle and snapped the shielding visor of his helmet into place.
"Mission Control to Solo 1. Report!"
"Sorry Mission Control. Holding back a little."
"Problems?"
"Couldn't maintain a visual. Making course corrections now. Rendezvous to Comet Ellie is still on."
"Proceed Solo 1. Be careful, Toby."
"Copy that MC."
The renewed approach called for a more risky trajectory. Harrison focused all his thoughts on the dark side of the comet, imagining a cool, welcoming surface. He plunged the craft into an approaching dust plume, shielding him from the sun but leaving him blind to any hidden dangers. The recklessness of the course set in familiar feelings of panic as the craft shook and rolled but he fought the urge to pull away. Not this time, he promised himself as clouds of stormy grey billowed past the window. Hold on, he thought. Remember the gravity. Remember the pull.
And then he was through. The comet's rocky surface loomed large before him and it was glorious in its perfection. He slammed the attitudinal controls, setting the landing sequence a little aggressively in his haste to join the surface. Outside he could see a chunk of hailstone shoot up past his window, and emerge into the broad sunlight where it condensed into a single clear teardrop. He turned away, his attention back on the surface.
*
The teardrop coursed its way down her cheek. Ellie Harrison didn't dare look Toby in the eye for fear of breaking the moment. Her 8-year old son held her in an embrace that was surprisingly strong. Standing across the room, Toby's father looked as stunned as she felt. She could read the elation in David's face, and a reflection of her own longing for this very moment. Closing her eyes to the torrent of feelings that overwhelmed her, she managed to hold perfectly still. Her son was hugging her for the very first time. That was enough.