The night started like any other, I sat dealing cards at the tavern in Arkansas. The usual crowd came in. They'd all learned long ago not to gamble with me as I'd paid for my drinks off their losin' for as long as I can remember. I always won, be it by bluffin', cheatin', or just plain luck.
This night, a stranger walked in the door. He was dressed in black with a new pistol on his belt. Not stopping at the bar, he sat at my table. He laid down his money, so I matched, shuffled, and dealt. A poor hand for me, but he seemed little better. He asked for 3 new cards and so did I. He didn't look at me after that, just placed some coins on the table. All I had was ace high and he seemed too confident for less than a pair. He didn't seem the type to be scared off by a bluff, so luckily I kept an ace in my cuff. I matched his bet and switched the cards while he focused on the money. we laid down our hands. He had a pair of jacks, beaten by my aces. As I scooped up the money, he grabbed my cuff. He pulled out the card, and I took off running.
The midnight train was loping down the tracks behind the bar. I turned the corner and grabbed the ladder of a passenger car. Luckily the whole train was empty. As I closed the door behind me, I heard the rapport of his pistol, but I never felt the shot. I plopped down in the chair and stared out the window. The bullet had gone right through, but I wasn't gonna make it long.
Maybe an hour later, I couldn't tell, a young man boarded the train. He looked distraught, but silently sat across the isle and too stared out the window. Every now and then he'd take a long drink of whiskey. I was happy to just sit, but after a while, I had to say something.
"Son, Ive made a life out of readin' peoples' faces, knowin' what their cards are by the way they hold their eyes, and if you don't mind me sayin', I would say you're out of aces and for one taste of your whiskey, I will give you some advice."
He pulled out his bottle and handed it to me though there wasn't more than a sip left. I happily drank it down, glad to have a last taste of the smoky liquor. I asked for a cigarette and a light. I hoped they would still my shaking hands. I took a long drag and waited a moment.
"If you're gonna play the game, boy, you better learn to play it right. 'Cause every gambler knows that the secret to survival is knowing what to throw away and knowing what to keep, and every hands a winner just like every hands a loser, and the best that you can hope for is to die in you're sleep.
You gotta know when to hold 'em, know when to fold 'em, know when to walk away, know when to run. Dont ever count your money while you're sittin' at the table. There'll be time enough for countin' when the dealin' is done."
He seemed more comfortable, but lost in thought, so I turned back to the window and finished my cigarette. My hands had stopped shaking at least, but my feet were cold. I put the butt in the ash tray and dozed off.