"Deadlift a word."
"Deadlift, can you comment on the ongoing trials?"
"Deadlift, how was the break up with Mistress Blue?"
A large man pushed through the crowd to get into the bank. He hadn't wanted this for his life. His cloths shedding layers of wood chips and saw dust as he maneuvered into the bank. Everything had been so simple. Go out, bid a job, do the job, bid the next, then work at habitat for humanity on the weekends. This had been life for nearly 15 years. Then one day the powers came. People were flying, shooting lighting from their fingertips, all while Dave found the shingles lighter. And he was happy with that. He knew the day would come when he would learn the true extent of his strength. But he was in no rush to find out. He was just a charitable guy, not a hero. The next Monday, He had saved the life of an excavation crew when the ground beneath them gave way. Lifted the excavator straight up while the other members of the crew pulled out the injured. He spent the next week in his bed nursing a strained back. Super strength and adrenalin allowed him to lift it and he had never quite found that much strength again. But even if he couldn't lift a digger like that again, it had earned him is name: Deadlift.
"No comment"
Dave walked in to the bank, late, foreclosure notice in hand. There was nothing the bank was willing to do over the phone, so he ventured into public. Past the people cheering for Deadlift, past those that looked at him with disgust. They were probably family members of the victims of the recent cave in. He could only save 5 of the 20 workers. He was forced to stop twice along the way. Once for a kite in a tree, once for a robbery in progress. Clamping the barrel of the gun closed, the robber pulled the trigger blowing the gun in to shards of shrapnel. The crook told him to expect a call from his lawyer.
"I'm sorry David, there's nothing else we can do for you." The loan officer said.
"Please, I'm bidding a job tomorrow. I can get an advance and pay off my late dues"
"You're out of time son. I'm sorry."
Dave stood to leave.
"Oh, before you go, could you sign this picture. My grandson loves Deadlift."
"Really? After telling me that you're taking my home you want a fucking autograph?"
"There's no reason to be rude about it."
Dave grabbed the pen and the picture, snapping the delicate pen in the process. He flung the door open, crushing the handle. He walked out to the table with the pens on the chain as the paparazzi forced their way into the bank.
"Deadlift, What's the news on your charity appearances?"
"Deadlift, any comment on the recent YouTube video of you drunk in public?"
"No comment. Backup."
"Deadlift, Is there any truth to the accusation that your burst the water main on fourth, leaving the hospital without water?"
"No. Please back up."
A shorter bald man stepped up, setting off a flash in Dave's face.
"Hey Deadlift, that a foreclosure notice in your hand? With all these lawsuits I guess you're just as bad at keeping the lights on as you are at keeping people save"
"I said back up!"
David swung his left hand into the paparazzi, sending them flying into the wall.
"I'm…I'm sorry" Dave muttered
The bald paparazzo stumbled to his feet.
"haha, Deadlift assaults journalist. This is a great story and my shoulder is killing me. Thanks for the payout you lug" he said, snapping a picture.
In the span of the flash Dave was arm's length from the paparazzo. Dave grabbed him by the neck and slammed him into the wall.
"Do you know what it's like to be a hero? Do you know what you get for putting your life on the line?"
He tightened his grip.
"A camera at every window!"
His fist slammed into the paparazzo face
"Walking down the street every child has a kite or some fucking cat up a tree!"
His fist again.
"While I barely make enough for to pay my way!"
Again
"Because,"
Again and again, the punctuation to his rage
"YOU. FUCKING. VULTURES. CAN'T. FEND. FOR. YOURSELVES."
The wall was stained with where the paparazzo had been.
"We give and give and it's never enough for you. Most of us aren't rich, we can't afford to keep being pulled out of our jobs to save someone. And those of us with our identity outed can't afford being taken in for wrongful injury cases every time your leg got broken while we prevented the whole burning building from falling on you. You take so much from us…"
He looked at the stained wall, the scared bystanders, and then the vault. He walked over to the teller station, punching through the bullet proof glass. He pulled the young teller out, putting his thumb under his chin as if to flip a coin.
He turned to the other tellers. "But my friend and I think today is the day you pay one of us back. Now open the safe, quick and calm. We wouldn't want anyone to lose their head."
Thanks for reading. Note, I am not a writer. You can give me criticism if you would like, but i don't know if it will do me much good as i don't write that much. I hope you enjoyed.