I focused on the 'everything is legal' part. I hope you enjoy it.
---
"Alright. Is *everyone's* phone on silent this time?"
Jenny shuddered, remembering her first trip with the group, only yesterday, involving an escaped tiger and an angry elephant. Set off by a blaring ringtone.
"Okay, good." Jenny snapped her head back up, trying to seem like she had been listening. It was no use. Charlotte gave her a long look.
"Jenny, you're with me," the group's 'leader' continued. "Everyone, get into your pairs and lets go."
Automatically, the huddle of 8 girls split into four pairs. Jenny felt Charlotte yank at her arm.
"What was her name again?" Jenny asked quietly, pointing to the tall girl with red hair lounging absent-mindedly against the solid stone wall of the museum.
"She's Nikki...but it doesn't matter for now, we'll be just on our own for this mission. Chin up, Newbie, you'll learn everyone's names soon enough."
*Mission, * Jenny thought to herself. *More like Death Wish. * She berated herself for joining the rag-tag team. All because she wanted to fit in in her new school.
Jenny brushed the hair from her eyes and looked around- had the older girl...Charlotte...left her? Her eyes caught on the familiar figure standing tucked against a dimly lit staircase, motioning for her to follow.
They walked in silence, the distant buzz of fluorescent lights the only noise to be heard. Charlotte turned to face the new-recruit.
"How old are you? I never asked..."
"Um, 14," Jenny said, tugging awkwardly at the sleeves of her hoodie. The rest of the gang seemed older- would Charlotte laugh at her for being so young?
Jenny's mentor only nodded wisely. "I was that age when I joined. I'm only 16 now. And I've been here the longest." Jenny felt a little weight lifted off her shoulders.
"Really?"
"Yeah. And Miranda was only 15."
Jenny shuddered. *Was*. All she knew about 'Miranda' was that her position was suddenly empty- and Jenny had filled it. There was no doubt that Miranda had died during one of the gang's so-called missions.
Charlotte thrust an arm out in a 'stop' signal, interrupting Jenny from her thoughts. She had just enough time to mutter 'what the...' before the older girl clamped her hand over Jenny's mouth.
"Warden..." Charlotte hissed. The pair watched in concentrated silence as a fat man in uniform wandered past, swinging torch from side-to-side lazily.
Jenny let a second pass before she allowed herself to breathe. They were in the Lockhart Museum, home to the world's most famous pieces of art...and the exquisite ancient chinese urn that the girls were about to steal.
*No laws for us. We can do whatever we want...* Jenny reminded herself, repeating the thought like a mantra in her head again and again. It didn't help to stop the niggling worry in the back of her mind. *But that doesn't mean the electrified security systems are disabled...*
---
Charlotte and Jenny worked in silence, sawing- quiet as a mouse- through the cables. They were the thickest cables Jenny had ever seen, and wire cutters seemed useless to them. The two of them had resorted to the little saw on Charlotte's pen-knife, each taking over when the other got tired. They were making progress, but slowly.
"Charlotte,"
"Mmm?" Charlotte continued to saw, beads of sweat forming on her temple. They were pressed for time, and they both knew it. "If you're about to say 'saw faster' don't."
"I won't!" Jenny exclaimed under her breath, scared to talk at normal volume after a run-in with the mechanical attack dog roaming the halls. '*Security measures these days...* Charlotte had remarked. "It's just. Charlotte is a bit of a mouthful, don't you think?" Jenny swallowed. *Please be cool, please be cool...oh god I'm trying too hard...She can tell...* "Sh-should I call you Charlie instead?"
Charlotte gave her a dark glare. "No. Absolutely not." She picked up the saw and handed it to Jenny. Her hands were red and raw, but the cable was almost done. "Here, your turn. You can do the last bit..." the teenager took a swig of water from her water bottle. "*Never* call me Charlie, okay? That's a name for try-hards trying to look tough. I'm naturally awesome, I don't need some shitty nickname based in my insecurities."
Jenny took in Charlotte's cropped hair, dyed a shocking blue colour. *She's right, * Jenny thought to herself. *She doesn't need a nickname to be cool, she's so badass already...*
Jenny looked down at the cable. With one last drag of the saw across the hardened wiring, it broke in half.
"Finally!" Charlotte turned to Jenny and winked. "Action time, rookie."
---
Nikki and a girl with gorgeous dark skin were already waiting by the glass case of the urn. From behind a corner, Jenny could see the guard's limp body and dark red blood pooling out from below.
*Thou shalt not kill, * echoed the theology teacher's words in her head. Something told Jenny that these girls probably weren't religious.
Nikki nodded to the body. "We dealt with *this* chump. But the dog is still out there. We better hurry."
From out of nowhere, more of the gang appeared and converged around the glass.
"Geez, is that all?" asked one girl, blonde dread-locks spilling out from her rainbow beanie. "Doesn't look all too worth it."
Charlotte folded her arms. "Trust me, girls. This one is worth it. *5 million credits* kinda worth it."
Jenny gasped, and the blonde girl's eyes grew wide.
"5 million!? For *that*?" she said, waving her fingers towards it, careful not to set off the heat sensors. "It's so *ugly*,"
"Well, tell that to the collectors," Charlotte replied, gesturing to the dark-skinned from earlier. "Jane, if you will,"
"Certainly," the girl winked. With one graceful motion, she unhooked a small device vaguely similar to a breathalyser from her pocket and clicked it together with a device she had procured from the guard's pocket.
She sauntered over to the case and the girls parted. Nikki pulled out an aerosol can and sprayed it around the casing as 'Jane' slipped on gloves.
With a sly smile, she pushed the machine against the glass and it let out a low buzz. The glass melted away, dripping like tiny hot raindrops.
"Be careful," Charlotte started, but there was no need. The girl had finished melting the glass and had gently lifted the urn from it's stand, replacing it with a small weight.
A mechanical whirr started in the background, followed by a robotic bark. The lights flickered on, illuminating the dark room.
"That's our cue to leave," Charlotte grinned, turning on her heels and motioning for the others to follow as the loud drone of alarm bells began to sound.
---
Jenny crawled back into her bedroom window, exhausted. Flashes of the mission whizzed through her brain, still crackling with fresh excitement. Nikki lighting a flare and rolling it into the corridor as the building echoed with footsteps...The gang piling into a car and screeching into night...Charlotte shaking her hand and driving away with the urn, ready to sell it on, leaving Charlotte alone and tired in the dark outside her suburban house.
A light flicked on. Jenny jumped.
"Just what do you think you're doing, young lady?" boomed Jenny's dad. Her mother came dashing in, face stony. "Sneaking out late at night? There's been a robbery at the museum! One of those gangs- think about it, Jennifer, you could've been hurt! If you had run into those *criminals* no doubt you would be dead! Think about your poor mother! We had no idea where you were!"
"I --"
"No, I don't want to hear it. The damage is done." He took a step away from Jenny. "There may be no laws regarding youths like you, but we are still your parents, and we make the rules. You're grounded. You will never be so reckless ever again, you hear me?"
Jenny pretended to pout as her parents exited the room in a swirl of rage and stern disappointment. Jenny tucked her head into her pillow, grinning.
*If only they knew...*