"Some things cannot be done by day. The sun is an eye of god, bringing judgement onto our sins. And some sins may not be forgiven. That is why, we, the Night Shift, do what we do in darkness. It is not for secrecy, but for shame. God sleeps when we do, and perhaps in the dark of night we can escape notice and with it, judgement."
"Shut up George."
"Tonight we create an abomination. We tread upon God's feet, the folly of humankind -"
"No more of this shit, George! If you want to go onto these fucking monologues, you should have been a fucking writer."
"Screw you too Blake."
Blake moved up to adjust the camera. It began to focus onto his scrubs and his surgical mask. He pointed it onto the podium where a mechanical sphere lay, connected by wires into the building.
"We're copying a human mind. The wires lead over to our patient. Who isn't being tortured by demons in the basement, like George's monologue would have you think. Completely painless procedure, just tracking brain signals and the like. It'll take a few hours or so to install."
Blake pointed over to a human body made of chrome and silver metal.
"That's the body we have housing the metal brain. Should be an exact replica of our patient, except a cyborg. Pretty damn cool, huh?"
He shifted the camera, panning to a rather smug looking Greg.
"*INSTALLATION COMPLETE*"
Blake hurriedly aimed the camera back at the brain and body.
"Well, that was a lot faster than I expected."
"Yeah, Blake. You're welcome. Turns out that my genius mind isn't just good at monologues. Turns out I'm pretty good at a lot of stuff, huh?"
"Yeah, George, good work. Say, how do we put it in?"
"You don't know? Is this another thing that I'm useful for?"
"Oh seriously? I'm a god-damned doctor and psychologist. You know I don't work with machinery like this."
"Then watch as we commit the ultimate sin of pride by recreating God's own work."
As George placed the brain into the body through the top of the skull, wires left small holes in the brain, exploring its new storage. They latched onto small connections within the head of the machine body. George lifted his hands from the brain as the hole closed shut. Cameras came out of where its eyes should have been. It whirred, moving its hand in front of its face, as though making sure it were well and truly alive.
"It's alive!" Blake shouted. The Frankenstein reference was ignored by George, who eagerly studied the robot. A speaker emerged and it spoke its first words.
"An abomination! Oh, never let me see the light of day, for it will melt through to the metal core of me! I was never meant to live!"
Blake paused, in shock. George stood by the robot, still smug as all hell.
"George.... You didn't..."
"Yup."
"Do you have any idea how much is at stake here?"
"Of course I do. I know my own intellect is far greater than our patient's. Hence my actions."
"George you little fuck! You just copied yourself into our only robot! The! ONLY! ONE! IN THE WORLD!"
Blake chased George as he dodged around the table in circles. The robot watched them passively before turning towards the camera.
"Ah, humanity."