"I need an *army* of *mole men*," the very-creatively-named Mole Man shrieked. "With noses that can detect incoming heroes from *miles* away. And big gnashing claws!" He held up his own hands and wiggled his stubby fingers, no doubt imagining them with claws. "And… and… giant…"
"I think I get what you're going for," I interrupted him with my most calming tone. Sometimes these villains can get a little worked up in describing their dream henchmen. "We can certainly offer you the very best mole minions to do your underground bidding, Mole Man." I'd gotten quite good at suppressing my urge to laugh while working here. "They'll have claws like you've never seen before! And they'll be great diggers."
"Excellent!" His nose twitched wildly like a scared mouse, and he rubbed his hands together in that way that all villains seem to pick up from each other. But he did it a bit *too* enthusiastically; it nearly sent the 4" 5'man toppling off of his chair. "And you say they'll be part man, part mole?"
"Absolutely." I swiveled in my chair and dug through my stack of pamphlets. Past the robot and/or cyborg option, past faceless soldiers with so-called weapons training, past super ninjas with troubled pasts… "Ah, here we go!" I plucked the human/animal genetic abomination pamphlet off of the rack. "You are familiar with our work on Grizzly's bearmen, yes?"
"Of course!" He was starting to get that wild gleam in his eyes that meant the deal was pretty much done. Supervillains are the biggest suckers out there. You show them a shiny new toy like an army of human-bear hybrids and they just *have* to have one of their own. "Most excellent work."
"We can absolutely do mole men for you," I said. "We just need you to sign our standard form contract here." I pulled one of the binders from my drawer and thumped all six hundred pages of it onto the desk. Mole Man's eyes widened behind his coke bottle glasses. "Just a standard agreement, saying that we will provide you with the best army that money can buy."
"600 pages to say that?" he responded.
"Well there are the standard legal disclaimers…" I said. Like that we make no guarantee of their combat abilities or training. Or that they'll even be semi-competent henchmen. Once they leave the lab, they're not our responsibility anymore. "But come on. You've *seen* those Bear Men in action, right?!"
Mole Man forgot all about reading over those disclaimers and signed immediately. They always do. I could have tried upselling him to the cyborg mole men, but I figured that would be better for the second round. After his first army gets crushed by the first hero to come along, he'll no doubt be back for more. And of course I'll be here to tell him that if they had lasers mounted to their snouts, they would have done better.
"Pleasure doing business with you," I told him as I ushered him to the door. "They'll be fully grown in six to eight weeks."
I headed back to my desk and waited a few minutes, just to be sure he was really gone. From my window, I watched him emerge from our office and then head into the parking lot and begin digging straight through the concrete, kicking up a flurry of rocks and dirt all over my BMW. *I'm putting the detailing on his tab, * I decided. Then I reached for my phone.
"Hey, Sergeant Lightning? This is Greg over at HenchCo."
"GREG!" Every time I spoke to him, it was like he was shouting full blast into the receiver on the other end. I'd only *ever* had contact with him by phone because I fear that any in-person meeting might shatter my eardrums. I had to hold the phone at arm's length just to have a conversation with him. "WHATCHA GOT FOR ME TODAY?"
"Ah, you know. The usual. This *Mole Man* came over looking for some help in his villainy."
"MOLE MAN, EH? I'VE FACED HIM BEFORE! HE'S TRIED TUNNELING INTO BANK VAULTS LIKE SIX TIMES!"
"I thought that might be the case. Well, just thought you should know that he's placed a pretty sizable order. A whole army of human-mole hybrids." I looked out the window at the giant hole in our parking lot and smirked. "And of course we'll make them to our high level of quality, as always."
Sergeant Lightning laughed. "WHAT'S IT GOING TO BE THIS TIME?"
"Well, they're part *mole*, right? They'll definitely be blind. And just for fun, scared of birds or something." I pictured them running through the streets, bumping into buildings and cars every time a seagull passed overhead. "It'll be *hilarious! *"
"HILARIOUS!" Sergeant Lightning agreed. "GOOD WORK THERE, GREG!"
---- -
As always, subscribe to /r/Luna_Lovewell for tons of other stories!