General Bolden made his way to the antechamber, as he had done twice before. He recalled with amusement how Presidents Bush and Obama simply laughed at him before carrying on with the briefing, just as his predecessors recalled tales of "The Revelation" dating all the way back to the Johnson administration. It began as a dare, something two drunken scientists made in a Houston bar back in the days of the Mercury program. If either of them made it to the office of the Administrator, they would assemble some official-looking presentation and bring it in for the President's in-brief. Something in private, very secret, plenty of pomp and circumstance for what would really just be an icebreaker at the beginning of a long and boring meeting.
It was largely forgotten by all who made it up, until Jim Fletcher remembered a funny story he had heard at a Christmas party a few years ago. He saw who Nixon's successor would be, figured Gerry Ford had a sense of humor, and gave it a shot. What he didn't expect was that President Ford would buy it hook, line, and sinker. To save NASA the embarrassment, he quickly had official reports drawn up with shaky physics to explain why millennia of accepted science was wrong, and why it had to be kept a secret from the community at large.
Over the years, it became a tradition, part of the President-Elect's initiation into the country's highest office. Most of them figured that with that much technobabble, it had to be true, though a few struggled with it. After Jimmy Carter was elected, there was some concern, as he had sailed around the world in his Navy days. The physicists cooked up a line about gravitational lensing near the edge of the earth causing ships to imperceptibly turn away, and Carter took it as truth. Reagan laughed it off, H.W. ignored it, and Clinton believed it all. Their next concern came in 2001, when Senator Glenn let an old colleague know that President Bush had been asking about it. After savoring the mortified look on Mr. Goldin's face, the Senator let him know that he was one of the young astronauts who came up with the joke in the first place.
Even with the years of tradition behind it, it was still a nervous time for the Administrator. To be found out was to risk dismissal or worse, risk losing funding for NASA. Still, there were certain things that just had to be done. Certain rituals to be observed, for old time's sake.
General Bolden nervously cleared his throat as he said those words his predecessors had said so many times before: "Mr. President, could we please speak in private?"