I remember the day my father died. I remember the rain at his funeral and looking up at my mother as the tears ran down her face. At the time I thought those were the worst days of my life, but now...now I look back on those days as a happy time, a time before things got really bad.
Back then we lived in a small house, close to the motorway. At night my brother, Dave, and I would lie awake in our bunk beds and listen to the lorries going past, talking about where they might be going. I guess mum must have been lonely and probably hungry too, as two growing boys are little use as company, but she worked so much perhaps she didn't have time to even think about it. I wish I could ask her.
When she met David I kinda liked him, but my brother took a dislike right away. "He's got my name" he would whisper to me in the dark, as we listened to them grunting through the thin walls of the tiny apartment. "He's got my name and he's got our mum."
I said nothing, perhaps I was beginning to see that what we had wasn't sustainable. Dave was just eleven and I was thirteen and soon we'd need more space and staying in the west side of town it was only a matter of time before we got into trouble, or trouble found us.
She told us at Christmas, waiting until after the presents were open and then standing in the doorway, the smell of turkey floating through the house. She showed us the ring and I tried to show an interest, but Dave just looked away, no longer even caring about the second hand gameboy he'd received. Dinner was quiet that afternoon, David trying to engage us, but we ate without enthusiasm. He was a nice guy, but it had been less than a year, we still missed our dad.
The wedding was in the spring, Dave refused to be a part, but I was David's best man and I stood next to them, trying my best to feel proud and happy, but inside I was scared. Mum had said that after today David would be our Dad, they had completed the paperwork and it was all legal, from here on he'd be as much of a parent to us as she was, but I didn't really believe it and Dave didn't seem to like it much either.
We moved soon after, David got a better job and we were in a suburb, were we had always belonged, but it meant a bigger house, no more sharing with my brother and no more late night chats. He stopped talking to me so much and I kind of drifted away, trying to make the most of things, while he...he didn't want to.
The first time he ran away was the night before our camping trip. David had said he'd take us up into the hills and I was excited, but Dave had been silent. He slipped away in the night and in the morning I heard my mum scream, the same noise she had made when my Dad had died in his sleep.
I peed myself at that noise, the puddle growing as the fear came back to me and the memories. At once I heard the commotion and that my brother was missing, not dead and I panicked, cleaning myself up as best I could and then running to help look for him. He'd not gone far, he was hiding in the attic, but we didn't go camping, we never did after that.
Over the next year my brother grew more distant still, skipping school and staying out late and for a long time I tried to ignore it, but finally one day it was too much, Mum had become thinner and withdrawn from the worry and so I waited for him in his room, until he crept back in the window one night.
He saw me and stopped, then shrugged and began tugging off his jumper. I stood and walked over, the anger building in me. "Why Dave? You *know* how much it worries Mum, why do you do it?"
He looked at me and smiled and for just a second the old Dave was there, but then it was gone again in the scowl. "You never saw him for what he really is, did you?"
I stepped back. "Him? You mean David?" He nodded. "I saw a guy who took on a woman and two young boys and helped them move into a nicer house and has never been anything but kind to me."
Dave shook his head. "Yeah, I see that too, but I see something else too." He smiled a crooked half smile. "Mum always said I had Dads eyes and he saw things cleanly too." He sat down on the bed, shirtless and I saw that he had scars running across his torso.
"Jesus Dave."
He looked down at the scars and laughed. "Yeah, some of the investigating has been… rough."
"Rough? You look like someone tried to kill you?"
He met my eyes. "A few times, maybe."
"This is insane." I stood, ready to go and get Mum, he was only thirteen for God's sake, too young to be nearly killed.
He moved quickly and blocked my path. "Look, just… just take a look tomorrow. Just take a closer look at David and try to look at him as Dad would?"
I shook him free. "Like he was fucking my wife after I died?" Dave froze and I felt bad for a moment, but pushed past him. "Sort your shit out and stop whatever it is you're doing man. It's not helping." He said nothing as I left.
In the morning I woke late and made my way downstairs groggily to the kitchen, David sat quietly at the table, his hands folded. The sun was high already and I glanced across to the clock to see the time and started as I saw it was nearly eleven. "Fuck! I'm late for School!"
David looked up, as if he had just heard me enter. "it's… it's not important now. Please, take a seat, I need to tell you something."
His voice held… an odd tone and I paused, the adrenaline from the panic of missing school already subsiding and being replaced by a knot of fear. "What… why?" He gestured again and I pulled a chair free and sat opposite him.
He reached out for my hands, but I kept them under the table and he sat back. "I'm very sorry, I'm afraid your mother and brother went to the shops this morning and had an accident." The words had no meaning, they came and went and my mind was blank, even as the knot of fear grew. "The car was hit by a lorry. I'm afraid they both died."
He held my eyes and smiled, sympathy and sorrow mixing on his face. "No." I could barely speak, barely squeeze out a word.
He looked down. "I'm sorry, I couldn't find the way to tell you before, so I let you sleep." He looked up and continued to speak, but the words were lost now, I was looking at the space around his eyes. There was *something* there, something which made his expressions seem… wrong.
I leaned in, but he didn't seem to notice and now I could see it, a festering ring of darkness around his eyes, which seemed to float on top, barely covering what was underneath.
"Are you listening to me?" I jerked back to attention, throwing myself back in the chair. He reached out again, holding his hand out for mine. "I said, it's just you and me kid, but I'm going to take good care of you. I promise"
*****
Edit - Dammit, I forgot to mention /r/fringly - it's like writingprompts, but with more fringly and less other people.