*Ugh. * The blunt punches stung Bruce Wayne as he lay on the floor but the officers, wreathed in shadow, continued the brutal onslaught.
*Day 15. * The day of the trial. Bruce brooded in between strikes to his sternum. His arrest had been sudden. Two-Face had organized the whole charade with the help of Hush who had played the part of Bruce Wayne perfectly. *They had to use their brains at some point, * Bruce thought. It was more than a good plan, Bruce had to admit that, it was impossible not to come, people would have died.
A fresh punch to the cheek woke Bruce from his short stupor. "That's enough, get the bastard up, he's got a date with Judge Wilkins." *Hahahahahaha, * the officers laughed as they unceremoniously dragged Bruce Wayne to his feet. The walk through the holding cells was unpleasant if not familiar. Now instead of jeers about Batman, the crooks were shouting insults about Bruce Wayne, about his parents, his money, his love interest.
"Say Brucie, how long do you think it'll take to find little Miss Vale after they smoke your brain with a thousand volts eh?"
Bruce Wayne looked at each of them in turn, remembering their faces, remembering what they did to end up in those cells. Then suddenly, he was through a set of doors and another into the courtroom. He was met with boos from the packed audience, but was astonished to find that half the people sitting had on Batman masks that you'd find at a dollar store. Bruce didn't feel particularly relieved about it.
He was sat next to an empty seat where his lawyer, Robert Madenson should have been, an old friend of Harvey's who stayed relatively clean and had helped Wayne enterprises with some criminal investigations falsely accused against the corporation. But he wasn't there.
"Well Mr. Wayne," the Judge stated. "Unusual circumstances have caused a delay in the trial. I am sorry to inform you that your legal counsel Mr. Madenson has been found dead in his home. Hanged himself. He wrote a suicide note mentioning you in name." Bruce couldn't believe it, no, it wasn't true.
He tried to get up but was promptly slammed down onto the table again. "Your honor, I spoke to Madenson two days ago, there is no way he would kill himself. This was murder."
"Yes, yes of course Mr. Wayne, regardless, you have no counsel at the moment and unfortunately, the state has no one left to spare. However, Bruce, you are a natural business man, I'm sure you can.."
"Excuse me, Your Honor, I have something to say, please, pretty please?"
The Judge slammed the gavel down, "ORDER," and the room went quiet as Bruce turned to see who had spoken, a feeling of dread creeping down his stomach. *That voice. *
A batman mask wearing citizen had rose to his feet. "Your honor, I myself have been greatly in need of some change. So much so that I decided to read a little law in my spare time. Its such an interesting topic. Law, morality, right and wrong and bats and cats and whatever weirdos do at night. I think I can represent old Bruce Wayne over here, at the very least, he needs someone in his corner."
And before anyone else could speak, he ripped the batman cowl off his face. The mask had smeared a bit of the lipstick, but the white, powdery face was known to all. The Joker reached into his pocket and pulled out a pistol and pointed it at the Judges heart. The two Bailiff's moved towards him but then the rest of the Batmen took of their masks and stood, pistols in hand. Goons.
"Ah ah ah, I will have order in the clown's court please. Bailiff's if you would be so kind and remove your weapons and kick them towards me please. How fun this is Brucie."
The Judge was cowering in his high chair, "how did you get weapons inside, what happened to the security?"
"Oh judgey boy, you really should pay your security a little extra, no matter, my friends and I gave him a promotion. Now...old Brucie here might be a little bat for brains but he's helped you all these years. He's been beating up my goons and locking me in the madhouse and this is how the people of Gotham repay him? Oh if I was him, I'd be feeling mighty betrayed right about now. Don't worry about it Bruce, I've got your back. Ladies and Gentlemen, please rise from your seats and get to running, the party starts now."
The Joker skipped up to the judge, said a big "Hello there darling," put his pistol in the judge's mouth and fired.
"NOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO," Bruce screamed as he fought against his cuffs. The other goons had already shot the Bailiff's, the DA had run to the exit with the rest of the civilians. Then there was a crash like the building was collapsing and a truck had crashed its way into the courtroom as papers flew and dust and debris coated the air. *Ahhhh. * The cuffs snapped apart and Bruce was moving. He made it halfway across the room when something slammed into the side of his head.
The Joker stood over him, "So long now Bruce, I'm off to kill a couple more Judges, I got to say it is really *really* fun. Oh by the way, if you're looking for your Batsuit, I got it dry cleaned for you. It's waiting in your holding cell."
The Joker smiled widely as he looked down at Bruce Wayne. "Let's see if the Batman can save the day again." Joker pointed at the Judge's corpse, "You can't save them all this time...Batman."
The Joker