"Your seventh child is going to kill you," the witch said as I finished my drink with her.
"Seventh?" I asked. She nodded, and her tangled hair fell over her eyes. Margaret was an interesting character. She hung out around the bar and fancied herself a witch.
"Yeah," she said, "had a vision last night, sucks don't it?"
"Well you aren't wrong there," I said, if I had children I'd be freaking out."
She looked from her glass and then to me, "you don't?"
"No, never found the lady."
"Well if you do, just make sure you don't have seven."
"Will do Margaret."
Three years later Margaret and I were married. Despite her unusual views on pagan gods, she was wonderful and the love of my life. The more interesting part of her, though, was the fact that she was literally a witch. I couldn't deny it once I saw the cauldron that could let her see anyone in the city at any time.
Three years and seven days later Margaret and I were sitting in planned parenthood. We didn't want to birth deadly children, but I'd fucked up. The visit was more about caution than coathangers, but it was still a visit. Which meant that I still saw Lisa.
Lisa was a blonde woman that I hadn't met before this day. She walked up and swore that she knew me from somewhere. We had talked for a while before I put my glasses on and it clicked for her. I had been her sperm donor for her artificial insemination. I looked at her with wide eyes and then to Margaret.
"How could you forget that you were a sperm donor?" she asked as we walked back from planned parenthood. We were eating ice cream, I was a vanilla person, and she liked black licorice for its name.
"It wasn't a big deal at the time," I said, "I did the shit for the twenty bucks and the cute girl at the counter."
"You flirted with someone by whacking it in the room beside them?" she asked. I still considered it flawless logic. She shook her head, "we are going to the clinic and getting a list of your children."
"I think that's against some privacy laws."
"Being a witch should get me burned and you still love me," she said. Margaret too a lick of her ice cream and then bit into it. "Don't be a pansy about it, illegal is nothing."
"All right," I said, and we went to the clinic.
Three spells later we had somehow managed to get all of the released information about my children. Most of them were names and some birth addresses, but we were told it was incomplete information. We didn't have days.
"You have 42 children?" Margaret asked as she looked over the paper.
"Are you impressed?" I asked.
"Terrified," she answered, "and you're a fucking idiot. Do we know who number seven is?"
"No birthdates, but they shouldn't be older than fifteen now anyway."
"Fifteen is the perfect age for father killing!" she said a little too loud in the middle of the street, "your magic blood will be potent in them by then! Who know's what they will do?" for the first time in my life I saw Margaret's eyes waver.
"FATHER!" a scream came from the other side of the street, "I hope you are prepared! I am your first seventh child!" I looked toward the voice and saw a little waif of a brunette carrying a sword, "prepare for your reckoning!" she screamed, and her sword went ablaze. Fuck.
"We weren't done talking about this," Margaret said as she raised a hand. Within a second the girl tripped and fell. She ended up beside her sword and caught on fire. I watched in horror as she burned.
"Do what you want father!" she screamed while also screaming, "when I die the eighth shall be seventh! One of us will drink your blood!" she yelled before she stopped screaming. Death calmed her down.
"Oh god dammit," Margaret said beside me, "I only have so many luck curses, and I don't think all of them are going to be stupid enough to have a flaming sword."
"What are we going to do?" I asked.
"I have no idea," she said, "but it's probably going to take years."
**Hope you enjoyed part one: If you want to read more, it's below. Once this thread dies I'll keep plugging away at one over on /r/Jacksonwrites**