Bright light wakes me, my clothes are damp from sweat. I think to myself "how the hell did I get so hot, I never turn the heat on in my apartment and it's only April."
Reluctant to open my eyes, I lean myself up and sit avoiding the light. I'm dreading today, like most days. I wish I could just sleep, or lay, or something other than moving from where I am. It's so hot I cant stay here in these clothes, I think as I wipe sweat from my forehead. My eyelids slowly open and the red seeps in quickly and powerfully. My heart beat quickens. Where am I? This doesn't look familiar. I thought I was just waking up, from my bed. I've never even been out of my home town, how could I possibly not recognize where I was. Scanning my memory I try to recollect what the last thing I did was. I cannot. Oh, yes I was...my eyes lock on to a casually walking figure in the distance.
Happy to not be alone, and the thought of some explanation briefly gives my racing heart a relief. I stay seated trying to make sense of what's happening. As the man walks closer, I pick myself up panting from the heat and my anxiety.
With his hand outstretched he greets me, "Hi." He helps me from my knee to stand the rest of the way up.
"Who are you?" He asks, in a tone that matched my own disheveled demeanor.
"I...I'm Sean" I stammer, only half sure. Most of my brain is still reconstructing my new reality. I've never been in such an unfamiliar and uncomfortable place before. "Where am I?" I sputter out shortly after my name, with desperation.
"I'm not really sure, I've been here a while on my own. I call it Hell."
"Wh.. What did you say?"
"I don't know, Hell, that's what I call it." He said, in a nonchalant tone as if he were embarrassed I didn't like his name for this place.
My mind races as I try to make sense of why I'd be in Hell. I'd never really believed it were real, I'd always pushed off those types of thoughts and set my mind on other topics. Less daunting, I guess I was always curious but figured I'd have time to make sense of it eventually.
My eyes scanned the terrain, flat with blowing dust blocking me from seeing any real distance. Glares of lights behind the clouds moved with the wind, but no sound followed their movement. There wasn't really a Sun, at least I couldn't see it through the rolling dust clouds. In fact, just then my thoughts were quiet enough to notice how eerily silent it was. Moments pass, and the silence is broken by him saying my name.
"Sean..." He says with his eyes scanning my face, surely wondering what I'm looking at as there's nothing to see.
"Ye.. Yeah I. I'm in Hell? But why? What did I do?" I asked, defeatedly.
"I was hoping you would tell me. I've been here so long, but I knew others would ever come. I just didn't know when" He says, grim and calm. It's as if he's not surprised, or happy to have another person here. I just, am.
"Wait, how did you get here. Why have you been here alone so long. How long have you been here. Who put you here? Did you bring me here? Am I dea-" I blurt out every question racing through my mind as fast as I can so that maybe the answers will calm me down. My brain needs an explanation to understand, to make sense of this. I wasn't a bad person, I don't belong in hell.
He stops me before I can finish throwing all the questions I have at him through my teeth and answers.
"I've always been here." His naturally sinister tone is more evident now. He continues "I did nothing to bring you here, you just showed up. You brought yourself here, tell me how you got here."
I scanned my memory, thinking about ways I could have died. I was dead, right? I had to be if I was in Hell. But I didn't belong in Hell, I never hurt anyone. I never broke the law, or was a bully. I had spent the majority of my life alone, filling my time with things I thought I enjoyed.
There was a long silence while I thought about what he asked. His slow and unwavering tone did not make me feel like I needed to maintain a conversation, it may have only confused me more.
"I thought I was just sleeping." I said without much thought.
"But now you're here," he said.
I took a moment to gather all this information. I was in hell, with one other relatively normal looking guy. He seemed to be calm about this barren soundless place, and walked up to me knowing I wasn't a threat and expecting me or someone to come eventually.
"Are yo.. You're the Devil. Aren't you?" I say in a half question, half statement sort of tone.
"I must be." He replies, and I get the sense that he'd never heard the name before, or thought it. But he knew that it was correct.
"Why are you here," He reiterates.
"I don't know, I was asleep, and now I'm here. Take me back, can you? Will you send me back?" I ask with a hint of desperation and confusion.
"Why, are you here." He says again, pausing briefly.
I begin to walk and he follows, thoughts being pounded into my head. I cant remember ever doing this much contemplation. I always pushed thoughts that burdened my consciousness aside and left them for another time. There was always another time. Now I can't escape.
He walks just behind me, over my shoulder. I imagine as a security officer at a correctional facility would, I could feel him watching me. Never breaking eye contact. Staring at my head as if he could see the wheels turning and me trying to understand what he meant by asking me why I was here. The memories I have from before this are scarce, I remember going to work each day, I remember eating, and sleeping. Falling asleep so many times in the same position, wearing the same clothes. Cycling through the same three outfits each week. I never put much thought to the cyclical repetitive nature of my daily life, it's just...how it was. I never allowed my self to be uncomfortable, and go places that frightened me. I never allowed myself to interfere with anyone else's life.
As I started to uncover more details and lift the fog in my mind, I remembered more subtle aspects of my life. The blank walls of my cubicle, the stark contrast of the low frequency drone the fans made against the high frequency buzz of the fluorescent lights. The thin trails in my apartment's carpet from walking to and from the same two rooms each day. Never had I thought of these things in such vivid detail, I just pushed them away. As more detail flooded in I remembered laying in bed on my last night. I sat down, took off my watch and placed it on my night stand. As I sank back on to my single pillow I looked at the familiar spot in my ceiling. That's the last thing I remember.
We had been walking for some time now, maybe hours. I really had no appreciation for time. The glow never changed, the heat never dissipated, but I grew tired as if the day had been going on. Neither of us said a word, and I only looked back to watch my foot prints disappear in the dust ridden terrain. I couldn't tell how far I walked, or where I was, I could just feel the life escape my body with every drop of sweat. As my mental and physical strength began to dwindle, I stopped. I hadn't looked back in a while, and I've given up thinking, I drop to my knees as the drops of sweat I can muster collect on my forehead.
"You see, now?" He asked me.
Still perplexed, but slowly realizing I say "Did I ever really live?"
"Did you?" His ambiguity and lack of empathy began to frustrate me.
"But I thought that people who went to hell were the ones who murdered, and stole. Who ruined lives." Still confused, and defeated I limply responded.
"You are the first." Plainly the words strolled from his mouth.
From my knees I fall forward, and roll on to my back. Looking into the plain red glow, the silent flashes of flames and red dust are the only thing I see. What I assume are the last few drops of water within my body collect in eyes. Not enough to create a drop, but enough for me to know. My tear ducts burn for more, but I have none. I want to cry, I want to feel. There was no tomorrow anymore, there was no putting it off. I guess, this is what I've always wanted.
___________________________________________
My First time posting here as well, I loved reading all the other responses after I wrote mine.