"John, I just don't want to go."
I tell my friend for the 5th time. He's persistent. He points out that I have been locked up in my apartment for weeks and that getting out would do me a world of good. In fact, there is a Match party few blocks over from my house and I can leave at any time and walk home. I relent, even though I know that I won't find the person who matches my color band at the party, it's still a place to talk to people and I've been isolated and depressed for too long.
We meet up at the party and start to mingle. I start to relax a little and people watch. I don't find many people with blue bands at the party, let alone anyone that matches my hue, but I was expecting that. An hour in to the party I start to notice that things change. People giving me sidelong glances, to people openly staring at me. I find John and ask him if something is wrong with me.
John grabs my arm, "It's gone." I look confused, then I look at my wrist. My Match is gone. The familiar light blue ringlet is not there anymore.
The world closes in around me; I see John talking to me, but the world has gone silent. All I hear is my heart pounding, so loud, so fast, and the sound of my panicked breathing. John has me by the shoulders, shaking me slightly, he looks really concerned. I break away and start running. This is my worst fear…my match, it's gone. I am truly truly alone now. There is no one for me. It's what kept me alive, no matter how bad it got.
That blue band, my anchor, my constant, never changing, unlike my other friends, who seemed to have a different colored band every month. That blue band, it always seemed like a sad blue, never a vibrant bright blue, just a light muted blue, but always my blue. That blue band, that little line, always meant that there was someone out there for me, that, no matter how lonely I got, there was someone else, someone looking for me, someone who would fit and understand me, someone who would love me.
Now, there is not.
Now, there is no one.
Now, there is nothing.
I get to my apartment and run to the bathroom. I pull out the razor that I have been saving just in case it got too bad. Well, it did. I look at my wrist again, I look really hard, hoping that there is something, some trace, anything, anything at all to show me that I am not destined to be all by myself. There isn't. Being all by myself is worse than dying and that is why….
I hear John banging on the door. Pounding and yelling. I take the razor and slide it across my wrist, where my band used to be. The red is so bright, such a contrast to the light blue that used to be there. I just stare and watch the blood flow into the sink. I hear more yelling and the thumps on the door are getting more insistent. I guess I cut pretty deep because it's running pretty steady. As I start to fade, I hear the front door splintering and then nothing.
It's been a couple of weeks since I woke up in the hospital. It's been rough, the meds, the visits, the emotions, the one on one counseling. It's better though, I guess. I mean my outlook feels the same, but I don't want to kill myself at this moment.
It's my first support therapy session, I get to talk to a therapist in a group setting of other people like me. I get to the room early and see that there is another person in there, a young lady, maybe my age, maybe a bit younger, wearing a long sweater and scrubs. I think we are the only 2 people in this group as there are only 2 folding chairs, besides the chair behind the table for the therapist.
I sit down. We make eye contact; I give her a sad smile. She looks at my wrist, at the fresh scars and gives a sardonic laugh.
I look at her puzzled, confused.
"Oh, sorry, I'm not laughing at you. Just laughing at life and how things happen."
I relax a little, but still am confused.
"Look…" she says as she pulls up her sleeve exposing her wrist, "we match."
EDIT: Edited and expanded on the story. Different from the rough that I posted earlier. I'll post the rough in the comments. Thanks.