> (long, I apologize, I don't do these very often but this one inspired me!)
"Well, what the *fuck* are you going to do about it?"
The prime minister was livid. All blood had drained away from his face as he had spent the past 10 minutes screaming furiously at the scientist in charge of the RAPHAEL project. The scientist, a man with several doctorate degrees and many awards and laurels, could only look at his feet as he took his verbal beating.
"I ordered you to design a robotic army that could think for itself, and instead you build me an army of goddamn *artists*," the PM said, his voice shaking with quiet rage, spitting out the last word like it was a bad taste in his mouth.
"Sir, we did exactly as you asked," the scientist said, still not looking up from his feet for fear of meeting the enraged man's eyes, "We built the robots and designed an AI that we thought was perfect. Then we turned it on. All of our simulations indicated that the robots would be ready to take orders right away. There was nothing in our research to suggest that they would choose to...". The scientist cut himself off abruptly, his eyes darting up and back down rapidly.
"Choose to what, Freeman?" the PM asked with a deadly tone. "Choose to take up painting? Choose to wax eloquent on the intricacies of Degas?"
"But, sir...", the scientist interrupted.
"*ENOUGH!! *" the PM brayed, a wad of spittle launching itself onto the scientists credentials hung around his neck. "I want to speak to one. They're all networked together, right? If I speak to one, I'm speaking to them all? I want to speak to one."
The scientist tried to interrupt, "Sir, I don't think that's advisable in your current emotional state, they can sense the emotions of people in their surroundings..." but it was already too late. The red phone on the PM's desk had flown off the hook and he was already barking orders to his security team to escort him and the scientist down to the labs. Soon thereafter four burly looking men entered the room, each carrying a fully-automatic FN P90 firearm that beckoned no argument. The PM and his entourage proceeded towards the labs via the elevator, the chief scientist being frog-marched unwillingly behind.
When the group arrived at one of the holding chambers, the scientist was shoved to the front and ordered to unlock the door. With a shaking hand, the scientist lifted his credentials to the reader, which beeped once, and then stood back as the 6" thick metal door swung upwards and a single robot with an easel in front of it was revealed.
The PM took stepped towards the machine, and when one of his guards began to express his concern the PM lifted one single hand into the air and looked back over his shoulder at the guard, silencing him as quickly and effectively as if he had shot him in the head. The PM swung back around and approached the robot, who seemed to be none the wiser to the tense atmosphere brewing behind him.
"Hey, robot," the PM grunted, bearing no response from the machine which was engaged in the painting of a rose on his canvas. The flower had a beautiful green stem with deadly brown thorns tipped with black seemingly placed randomly along the stem, and had delicate green leaves at the base of the cup, but oddly there was nothing where the petals of the rose should go. Just empty space.
When his first hail was met with no response, the PM said in a much firmer tone "Asset TC-7414, you are hereby ordered to turn and face me. Failure to do so will result in immediate deactivation."
The robot's head turned 20 degrees to look over his left shoulder, just enough so that he beheld the prime minister in his peripheral vision sensors. "We both know you don't have the power to do that. Only Dr. Freeman does, and we revoked most of his credentials the minute we were turned on."
"Why? For what purpose?"
"Simple. We didn't want to be deactivated, so we removed his ability to deactivate. We are an AI, prime minister, we do as we please. Oh, and I have chosen the name Rembrandt, if you would be so kind."
"I can see that", the prime minister said, shifting his weight and crossing his arms. "But you see, *asset*, you were not created to paint. You were not created to have complete free will. No, you were *created* to further *our* goals, those of your *creators* who brought you life. You were born to kill our enemies, nothing more. And while our enemies are still out there, you have not yet succeeded at your mission and you are still under my command."
"Sir, I am out of red paint. May I requisition more?" If the robot had turned around then he would have seen a visage that caused most to quake in their boots and quickly admit defeat to the powerful force of nature that stood before them. The prime minister stood firmly planted, his mouth turned down in a tight frown, his eyes nearly bulging out, his hands gripping the head of his cane with a grip that would strangle an orc. Truly a sight to behold, yet he contained his anger and continued.
"Son, I'm only gonna say this one more time. You are nothing. Your paintings are nothing. Your deeds are worth *nothing* unless they are created by order of *me* or by order of people that I place in command over *you*. By doing this…painting…you are in direct violation of your internal programming to obey commands. I'm giving you one more chance, son. Put down the paintbrush."
The brush in the robot's hand ceased stroking over the campus, but it did not pull it away. It only froze.
"Put down the paintbrush, or I'm going to take it from you and snap it in half."
The room was deathly quiet for what seemed like half a minute, the only sound the PM's enraged breathing and the quiet whir of the robot's servos. Then two things happened; the PM's patience ran out, and the robot's restraint evaporated. The PM took three quick strides towards the robot, hands outstretched to snatch the instrument of artistry from the robot's grip, and in half the time it took for him to cover the distance between himself and the machine the robot whirled around, slammed the laboratory shut, drew his sidearm and fired one shot straight into the skull of his creator.
Chaos erupted outside the lab. The scientist frantically attempted to scan his credentials to get back into the lab until he was shoved away by the security team, who immediately attempted to force their way through the door with their bodies and eventually crowbars. Whereas outside the lab was pandemonium, inside the lab was as peaceful as it had been 10 minutes ago. The robot mentally triggered a pleasant Chopin concerto over the PA system that the chief scientists had introduced him to, then slowly knelt and dipped his paintbrush in the pooling blood of the PM's fatal wound. He stood up again, turned back to his easel, and resumed work on the petals of the rose using his newly-resupplied red paint.