I'm really not sure why I took this job. I have family members who are retired Aurors. They view me with a mix of shame and despair. I've got family members who are pardoned Death Eaters, and they feel the same way.
I may not be the black sheep of the family, thanks to the aforementioned Death Eaters, but I don't get asked a lot of questions at family dinners.
Oh well, fuck them. I get paid decently enough to sit on some semi inhabited island around Iceland to come up with new spells.
Why am I near Iceland? Because my job is the equivalent of throwing shit at the wall to see what sticks. Highly volatile spells come out of my research. The Ministry created this post about a decade after they finally put Voldemort down for good. As the son of decorated Aurors, I was able to get the job pretty easily. My resume boasted both the pedigree and the skill.
Also, as my former supervisor said, "I'm one crazy son of a bitch."
He's my former supervisor because one day, working on a teleportation spell, he vanished. His whereabouts are unknown, but there are rumors that he's using his magic to great success in Vegas, hustling blackjack.
I always liked that guy.
Now, I'm the boss. I have a new recruit. Fresh faced kid out of Hogwarts, who takes everything way too seriously. I worry about his ability to hold up in this line of work. Between the remote location and the dangers of our work, he's ripe to crack up.
"So, what are we working on today?" the Kid asks.
"The Ministry wants us to start coming up with countermeasures, just in case the Old Ones rise."
"But, but, my Defend Against The Dark Arts Professor said that the Old Ones can never rise again."
"You're not at Hogwarts anymore, the stars could be right at any moment, then we all could be shit out of luck."
I have to remind the kid of that a lot. He's still wearing his robes, looking like he's about to go to some damn Potions lecture. Meanwhile, I used a proven teleportation spell (I don't fuck around with those) to "borrow" full SWAT Team gear from the Dallas Police Department. They have nice toys in Texas.
"So, what's our first spell going to be?"
"Special banishment spell," I reply. "One to cross over dimensional walls."
No wizard, even that Potter guy, could singlehandedly banish an Old One. But if enough talented wizards got involved, the spell might have a chance. Might.
The Kid didn't need to know that part.
"There's a baseline spell I put together to get rid of a few Dementors," I continue. "Did you watch the presentation?"
"Yes, I did. Although we never used that strange device at Hogwarts "
I shake my head. Hogwarts should really at least mention what a DVD players is to its students.
"Okay, we're going to basically take that spell and crank it up a few notches. Let's make sure you've got the basic spell down before we continue."
"Alright," he replies
"Remember: right arm fully extended, off to the side. Swing it in a controlled motion across your body."
"I got you," he says, a little more confident than I like. Damn Gryffindors are always like that.
"What's the activation phrase?"
"Piercus Four," he answers.
"Good, let's see you do it."
The kid steps over to the other side of the room. As soon as he goes into the motion, I know it has gone to shit. He doesn't extend how arm far enough from his body and he moves way too fast. Before I can yell for him to stop, the fateful words come from his mouth.
"Piercus Four!"
The space around him blurs. By keeping his arm close and going too fast he redirects the spell at himself. My worst fears are confirmed when that space stabilizes.
The Kid is gone.
Shit.
Now I have to go find him.