"What does it say, Pia?" Aksyl looked up at her, his bright eyes wide with wonder.
When Pia was a young girl, her father had given her lessons in Enginetongue, but she wasn't a little girl anymore. She brushed her graying hair out of her crow-footed eyes and peered at the inscriptions on the panel in front of her. She moved out of the way of the light from their campfire, flickering behind her, to get a better look. "It says..." She sounded out the characters, her lips moving silently. "It says, um, 'Inlet twenty...twenty-one. Stand clear when in motion."'
Aksyl reached up to run his hand over the inscription on the Engine's gleaming, silvery panel. "What does it mean?"
"I'm not sure," she said, furrowing her brow.
"And what's this?" Acksyl pointed to a small hole in the metal just below the inscription. It wasn't any sort of damage. It looked like some kind of socket, built into the panel.
"I don't know that either," she said, smiling down at him and ruffling his hair. "And it's time to go to sleep, little prince. That's enough looking for one night."
Aksyl immediately looked up at her with wounded eyes. "But can't we climb up? I want to see inside!"
Pia shook her head firmly. "No, Acksyl, it's too dangerous, especially at night."
"Pia!" He pouted. "We'll be careful. Don't you want to see, too?"
"No, and that's the last word, boy." She pointed at his bedroll by the campfire. "Sleep. Now."
"But --"
"*Now*, Acksyl."
He looked ready to protest more, but he huffed and went sulkily to his bedroll. He curled up inside. Pia went to a boulder by the fire, across from Acksyl, and sat. She watched him, watched his breathing. Her little prince. In moments, she could tell he was asleep.
Pia looked up at the Engine that overshadowed them. She wouldn't be taking the boy inside, even when it was light out. But he was right. She did want to go up there. By the Gears, just *look* at that wonder.
The panel they'd been reading was at the base of one of the Engine's four mighty legs. Pia could spread both arms wide and not reach across half of its width. At the base of the leg were three huge metal talons. The landscape in these parts was stone pocked with scrubby grass and shrubs, but the claws dug deep into the hard bedrock. The legs rose up to a dizzying height, surely ten times as she was tall. They reminded her of a hound's rear legs, with a lean, sculpted look, one switchback curve at the 'heel' and then another, further up. The four huge columns supported a titanic body. She had seen many houses that were smaller than any one of the four huge segments that made up the Engine's main body. At the fore was a smooth, bullet-shaped head. Atop the head were two orbs on metal stalks. They looked like eyes, and Pia shivered at the thought.
If they were eyes, though, they had been blind for a long time. The Engine stood silent, as though it had frozen in place in the middle of a mighty stride, and had probably stood that way for an age. Just like all the others. Pia had seen a number of Engines in her travels, all broken. All dormant. Some lay fallen, picked clean by scavengers. Sometimes there were just pieces, a lone leg, a huge metal panel, some mighty gear sitting alone in the grass. This was the most intact Engine she had ever seen, and it woke long-dormant thoughts in her breast. She tried to imagine the Engineers who had made such a thing, a people from a distant past who she thought must have been equal parts artists, craftsmen, and gods. And now they were gone, forever.
Pia sighed, and took off her boots. She climbed into her own bedroll, and closed her eyes.
Late in the night, she dreamed of the sound of metal. The sound of machinery in motion.
It was a sound she'd heard many years ago, in her father's workshop, as he tinkered with some gadget or another. She remembered him holding up a timepiece that he'd repaired, and she could hear the clicking and clacking of the gears inside as it worked. It *worked*!
"It's going, Pia!" He'd shouted, grinning and holding it close for her to see. "The gears are turning! Do you see it, Pia?! It's *moving*!"
It's moving.
Pia's eyes snapped open, then widened in horror when she saw what was in front of her. Her lips parted. "Gears of the world...how?" For a moment, she was frozen in shock.
Acksyl was not in his bedroll. He stood by the foot of the Engine, where they'd been reading the inscription earlier. There was no firelight to see by, but it didn't matter. There was plenty of light to see by. Crackling, white light that flickered and popped and lit their camp in an eerie, shivering glow. The light was coming from *Acksyl*. His body was surrounded and sheathed in it, in a halo so bright that she had to squint to look at him. The light flowed out to one of his small, outstretched hands, and flowed into the machine, into the socket in the panel. The snapping sound of its passage was deafening, like the chaotic cracking of a hundred whips.
Small lights began to light up along the length of the machine's leg, one after another, a trail of them leading up to that huge body, that bullet-shaped head, those dead eyes. She heard deep, echoing clanks and clunks from deep inside the hulk. Suddenly, Pia was filled with terror. "Acksyl!" She shouted, and threw off her bedroll. She climbed to her feet. "*ACKSYL*! Get away!"
The lights blinked on, one after another, and they reached the huge body. She looked to the head atop the Engine, and saw light stir in those dark eyes. They glowed faintly, and with a mighty groan that echoed like thunder, the head *moved*. It swung slowly towards her as the beast woke, and when they reached her, the head stopped its swivel with another groan. The eyes swam with faint light. It saw her. Gears of the world, it saw her.
"Acksyl, get away from there!" She pelted towards him, her feet scattering the last glowing coals of the fire in her haste, and she tackled Acksyl to the ground.
The light vanished. In an instant, night closed in around them again. There wasn't a trace of it, around Axyl or anywhere else. She flopped onto her back and looked up at the Engine. It was as dark and still as it had been before.
Next to her, Axyl groaned. He sat up slowly, and turned towards her. "Pia? Pia, what happened? I don't remember what happened."
She shook her head, trembling. "I don't know, little prince. I don't know."