She's got this feeling at the back of her neck, like there's a slug dribbling down the nubs of her spine, sliming over her skin from hairline to shoulder blades, and it won't *stop*. It's been there since she left Prague, making her face contort and her fingers curl in every conversation. She's sure she looks like a pig.
It fades sometimes, like during the meeting in Berlin and the conference in Brussels, when she can occupy herself with the humdrum activities of global parliamentary management, but then she sees one more "Gitti for the United Republic!" poster and the slug is back, filming over her skin, making her feel like she needs a shower, making her feel like she's going to be sick.
Victoria Gitti will never go down in history as the woman who demolished the republic, but only because they won't remember the word republic when she's done with them. They won't remember democracy either, or history, and they certainly won't remember Representative Dou Mei Li of the Beijing Corporation, who might consider taking off a layer of her own skin with a fish knife if meant getting to sleep at night. But Victoria, with her bright smile and perfect rainbow of suits, her voice like the old American movie stars'— she'll be remembered. Mei Li can see it in the way her smile pinches at the corners, the way she moves when she's not on camera. Mei Li, with her seat just behind the dignitaries from New York and London, has seen it herself, how Victoria acts like she's the only person of any importance in the world. She'd say it baffles her, how the lambs appear to fawn over the wolf, but times are bad. Times are worse than they've been in a long time, and Victoria Gitti is the most charismatic of many evils.
Mei Li is in Beijing, in her offices, and her PA is on the vidscreen, asking her about a call from Representative Correa. Mei Li waves it on.
Correa looks grim, backlit by a smoky orange light barely diffused by the fine curtains of his home office. "Good morning, Representative Dou," he says in Mandarin, stony faced.
"Andreas," she replies, returning to her paperwork. "I think I know why you called."
"You're the last vote on the Cities Conglomerate, Mei Li," he says, dropping all pretenses. When she raises her eyes to the vidscreen, he looks wretched. There's a bruise forming across one cheekbone and he's down to his shirtsleeves. He must have been out in the riots, trying to stop his constituents from doing anything rash. She doesn't envy him. It may be her turn soon enough. "We need you for a unanimous vote, and we need a unanimous vote to ensure she has the mandate. We can't risk dissension on this, you understand? We need her to be legitimate."
Mei Li snorts and sets her pen against the desk. "Gitti doesn't need us. She doesn't even like us. And I sincerely doubt she requires our endorsement to win. She doesn't seem like the kind of woman to subscribe to the whole 'separation of powers' idea."
"Now, come on," Andreas begins, image momentarily pixelating as the light behind him flares red, "you can't possibly believe those crackpots, she's not about to—"
"She *ran* on it, Andreas!" Mei Li shouts, suddenly furious. She's standing now, fists planted against the desk, and the vidscreen's camera tracks her up. "Were you not around two days ago, did your translator suddenly give out? She said 'we cannot let the squabbling of the few drown out the cries of the many.' She said 'a diffused government is a weak government.' Andreas, she fucking said 'the die has been cast'! She's going to dissolve the URC and assume a very likely indefinite state of emergency, and if you can't see that then god help you, Representative."
She breathes for a moment and Andreas stares, mouth forming inchoate shapes as he scrabbles for a reply. The office outside her door has gone entirely quiet.
"You don't know that," Andreas manages, finally. Mei Li shakes her head, already preparing a reply, but he continues over her, voice suddenly pleading, "No, you don't know that! Maybe she's just trying to attract the hardliners, or the Mediterranean neocons. She's not about to become the next Ceaser, Mei Li, she's a good woman, she wouldn't do that."
"And you know this how?" Mei Li shoots back, though she can feel the anger draining out of her. The slug once more begins its ponderous slide down her neck.
"I—I don't know," Andreas returns, no longer meeting her eyes. "But it's like you said, she doesn't need us to win. She's the only choice we have, and I have to believe she's the right one. We're falling apart. We need a strong hand."
Mei Li slumps back into her seat, breath gone from her lungs. She can't be mad at Andreas, though she should be. You can't blame the wolf for killing, in a certain morbid way, but every lamb that lets it into their pasture is a damn fool.
There's a low susurrus growing outside her door. Her staff must be gathered around her PA's computer, watching the feed. Andreas has found the balls to look at her, obviously waiting for some confirmation, some validation of his cowardice.
"Have you ever heard the saying, 'May you live in interesting times?"' she asks, voice clear in airy room. "It's the first of three ancient Chinese curses, each of increasing severity. May you live in interesting times, may you come to the attention of those in authority, and, worst of all, may you find exactly what you are looking for."
"I—really?" Andreas starts, confused by the subject change. "I've never heard of any such curses."
"Well, that's probably because they were made up by some English twat back in the 1930's," Mei Li replies, leaning forward. She taps an icon on the vidscreen, and her contacts folder open, pushing Andreas to a corner of the screen. "But you know, I think he had the right idea. May you find exactly what you're looking, Andreas. I resign. The vote is unanimous. Long live the king."
She cuts the feed before he can reply. One frame remains on screen, his face just beginning to twist as he processes her declaration, the fires behind him so close she can each lick of flame outlined through the curtains, but she quickly closes out. She prints off a list of addresses, grabs her coat, and throws open her office door.
Her entire stuff is, indeed, gathered outside. Not a one of them has the decency to look shamefaced, which she appreciates in aspiring young politicos. She tosses the list to her PA and announces, voice booming, "For the next two weeks you do not sleep. You do not eat. You do not blink unless I give the OK. Gitti comes to power in 15 days, so we've got 14 days and 23 hours to get our hands on every scrap of China we can and put it somewhere she'll never find it. That list is addresses of historians, academics, community leaders, journalists, and artists. We're going to find them, and we're going to enlist them."
One staffer raises her hand, an intern by the fear in her eyes, and Mei Li nods to her. "Uh," she quavers, slightly shaky in the face of Mei Li's sudden will, "do we still work for you? What with the resigning and all."
Mei Li pauses, and after a moment, laughs. "No," she replies, smiling at her own bluster, "I suppose you don't. So I suppose instead I'll have to ask you." She pans around the room, meeting each staffer's eye and says, with sincerity, "What you heard was real. I'm not crazy, and I'm not paranoid. Gitti will dismantle the Republic in a matter of months and the world will bend to her vision. She will scar the global culture for generations. But," Mei Li says, and smiles again, with more teeth. "We are Chinese. What we are, we have been for longer than generations. We do not lose contests of time. With your help, Gitti will find nothing we do not want her to find. With your help, we will outlast her. Sound good?"
The staffers, young and stupidly idealistic to a man, cheer. Mei Li smiles back and begins doling out tasks, assigning districts and universities and museums to scour. It won't really help, she knows. Dictators have a way of enforcing homogeneity, not to mention obedience. She will likely be dead within the year, her name erased, but perhaps it won't be for nothing. The slug inches its way between her shoulder blades, but it's faint, and easily ignored.