"Hey!" I shouted. "I'm not insane, you can't keep me in here!"
The door resisted my attempts to knock it over. My thin coat proudly proclaimed 'Pizza World!' across my back. It was new, I had only had the job a few months. Just enough to make a little money to go to a community college. It itched, and I had always hated it, but it was money.
I had been a week away from moving to a college town, to finally get my degree. And then this idiot thought I was one of his flock to coral, a loony to rot in a loony bin. I never should have taken this job.
A worn voice coughed a laugh next to me.
"Heh," the voice croaked, "This again huh? Alright. I can do this one last time."
"Hey!" I said. It was hard to contain the hope from bursting out from my chest. Another person! And he sounded sane! He must be a staff member, I thought. He can fix this all up. He can explain this, and get me out!
"I think there's been a mixup, can you get me out of here?" I asked hopefully.
"I didn't tell my girlfriend where I would be going, thought it was just another quick pizza run. Get me out of here, will ya?"
There was a pause.
"There ain't no mixups in the Dragon's Den sonny," the voice said finally. Regret was thick in his voice. It was a voice of an old, broken man. Full of dust and spiders, choking on dreams long lost. I hoped I would never have to seen the owner of such a voice, such a creature must surely be broken and lost. Maybe he wasn't my solution after all. Hope began to drain out of me.
"What...what do you mean? Isn't this the cities Insane Asylum? This place is supposed to help people." I said. I was claustrophobic, and the minuscule cell seemed to be growing smaller by the minute. I had to get out.
"You're new here, so I'll try to get you to know what you expect. That way you don't have to learn for yourself," the voice said.
"My names Hill. Been here a long time, I have." The voice stopped, seemingly lost in recollection. I waited desperately for him to continue, to say something, anything. The cell was so small now.
"He tries to keep us separated. The man in the lab coat. But I've been here for a very long time. Long enough to forget the smell of fresh cut grass. Long enough that a sunrise is now a fantasy, and not a reality." the voice paused.
"The sun does not rise in the Dragon's Den," he finally said.
"And that's a funny name for an insane asylum, isn't it? I thought so too at first. It didn't rightly make much sense to me until I had sat in this dirty closet for a few years, and then I got it. The Dragon's Den." the voice sobbed a laugh. The dim hallways echoed the sob, bouncing off the cold, dirty concrete walls. And echo made the sob sound more like a scream, until it finally drifted off.
"We were his golden horde, you see, and he would defend us at all costs. And dragons loved secrets more than gold. You know what that secret that he defends so fiercely? I bet you're starting to guess," the voice asked. It wasn't a question.
I was. Dread spread like black ice down my veins. My heart quickened it's frantic pulse, almost like it had a voice of its own. No. No. No. No. No.
"We weren't insane. None of us were." the voice affirmed.
"The cell next to me used to have a man named Franklin James. He was a construction worker. The *Man* had collected him after paying for a renovation in one of the blocs. Threw him in one of these cells. He passed away a decade ago, did Franklin. Was never as tough as the walls he built. I should know, I heard him trying to dig through them every night." The voice choked out another laugh.
"Next to him was a woman by the name of Sarah Smith. She used to make pastries. Muffins. Croissants. Soft, fluffy things full of flavor. Can't say there's much left in the Den that is soft anymore. Those get weeded out fairly quickly, like Sarah did. She didn't last half a year through the electric shocks the Man so loved to give, to correct our *madness*. Our madness. Right."
"I've been here a long time, and the funny thing is, so have you." The voice paused.
"We've had this discussion many times by now. Always the same, when you woke up. Always the disbelief. The exact same as the first day we talked. The first day you made me up to hide from the shocks. From the torture. The day you made up an older man by the name of Hill, a man who missed fresh grass and sunshine. A man who could live through the pain and take the misery for you."
Nothing moved. Silence settled over the small cell like the soft cloak of death.
"Well, I'm tired." the voice said. My voice. It had always been my voice. My jaws ached from speaking. Why was I still speaking?
"It's your turn now," the voice said. "Maybe now I'll get to retreat inside of you, into a place without the darkness and the pain. Maybe now you'll get to take fifteen years of abuse with barely a soul to talk to. Or maybe you'll make someone new. You're good at that. In any case, it doesn't matter to me anymore. I'm done. "
"Give the Man in the Coat my regards, sonny." the voice-I- said.
The voice retreated, leaving me alone in the padded cell. I frantically looked at my clothes. A few tattered scraps were all that was left of my old coat. The patch read "Iza rld!" held on by a few determined tatters. In the corner were a few scraps of cardboard and blanket. This couldn't be real. This couldn't be happening.
The metal grate on the thick door shrieked open. The only thing I could see on the other side was a mouth full of broken, yellow teeth surrounded by cracked, wrinkled lips. A mouth befitting a demon. I could almost see the smoke wisp out of those lips as a long longue lashed over those teeth, anticipating the moment.
"Hello, Franklin Hill." The Man croaked.
"Ready for today's treatment?"
I started screaming.