"I was a great adventurer, long ago," Mulan said to her grandchildren.
They rolled their eyes and shifted in their seats as her children and nephews and nieces had done before, but that didn't stop her from telling her story. "I stole my father's armor, and I rode away from my father and straight to the army, where the prince was waiting."
"Grandma," one of the children - what was her name? There were too many to remember them all - asked her with wide eyes. She was a believer, Mulan could tell, a rare quality among her friends and family, even those who knew better, "Grandma, was Grandpa really a prince?"
"He was," Mulan said with a hint of pride, remembering the conquest and how happy she'd been, "and he is still, though his older brother holds the throne."
"Could he ever be emperor?"
"No, child, his brother has many sons with sons of their own. The throne will pass to them long before it passes to him."
"Grandma," a boy spoke up, again with a familiar face but no name - drat it all, where had her memory gone? - "Grandma, what about the dragons?"
"There was only ever one dragon," she replied, "and a great and powerful beast he was. Without his guidance and powers, I never should have made it through the war."
"Grandma..." another child asked, but then a bell rang out over the grounds of the temple, and the children scattered away like excited pups, ready for their mother's teat. "Dinner!" Mulan heard over the clamor, "come back and eat!"
A few of the older children stayed behind to help her to her feet. "Thank you, thank you," she said as she hauled herself upward and positioned herself over her cane. "Run along now." They scattered as well, leaving her alone with her thoughts and memories, watching as they ran back to families and friends that she made possible with the sweat of her brow and the flesh of her back.
No, I must not think those thoughts, she thought. I am not special to them. Not any more.
There was a time when she was hailed as a hero, a time she remembered. The fire had purified her somehow, and after the Huns had fallen she emerged like a fiery dragon from the embers, ready to lead their great land. But her husband and his brothers weren't ready, and the old ways fell back into place. Soon she was a mother, and then a grandmother, and now she was a memory, an artifact of an earlier time, a relic consigned to the museum of the past, a curiosity worth little more than a passing glance.
"Oh, she told us she fought the Huns," they would say. "Oh, they say she donned her father's armor," they chatted. "But how could that be?"
Sometimes she looked out over the palace grounds, and she could still feel the heat from the flames and taste the soot in her mouth. She felt the weight of the blade in her hands as she danced across the rooftops, nimble and lithe. She remembered how her prince had looked at her as he realized the truth, saw her for what she was instead of what she pretended to be. With a pang of guilt, she longed for those days, and not for the first time.
"Is this what happily ever after feels like?" she wondered aloud, and then, leaning her weight on her gnarled cane, she stepped out of the temple and downwards, her shoulders weighed down with the past.