I dropped the marker in shock, staring at the board in wonder. 15 years...I looked at the mathematical solution written in electronic ink. The problem that had consumed me since I got my masters. I stepped back and stared at the board, as it cycled through the pages of mathematical insanity. I had finally proven the existence of a God. I had done it. I quickly began printing the 108 pages of my theorem, excited to stun the world. I picked up the last paper, still hot from the printer.
I placed the papers into a folder, which went into a briefcase. I then sprinted out of the small room I rented from the university. I left the room, ran down the hallway, and as I ran around a corner, collided with Dan the janitor. I fell to the floor, but Dan and his floor buffer didn't even flinch. Which was weird, considering he was 80 years old. Dan turned to look at me, amused. "Well, you seem a mite startled there, bud. What's on your mind?"
I grabbed my briefcase and stood up, a little flushed. "It's nothing." I said, straightening my tie. "Just little theory I was working on." Dan smiled. "Ah yes. The quest." I paused at his words for a moment, but decided to write them off as the ramblings of an old man. I stepped away from him. "Well, anyway, I must be going."
Dan grabbed my arm with an iron fist. "Not so fast." Startled, I stumbled back, but Dan didn't move, and neither did his grip. "Let go of me you crazy bastard!" Dan pulled me close. He smelled like ozone. "You mustn't reveal it. The world isn't ready for it. Hell, the world wasn't ready for it 10,000 years ago." We locked eyes, and I gasped. His were a waterfall that I fell into. But instead of water, I saw forests, rivers, oceans, stars, galaxies. I saw supernovas and black holes. I saw the Big Bang, and I saw time manifested.
Dan blinked, and the visions vanished. He pulled me close enough that our noses touched. The fight in me was gone. "You will take your proof of me and burn it. You will then scatter the ashes. You will erase it from your computer. If you do not, you will witness your vision first hand. He let me go, and I fell to the floor again, my heart racing. God turned his back to me and resumed buffing the floor. I stood up, clutching the briefcase to my chest. My voice failed me and as I backed away, he turned to me once more. The veins in his eyes glowed with the ferocity of the universe. "I'll know if you don't heed my words." His voice had changed to a deep baritone, multiplied over itself dozens of times. I nodded, and ran.