Arista stood frozen on the sand a safe distance from the edge of even the most ambitious wave. Her heart racing as she looked out to the ocean. She willed herself to move forward with every ounce of courage she could muster but her feet remained steadfastly planted. Her childhood friend Todd bobbed in the water motioning for her to join him. Todd and Arista spent the last week practicing for this day. The day Arista conquered her fear of drowning. Todd took Arista to a larger body of water every day and worked on overcoming her aquaphobia, starting with a kiddie pool in her back yard and finally ending up here at the beach. Todd would go in first then slowly Arista would follow until both were calm and floating in the middle. Arista hated herself for having such an idiotic fear especially considering she should be the last person on the planet with a fear of water. Todd swore to himself to accept his friend's unusual situation and do everything in his power to help her and he had picked up a few tricks along the way. He saw Arista wasn't moving forward so he did the same thing he had done every time so far, he moved deeper in the water, she knew if she wanted him to stop she would have to get in or he would just keep going he was an excellent swimmer and comfortable in deep water.
What Todd didn't notice was the rip current warning signs and suddenly he found himself being whisked away from the shore. The waves intensified and he was having difficulty staying above water. He looked back to the beach and Arista was running along the edge of the water calling for him to swim out, but he couldn't, he was gasping for air and inhaling more water than oxygen, he gave one final glance at Arista before he was submerged completely and unable to resurface.
Arista refused to stand by and watch her best friend perish. She pushed down her fear and ran as fast as her legs would carry her toward the water. Her phobia replaced with long lost instincts. Her feet splashed twice as she entered the water and she dove beneath a large wave. The second her toes and legs were submerged with the rest of her body in the salty water they shifted back to their natural state. No time to waste she used her newly restored turquois tail and large fins to thruster her forward toward the last place she had seen Todd. Her eyes adapted to the salt water and she could see further and clearer than she ever could on land. Arista spotted her friend's limp body drifting in the water. She swam toward him moving through the water faster than a torpedo. He was still alive but just barely; she reached around his chest and bolted toward the surface. Arista lifted Todd above her as they broke the water's surface. She quickly shifted back from her mermaid gills to human form and inhaled deeply then, pressing her lips to his, forced air into his lungs. In seconds he was coughing up water violently and struggling to catch his breath. Arista couldn't tread water for very long with legs so she shifted back using her tail to support her while she focused on keeping Todd's head out of the water as she carried him back to the shore.