"You'll probably feel nauseous when you come to again," one of the researchers said as he double checked the fastenings on my suit. Cry pajamas, they jokingly called it.
"Scratch that, you'll definitely feel nauseous," he continued. The other scientists circulated around the room like cogs in a machine. Keyboards clacked and sheets of paper were moved around as the final preparations for initiating cryosleep were in effect.
I didn't care much for it all. I always looked forward to a nap, so I figured this wouldn't be any different. If anything, it would be the best damn sleep I'll have in my life. No more work to worry about, or anything else for that matter. My responsibilities faded away, and I excitedly began to wonder what would be awaiting me on the other side.
Mind you, it would only be a decade past. This is the farthest they've sent the other test subjects, and from what I understand the science behind it is still too fuzzy to try for longer periods of time. In any case, there's comfort in knowing that it's been done before and that I'm not just some kind of lab rat being toyed around with by some fresh college graduates hoping for the best but expecting the worst. Nah, this is legit. As legit as it gets.
"Last chance to back out," quipped one of the other researchers. She was kinda cute--I always liked her. "Wait for me on the other side and I might just take you out to dinner," I told her. That drew a smile from her. "But I'll be old and decrepit and you'll still be the same age," was her reply. "Don't worry, I prefer the older types anyway." Another smile. Nailed it.
Two others approached me and led me backwards into the cryo chamber. Even with the suit on I could feel the chill emanating from inside. Once I was submerged in the water, that was that. No more communication, though I could see the group giving me thumbs up and a-okays through the glass. It wasn't long after that I went under. *This is it*, I thought. This was the big one. *The big sleep*. Hopefully not that kind, though.
*To be continued...*