Bill slammed the empty shotglass upside down on the counter. "Seriously! They never talk about how much...Ummm...Paperwork! Yeah! And shouting! They never mention that in the pamphlet!" He reached over the floating counter top and grabbed another green bag from the shelf. After uncapping the top, the liquid slowly slid out and splashed into another shotglass in his hand. The counter bobbed down slowly as Bob dropped the bag on it. "I signed up to go see the sights and meet new cultures! Not to get stuck in an office signing contracts and making ads! Paper after paper after- ugh- paper...Meeting the president even gets boring after the 20th time! So many questions that we had answered in our report months ago! You never realize how much people don't read until you do something abnormal. They always want to ask the same question but hear the answer from you!"
Bill had forgotten that he was still holding the glass and his angry arm waving sent tiny orbs of the green liquid onto uniform of the person next to him. Aweah'jebe didn't notice though. His head was thumping and he was slumped over on the counter. He made a series of gurgling and clicking noises. From a band around his neck came a humming and then the translated message:
"I know what you mean! Even here! Our overlords- burp- put tons of pressure on us. We haven't even left our own planet! We've just been chilling here entertaining you. We're a welcoming committee! It's a good time going out and drinking and picking up girls but-"
"Yeah! Despite the gills, the green skin, and the really big eyes, the girls here are pretty dang good looking!"
"Oh yeah, definitely. Just wait until they legalize cross-species marriage! Your gravity is so much worse. You can do crazy things here. I can't imagine doing it with a girl so heavy and so slowly...Ummm...What was I- Oh right! What I don't understand is how- ugh- you're drinking me under the table so easily!"
"Probably that dang gravity again. Alcohol just floods in and out on Earth. Here, the alcohol chills in your blood for such a long time! Your kidneys barely have the work and the good times last so much longer! Which reminds me: Here is another shot!"