"So, what have you been struggling with the most?" Dr Frankenstein asked one of his fellow competitors as he sat backstage before the event.
"Glutes, mostly." Arnold replied.
"Glutes?" Frankenstein thought to himself "This guy's good, I wasn't even going to be going into such detail. I've been struggling with just getting this guys head on straight in practice and this guy is already going into muscle details? I'm so going to lose."
"You?" the man asks the visibly anxious Doctor.
*Think, think of something, you can't just tell him 'the head' he will know you're a fraud. "The vas deferens and the genitals have been particularly tricky."
Arnold smiled, picked up his protein shake, and walked away quickly.
"Okay everyone, let's get out on stage" Ivan called as the contestants filed out of the small holding area.
The doctor watched as they all stripped down. "Well that's confident," he said to himself as he pulled up his long black rubber gloves. "I'd rather stick to more sanitary methods" he added as he signaled to Igor to wheel out his cart of miscellaneous body parts.
"Do you hear them? They are all applauding the work already, this will be a disaster! And where on earth did you get this duodenum; are you trying to give him a peptic ulcer?"
"Sorry, master"
Terrified but knowing he had to face his fears the doctor put on his face and pushed the cart out onto the stage.
"I apologize for the delay" the young doctor said as he introduced himself and grabbed his scalpel. "It is important that you remove any necrotic flesh before you begin, scooping out the left eyeball of his specimen, "And always bring extras!" he joked as he held up the rotting tissue.
Wilhelm screamed and set off a panic throughout the venue as people jumped over each other to exit the auditorium. "Oh jeeze," Frankenstein began "I'm so losing my tenure over this."
Looking out over the empty room the doctor could only sigh and judge himself for his failures when suddenly a hand came across his shoulder, giving it a little squeeze of assurance.
The doctor turned around to see Ivan standing there with a smile on his face, "So, can I watch?"