"Number 108, today's your turn," a voice rang through my skull as it shook me from sleep. I panicked; throwing off the sheet as I frantically looked around me for my clothes. My hands came into contact with a silky cloth, softer than anything I had touched before. A grimace formed on my face as I touched the sheer dress, grabbing handfuls of it onto my body. So this was it then; the day I would meet the king.
I bit back my urge to scream as the jailer tied my hands. Slaves took me from the simple room, leading me to a small bath chamber. They washed me meticulously, easing the dirt and grime out of my hair, vigorously scrubbing my skin. My skin became pale, and then flushed. Oils were rubbed into my skin. My nails were clipped and filed. My terror built as I looked for a way to avoid the confrontation, but I could think of nothing.
A pair of guards entered. Their faces and bodies were hidden by dark robes and curved blades hung at their waists. They waited as I adorned the dress and blindfolded me. A firm hand was placed over my own, leading me forward. I'm not sure how long I walked through corridors up a flight of spiraling stairs, but I was shaking by the time I arrived. I felt lecherous eyes probe me, confirming what the luxurious carpet and thick incense had made me suspect.
"They've certainly brought me a pretty one today. What's your name? Ah, it won't matter anyways, after tonight." The voice hit me like rolling thunder, and I shook under its impact.
"M-my Great King… it's that time of month. I'd be b-b-better able to serve you in a fortnight," I stuttered. Cold sweat appeared all over my body.
The king roughly pulled off my blindfold, evaluating my face. The light stung my eyes and I blinked tears. "I've killed a hundred treacherous girls; did you think none tried to lie to me?"
Suddenly rage filled my mind. I had done nothing to deserve this. I've worked hard all my life in the village, but I'm here just because of a Nobel's jealousy. I calmed my trembling and stared back into the King's eyes.
"Very well, off me if you will. There's a girl from my village, the Overseer's daughter. She is also a virgin, and is much prettier than me. Promise me, you'll kill her next!"
The king laughed; a single sound at first. The laugh continued, and before long he was gasping for breath.
"You won't be killed tonight," the King said as he spun around and fell into his blankets.
"Not tonight? Then am I…?"
"We'll see, we'll see."
I laughed nervously as the bell chimed midnight.