*Northeast of Syria, heavily fortified city Deir ez-Zor. *
Sandstorm was over. It cost Syrian Arab Army 26 well-trained soldiers and northeast quarters of the city called Baqiyah. SAA was low on morale. After all they were besieged for more than 2 years now by cruel men who is going to kill them, torture them and rape & pillage whatever they care about in the city.
At the Baqiyah, Euphrates Hotel ISIS was singing songs and chanting over victory. They were successful at using sandstorm as cover and they got a hold of strategic part of the city to launch attacks from.
ISIS was using inexperienced newly joined forces in fronts such as Palymra or other hopeless places that they are definitly going to lose. But These guys were different, they were the elites of ISIS forces called shock troops. They were battle hardened soldiers that ISIS used to take Mosul, Raqqa and North of Aleppo. Nobody fucked with these guys and lived to tell the tale.
While they celebrate the half victory a guy enters from the revolving door of the hotel. He was tall guy with a lanky arms and he looked really skinny under that traditional arab clothes. He was looking like a giant beach umbrellas.
"Hello comrades" He says. Nobody says anything back to him. Being heavily radical islamists they weren't drinking shit at the party so everyone was sober. Yet the situation was so bizarre they were struck like lighting. "hoorayy Allah may peace upon him am I right? we really owned those suckers. Now where is the booze and hoes"
"Since medieval wars, since your kind first came to these lands. Only infidels chanted hooray. We chant 'Allah Allah'. "says the leader of the group (his beard was the longest) and raises his AK-47. The rest of the group surrounds the tall guy.
"Yikes, that wasn't successful i guess. Ok man you have struck an cord with history and I am really impressed. Now drop your guns or I will swear to god, Allah or whoever the fuck is I will blow your fucking brains all over the floor"
------
[The Blog
] (http: //whydontyousingfreebird.blogspot.com.tr/2016/01/inspector-gadget-attempts-to-infiltrate.html)