Akron returned to his room, another day gone and he was no closer to finding work. He was a good swordsman, but the army had just dismissed a legion of good swordsmen back to a kingdom who did not need a single one. He might have found work as a Night Patrolman had his unit been in one of the companies nearer home when the war was over. As it was, he and likely most of his brothers in arms were living on tabs and promises of payment. He was beginning to wonder how much farther he could make his 'soldier's honor' stretch.
He had nearly gone to bed when there was a knock at his door. He opened it to find an empty walkway. He stepped out to look down into the tavern and saw no one rushing for the door. When he turned back to his room he saw a note just on the other side of his door. It read, "Akron, Meet at King's Fountain. I have work. - Pitch." Akron folded the note. Pitch had never been a brave man in the company, but he was the most resourceful. What he lacked in holding the line he more than made up for in his scrounging after the line no longer needed to be held, most of which he kept for himself.
---
Akron waited at King's Fountain as the letter asked. A chill swept through the empty square and he wished he had brought his coat. The hairs on his neck pricked when he heard a set of footsteps approaching. "Akron old boy," a voice called, "I didn't think you'd come." He held his arms out wide.
Akron turned, "You were right to think so," he replied, keeping his hands in his pockets.
"C'mon sarge," Pitch goaded, "Is that any way to greet an old man-at-arms."
"As I recall, your arm stayed sheathed more often than not," Akron said back, a hint of bitterness coloring his words. If Pitch was disappointed he did not show it. "You said you had work," he laid down his cards. They were not and had never been friends, but the promise of work bought Pitch a meeting.
"Alright," Pitch said, slumping a little, "I work with one of the Mage Schools."
Akron waved his hand, "No," he said, "No thank you, I'll have none of that."
Pitch raised his palms, "Please, Sarge, just hear me out." Akron shook his head, but then nodded. "They just need some muscle, Sarge. You don't got to do anything, you don't got to say anything. You just need to be in the room to make my guys look tougher than they are."
"Tougher?" Akron spat, remembering the power the wizards wielded during the war. Some nights he could still see the crawling embers on his men when the enemy Fire Schools unleashed their power on his lines. "Why would they need to look any more dangerous than they are?"
"Sarge, it's just a power play. This school's not a big one, they just need to bring up their numbers a bit at the meeting," Pitch said, shrugging his shoulders.
"What meeting?" Akron asked, squinting at the scoundrel.
Pitch shook his head, "I shouldn't even be telling you this," he said as his eyes widened.
"Talk."
"They want a seat at the Mage's Circle," he said, "Something big is about to happen in the city, and they want a part of it when it all goes down. No one's taking them seriously because they don't got the numbers."
"So what?" Akron asked, "You add to them one guy who can't use magic?"
"Not just one, Sarge," Pitch said already starting to wince, "I got some of the other guys from the company."
"Gods on high, Pitch," Akron sighed, "All of them?"
"No, Sarge, not all of them. Some of the boys didn't want no part of this. Still shaky from the Mage Fire. You remember don't ya Sarge?"
Akron nodded and clenched his jaw.
"I'll pay you standard plus what I would have paid the other guys," Pitch said, "It won't work without you, Sarge. You gotta get them back in line, whip them up, look impressive. The mages I work with will take care of the rest."
Akron began to shake his head, but his stomach grumbled loud. A hint of a smile crept across Pitch's mouth. "How much does it pay?" Akron asked.
Pitch tossed a bag of gold coins to his old superior. "That's just what the other guys get," he said already grinning, "You get that bag and four more like it."
Akron looked inside and saw more gold than he'd seen in a long time. "Fine," he said.
Pitch clapped his hands, "Good man, Sarge."
"But I won't take more than the men," Akron said, "divi it all up evenly."
"Alright, Sarge, alright. If that's what you want," Pitch said as he wrung his hands. "The Archmage is gonna love you."