I could rule the world if I wanted to. Be revered by all mankind and be looked at as a God. But I will do none of this. I will not help the world nor will I harm it. I'm not interested in that anymore, I'm not really interested in anything anymore.
Many people would say I'm selfish for thinking the way I do. Being able to help the entire world, yet I do nothing. I could tell people why I think this way, but they wouldn't understand. You see I know life is meaningless, I know there's no point or moral to be had. That every action isn't worth the effort. Of course others think this way, but there's a difference between thinking you know and actually knowing. I didn't always have this mind set though. The way I think is a result of the power that was bestowed upon me. One that I did not ask for, and certainly would never want.
You see when I die, I wake up as my six year old self. You would think it would be amazing. To keep re-living your life doing everything you wished you could have done, but that's not the case. You see it takes away life's meaning. Everyone else's life has meaning, or at least it does to them, and that thought is all I wish I could have. The thought that anything I do has some value. For me everyday is like being trapped in a glass jar with the oxygen slowly running out, but it never does. I can never die no matter how much I want to.
In the beginning it was different. Life would have been exciting, it would have been enjoyable. To be able to re-live life, correct all stupid things I did, to ask the love of my life out, to work harder and make myself better than I was before. I tried to learn everything I could. From the arts to engineering I wanted to learn it all.
I would eventually know how to build quantum computers or make sustainable fusion. I would know how to make the cure to cancer and the common cold. I even learned how to create worm holes and transverse entire galaxies in mere seconds. It took a while to learn this of course, I never was the sharpest tool in the box. But when you have lived billions of years you can pretty much learn anything.
Eventually I could single handedly progress all humanity millions of years ahead of what it should have been. We would land on Mars and have a colony before the 21st century. The whole world would be run by fusion plants by the year 2005. And then there was the way to prolong life, almost infinitely. That's when I made the biggest mistake of my life, to choose willingly to never die, and so I lived for billions of years in a single life. All the way til the universe was starting to end.
We tried to stop it, we tried practically everything. We even build an entire artifices galaxy just so we could try to survive, but nothing would work. It was then that I learned the truth of life. That everything comes to an end, that life is really meaningless. I then awoke, just as always as a six year old boy in my mothers arms. I looked at her face, a face I hadn't seen in almost 30 billion years. This was when my life ended, at that moment. Although I still breath and have a heart beat, I am dead inside.