The computer gave a three note chime of discovery, waking Ben from his light doze. He knuckled his eyes, feeling grimy. They'd been out for six weeks, nearly double the length of a normal run, but had been having bad luck. Every wreck he'd scanned up was tagged, and touching them was against the law. He figured he had enough problems without Galactic police hunting him down, so he'd moved on. But every time, his worry sharpened. He had a family to provide for, and a salvager who couldn't find wrecks starved.
After the tenth time pinging a tagged wreck, he'd decided to sweep an asteroid belt. He hated to take the risk, but they were running out of time. He hadn't bothered to wake Jade up from hypersleep and ask her if she minded putting their lives at risk. She would have just shrugged, anyway.
Ben thought sometimes that God had forgotten to put fear in that woman when He made her. Or any other emotions. The only things she expressed interest in were wrecks, and spending as much time in hypersleep as possible. He had a wife and daughter, and left skipping across time to Jade, who cared for no one. They had been partners for twenty years, and she didn't look a day over twenty-three, while Ben was starting to gray. He had a feeling she would long outlive him. But at least when he'd asked her to split their income 70/30, she had just shrugged.
"Is it tagged?" Ben croaked at the computer.
"Tag not found."
"How big is it?" he asked, excitement beginning to rise.
"Artificial matrices scan over 100 kilometers."
"Tag it now!" he said joyfully.
"Tagging," said the computer obediently, but Ben wasn't listening. He was already out of his pilot's chair and pulling himself to the back of the little wrecker. The ship he owned was almost all cargo bay, but he did have all four sleep pods required by law nestled in the corridor to the main airlock.
He punched in the code sequence for sleep release and waited. If he hadn't been in zero gravity he would have bounced from foot to foot, but instead he fidgeted by pushing himself back and forth between the corridor walls.
At long last the pod door slid aside, and Jade floated out, her short black hair standing on end.
"What've you got?" she asked at once.
"Big one," he said. "100km."
She gave a small smile. "We'd better get to work."
*****
The wreck wasn't just large, they soon discovered. It was a transport ship hauling platinum, and Ben was a little surprised the company hadn't sent out a recovery team. Salvagers rarely came across such large, valuable finds. Perhaps the shipping route hadn't been received properly, and the ship was badly off course. A good insurance policy or the risk of the asteroid belt may also have made recovery a losing proposition.
In any case, he was glad they hadn't. A wreck like this came once in a lifetime, and would set them up for years. Jade had been tractoring in neat packs of foam-wrapped titanium for two days, and the hold was nearly full. It would take four trips just to retrieve the cargo, and several more for the ship parts.
Ben had done two EVAs, searching for the sleep pods. The computer told him it couldn't find any active signals, and he knew that transport ships were often unmanned, but he still always looked. He had found three empty pods, and was suiting up for another EVA to look for the fourth, when Jade opened her mic.
"Ben, you should take a look at this."
"Be right there."
He hooked his helmet to his belt and headed for the cargo bay. His partner was strapped into the tractor control seat outside. Jade was deft with the tractors, able to spin the fine filaments out eight at time without tangling them. She was a worthy partner just for that; Ben could only handle four tractors at once, and preferred EVAs.
"It's strange," she said, pointing at the screen. All eight filaments were out and pointing at the same object. They looked like snakes poised to strike.
"What is that?" He peered at the screen.
"I don't know. I thought it was a piece of the ship, but the tractors won't lock on."
"Let's get a look at it through one of the tractor cams."
Jade gave the command, and the object appeared on the screen, much bigger, but still indistinct.
"I think it's an asteroid," she said. "I've never seen one that looked like that, though."
Ben agreed. It was the shape of a small asteroid, lumpy and oblong, but it seemed to shine with many colors, and he couldn't quite tell where the edges were.
"How big is it? Can we get a better picture?"
"Seems to be about fifty meters across. This is the best the tractors can do. Sorry."
"I was going out anyway," he said. "I can get a good look at it with the suit cam."
Jade shrugged. "We've got plenty here without some weird rock," she said. "Up to you."
But his curiosity was spiked. The asteroid, if that's what it was, was fifty kilometers out, so he locked his suit into the EXO, making sure its thrusters were full.
Traveling fast was a recipe for death in an asteroid belt, so he kept his speed at ten meters per second. It took him over an hour to near the asteroid. The tractors were long gone, and he knew they would be hard at work elsewhere in the site.
He used the thrusters to slow his approach, and made sure his suit cam was on.
"About there," he told Jade.
"Copy."
He was close enough to see the colors, and while he examined them they shifted and rippled.
"The colors we saw are moving. It might be rotating, can't tell yet. Going to get closer."
"Copy," said Jade dutifully.
Ben moved in at half a meter per second. When he realized what he was seeing, he stopped breathing.
"They're flowers," he whispered.
He swept his gaze over the shining things, struck with wonder. There were no leaves, only petals. The ones nearest him were a deep blue, edged with an electric purple shot with green, the tips hinting at colors no human eye could see. Each flower was a trumpet, with six petals fanned out like lilies.
"Say again," Jade's voice seemed very far away.
Ben fixed his eye on a single flower, watching as its blue blossomed into red. Its bell and those of its immediate fellows turned toward him slowly, as if in greeting, then away.
"It's an asteroid, all right," he said. "It's growing flowers."
"Flowers?" He had never heard Jade sound confused before.
"Space lilies," he laughed. "I've never seen anything like it. How is this possible?"
"Copy. I think you should come in, Ben."
"I will." He reached out and stroked the underside of a petal. It moved with his finger, closing slowly, then returned to its original position. It reopened, undisturbed.
"Ben," she said, worry in her voice.
"It's all right, I'm coming." Regretfully, he turned away. He was careful not to point his thrusters at the flower colony when he left.
*****
Jade tried to hide how impressed she was with the video he had taken, but he wasn't fooled. She was almost as excited as he was.
"Do you know what this means?" he said.
"We send out the beacon for discovery of alien life."
"And?"
"And it's under our tag. We're going to be extremely wealthy."
Jade smiled. "You'd better go send a message to your wife. You aren't going to be home for a while."
Ben smiled back. "But when I get there, I get to stay. Say, do you wanna buy a ship?"