"Hey, Todd! What's up?" I waved to Todd from across the lobby. He waved enthusiastically back and started to walk over.
"Craig! Didn't expect to see you today. I see my assassins have failed again!"
We both gave a hearty chuckle, and he slapped my shoulder a few times as we shared the old familiar joke.
"So how's the family these days? Is your wife doing well?" he asked, the smile slightly fading from his face.
"They're decent, you know, not bad. Mary had some pretty bad food poisoning the other day, but the doctor put her on antibiotics and she's getting better. Gotta be careful with Chipotle these days, I guess. Never thought it'd happen to us, though, you know?" I said thoughtfully.
He nodded solemnly. "I've heard of some pretty nasty stories coming out of there recently. It's a shame, really. A damn shame."
"It really is. World's a scary place these days, you know? Hell, just last month my twin brother (you've met Thomas, right?), he got mugged in broad daylight! Scares me to think that I almost took the kids out to visit him in Long Island last week. That could have been us!" I shuddered.
He looked disturbed. "Wow, that's insane! Lucky it wasn't you, though, right?" He smiled a bit at that.
"Yeah, for sure. And there was that time our house was broken into a year ago. We could have been at home then! But look at me, talking so much. What's going on with you, man? I feel like it's been forever since I last saw you! Are you still dating that one girl? Carly, or something?"
"Nah, we ended it a few weeks back. It just wasn't right, you know? You know when you feel it, and that just wasn't it," he concluded.
"Man, I'm sorry. It seemed like you two got along pretty well. Say, while you're here, can I ask a big favor of you?" I asked suddenly.
"Sure, Craig, what's up?"
"Well, I was driving here, and believe it or not my brakes stopped working almost as soon as I got off the interstate! Luckily I was already going pretty slowly and was able to pull off to the side and get the parking brake going before I called a tow truck, but now I'm stuck here without a ride, and I don't want to make Mary get up and drive me back home while she's still sick. I can pay for gas and everything."
"Absolutely, man, I'd be glad to. Don't worry about gas, that's totally fine. Talk about good luck, though. That couldn't have been better timing!" He almost looked frustrated. I guess I probably was screwing up his schedule a bit.
"Hey, thanks a ton. I'm really sorry. I owe you one for this. I'll meet you up by the front doors when we get off. See you around!" I started to walk away.
"Sure thing. See you around!" Todd turned and left in an opposite direction.
-
As promised, I met Todd at the door later in the day with my bag over my shoulder and a small sealed box in my hands. He gave me a questioning look.
"Ready to go? Say, what's that box? I don't remember you having that earlier."
I shrugged and answered truthfully. "No idea. Someone delivered it earlier today and said not to open it until I got home. Probably Freddie. You know how much he likes to play the secret agent." I chuckled. Todd apparently didn't find this as funny as I did.
We walked out to his car and had a surprisingly silent and awkward ride back to my home. After I clambered out of his old 2001 Honda Accord, he waved goodbye with a somewhat strained smile on his face before peeling out.
I unlocked the front door and went to check on Mary to make sure she was doing okay. She was sleeping peacefully on the couch in the living room, somewhat pale but still looking as beautiful as ever. I smiled slightly to myself. Suddenly, I had the feeling that I had forgotten something.
The box! I had left it in the back of Todd's car!
I sprinted outside as quietly as possible and tried hopelessly to catch him before he got too far away, but he was gone.
And that was the last I ever saw of Todd. That night, when Mary and I watched the evening news after putting the kids to bed, there was a story about a massive car crash on the interstate that was apparently started by the fiery explosion of a 2001 Honda Accord.
I was sad, in a distant way. Todd was such a good guy.