I look up from my laptop after a 3-hour study-binge. 3:46am. Eyes still raw from hours of straining, I see something out of the corner of my eye. This isn't out of the ordinary, so I ignore it. Slowly I rise from my chair in to a full-on, bone-crackling, almost orgasmic stretch. A couple squints and my vision focuses on a small envelope sitting in the middle of my floor in front of my closet. "That's odd," I thought. I didn't recall getting any mail today and I certainly didn't recall dropping it on the floor.
The front of the envelope reads 'Rachel' scrawled in red sharpie. My heart beat starts to pick up. I absolutely would have remembered getting a hand-addressed letter. Let's be real, I don't have a lot of friends and it is a rare occasion indeed that I receive any mail at all that isn't a bill or junk.
I think back to the last time I smoked, about four hours ago. I came down completely at least two hours ago. Smoking usually relaxes me but it's moments like this I know exactly why I'm so paranoid.
I consider this, snort to myself and grab the envelope off the ground. I dig a nail in to the side of the seam and tear it open. A small, white piece of stationary flies out as I rip the thing open in excitement. My 21st was a month ago, but knowing my family, this could be some late, much-needed birthday money. I unfold the sheet and begin to read the note. As my eyes scan the sentiment, my mouth runs dry and my heart drops out of my ass.
"Rachel,
As I stand here looking at you now, you have never looked more beautiful. Vulnerable. Delicious.
You'll see what I mean.
Much love,
Your Roomie"
My eyes snap towards the closet door. Closed. I don't close this door because the handle is busted and drifts ajar on its own. The only way it will stay closed is if someone were to hold it from the other side. I audibly gasp when I make this revelation.
As if taking this as an invitation, I see the closet door slowly begin drifting open. I back towards my dresser and retrieve the large pocket knife I was gifted at my high school graduation. "Be careful out there sweetheart," I hear my dad's voice echo in my head, "there are a lot of weirdos in the big city, and they all want a piece of you."
I think back to everything I've ever learned in my years of hunting. I think of my first kill, a middle-aged man. He had this wild look in his eyes as I was carving out his jugular. The look of a person begging to live. I revel in this. I think of the motto we are taught: Eat, or be eaten. I grab the door knob and slam the damn thing open.