"I'm flattered." right after I got hit by a huge truck, a male figure with black wings entered my field of vision.
"Handsome as always, Azrael." I stood up, ignoring my broken body. "May I ask, what in this humble human's act that flatter you?"
"Never before a human took the phrase *'flirting with death'* quite literally like you, Miss Reinia." Azrael smiled. "Well, it's not like I dislike your attention. So, this is third time this month, how long do you plan to stay?"
I laughed sourly "You know full well that no matter how much I like your company, I won't let myself got hit by a truck intentionally."
"There's no way to know if it's you, Reinia." a tinge of mischief glittered in his eyes. "So, care to join me for an evening tea?"
"It's exactly noon though."
"Who cares? This place has no time, after all."
I followed him into one of the open doors, it was supposed to be a small cafe, but the interior was far larger than the exterior permits. "One of the perks of being Death's best friend." I muttered unconsciously, gaining his attention.
"Having an inflatable cafe?"
"Having no competition would be more appropriate." his laugh filled the white marble chamber.
"Trust me, I'm quite popular in the another world."
"True, everyone in the underworld should've seen you at least once."
"Another joke you could only say to Death." we both sipped on our tea, and for a while only silence ensues.
"Even so, it's a truck this time, huh. Must be in the top ten of my painful experience."
"Out of curiosity, what is the number one painful experience you had?"
"Every single second I spend separated from you." I smirked, Azrael scratched his head.
"Well, imagine how painful would it be when your death actually come."
"Ah..." that's right, this white world isn't the Realm of Death, but merely the closest part where the World of the Living and the Realm of Death intersect, the place souls have to pass after dying.
"I'm sorry, that was in a bad taste." Azrael fidgeted.
"No problem." I sipped my tea agan.
"Say, Reinia?"
"Yes?"
"If you could stay here forever, would you discard everything in your world?"
I startled "That...I can't answer that question...I'm sorry, Azrael. That question is not one I could answer."
"But why?"
"Azrael..."
"I thought we loved each other, I thought even if you don't plan it, you actually wish we could meet again, I thought that even if it's painful, as long as you could be in my side..."
He fell silent.
"Death. It's not your name that I feared, nor the being that you are, nor the inevitability of your arrival."
"I'll return you to your body. It might be a bit painful, but your condition has stabilized."
"Wait! Listen, it's not because of you that I cannot answer your question."
"Death should have no business with those that still have the will to live. Death has no right to detain souls that destined to live on. Death should never..." a tears dropped from my eyes as I embraced his being.
"It's not because I don't love you, that I cannot remain in this world..."
"Death should never let itself fall in love with beings it cannot reach." a bright light blinded my eyes as I woke up in the hospital room.
"You're wrong." I whispered. "It was I who never deserves to fall in love with you." tears flowed through my scarred face.
In a realm neither of the Death nor the Living, a black-winged being floats in the emptiness.
"I should have never shown myself in front of you." it whispered, its black wings expanded to fill the vast whiteness.