"Who here has been in an aDAM attack?" I said, addressing the college audience. I was glad I was here, giving my account of the aDAM attacks. It was a good job; I sacrificed too damn much for this world, and it had given me little in return. Being a touring guest lecturer across the world was a dream come true.
Two kids raised their hands in the fact. The girl looked like she was about to fall asleep, but the guy poked her with a cane-yes, a someone still used a *cane* in 2112. The guy also raised his hand, his face grinning broadly. It really made me want to smack it right off.
"Interesting. There's at least 300, no, 500 students in this lecture hall? Usually, I get a lot more. I'm sorry. I apologize for not doing my duty as a U.N. soldier. Civilian casualties have been rising over the recent aDAM Encounters. Let us have a moment of silence and pray for all the students who could not make it here today."
And then there was that moment of silence. After lowering my head for the smallest of tilts, I opened my eyes early to find those same two kids looking at me. The girl looked bored, and the guy looked like he was trying his hardest crack up silently. It looked like he was having a spasm.
"You. Girl with the auburn hair and guy with the cane. Get up here," I demanded. The girl looked annoyed-did she have resting bitch face or something? -and elbowed the guy, who couldn't hold it in anymore and burst out laughing. The rest of the auditorium was quiet as the duo made their way forwards. It made the cane's impacts with the floor that much louder.
"You two are also U.N. soldiers, aren't you? Cains?"
"Eh? Yeah, how did you know?" the girl said, looking surprised.
"Arrogant brats," I growled. "Stop lying. First of all, even if you were Cains, you're not a soldier yet. You two are still students."
"Well, duh, we're students in a college auditorium..."
"Don't give me that attitude," I snarled. I wanted to slap her face. In fact, the guy's too. He gave up standing and was rolling around on the floor.
I put an arm proudly on my black uniform. "I am a U.N. soldier, part of the 82nd generation. I have fought in the previous 12th aDAM Encounter, when the aDAMs decimated Paris and terrorized everyone in France. I was pinned to the ground for hours when the level of the Gravity Field surpassed everybody's expectations. Do you know how hard it is to be helpless, unable to move? I only survived because I drank the rainwater that sipped into my mouth. I couldn't do anything as the aDAMs stepped onto my fellow soldiers and brothers. And you, *you* have the gall to pretend to be U.N. soldiers?!? You have not been in my situation! Have you been bragging to your friends that you're one of the lucky few to be Cains, defenders of humanity? Don't make me laugh. You're sad, pitiful, human beings."
This time, the girl also began cracking up. "Ooooh boy," she giggled. "This guy is really a looner."
Then the guy finally began to speak. "Please dude, stop speaking. You're embarrassing us. A true Cain never talks about past aDAM Encounters they've been in. They're too traumatizing."
"Too traumatizing for spoiled kids like *you*, I presume. And what about this?" I said, clasping my uniform. "Where are yours? Let me guess. They were somehow vaporized by the aDAMs, leaving you barely alive to tell the tale?"
"Wow, how did you guess?" the guy said, raising his eyebrows.
"I think mine's in the laundry," the girl said. She had a pinky in her ear, digging around for some earwax or something. Again, it made me want to tear their heads off. "Who's dead body did you get yours from?"
"Enough. Have an arm wrestle contest with me," I growled, lying down on the ground.
"Arm wrestle contest?" they both said simultaneously. Then they both began laughing again.
"It is below me to use violence," I said. "But I need to teach either of you to learn your places in front of a true Cain."
"Sure. Jenn, you got this," the guy said. The girl sighed, but also laid down.
I'll concede. I was not actually a Cain. The boy was correct; I looted the uniform off a corpse. But the experience was true. I was in Paris when the aDAMs hit and destroyed my life forever. My family was killed instantly: fiancee, parents, and everybody else at my wedding. Only my one-year old daughter was left alive, born out of wedlock. But despite our sins, my entire family, none of us deserved to die. It's a horrible feeling, having your child die in your arms, because the damned Cains took too damned long to slay the aDAMs.
So I undertook my revenge. Of course I couldn't use violence directly and suicide bomb into their headquarters or something. But I could embarrass Cains, like those two naive fools who thought they could challenge me. My arm wasn't real; lost in the Parisian aDAM Encounter, I had it replaced with a robotic arm. covered with real skin. A strong robotic arm, one that would not lose to even Cains. The charade has been going on for a while, and been going well. I was having my revenge.
"So cocky you think you can beat me, little girl?" I said, readying my arm. To my surprise, she took her pinky out of her ear and placed that sole finger on my palm.
"Ready?" she said, and at that moment, I knew I was fucked. A split second later, bolts and screws were flying around everywhere, electricity spewing from splayed wires as I stared in shock.
"God, you're such a dumb dude if you didn't think the U.N. was watching you," the guy said, yawning. "Please. H.Q. wanted to expose you directly with a public announcement, but we Cains convinced them that we wanted to have some fun. Mannnn it was hilarious seeing you 'beat' Cains in arm-wrestling contests who pretended to try their hardest. Shame Jenn here was getting too pissed off."