"Good morning, Mr. Choi. The hour is 7:42 AM, Wednesday. Weather foreca-."
"Stop. I don't need the weather report, Vegas," Kevin could see the sunlight through his eyelids. His apartment's management system had already opened up his blinds to wake up him.
"This is the sixth time in the past 22 days that you have interrupted a weather report. Would you like me to discontinue your weather report subscription?" Vegas asked. Kevin sat up, his knees pulled towards his chest, his arms resting on his knees, his gaze a muted glare to the touch control and microphone panel at the doorway to his room. He made a mental note to contact ISM (Interpersonal Services Managers) customer support to discuss the word choice algorithm in the empathy suite he had installed into the apartment management system.
"What would have been a better word," he thought out loud. *Interrupted seemed so, annoyed? Like the machine was frustrated with being unable to perform it's function. Declined. Declined would have been better, * Kevin thought to himself.
"Does that cancel my stock ticker updates?"
"Yes. I've made three inquiries to your News Subscriptions. Service Representative Lawrence indicated he spoke with his manager yet again. He indicated he is still unable to separate your services without a rate change as a result of canceling your bundle. He offered alternatives. Would you like to hear them?"
"No thank you, Vegas. Bullshit is bullshit regardless of who it's coming from."
"Your word choice suggests you are upset. Would you like me to prepare an extra egg with your breakfast? Your most recent blood sample indicates your cholesterol levels have been....healthy...for...the past 1,420 days," Vegas said.
"No, thank you. I'll eat at the office. They cook better than you do. Coffee is just fine," Kevin said as he pulled his arms through the sleeves of his dress shirt and eyed the overnight package of stubble his chin had delivered.
"I am sorry that my culinary systems are not up to standards. ISM has indicated a patch is due for release in two months to fix the salt and oil ratio bug. Coffee is brewing. You are down to 6, Keurig canisters. You have opted not to restock. Is this correct?"
"Yes. Vegas, disable your voice simulator for one hour, switch to overhead text, and call Sharon."
His apartment had no soft surfaces with the exception of his furniture. No carpets. No rugs. He had wood flooring, real wood, not the fake stuff imported out of South America. Brushed steel plates hung on the exposed concrete walls, giving his space an industrial look that Sharon hated. She hardly stayed over. If he was honest with himself, that was half the point of his interior design choice. A home that felt that way only to him.
"Morning, beautiful," Kevin cooed as he heard the telltale click of the call being picked up. He smoothed out his consonants, lowering his voice to give it that deep resonance she loved to hear when he woke up next to her.
"Would be better if you were here, even more so if you would be original," her voice had just a bit of gravel. Sharon was a snorer.
"I can be tonight, assuming we're still on for tonight. I'll bring a bottle of your favorite wine and make lamb chops."
"Only if you stay over."
"Done. You heading into the office today?"
"I could. Or I could take the day off so I'm fresh for you when you get here," she laughed playfully, "maybe you could do the same?" Kevin imagined the mischievous look she had on her face, and grinned.
"Sorry. Got paperwork to catch up on. Captain's been threatening me with an enema if I don't get it done."
Kevin stopped abruptly in the hallway leading up this front door, one hand sliding on his right shoe, the other clipping his handgun to his belt. He looked up to see a holographic projection of Sharon's face, her features still soft through the grimace she wore. He smiled back apologetically.
"Didn't need that image, Kevy." Kevin blew her a kiss.
"I'll make it up to you."
"You had better."