*Edit: Doing as /u/packos130 and putting the prompt after so to not spoil the story. *
"I can hear you trying to sneak by."
For a moment Phil thought he got lucky. His bosses chair was turned around, facing the window. He figured he could tip-toe past his bosses office undetected so he could meet his girlfriend for lunch fifteen minutes early.
"I.. I'm sorry Mr. Crawford." Phil stammered. Mr. Crawford spun his fully adjustable leather chair around, revealing steepled fingers and a sly, closed-lip smile. Mr. Crawford had been given a nickname for his strict deadlines, unforgiving adherence for reprimand, and the general super-villain-esque way he carried himself around the office. They called him "Doctor Doom." Just like the comic book villain. At some point it became abbreviated to just "Doom."
Doom sniffed the air and gave a quick glance over Phil's blatantly guilty and unnerved posture. He then stared Phil in the eyes, and his grin got slightly larger.
"That's the same atrocious tie you wore last time you tried to sneak out early."
Doom spoke with his usual confident and nonfluctuating tone. His mild southern accent would be a great voice for radio, had he not inspired so much conditioned terror in his conversational counterparts.
"Tell me, where is it this time? Banking errand? You want to beat the Friday lunch lines? Hmm...No. Fidgety Phil, you've been working on the Wilson account all morning, a big account NO? Normally your nervous little fingers would have plied patterns in your miserable excuse of an 'Ivy league' crew. But no, your hair is styled, styled like you spent office time fixing it in the washroom, yes? And that smell, you wreak of bathtub cologne, and your Walmart brand shoes are shined for once; tell me, did you tip our poor shoe-shining Joe this morning, or did you stiff him, like you're about to stiff me out of 15 minutes so you can make it your date on time?"
"I.. I was going to stay 15 minutes late at the end of the day s-sir. My girlfriend told me that she was having a rough day, sir." Phil's put his hands in his pockets and submissively stared at the ground.
"Yes. I'm sure you will stay late tonight...Phil, do you know why your lunch is between 12:00 and 12:30? It's because that is when I need you to take lunch. If I was to have an emergency at 11:50, and our client needed an answer to an important question that only you knew, how would we proceed?"
"You could call my cell-phone, sir."
"Ah. Of course. So when we call and you say that you need to see the file to answer his question, and you're at the Cactus club, or whatever rube restaurant makes you feel like you're back on in small-town Virginia, you'll come right back I assume? So maybe you pay the waiter and get the food to go, but Friday's are busy, so you're out of there when? 12:03? Then nine minutes return, assuming the elevators aren't busy with the traffic of honest, hard-working employees on their real lunchbreak. Now our client has been waiting 30 minutes for his answer and you have missed your opportunity to pacify your girlfriends fragile sensibilities."
"I. Well, I just figured I made good progress this morning on the Wilson account I could maybe go do something for my g-"
"**NO**, your progress is circumstantial and your excuses are ad hoc. The pestering little whims that circle through your head have made you their slave Phil. You are a slave to little buzzes of immediate gratification and helping yourself to company time. I see you taking extra coffee breaks and fooling around with Pam at reception when there is still work to be done."
"And this 'consoling' you will be doing for your girlfriend, that fifteen minutes will help you do it? Or maybe you need the time for something else, maybe you need to visit the bar first, have a little shot for courage?.........Oh don't respond Phil, your employer just accused you of drinking on the job. It's not a secret or anything, your hands have been shaking since you got here this morning, and you spilled your coffee already. Tell me, what else did you spill? Perhaps on one of your frequent bathroom breaks you took one of those tacky little airport liquor bottles, maybe one or three? And your hands, that shake, your nervous little ticks.. I guess you have enough cologne to cover up the smell though, yes?"
Phil's face turned red, and his lips quivered into a painful grimace as he choked back anxious tears. "I'm.. Sir, please. I need this job."
"Yes, I know you do. You are 23 and in your first job ever, no? I saw your transcripts, outstanding post-secondary, bravo! But your high school grades were not so great, were they? You didn't get offered a scholarship did you? So Ma and Pa worked their land dead and pinched their pennies so you could go, but it wasn't enough was it? Yale is a pricey school. You had a loan, which put you under considerable debt, didn't you? You couldn't let your parents down and live with the guilt of breaking their bank for nothing, so you studied hard, too hard to party on the weekends, yes? Where does one like you find the time to develop an alcohol problem, hmm Phil?..."
"Sir, I'm. I don't -"
"Yes. I know you don't have a problem Phil. Not an alcohol problem anyway. You just have an anxiety problem...By now I've realized that your mind hasn't been on the job this last little bit, but why? You're ridiculous tie, atypical shoe shine and fanciful hair styling betray your delicate, anxious compulsions, your need for static routine...Today you planned on leaving 15 minutes early for lunch for a total of a 45 minute lunch break, but downtown on a Friday you could easily be held up 30 minutes just waiting for a table. Tell me Phil, she doesn't need consoling, does she? This isn't a spontaneously planned comfort lunch, is it?...Where is your reservation?" Without breaking eye-contact, Doom's head pointed down slightly and his smile grew, as he stared at Phil in anticipation.
"C-c-c-chez Marko's"
"I see. And that bulge in your pocket. It's an engagement ring, no?...How many months salary did you spend on it? Three? Sure, you spent three-months salary on it. You're a classy grass-roots boy Phil, with a strong compass to familial value. It's probably shaped like her favorite animal, you'd be attracted to a caring type, it's in your bones, Phil. Please, let me see it?"
Dumbfounded by Doom's remarkable accuracy, and afraid for his job, he pulled out the red velvet box and diffidently placed it on the desk.
"Open it boy, I'm not going to touch your girlfriends engagement ring."
Phil opened the box with his paint-shaker hands.
"Cat's eyes...Yes. I like cats too. You know I am within my power to fire you right now, with all that booze spilled on your shirt. Stealing company time...Do you know what the greatest display of power is Phil?"
"W-wrath sir."
"No, Phil. Forgiveness. I can ruin your life today. If I fired you right now, how do you think your $150 engagement lunch would go over? You think your ailurophile wants to marry an unemployed debt-ridden farm boy?..."
Phil stared, dumbfounded by the direction this conversation had gone in and Doom's almost clairvoyant insight.
"'Ailurophile', that's a cat lover, Phil. You think your cat loving girlfriend would like it if you were fired?.... So I have your entire life in my hands right now. I can fire you and watch it crumble. Or I can forgive you. That's the trick, I don't even need to fire you. That's how much control I have. You have broken several company policies just today, but I can let it slide without even worrying it's not the right decision. I am absolute power."
Doom steepled his hands again and paused a few seconds. He then removed his tie and placed it on the table. He then opened his drawer and grabbed a bottle of aged scotch and two glasses, pouring into them.
"Take off that dreadful tie, Phil. This one is Versace. A man must be presentable when meeting his future bride. Skip the bar, take a swig of this. 13 year old scotch. It traveled for 13 years to get here today, the day of your engagement. 13 years. Oh 13 is only bad luck if you have fear, and you just came face-to-face with fear and stood your ground. Don't let the ploy fool you, dear Phil, Doom is not such an apropos moniker for me, though I do enjoy the perception it yields in my staff..."
Phil's hands stopped shaking. He glanced at his watch, 11:51. He still had time to make his date. He downed the drink, and quickly fixed his tie.
"I assume that after your girlfriend says yes, you won't need to spend so much company time confiding with Pam at reception any more? And your excessive coffee breaks will be cut back, since you can focus on work again, yes? Maybe you'll focus so hard you'll impress us one day, earn yourself a little promotion, yes?"
"No. I mean yes. I meant no more wasted time and Yes to hard, err harder work Mist-"
"Don't come back until Monday Phil, take the afternoon off, I'll make sure payroll doesn't dock your salary. Mush along now Phil, you don't want to be late. Mush away." Doom spun his chair back around so it faced his window. He heard Phil's quick steps bolt out of the room.
"Thankyou Mr. Crawford!"
Doom would enjoy the omniscient perception Phil would have of him thenceforth, even if it was largely due to the two sharing the bathroom while Phil recited his proposal speech in the mirror, thinking he was alone.
Doom looked at his clock. He still had 7 minutes before the lunch break at 12:00. So once again, back turned to his door, he recited,
"I can hear you trying to sneak by." He waited another thirty seconds.
"I can hear you trying to sneak by."
"I can hear you trying to sneak by."
-
Prompted by: [(WP) The first sentence has to be the same as the last sentence, but the ending has to catch the reader off guard.] (http: //www.reddit.com/r/WritingPrompts/comments/21ajlg/wp_the_first_sentence_has_to_be_the_same_as_the/)