I have always been careful. ALWAYS. How the HELL did I get caught?!
I struggle against my straps, not even noticing when someone comes in. Man I'm getting sloppy...or rusty...hmm rusted blades, there's an idea...
The person speaks, it's a woman? "I have been watching you for some time..."
That canNOT be good. So I turn on the charm. "Oh really? Well I wish you would've shown yourself, maybe I could watch you~" and wiggle my eyebrows. Yeah, weird, but ladies seem to be easier drawn when guys are FUNNY rather than too flirty.
She huffs a breath. "I...I can't let you out of your straps just yet. Not. Not yet." She hacks a cough into her elbow. Ew. Germs.
She stands up a little straighter. "Does the name Ricardo mean anything to you?"
I had to search through my aliases before it clicked: I had, of course, a family. Ricardo was my older brother. He was...kinda good. Wasn't abusive, didn't drink too often.
However, just last year he was shot and killed by a very well-known mob boss.
They couldn't arrest him, especially when I doused out my own brand of justice.
Heh. Doused.
After a moment, I nodded slowly. "What about it?"
She hacked a cough, and I could see the speckled blood. "I...I was in love. And we were going to be married soon. I got pregnant, and well, had his baby. However, he died before the baby was even born."
Oh. *Oh*. I'm...an uncle? My brother was a *father*? What...
She coughed out a sob. "I have end-stage lung cancer, due to not smoking but from an infection in a not very well sterilized operation room. I don't have long to live. I know you're his brother you look just like him!"
She came closer. She was a...pleasant woman. Wavy locks of brown, deep brown eyes. Plump cheeks. She was nice.
I knew what she was asking of me, why she couldn't ask our parents. They were long dead.
She hovered over my straps, and I nodded. She undone me, and I sat up. "May I see the child?"
She nodded with tears in her eyes, and whisked up something out of the crib nearby. She tilted the babe. She, and it was a she, had curled black hair like my brother. Sleeping.
The mother sniffed. "I know you...kill people. And I know some may find that reprehensible, but honestly I also know how you are with kids, how your brother was. I have faith in you."
I agreed. I loved kids. I would love this niece of mine, this daughter of my brother.
I gently took her away, understanding when the mother's arms tightened even for a moment before relaxing.
She gave me instructions: feedings with formula, or the milk in the fridge. I could take it all home, along with the crib and the toys and anything.
Finally, she stood stock still, a woman with a plan. "I can't suffer any longer. Would you...?"
I nodded again, and gently covered the little girl in my arms, moving the blanket over the tiny, tiny ears.
She left.
I knew what she was going to do, and so I went outside, and I coddled my new found family.
And I waited.
I gathered up the child's belongings, made it seem like, say, a kidnapping, then put in a 911 saying that someone was shot.
I left.
The child, her name was Keke. A wonderful name.
I think I'll stop killing, just...just for a while. So I can get in the swing of things with her...just a little while...