"Let's go. Up and at 'em asswipe."
I slowly opened my eyes after I thought I had closed them forever. I looked down and around me every which way. There was nothing but empty space. It didn't have a color or any sort of look I could put into Earthly terms. It just looked like emptiness in the most basic sense of the word. I had no body. I had no idea how I was even seeing things or comprehending words. In front of me was a man sitting at desk with a large stack of papers. He was short and slightly overweight. He wore thick glasses and combed his thin, brown hairs over his hopelessly obvious bald spot. He looked like a man who hadn't had a day off in centuries. Tired, detached, and largely indifferent.
"Come on Jocko you're supposed to move in front of the desk and address me."
"How should I address you Sir?" I asked as I moved whatever I was towards him.
"I'm the Supervisor. Now look here Jocko you've got a difficult record to pick out. I'm going over your previous lives here and I'm not too impressed. You died today at the age of 55 from cirrhosis. But we'll go over that life later. In the life previous to this one you served in World War II. When you returned home you were paralyzed from the neck down and your wife left you for some American GI she met when they marched on Paris and you were still stuck on the Eastern front watching your pals get their brains blown off by Nazis. You killed yourself a while after that. I can't say I blame you."
"What are you talking about? My previous life? This is the only one I've ever lived!"
"Not quite Jocko, let's just say the world isn't what you made of it. We created everything, we watch everything, and someday we will end everything. We're the closest thing to any of your Gods there is."
"Who is we? What are you talking about Supervisor?" I somehow managed to stammer.
"Jeez Louise the worst part of my job is the repetitiveness. Each of you always ask the same questions. I swear you could replace me with a tape recorder and a computer. I don't know the answers to that question. My superiors don't tell me much. All's I know is it's my job to re-assign you to a new body once your old one has passed. The conditions of your next birth are based on the life you previously led. You're next in line."
"A new body? But how --"
"I'm going to have to stop you there Jocko there's a long line behind you. Now onto the analyzation of your most recent life. I felt bad for you after your death in 1958 so I put you in an excellent position for your new life. You were given the bodily aptitude to be a star quarterback. I put you in a middle class home in suburban Los Angeles. Your father was a quarterback in college himself and had a stable job as a plumber. You were given exceptional arm strength, exceptional vision, and the ability to make tough and correct decisions immediately. You were a star in high school and you let it get to your head. The girls, the parties, the cars. It was all just too much for you wasn't it, Jocko?"
"It wasn't as simple as you made it sound. My old man was an asshole. School was the only place I was accepted."
"This isn't a hearing Jocko you don't get a chance to defend yourself. Me reading this aloud is simply for the benefit of my superiors. You got your first jail-time at age 18. Assault in a bar fight. Lost your scholarship to Stanford. After you got out you became a mechanic (and a shitty one too, I might add). But boy, you still loved to drink. Those high school parties must've really been stuck in your head huh? You hit the dive bars every night until you were too shitty to stand. You met a nice girl there one night didn't you though? Knocked her up real good. She came crying a while later in that same bar because it was the only place she knew she could find you. Told you she was pregnant. You knocked her upside the head and walked out. Never saw here again did you Jocko?"
"I was young and drunk. I made a fucking mistake."
"That wasn't your only mistake. By this time you were about thirty. Your boss got sick and tired of you showing up drunk all the time and gave you the can one day. For five years you just laid around drunk until you were out on the street. Wandered around the streets for about ten years until you managed to get a job as a dishwasher in Bakersfield. Got yourself a ratty ass apartment blowing welfare checks on booze until you keeled over and died. That about right?"
"Fuck you. I don't give a damn what kind of fucking supervisor you are. You don't know me, you can't control me. I've lived my whole life as my own master. As my own captain. Whatever you fucking do to me next won't mean a damn to me. I'll always be in control of where I work, when I drink, where I live. You don't mean shit." If I could've spit on the ground at this point I would've. That slimy little shit really pissed me off.
"I'll let you live out this delusion for the next few seconds before you're reborn. Right about now your new mother is in labor in Manilla. She is a prostitute and you will be expelled any second now. Goodbye. Good luck. And I will see you next time."
With that everything faded to black. I looked up and saw a little peak of light which I began to move to.