Elon walked along the forest trail, breathing deeply of the smell of decaying leaves and cold. The sun was setting and the short, pale winter day had barely even melted last night's frost from the ground. He looked up at the sky, watching the now familiar arrangement of stars through the cold, dry air and the clouds of condensation from his breath.
It seemed like a sadly appropriate setting for the last few minutes of the human race. Winter and nightfall, the end of the cycle. Elon mused for a moment on how the cycle of seasons seemed to be a constant source of symbolism in the stories of all cultures that came from a place with a changing year. While the weather of his childhood was vastly different from that of his adopted home, the simple stories seemed to endure, no matter where you are.
He absentmindedly brushed his pocket where his smartphone usually was. It was, of course, gone. He had discarded it hours ago. It was doubtlessly buzzing away in the train station locker as hundreds of notifications, questions and urgent attempts at contact avalanched into it. Pointless buzzing. He had no desire for it to break his final enjoyment of the apocalypse.
The sky had faded from the pale champagne of the winter sunset to a deep purple. High cirrus clouds framed the growing green glow of the aurorae that were starting to dance, just a few seconds later than he had expected. Silent green and red fire wound in huge, sinuous curtains across the entire sky in a few seconds, far, far brighter than they had been in at least several million years.
Piercing through them, a painfully bright purple light blazed in the sky where Mars normally would have hung. All contact with the Martian colony would have been lost about 2 hours ago. Judging by the color and intensity, Elon quickly estimated that the surface temperature of the poor, dead planet must be climbing into the low millions of degrees as the final waves of neutronium kinetic impactors hammered it at nearly the speed of light.
At least the final curtain call for this place was pretty. Elon did not feel much guilt about humanity. *Homo sapiens* was an intriguing species and burned bright with potential. But it suffered the fate of being at the wrong place at the wrong time. The only technologically advanced sapient entity in 500 light years but still far too primitive to escape from the doom that was now bearing down upon them. Such was the story of countless millions of other species across the galactic disk over the last 2.7 billion years of recorded history. There was no sense in melancholy over an event as common as the rain washing away loose specks of dirt.
Elon took another deep breath, enjoying the exotic scents of the forest. So many unique chemical signatures, such a complex biochemical web. The loss of Earth's biosphere was a loss that he did feel with a keen, cutting pain. So much information, so much diversity, about to be lost forever. He wondered if some of his indifference to his dooming of humanity came from the anger from watching them squander the incomparable wealth they had inherited on this planet.
At least he had been able to save some of it. The first few years after landing here, he had spent his time incognito, gathering as many samples as he could from the biosphere. Precious engrams taken of genetic material, biosphere interactions, the flow of energy and chemistry. He had toiled as long as possible before packing up the data - a mere sliver of the bounty here - and launching it on a minus-space drone back to the fleet. There, it would be modified into new forms, integrated into the continuum and giving invaluable diversity to the whole. "The strengthening of the web is the duty of the unique" The mantra of his people still echoed through his mind, as clear and beautiful as the day he had learned it.
He had cursed the limited time he had. If only the fleet had been better positioned, his scout craft could have ridden to Earth along one of the spacetime currents tracing the ventral edge of the spiral arm and arrived here centuries earlier. It would have taken decades more to do a proper catalog. But any later and he would have run the risk of the drone's spacetime spoor being detectable by the long-range sensors of the approaching horde.
After the probe was gone, he had integrated into human society. A young male, traveling between continents for schooling made for an easy target. A quick assimilation of his bio-signatures and vaporization of the original body was simple. The lack of nearby relatives and the excuses of cultural barriers made his early mistakes in impersonation easy to cover up. Elon had never completely adjusted to this new form. Only two forward facing eyes incapable of visualizing ultraviolet light, the peculiar and problem-prone calcium-phosphate rigid armature for movement - his human shape had come to awkwardly fit like a mis-sized glove, stretched to fit over years of wear.
The most difficult task had been the ridiculous 'tense' structure of English. How a language could have such a complex set of constructs for temporal relationships still baffled him. Fortunately, his occasional pauses and stutters as he mentally parsed his syntax during interviews were brushed away as 'nerdiness' and being 'awkwardly charming'.
It had succeeded with barely 5 years to spare. Entrenched interests had nearly thwarted his plans to drive humanity to Mars colonization several times. How ironic that the most short-sighted and greedy of humanity had nearly saved it. After all, single-planet species were safe. The titanic, self-replicating machine hordes that scoured the galaxy would have silently passed humanity by, if not for Elon's prodding. However, that fragile, 225 human colony had doomed the entire species to a sudden and unstoppable eradication. A suicidal beacon in the predatory darkness of the cosmos. A singular answer to what humanity had called the Fermi paradox.
But in dooming this place, the horde had detoured precious distance anti-spinward, giving the home fleet just enough time and space to avoid their notice yet one more time.
Overhead, the aurorae grew in intensity until the greenish-red glow was nearly as bright as day. The leading edges of the horde's plasma lances were starting to smash into the upper atmosphere. Out of the corner of his eye, Elon saw a brief, white flash - probably the ISS being burned away in the torrent of superheated matter that was now washing over the planet. It was probably only a few more seconds before the plasma stream burned the atmosphere completely away and everything on the surface was scoured in purifying flame. Anything left in the deep oceans and in the crust would follow shortly after as the kinetic impactors boiled away the top several hundred miles of the Earth.
Elon sat down on a pile of forest detritus to the side of the trail. Cold wetness wicked through the seat of his pants but he didn't notice. Leaning back against the rough bark of a tree, Elon closed his eyes and narrowed his awareness down to the smell of the forest. Alien, deep and complex, the smell somehow reminded him of the concordance pools of home. He was filled with a deep regret that he would never smell them again, nor swim with his broodmates and lose his self in the song of the whole.
"The strengthening of the web is the duty of the unique."
How he wished he could have been with it/we/them one last time...
Elon drew one last deep breath of the cold forest air.
- Notes - somebody crossposted this thread over to /r/spacex and it tempted me into trying my hand at it. Written in a single pass in about 90 minutes, hopefully it's decent.