The vast hull of the X'tac ship emerged a million miles from the surface of the earth. Hatu sat in his chrome throne in the control room, gazing at the blue planet slowly spinning beneath them. They'd sent scouts eons ago and now the time to reap the planet's bounty had come. He lifted his fingers in an almost absent gesture. Beside him, his second barked out the orders. All around him, subordinates scurried around, beginning the assault. Canisters of poison shot out from the cannons. The canisters had been made to explode upon entry into the atmosphere. The acid would vaporize, but then, when it rained, it would rain acid. All there was left to do now was wait and Hatu was patient.
Hatu was not _this_ patient. They'd been raining acid on the planet for weeks. Still the planet rotated upon its tilted axis and still the humans did not come and beg mercy. He'd been told kings would beg to give him water and algae. That he could plunder their lands to his fill. Why did the humans not cry for succor?
A subordinate bowed low before him. Hatu waved his hand and his second barked at the subordinate to proceed.
"Sir," the subordinate said, shaking in fear but admirably keeping the tremor out of his voice, "our attack is failing. We are running low on ammunition."
"What!" Hatu roared. There was just the briefest moment of satisfaction when everyone started at the power of his voice. "How is this possible?"
The subordinate looked down now, too cowed to meet Hatu's eyes. Hatu glowered at him. "You will answer my question, scum."
"Sir," the subordinate said, voice barely above a whisper, "the earthlings. They-they appear to be…they appear to be drinking our poison."
"In fact, many people have been collecting it in large urns," another voice piped up somewhere behind him.
Hatu could feel the eyes of his subordinates upon him, looking to him for guidance, but all he could think was, "If the acid from the orange fruit could not burn the humans, if they could so boldly drink that, what use was any of their weapons?"