"Babe," Tyler rubbed her back gently as he stared straight ahead with glassy eyes, "We've known about this for a year. We're prepared. We've done everything we ever wanted to do. Now it's time to accept our fate." He spoke almost robotic, emotionless. He was just as frightened as she was, but he didn't let it show. He comforted her, but allowed his eyes to remain fixated in front of him. His hand became motionless on her sweat-soaked t-shirt.
Kate had been crying violently for the past two hours. Her make-up ran like two long black roads down her cheeks and her nose was red. "I don't want t-to die!" she exclaimed, mucus dribbling out of her nostrils.
He still didn't blink. The world was ending tonight. A massive solar flare was about to reach the Earth's surface and burn everything up. Including the humans.
"We have so much more life to live!" she exclaimed once more, still blubbering. She sobbed, gasping for air and wiping the sweat off the back of her knees which she held tightly against her chest. "I don't want to die," she whimpered again.
"Neither do I," he snapped, tearing his eyes away from the blurred view in front of him and looking at her. "We can't stop it, though. So why don't you stop wasting our last few hours crying and make the most of them!"
Her tears stopped immediately and she stared at his with wide eyes. "I'm sorry," her lip quivered.
Tyler's expression softened and he swallowed hard, "Me too. You know I love you."
Kate nodded and wiped her nose with the back of her hand, blinking at the ground in front of her. "I should call my mom to say goodbye." She choked on the last word.
Tyler glanced at his own phone as she stood up. She tugged at her shorts and walked uneasily out of the room, preparing to make her final phone call. Tyler's phone immediately started buzzing, his own mother calling. He answered. "Hi, Mom."
"Baby," she responded, her voice more cheerful than he expected, "Has it happened there yet?"
He furrowed his eyebrows, "What? The solar flare? Obviously not..."
"No, no. The sunscreen!"
"The what?"
She beamed and he could hear the smile in her voice, "The sunscreen! I'm glowing!"
He shook his head, his mind becoming frantic and confused, "Mom, slow down. What are you talking about?"
She inhaled and then exhaled deeply, "They're calling it sunscreen. Apparently every living organism is equipped with a protective shield that is triggered when a solar flare is impending. Who knew?"
His mouth hung open for a moment as he processed his mother's words. "That's...ridiculous. Mom, I know you're upset, but it's okay. I love you and this was going to happen at some point in our lives --"
"No," she insisted, "It's all over Mexico. Everything is glowing!"
"That's insane."
"Honey," she continued, "Scientists are as dumbfounded as you are right now, but it's true. They expect it to spread across the globe within the next hour."
He glanced down at his arm and noticed a warmth rising out of it that he didn't see before. "What the..."
"Is it happening?" she laughed through the phone's speaker.
Just then, Kate bolted into the room, a wide smile on her face and a yellow glow emitting from her skin.
Tyler looked at her, his expression full of amazement. Not removing his eyes from her, he said, "Yes, Mom. Can you hold on?" He slowly put the phone down and stood up, approaching his girlfriend. They smiled at each other for a moment and then he picked her up in a tight hug.
She giggled, "We're going to be okay!"
He laughed joyfully at that, kissing her cheek several times as he set her down. They then proceeded to click on the television to confirm what was happening. Without a doubt, scientists around the world were shown celebrating and explaining the phenomenon.
Two hours later, the world lit up. An hour after that, it lit up again. With fireworks and relief.