I woke up, and found myself standing straight up in my bed in the same clothes that i've always worn.
I checked my inventory to see that all my stuff was still there.
Pencil: Writing utensil
Weight: 0
Value:.10
Quantity: 5000
Calculator: Calculation device
Weight: 1
Value: 15
Quantity: 1
Phone: Communication device
Weight: 1
Value: 300
Quantity: 1
Everything was there. Good.
Now to say hello to my mother.
"hello Mom"
A) did you sleep well?
B) Whats for breakfast?
C) can i have 5 money? (Requires level 15 speech skill)
let's go with A
"Mom, what's for breakfast?"
"Sweety, there's a cereal in the pantry."
"OK. Thanks."
After this i seemed to lose control of my body as i went through the motions of getting cereal, and eating an entire bowl in five seconds.
But the stat buff was worth it.
Now it was time to walk to school.
Checking my map to see where it was just in case, i began my journey.
"Damn, the road takes me around this mountain. Ain't nobody got time fo dat!"
I spent three times the necessary amount of time trying to get over the mountain. After 3 respawns i finally managed it.
I arrived at school, and went to my locker. But i hadn't written down my code.
"Damn, i need some picks to open this novice lock. I'll bet there are some in this trash can!"
*Lockpicks (5) added to inventory*
I then set upon picking the lock, and removing my textbooks, and going to class.
I opened my math book, and blam! *Math skill upgraded to level 15*
Then it was time for science. *Science skill upgraded to level 13*
Then gym. We were doing laps around the school. After sprinting for half of my stamina bar i let myself recharge a bit by jogging, and then sprinting again. I was in first place.
Then we ate lunch.
*picked up potatoes (87), carrots (50), and tomatoes (60).
Time stopped as i spent a few seconds wolfing down all of that, except for the tomatoes. Might need those later. The fall damage from my time on the mountain was gone now.
After my afternoon classes and various buffs to Speech, Chemistry, and Diction, i began my way home.
I only needed to respawn twice this time.
After getting home i ran into my brother. He said he wanted to fight. For practice.
I equipped my hands, and readied them. I swung left, then right, then left, then right, used a power attack. I was hit by a left-left, right-right, and then a power attack. I began to lose. My Hp was low.
I knew what i had to do! I went into my inventory, and devoured the tomatoes!
My Hp was full now, and i won the fight.
We shook hands, and went to eat dinner. My brother could replenish his Hp there.
After dinner i saved my progress, and went to bed.
I slept for exactly 8 hours, and woke up the next day completely awake, and with a "Well rested" Stat buff.