(I invented a fictional drug for this)
I woke up on the floor again. The sun was casting a muffled midafternoon light through the thin curtains and I couldn't bring myself to feel surprised that I hadn't made it to the bed last night. My head was pounding and my mouth tasted like something had died in it. Just another damn day in this stupid shithole. I had to get up.
That took a little effort, first, I rolled over onto my stomach, then placed hands firmly on the floor, pushing myself up with some effort, to my knees. Where was it? Did I have any left? My thin, yet dextrous fingers fumbled for the box I kept nearby. Nope. It was empty. I swore profusely under my breath before clambering to a standing position. Then, dizziness overcame me. I almost fell back down to the ground, but the wall caught me. I leaned into it's comforting embrace, stayed there for a while. What time was it? Did it matter, though? not like I had anywhere to be. All I needed was another taste of Bliss.
The beast gnawing a hole through my stomach growled with the ferocity of a chained and beaten bear. Nothing I could do about it with those empty cupboards though. I sighed, mustering the strength to support my own weight, counting to five mentally and pushing myself off. Wobbled, then reached stability. Bliss. Bliss would fix it, Bliss would fix everything.
One tentative foot in front of the next led me to the front door. I'd left it unlocked. Why had I...did it matter? I had nothing left worth stealing. I wandered outside and was immediately almost blinded by the midday glow. Damned UV rays, the sun'd have someone's eye out if it wasn't more careful where it pointed those things. I was feeling weak. Weaker than usual. Bliss. Bliss was going to make me feel strong again. Powerful. I set off down the balcony that connected the various studio apartments in this block towards his house.
Knocked on the door more firmly than I intended to as the Itch began to consume my thoughts. I needed it, needed...needed it badly. Took him a while to answer, I could feel the infinite ticking of every eternal second that he delayed me. He didn't even wait to hear my question though. Not a word of it's obviousness.
"You got my money, bitch?" he asked.
I sighed and shook my head no, "can you just...look, I'll have some money for you, end of the week, I swear," I claimed. No idea if I could make good on that. Doubtful, and he knew it too, "just a gram? on credit? you know I'm good for it..."
He sneered, greasy hair covering his left eye, and reached a scarred, muscular arm out to almost slap me. I felt the air from the near-impact rush past my face, "you'll get just a gram when I get my money," he told me, slamming the door in my face.
I turned, leaned against the cool stone in the harsh sunlight. Needed to find a way to make money. As much as possible. Cost of Bliss only ever seemed to increase, I could remember a time when a fiver would get me enough for a week, now, it barely cut it for a day, and I owed him.
I set off back home, racking my brain for ways to make 'his' money. Nothing came to mind, I mean, I certainly wasn't like the other girls, the ones who sold their bodies for a taste of heaven. I had standards, I wasn't some dumb junkie whore. Though sometimes that thought, much to my shame, tempted me more than I'd like to admit. It'd certainly make things easier.
No job, no things left to sell, couldn't get another loan. Needed Bliss. Badly.
Perhaps if...but no, that would be wrong. Maybe I could?
I made my mind up, but had no idea if I'd even have the courage. Took an hour to persuade myself to move far enough to reach the kitchen and retrieve the carving knife. All I could feel was my heart, pounding throughout my body, everywhere. Ba-dum, ba-dum, it was in my chest, my fingers, my toes, everywhere. It eclipsed all the external sounds. I gripped the knife tightly, my thoughts on...look, I wasn't going to hurt him, I'm not dangerous, I swear...was just going to threaten him. Just...threaten him a bit.
Felt like it took a week to walk back to his apartment. Pounded on the door a bit harder now, didn't mean to hit it quite so hard. He answered quicker, doubtless thinking the firm, confident-sounding knock to be the fuzz or something. He stared at my skinny, short frame, and the big sharp knife and I swear there was fear in his deep blue eyes.
"The fuck you doing with that?!" he asked.
Shit, I don't remember what I said to him, everything happened so fast. Think I asked him for some Bliss. Think he refused.
Not sure what came over me. Damn, it just...it happened so quickly, was over in a flash and there he was, on the ground. There was blood everywhere and all I could think to do was raid his place for Bliss...
That's where I was when the cops showed up. Checking his drawers and under his bed. Slowly as any blisshead ever moves. They didn't think twice about arresting me...