It *sucks. *
I'm terrified to touch people. Before you ask, no I do not have some kind of mental illness, nor do I have OCD. It's just that I can see more than people think. How it works is that I touch the person in question and I can see their emotional background. I can see what their brain protects itself from. Their dog dying made a huge impact on them. *Whoop. * I see that kind of thing all the time waiting for my subway train.
Sure, some of them are pretty run-of-the-mill things like a pet passing away, a loved one dying, or even the occasional shady dealings with the local loan shark. After a while, it gets easier. Kind of like a filter; the redundant stuff just blurs together.
Then she came.
She was a new client who came into my office the other day requesting some kind of graphics project that "absolutely had to be done yesterday" and that "money was no object, just get it done." After yelling at my poor secretary Charlene who, bless her heart, put up with her while I got her file all ready for our meeting.
"Mr. Peterson will see you now. Please follow me." Charlene said curtly. It was painfully obvious that she was fed up with her, from the sound of her voice.
"God, finally. I've been waiting *all day* for this."
After Charlene opened the door to show her in, I took a quick look at her file that her employer sent me a few hours beforehand and shifted my gaze upwards to meet hers. I would be lying if I didn't say that I was shocked.
She was *beautiful. * Absolutely gorgeous. She was around five feet, six inches. A full five inches shorter than me. She wore a grey cardigan that sufficiently showed her full breast and a nice pair of matching slacks that seemed to follow a smooth, full curve starting from her waist down to the beginning of her thighs. Trying to pull my eyes away, I shifted my eyes upward and saw her face. Her face had perfect proportions. Piercing gray eyes combined with brown hair made her upper half just as pleasing as her lower half.
I gulped: "Hi, I'm Scott Peterson. I'll be handling your project."
"Oh it's nice to meet you! I'm Julie. Julie Robson."
"Thanks for coming in, Julie. Can we discuss your project?"
"By all means."
We sat down and started a healthy conversation about the project she needed to have done for her boss's convention coming up soon in the city. As we talked, I noticed that I actually liked her. Was this the same woman I heard screeching to poor Charlene just a few hours before? No it couldn't be. The pearly white teeth that flashed each time she made a quick glance in my direction, the hair tied in a tight bun-
"I'm sorry my hair's bothering me. Is it alright with you if I let it down?"
"Sure! I don't mind. At all. Uhh I mean...go ahead." *Come on don't screw it up. This is a beautiful woman standing three feet away from you! Divert all blood away from the other head! * Julie pulled out a pin and her hair came tumbling down. Oh God, it was like a Pantene commercial. It was almost impossible that a goddess of this caliber would be talking to me.
"Can we continue?" said Julie.
"Yeah."
It was around ten o'clock when we finished discussing her project. Both of us were exhausted. I wanted to know when I would see her again, to enjoy her presence. I know it sounds pretty bad, but I fell pretty hard for Julie. She was perfect.
"Are you sure we're all done here? Got all the questions you wanted to ask answered?" I asked.
She said, "oh, I still have a few questions. I can wait until tomorrow though. Same time, same place?"
"Of course. You know where I sleep." I pointed to my office.
She giggled. "Oh stop. I'm sure you don't work that hard. I am exhausted. I'll talk to you tomorrow!"
She extended her hand for a friendly handshake. Without thinking I reached over and grabbed her hand. It wasn't until her memories came flooding into me that I realized what I had done. I didn't want to ruin my perfect idea of her.
Her memories were pretty standard. The typical upper-class only child upbringing. Well-off parents who spoiled her, but restrained enough to prevent her from going rotten. Memories of high school and heartbreak. College and new experiences. Study abroad.
Then everything went dark. It was just myself. Was this the end of her memories? I heard a screaming and the sound of a news report detailing a grisly murder. Then came the sound of a scalpel cutting through flesh. The screams of someone being tortured for information...or just for the sheer pleasure of his or her captor? During this entire episode, the news report kept getting louder and louder until it all turned into a buzzing white noise that stayed in your head, like a hive of bees in your brain.
More screams. I expected the scalpel cutting noise again. It never came. Instead I heard the revving of a chainsaw. It tore through flesh, tearing away its target's humanity. It reduced a faceless girl to a stump. The same thing happened to countless other people. Trying to block it out, I crouched down, blocked my ears, closed my eyes, and convinced myself it was all just a bad dream.
During this time, I heard something that was being repeated. I had to strain my ears and force my earbones to vibrate at full capacity to make it out.
"Dont'cha love me?" was what I heard. This phrase was being repeated through the screams, the news reports, the scalpel, the chainsaw...I couldn't deal with it anymore and tried to focus my thoughts, to regain control of my body so I wouldn't have to touch her; to keep seeing these things.
Then, the news report came through loud and clear: "it has been determined that all of the victims were exposed to one thing in the hours before they were killed. This phrase came in different forms: speech, text, or even a call. If you see this phrase, do not hesitate to contact the local authorities."
The phrase shown next to the anchor's face was: "Dont'cha love me?"
At this point, all of the darkness, the screaming, the cutting, the blood, the...everything stopped. I slowly regained control of my body and finished the handshake.
"You ok there, Scott? You look like you've seen some pretty bad shit." Julie said.
"You have no idea. What time is it?"
"What do you mean? We just finished talking at around ten o'clock at night. It's 10:05PM. You've been here with me the whole time."
"Did I really just shake your hand for five minutes?" I said.
"No, silly. The walk down took around four minutes. Anyways, I came up with some really cool ideas to discuss tomorrow! Dont'cha love me?"
*Shit. *