Without my hoodie on, the fall air stung my arms as I tied the sleeves as tightly as I could around his leg. My white sweatshirt now an eery crimson.
"Hu-hurts. Stop that, it hurts."
"Can't stop, sorry. Tourniquet. Gotta stop the bleeding. Your femoral artery is cut." I say louder than normal so as to be heard over his anguished groans.
"I'm going to die."
"No, you're not."
"Julian," He says, defeated. I meet his eyes.
"You're not going to die. We're going to get out of here. Hang on, this is going to hurt."
Holding the sleeves of my hoodie, I yank them tight around his slashed up thigh, effectively turning a jacket into medical equipment. When I do it, he screams a scream like no other I've ever heard. A scream that reaches out and out and could seemingly be heard for miles.
"You bastard."
"I had to, sorry. Put pressure on the wound, like I'm doing now. Hold on as tightly as you possibly can, and for the love of God, don't let go."
"Where are you going?" He pleads, pushing hard to stop the bleeding.
"To flair for the rest of the group. You're in no shape to hike back to camp."
"No! I told you, it wasn't the fall that hurt me! There's somebody out there! I told you, Julian! They tried to kill me. The rest o the group is dead! I saw them, I saw them! We should never have split up-"
"Hey, Max! Ssh, it's okay. That's just the blood loss and dehydration talking. There's nobody out there. I'll be back."
"Don't go, don't go." He says, just as panicked, but weaker.
"Hold on tight," I say giving a gesture to his leg. "And don't let go."
With my bag on my shoulder, I make my way away from the overhang Max is laying under, and into the vast woods. It's painful to leave him like that, but I have no choice. The sun is starting to set, and I need to make it back to Max before dark. Looks the two of us will be spending another night sleeping under that thing, away from camp. Two days since we got lost. One day until any infection that is nestled in Max's leg could become fatal- if he hasn't bleed out by then.
"Dammit." I yell out to nobody. It's just me and my thoughts and the endless, engulfing forest.
It'll be fine, I tell myself. It'll be fine. I'll signal the group. they'll find us by morning, and we'll all go home.
Deeper I trek into the trees, looking for a clearing to shoot up a flair. I don't make it.
The crunch of leaves under feet sneaking up behind me.
The sharp, stabbing pain in my neck.
The ground beneath my head.
Blood warming my back against the cold night.
The eyes of a madman. The smile of a killer standing above me.
Max was right...