-Week 18 aboard the Depth Reaver, Circa 2023-
I walk about the dull gray halls, the artificial gravity making my steps feel almost as if they were on land. Almost. I glance out a window as I pass it by. There's the sun, and there's the moon right there. And, of course, there's the Earth. I kinda miss it. Then again, space is pretty cool. It's got some brilliant views, and the wifi is surprisingly good. Even countless miles away from the Earth, I can crush Silver noobs on CS GO.
I pass by Dale Malkowitz, the head scientist on board.
"Evening, Dale," I say.
"What up, Danny?" he replies cordially.
"Nothin' much. A little bored, I guess."
He shakes his head in disbelief. "I really, *really* don't understand how you can be bored in space."
"Well hey," I say slightly defensively, "Aside from the views, it's kinda...dull. And empty. And stuff."
"Whatever you say, Wittell," he says, not unkindly. Then he walks off. A few moments pass, and then I decide to look out the window right by me. As my eyes scan the inky blackness of space (again), I notice something odd about the moon's surface. It's slightly...cracked.
"Hey, Malkowitz?" I call out, "You might wanna check this out!"
He walks over to me casually, probably expecting nothing. "What?" he asks, "What do you see?"
I point at the moon. His brow furrows. "Huh...I guess there's something up with the surface. I'll have to look into tha-"
Suddenly, the surface cracks a little more. We glance at each other, and then back at the moon, and then at each other again, and then back at the moon again.
"What's going on?" I ask, alarmed.
He's silent for a minute or two, mouth hanging open. Then, he calls out: "Janice! Terry! Johnny! Get over here! Something's up with the moon."
The other crewmates enter, unsure of what to expect. As their eyes lay upon the moon's surface cracks, they widen.
And, by coincidence, more cracks appear at that very moment. And then more. And more. And more. And more...
Little bits of the moon begin to float away, torn free of the rest of the surface. We all stare, speechless. And then...it happens. It *happens*.
The side of the moon facing us is...torn away by a...
Human...hand?
And we see...
A giant...human face?!
Surprisingly, I can hear my thoughts over my racing heart. *I can't help but feel as if I recognize that face...from the...*
*Internet. *
Suddenly, the great face's lips move.
Of course, none of us can actually *hear* it speak, because of the laws of space and whatnot. However, I can read its lips, and it appears to be saying:
"Are you sure about that?"