Ted entered the life office and walked up to the front desk. The 19 year old secretary was ignoring him to face time here soul mate.
"No I love you more" she said
"No I love you more" he said
"No I love you more" she said
Ted rang the bell.
"No I love you more" he said
"No I love you more" she said
"No I love you more" he said
Ted rang the bell.
"No I love you more" she said
"No I love you more" he said
"No I love you more" she said
Ted rang the bell repeatedly.
"No I love you more" he said, speaking louder
"No I love you more" she said, also speaking louder
Ted picked up the bell and started slamming it into the desk.
"Sorry I have to work" she said
"Finally" said Ted
"You hang up first" he said
"No you hang up first" she said
"Oh for fuck's sake"
"No you hang up first" he said
"I'm going in"
Ted walked past the secretary and into the office of the 21 year old CEO of Life Indsutries. He was face timing his soul mate.
"I love you the most" said the CEO
"No I love you the most" said his soul mate
"No I love you the most" said the CEO
Ted stewed in silence.
"No I love you the most" said his soul mate
"No I love you the most" said the CEO
"No I love you the most" said his soul mate
"Sorry babe, gotta go, I've got a customer"
Ted's spirits rose.
"You hang up first" said his soul mate
And came crashing back down.
"No you hang up first" said the CEO
"No you hang up first" said his soul mate
"No you hang up first" said the CEO
"Ok" his soul mate hung up.
The CEO looked at his phone and laughed.
"What a kidder" he said, then to Ted "What can I do for you"
"Hi, I got my manual for living a long and happy life"
The FaceTime ring tone emanated from the phone.
"No you hang up first" said his soul mate
"No you…"
Ted leaned across the table, ended the call and held out the open book.
"It just says give'er" said Ted
"Hm" said the CEO, taking the book and leafing through page after page that had give'er written in big, bold letters in the middle "This one doesn't just say give'er"
Ted took the book back and read the page. He let the his arms drop to his waist.
"Yeah" said Ted, turning the book to the CEO "because instead it says 'just give'er"
"Well have you tried it?"
"What?"
"Giving 'er"
"No because I don't know what that means"
"Well it means to…you know…give'er"
"Give her what?"
"No no no give'er…like give'er"
"You've just made it less clear"
"Well you know how you haven't been giving 'er? Well now start giving 'er"
"Stop fucking talking and give me another book"
The phone started ringing again. The CEO reached for it but Ted got it first. He flung it across the room where it shattered against the wall. The CEO looked at the broken phone, then back to Ted. He pulled open a drawer and took out another phone, which he put on his desk. The CEO stared at it for a second, adjusted it a centimetre to the left then looked at Ted.
"I'm afraid we can't"
"Why?"
"Every book is personalized. If we gave you a book someone would go without one"
"I'm going without one"
The CEO furrowed his brow "You have one though"
"A fucking useless one"
"I think it's solid advice"
"You think give'er is solid advice?"
"Yeah. Look at me, I'm 21 I'm a CEO, I've met my soul mate…"
On cue the phone started ringing. Ted picked it up and tossed it over his head. It landed in the water pitcher by the door.
"And if I could sum up what I did down to one word" The CEO looked down nonchalantly, opened the drawer, took out another phone, put it on the desk and looked up at Ted "That word would be give'er"
"That's two words"
"Is it?"
"Yes"
"Is it"
"What the fuck is wrong with you people"
"Nothing, because we followed our manuals, just like you should"
"But it just says give'er"
"Now you've got it"
The phone buzzed. The CEO picked it up and held it to his ear.
"Uh-huh?" he turned the phone slightly, angling it away from his ear towards Ted so he could clearly see that the caller ID had identified the caller as 'bae' "Work stuff, I have to take it"
Ted turned around, his book dangling from his finger tips, and walked out of the office, numb to everything.
"No you hang up first" said the CEO
Ted walked into the reception area.
"No I love you more" said the receptionist.
Ted walked by her desk.
"Thank you for coming, No I love you more"
Ted left the building and walked into the alley where a hobo was standing over a trash can fire.
"Hello" said the hobo
"How are you homeless?"
"I have no house"
"No I mean, didn't you get a manual?"
"Sure did. Best advice I ever got"
"Really?"
"I couldn't imagine being happier"
Ted looked at him funny. A female hobo stuck her head out from their semi-detached cardboard and newspaper bungalow.
"There she is" said the hobo
"There he is" said the female hobo
"There she is" said the hobo
The hobo walked into the semi detached and started having loud sex with his hobo wife. Ted at the garbage can fire, holding his book, the sounds of hobo love making drowned out by the buzzing in his head.
The book teetered on the edge of his fingers and just before it fell he pulled it back. Ted sighed, looked over his shoulder at the rocking cardboard box and then went off to figure out how to give'er.