It wasn't like I wanted it to happen, hell, it wasn't even that I knew it would happen..it just did!
Our society has labeled my ilk as "Defects"; while the majority of our race has evolved into a species with extraordinary powers, the rest of us (the defects) just do stupid shit like turn into bread, or have a golden anus. Don't get me wrong, I'm not judging my comrades here its just that we're not all that special, at least not special enough to require around the clock supervision by our government friends.
So why am I writing this and why are you reading this right now? The answer for both is the same, you're wondering why the sky is always dark and food is nearly non-existent! For that, I truly am very sorry and I hope after you've finished reading this that you will forgive me and Charles.
It all started in 10th grade, when our powers "awaken" for the first time. Yes, just like puberty we not only begin to judge others but ourselves as well. After classmate after classmate was isolated in a glass room and taught how to bring forth their newly found abilities I was left in awe by what I might be able to do!
Then my turn came, I stood in the middle with my hand in front of my face to protect my eyes from the heat and brightness of the massive spotlight shined onto my face. I was injected, electrocuted and made to wait for two minutes before the voice overhead instructed me to 'concentrate, focus on the beating of your heart. Count the beats and when you feel as though you're going to pass out I want you to exhale".
So I did, I counted the beats and I exhaled like they asked me too....but nothing happened! Nothing shook, nothing moved, I didn't float hell I didn't even turn into toast. Then I heard the screams, through that thick glass I heard the blood curdling screams of my classmates and I knew something bad just happened.
When the door opened and I saw the nurse the look of horror on her face filled me with dread. You could tell she shit herself by what I had done and I mean that literally. Her uniform from the waist down was now brown and the stench perforating into my bubble of seclusion let me know she wasn't the only one.
I took a walk of shame that still haunts me to this day in my dreams. All of my classmates, the principle even the security guards were leaking bodily fluids and trying their best to conceal what had happened to them.
So I went about my life avoiding as many people as possible, if I lost my focus for even a moment everyone around me would evacuate their bowls in a painful and torrent way. I tried to think of any use my skill could have and besides being a walking laxative I really couldn't come up with any respectful and useful way for me to use my powers. Neither did the government as from 10th grade on I was provided my very own security guard, who happened to be sponsored by Depends.
Everything in my life was in seclusion until the day I fell ill and needed to stay at the hospital overnight. The nursing staff and doctors were screened before treating me and their name tags comprised of a post it note stuck onto those stupid tree shaped car fresheners.
The last night I was their, the last night most people remember of normalcy actually come to think of it. Well that was the night maintenance was replacing the faucets in the bathrooms with new touch-less ones.
Enter Charles, a burly man no more older than I. His real name I soon found out was not really "Charles" but since he was an illegal from Canada (borders were shut down after we evolved remember?) he changed his name to protect himself and get a fake social security number.
Anyways Charles enters the room and startles me, so much so that I lose control of my focus and cause him to shit himself. I attempt to apologize but am shocked to see him stripping off his clothes as they themselves go up in flames! He confides that his ability is, in his words "I dun turn shit to napalm".
Now at first we thought it was kind of funny, he can't go into public restrooms while others are using them for fear of starting someones asshole on fire. I can't be around people without worrying I'm going to make them shit themselves. Together we're just, bad karma I guess.
Everything seemed to be going ok, both of us had our abilities (if you want to call them that) under control. That is until we heard the fire alarms going off. For whatever reason, our powers were magnified and constantly active as soon as we both triggered them in each others presence! It didn't take long for the screaming to start and by the time we made our way outside we saw the ring of fire spreading rapidly.
We both stood and watched as the surrounding buildings started alarming, windows blowing open as flames shot out. It spread faster and faster until the entire night sky glowed amber and the stench of shit and burned flesh filled our nostrils.
The city was in chaos in just an hour, news reporters on TV suddenly burst into flames as they tried to asses what was happening around the country. The last transmission we received was via Telemundo around midnight before a European soccer match ended with the players no longer chasing a ball, but running off the field with flames shooting from their asses.
We burned the world down! It seemed like it was going to go on for ever, those who were safe while swimming or bathing at that moment wouldn't be safe for long if we let it continue. I seek your forgiveness for what we have done and hope the world won't judge me to harshly for the decision i had to make concerning Charles. Of all the people I accidentally killed during that time, it's the one I intentionally did that hurts me the most.