I questioned my choice on that first day, and on several subsequent days. By the time summer came around, I was enjoying it of course. But then autumn came again, and fat clouds brought more questions.
I always walked my section of the Thames, never any other, not even on my own time. The filthy serpent that snakes through London had never interested me, and still doesn't. I passed through Rotherhithe Docks and paused, the rain falling around me in sheets, splashing off a nearby awning with a roar. I recall this now, because it was the last good day. Every day since has been horrific due to my own curiosity.
The other Regulators had said not to ask questions when I transferred over from the Environmental Department. As far as cushy government jobs went, this was the best. So secretive, you can't even tell yourself what you do. Just stand out in the rain with your clipboard every time the heavens open, and record all 'strangeness' you see in the waters. Post the form in the box and go home.
Some days, like this day, the wind was not strong enough to move the mist from the murky surface, and it made it difficult for me to see the eddies. Never get too close, they said. I stared at a dark twist in the current and hunched deeper into my raincoat. I checked boxes on my waterproof sheet.
I saw Ben Thompson slowly go mad. That was when I had first begged my superiors for the answers. They laughed as if we were sharing a joke but then threatened my job, and I have a family. So then I asked some of the other Regulators, even though I knew we were not supposed to fraternise outside of work. Blank faces and sullen looks. These folks knew their ebb from their flow, but never more than that. Just like me.
I threw my legs over the barrier and landed knee deep in brown slime. My hood slipped and my hair immediately plastered to my face in the deluge. 'Never get too close, they said', I murmured as I waded to the water's edge, past sunken shopping carts and drowned sea birds.
Never get too close. Never ask questions. Two rules, both broken. I learned that when you see it for the first time, you will always see it. The clamour beneath the chaotic surface. Dark shades of fingers and translucent twists of limbs. The long dead fighting for a return to civilisation. The rain brings them up like worms, out of their watery graves. Gasping for air but never quite reaching it.
Since that day, I see them. And the London rain stinks.