There was always so much talk. Big words for big hypotheticals, bravado and overconfidence in the face of imaginary monsters. But what good is talk in the face of the first screams?
Amazing how quickly those tuff words soon too become screams.
It started with the sirens. Crowds slowly gathered outside of their homes to watch the local police force empty the town without warning. "Protect and serve." All talk. The sheep dogs attempted to rouse a militia, thinking the revolution was nigh. The cowards hid in their cellars.. the lucky bastards got to leave early. Others stood idol, either in defense of their homes and lives, or simply waiting for a reason.
Most called their kin, hoping their last thoughts were love.
No one expected the reason. From afar it could have been a wayward traveler on his way to the hills, until others gathered behind. Oh but the weaponry was too small, knives, clubs, tools of labor, could hardly defend against the hoards. Even the re-slain posed a threat, festering pestilence into the air and sickening those nearby.
Soon the roads were useless, choked with traffic and the pained screams of panic and failure. The strong turned their hearts to hardness, raiding the weak for their supplies. Safe havens activated their defenses against the double threat of attack, and fear. There was no need to leave anyway, there would be no escape from the threat.
Within one day, the roads were quiet. Those who didn't die remained hidden, or silent behind their arms. The main sources of supplies were all occupied or raided. There was no din of raid, nor chaos of fire. Whatever remained of humanity had finally lost its superficiality, and worked only to protect it from the threat.
For the only means of stopping war, is with greater warfare. And all mankind becomes united against inhumanity. For now, sin takes on life, manifested in the resurrected bodies of the slain.
For all man are kin, where death is succession. None were left now to talk, the liars and screamers are on the other side.