And now for the Feature Presentation
Part I: How it all Started
"I guess you can say, well it happened a long, long time ago."
"Shut up old man, can't you see I'm trying to read the damn Journal?"
That idiot lawyer, at least I think he's a lawyer, rides this part of the line, between Pennsylvania Avenue and Wall Street every day. At least I think he gets on at Pennsylvania. I can't be sure; I don't wake until Franklin.
"Every damn day, you try to tell me that blasted old story. The year is 2017; get in the habit of living in it, bum."
He says something like that every day. All I try to do is say hello, and the rat goes off on me. I've tried to tell my story; no one believes me. That story is what landed me here, on this blasted old underground rail system. They think I'm crazy; they never saw my partners.
Of course, I ought to describe myself a bit. The rat race may think I'm crazy by talking to myself, but screw them. They put me here. Anyways, it's been a while since I've actually looked in a mirror. Years since I've gone through the trouble of comprehending what was there. I figure I look a bit like the idiot in that ‘ Aqualung'song. Damn limeys, can't keep an empire, but sure can write a great song. Of course, I am just assuming this. Hell, I could still be handsome and buff like in my youth; but that, my friend, would be crazy.
As usual I sit on the bench in the rail car with my hands in my face. Nobody needs to look at me; they had they're damn chance. But today, something odd happened. A young girl, probably just into high school, came up to me.
"Excuse me sir, but is the seat next to you taken?"
"Screw off, girl. I don't need you here."
She turned her nose up, and I expect a few tears dripped from her eye. It's still better than landing the night in jail; been there, done that.
I got off at the next station, and proceeded to a bench, off in the corner of the terminal. I tend to keep to myself, if at all possible. I sat down, and put my face in my hands once more, robotically, it seemed. It's just what I'm accustomed to.
I must have dozed off, seeing as when I woke up, that damn girl was sitting next to me.
"Sir, what in the hell is your problem?"
I looked her square in the eye and said, "In my day, women didn't swear."
"Well your day is past, old man. You get snarky with me, I'll be the same with you."
"I'm an educated man, lady. I went to school for eight years. Be more respectable."
"Why should I when you won't be to me."
Of course, of course. Kids these days. Damn feminist movement, taking the spotlight away from *my* movement. Women running the nation? *I should be ruling the world! *
"Alright, little girl. What do you want? I hope not money, I certainly don't have that."
"I want to hear your story."
"You little belligerent, you can't handle my story."
"Sir, you used the word ‘ belligerent'wrong."
"Depends on your perspective,"
"Seriously, you may not have noticed me, but I've been ‘ progressively researching'you for awhile. I know your name, for a matter of fact. It's Roger Carson."
Little wench knows her shit. I suppose I could tell her my story…
"I'm sorry, I'm all told out."
"Carson, I know you have never told your side of the story."
"Why sure I have! I tell myself it every day!"
"Look Carson, the police reports are vague. I may be young, but I can already tell that the reports were spot on about you being impotent."
I feel enraged from that accusation. But she's right.
"Alright missy, you want my story, eh?! You'll get my story!"
***