Gieta sat in the field near her house surrounded by daisies and sweet-grass, weaving the two together in absent boredom. This place used to be her favorite place. It was a place where any adventure could happen, where any story from the imagination of an eight year old girl could and would come to life. Not any longer though. The grass seemed dull. The flowers seemed listless. How dreary it was. She didn't want to be there anymore. Gietas train of thought was cut off from the sound of footsteps striding through the grass.
"Uncle Brathe!" She exclaimed, glad to see someone who would help relieve her problem of nothing to do. Uncle Brathe was always a favorite. If Uncle Brathe didn't have a good story to tell (which he always did) or if he didn't bring sweets with him (which he always did) or if he didn't pick her up and rub his bearded cheek against hers (may the powers forbid!) he would still be her favorite. He still remembers how to play. As she ran to meet him, her Uncle lifted her off the ground and greeted her as he always did.
"Uncle, where have you been? You have not visited me for weeks now!"
"I know Darlin', I know. Your old Uncle has been busy."
"I wished for you to visit every day and you never came. But now that you're here, we can play!" Her Uncle set her down, and as he did the cheerful demeanor diminished. He crouched down beside her in the over bearing shade of the orchard.
"Actually Darlin' I thought we could just talk for a bit." Gietas face scrunched up. Her parents had been talking to her an awful lot lately. About how she spends too much of her time dreaming of things. She didn't see the problem.
"Did my Mom tell you to do this?" She asked, feeling slightly betrayed.
"No sweet pea, she didn't. I haven't visited your Mom in a long time because she still hasn't forgiven me and you know how upset she gets when she sees me." Uncle Brathe started weaving dead sweet grass together as he continued. "You need to understand darlin' that the things you can do when you're asleep is a rare gift that many others can't do, nor can they comprehend what it is like." He set aside the grass, and reached for leaves on the saggy tree. "I understand though, because that's exactly what I used to do and look how I ended up." Geita went to speak but he stopped her.
"I know it's like godhood described in the old tomes, to be an ultimate creator but the problem is that you are not a God of the Beginning. You are a sweet little girl with freckles. You must feed your dreams with the experience of life." He stood and picked up a dried up stick, as a knight would draw his sword.
"Do you remember when we saved the village from the Shadow Breathers? You learned those sword tricks from your Father." He slashed the air with his stick. "Or what about the time you wove a web so great that we lifted the Ocean King to the surface so he could see his own childrens wedding? Your mother taught you to weave, you know." Gieta picked up a stick of her own and swatted at her Uncle.
"Well ya, but real life is so boring! I can't control anything around me and I have to do everything that everyone else says." They weaved in and out of the lack luster orchard sparring back and forth.
"If you don't live a little now and again darlin, eventually the dreams will get just as boring. The color will slowly start fading, and the adventure becomes a routine. Life is what creates dreams, not the other way around." The thought stopped Gieta as she lunged with her substitute sword.
"What did you do then, Uncle? When your dreams became gray and still?"
"I blamed the waking world. I cursed it for lacking everything I had once been able to do in my thoughts. But I was wrong, sweet Gieta. I was so wrong. What I did in the name of dreaming was unforgivable." They had stopped sword fighting now and held each others gaze for a long moment. A breeze drifted through, much colder than normal.
"I think I understand, Uncle. I will try to feed my dreams, but it sounds terribly hard." Uncle Brathe kneeled in front of Gieta.
"It is my dear. It's very hard and very important that you start as soon as you can."
"Ok Uncle. I promise I'll try. As soon as I wake up."