"Water?" he asks, a slight nervous chuckle escaping his lips, "You can control water?" I smile, he thinks he's saved. "You can't hurt people with water. What are you going to do? Splash us to death?"
He thinks that because I don't have a weapon, because my great power is hydrokinesis, that they're safe. But they aren't safe, these are the kinds of people who spent years, decades mocking me because I couldn't manipulate earth or fire, I couldn't lift buildings or call down thunderstorms. Just water, good ol' H2O, what could anyone do with water? Not everyone is born with superpowers but out of those of us who are, I was born with the useless one. I couldn't be a superhero with water. They broke me down, they cast me away like trash because, at the end of the day, I'm too different to live a normal life and too weak to be a hero. But now who's laughing? Water is patient, in weathers away at mountains and creates vast canyons, it breaks down human achievement and one wave can bring entire countries to their knees. Most of all, water is life. 70% of the Earth is water and 60% of the human body is water. I can control 60% of every single human on this planet and I can make them scream.
It started off small, rodents and household pets that I could torture and break. So small and defenceless that they never had a chance to fight back, at the end of the day that is all these people are, rodents that walk on two legs. I can still hear them laughing, all of them, even now as they sit here before me, they're laughing at me. I can see it in their eyes, they don't fear me, they think I'm weak, they think they're safe. They think that once they're in school, hidden behind their walls and cowering behind their teachers, that they're safe from me. But this was the perfect place to begin, I will make the world understand who I am from here. I will climb over their broken corpses, their mutilated remains and I will watch their world burn.
He's still talking, laughing and mocking behind his eyes. Or is he. Did he even open his mouth in the first place? Wait...who IS talking? Am.. I....? No. They're still laughing at me, everywhere, all the time, all around me, echoing through the hallways and classrooms. It is time they learnt who I really am. I raise a shaking hand towards one of the teachers while staring out into the crowd to see that maniacal laughing turn to dread. The first thing I see of it is the puddle that begins to form at his feet and spread out across the floorboards, the wave of people trying to get away from the horror unfolding before them. Finally, I look towards him and gaze upon my handiwork, water is dripping out of every orifice and hole in his body. Small waterfalls falling out from his eye sockets, mouth and nose and cascading down to the floor. His screams begin to echo out from the back of his throat and through the chamber as his skin dries up and his body starts to shut down. Eventually, his body falls to the ground and he lifelessly lies there in the pool of water, urine and blood that has formed on the floor. They stare at him silently for a second before all hell breaks loose, students and teachers sprinting everywhere in a desperate attempt to escape, some trying to push past me and many going down like their professor. Another few suffer the instant dehydration, I drown others, one or two explode in blood as I punch through their skin with the water.
I stare at the corpses, spread out all around me, their blood and water creating a small lake throughout the hall. For just a minute, I hang around and just enjoy the carnage I created, sirens ringing in the distance as the police rush to try and stop me. They'll learn soon enough that they can't stop me, they're going to need much more than guns to stop me now. This is a world filled with heroes from New York to Japan and everywhere in between, it turns out that I'm the villain.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note from the Author: I'll admit that I don't think this one turned out very well for me but I'll post it anyway, see what people think.