"Don't mind me," said GOD as HE sat down on the toilet. HE reached into the magazine pile on the side and grabbed an US Weekly. "I'll still be here when you're done."
Loretta screamed. She grabbed the shower curtain and tore it from its hooks, wrapping it around her body. The shower continued to run and the water bounced off the pale yellow curtain and onto the white tile floor. Steam spread throughout the room.
"WHO THE FUCK ARE YOU?" Loretta stepped out of the shower and onto the wet floor.
"Alpha, Omega, I am he who is called I am, you know the dri-" GOD stopped as HE saw Loretta slip, she fell onto the edge of the shower tub and her neck bent unnaturally. HE sighed, pointed at her, and she rose up as if pulled by strings. With a snap of HIS finger, her neck returned to its proper position.
"Loretta Jones, 32 years old, assistant finance manager at Brunk & Spurlock, has never lived farther than 25 miles from her hometown of Sacramento, California, dreams of one day meeting Peter Falk, I am your creator."
She brought her hands to her mouth as her feet returned to the tile floor, the water giving a quiet splash.
"Tell me, Loretta, what were you just thinking about?"
"Umm, nothing. Nothing at all."
HE smiled.
"How often do you think about nothing?"
"Pretty often, I guess."
"Loretta, what would you do if I told you that you think about nothing more than anyone I've ever met before?"
"I guess I'd be inclined to believe you, sir."
HE laughed.
"I'm going on vacation, going to spend a few weeks as a capybara. I need someone to take over, someone who truly understands how the universe works. Can't let Jesus do it, he'd cure diseases and - trust me - they serve some purpose. Momo would give everyone raisins, and Sidd would end suffering. I need someone like you, after all omnipotence means anything you think of instantly comes true."
"What are you asking me?"
"If I needed you to think of nothing until I returned, would you do that favor for me?"
Loretta's quivering hand fell from her mouth and swung up to her forehead, a soggy post-shower salute.
"Good!" HE said and in an instant HE was no longer, and where HE disappeared the steam swirled. Loretta grabbed her hot pink towel and waddled to the living room. Her husband was cooking in the kitchen, the loud vent fan was running on high.
"Were you singing in there? I could hear you halfway across the house."
"I met God himself, he gave me infinite power and knowledge for an indiscriminate amount of time."
"Oh. Do you want one scoop of bolognese sauce or two?"
She sat down on one of the wicker chairs in the living room. The clock said 7:25, Bones would be on soon.