Fond memories came to me in dream-like visions as I held my mother's hand. The steady rhythm of the machines that were struggling to keep her alive faded away. In its place, I heard my scampering footsteps through the kitchen and smelled the sweet, salty aroma of freshly baked cookies. My mother, much younger, stood in front of a piping hot oven in her cooking garb. Carefully she carried the cookies to a waiting tray to cool before quickly swatting my hand as I moved to steal a molten morsel. The scene skipped ahead to us sharing a cookie at the table, it was beginning to cool as was my mother's hand.
"Hey," I said, gently shaking my mother's shoulder as the vision broke. "Hey, would you tell me how you used to make those cookies?"
"What?" she asked weakly. "Of all things, why now?"
"Because that's how I remember you best," I replied with tears in my eyes.
"Hmm," she said, turning her head away from me. She continued thinking for a time as coughs rattled her thin frame. "No. I think it's best that we let it die with me, son."
"But-why?!" I replied, shaking my head fiercely in disagreement. I was surprised by just how much this meant to me. "Everyone loved your cookies! I loved making them with you and sharing them with you, don't you remember-"
"Now, you know I do," she interrupted with a reassuring pat on the back of my hand.
"Please, mom" I pleaded. "It's all I want. Share with me one last time."
"Alright, but don't say I didn't warn you," she relented as she struggled to turn her body towards me. "Grab that pad and pen there and get to writing."
"Okay," I said, hastily scooping the items from her bedside stand as she broke into another fit of coughing. This time it was productive. Her hands were stained red as I watched in horror. "Mom-"
"Listen up, I'm only going to get to tell you once before I croak," she said in her old tone with a slight smile on her haggard face. "You'll want 2 cups flour, not that self-rising stuff. The all-purpose kind. A quarter of a teaspoon of salt. Go fine on that one. I know you like your coarse salt. Oh, and keep it table. I never cared for that sea salt. Now, this last ingredient is the most important, have you kept up with me so far?"
"Yes, ma'am," I said as I furiously scribbled her every word.
"Good. You're going to want a human heart," she continued. "Get it as fresh as you can now, those stale hearts make the cookies go south in a hurry. There's just something about the consistency and taste of a good, fresh heart. You can't beat 'em."
"Mm-hmm, okay," I said to myself as I wrote down her words without question, without thought. She settled down on her back once again as her breathing slowed. I didn't notice as I read over my notes. Something seemed a little off to me. The noises in the background began to die out as she took her final breath. I saw her chest rise and fall for the final time on the edges of my vision as I reached that last line. "Hey! Wait! You can't go! You didn't tell me how to prepare it!"
Her chest fell still and she said no more.
"No! I'll never know what temperature to bake them on or how long they're supposed to cook, mama!" I cried as I cradled her in my arms. Our greatest family recipe was forever lost to me.
-301