The Impala's engine throbbed through the streets of Culpepper, Virginia. It was a quaint, sleepy little town in the shadows of the Blue Ridge Mountains that had been disturbed by the gruesome murder of a young teenage training to be a lifeguard at the local country club pool.
"Sucked *dry*," Sam read from the article, scrunching up his face in disgust at the description. "And the CPR dummy was nowhere to be found."
Dean pulled into the parking lot of the motel and turned off the engine. "So, what? Succubus, you think?"
Sam shrugged. "The body fits, but why would a succubus steal a CPR dummy? And besides, there's nothing to indicate that the kid had sex before he died. The article probably would have mentioned it if he was found nude and handcuffed to a bed or whatever."
Dean smirked. "Yeah, that's the way to go..." Sam rolled his eyes and got out of the car to go check in.
------
"How'd the FBI get wind of this one?" the coroner asked as she led the way back to cold storage. Sam and Dean, wearing dapper black suits, tucked their phony IDs back into their breast pockets and followed behind her. "Isn't this a little outside of your jurisdiction?"
"It's...uhh..." Dean was always bad at coming up with this kind of stuff.
"Part of a federal investigation into faulty CPR dummies," Sam cut in. "The FDA is concerned that the training devices might be dangerous and asked us to look into it."
The coroner didn't seem convinced. "Well it would have to be pretty damn defective to do *this*." She opened the drawer containing the body and slid it out in a puff of frost. Sam flinched at the sight, but Dean leaned in with a fascinated-yet-disgusted grin. It looked like something you might find in an Egyptian tomb, all shriveled and lifeless. "Official cause of death was asphyxiation," the coroner continued to explain as she handed them all of the information in a little manila envelope. "But somehow his body was drained of fluids afterwards. The kidneys were shrunk down to the size of green beans! I don't know what kind of defective CPR dummy could do that!"
Sam pulled out a picture of the kid and exchanged a look with Dean. Definitely not a succubus; they tended to go for burly, brawny men. Real specimens of health. This kid was so scrawny that a strong gust of wind might have carried him away.
The coroner's phone began to belt out the refrain from a Justin Bieber song. She blushed and scrambled in her pocket to pick it up before it could continue. Sam and Dean hid their smirks and continued studying the file while she answered the call.
"This is Erin.... oh, hey Sheriff. I was just showing the body of Mi...."
The Winchesters could hear the shouting of the Sheriff on the other end, but couldn't make out what he was saying.
"Wait, *what*?"
....
"He *WHAT*?"
.....
"I'll be right there!"
She hung up the call and turned back to Sam and Dean, who'd of course listened to every word.
"I'm sorry, agents, but I have to go. Sheriff said that somehow one of the local high school kids *impaled himself* on the sword of the Stonewall Jackson statue in town!"
"*Statue*?" Dean asked. Certainly no coincidence; he would've bet $50 that this victim would be drained and shriveled too.
She nodded. "I can leave you here with the body if you want..."
"No, we're coming with." Sam interrupted. "I've got a feeling that you might need our help here."
----
The prompt seemed like the perfect opening to a Supernatural episode so I decided to run with it!