I am a cruel human. I have committed unspeakable acts against all that is pure and if I should die for it, then I accept my fate. For there is no undoing of the things I've done.
A door shuts behind me. I'm in a different room now and I've been sat in a chair that is cold to the touch. I shiver alone, sitting there in silence and reflecting on what has brought me to this chair.
Man, and woman, live by rules. Rules, whether they be religious, intrinsic, natural, or self-imposed, govern our lives. I lived and still live by some combination of the aforementioned. But, my will is not always strong. We endure external pressures that some can absorb but others cannot, like a home absorbing storm after storm, they begin to break down and weather---some sooner than others. Our restraint and control is not much different. I don't know if my control is predisposed to weakness, is there some flaw that is unknown to me and only needed substrate for a reaction? I feel remorse and as my fingers clasp the cold arms of the chair it is not them that reach into my soul and make me shiver again but the guilt I bear.
The door opens and closes behind me and the lights flicker on. I can see.
The chair is exactly as I envisioned, stainless steel and positioned in the middle of a room that has a table of similar design in front of me with a small drain in floor below it. The room is cold and about twice the size of my cell. There is a door on the far side of the table, an exit to where I do not know.
On the table is a sealed brown envelope placed near center and adjacent to it is a silver letter opener with a robust ebony handle fused to the blade. I reach for both. The paper knife slides through the seal with ease and I empty the contents onto the table. A passport with my picture but a different name and a letter.
As I read the letter my eyes begin to water yet my shoulders sag, as if my sins were sponges rested upon them absorbing the anguish leaking from me. I stare up at the door. It is an exit to life. To a new beginning where I can mend the damage I've caused. It is a opportunity to see my family. To be a daughter, a sister, and a mother again.
I place the letter down on the table beside the glistening blade. Darkness enters my thoughts. The shame begins to swell and my moral compass spins in the hurricane. I wade through to the center of the storm and in that moment of calmness reach for my exit. While departing all I remember hearing is the sound of a drain filling with my guilt.