Did our Words doom us to failure? Or was it just me?
Alice had hoped never to meet her soul mate. She met me through some godawful fucking boring work thing, and she caught my eye from across the room. Her Words started tucked up behind her left ear, and plunged into her neckline, tantalizingly low but not enough to finish them. "I'm much happi --"
We only had to talk for an hour before I knew we were going to make up an excuse to leave together. It was early enough in the evening that we could find a diner or bar. We chose a Denny's nearer to my house than hers. It was the first place we ever told a consequence-free lie together, to our waitress.
We both loved lies like those. She would tell clients at work she'd never see again that her father owned a rhubarb farm in New Mexico. I think she fell in love with me the more details I added to her dumb lie. "Emus are a real pain for a professional rhubarb farmer." "Rhubarb is the best-selling produce in Tesuque." "Cormac McCarthy basically wrote Blood Meridian on dad's farm." Consequence free.
At Denny's is when she told me she never wanted to meet her soul mate. After Denny's is when I found out why.
Her shirt came off and I guess I'm a nerd because even with a pair of breasts in front of me I had to read the words. "I'm much happier without you." I'd known her a night and already the thought was mind-boggling to me. Over the next several months it only became more so. Alice was light, she was funny, she made fun of me because my Words are right in tramp stamp territory. We were an argument against pre-determination. We fell in love and knew each other so well. It was impossible that we could ever say our Words to each other. But there was no doubt we were soul mates.
But neither of us had ever met someone who escaped their Words. And that's where the fear came in. What could make me say that to her? Would she cheat on me? Murder my family? Surely if I ever said those words to her, the reason would be monumental. But everything was so perfect. The only monuments could be to how well we'd woven together.
But I was afraid, and my fear made her afraid. She never buckled. I started drinking.
We still told lies to strangers, I still told them about how my second cousin invented velcro while she stifled laughter which she'd let loose when we were alone. Her laugh was huge and unabashed for such a small girl. But there were other lies too. My lies about how late I was gonna be out, her lies about how happy she still was.
The end of us came so many times. It wasn't an inevitable whirlpool we were being sucked into. Our heads bobbed under the water so many times but we came back up. But eventually she had to be done with me. I couldn't blame her. I was insufferable.
The really bad moment, the real end of it all, came months after. I would call her sometimes, drunk, trying not to wake up whoever was in bed beside me. I caught a little timeline of her life after me, the mourning, the new boyfriend, the weird updates to her family's affairs she couldn't help but tell me even though I was sloshed.
The last phone call *was* inevitable. It was like I'd tied her up on the railroad tracks and was determined to barrel over her. We talked, I was so bitter, I was spitting every word by the end. I wanted to hurt her. I wanted her to know I was her soul mate and she'd lost everything when she left me. So I said it, sickened by myself. "I'm much happier without you." She was crying, I could tell she was, when she asked, "Is that how you really want this to go?" She was trying to trick me into more words, trying to avoid the truth, but I stayed silent. So she said my Words, disappointed and crying but somehow resolute. "Please just...don't call me again."
We were both quiet for a few minutes and when she hung up I laid down with a hole in my stomach. Some lies aren't consequence free.