"It's a balancing act, you see, Senator." I couldn't actually understand what he was saying at this point. I heard him, sure, but the smartly dressed man from what he called "Section '76" absolutely had to be lying. There was no possible way.
At least, that's what I thought until I saw them a moment later after being lead through a massive vault door that hissed and clanked as it open. And there they were--attached to giant turbines that hummed with a mechanical ferocity.
"So you see, now, at least?" the man said.
"Oh..." I had to remember to breathe. "Quite."
With a grin, the man turned to me, "You know at the beginning they didn't have enough specific impulse to get them running. We knew we could get them up to almost relativistic speeds, but we had to ramp them up gradually. These machines are so large an expensive that we had to tune them up relatively slowly."
"So how did you do it?"
"Well it started with Kent state." he began, gesturing back through the vault door where we wouldn't be deafened by the cacophony.
"Are you serious?"
"Oh, yes, Senator. We killed those kids."
"JFK?"
"Yep." He winced a little. "That was definitely pushing the limits." He quickly returned to smiling. "Helped us defeat the Soviets though."
It was hard to stomach. As much as the things they did were awful, there's no way we could have kept the country going without this massive amount of power. But there was still something missing. There's no way they could keep this secret if they told every congressman.
"You said something about a balancing act earlier?"
The man stopped walking and looked to me. "So you are starting to understand. Good. Come this way."
We changed directions down a different hall, and eventually came to a door with an unassuming door. He swiped his badge and placed his hand on a biometric scanner. The door clicked and swung open to the inside. He gestured for me to go first.
Inside the room there was just a table with some snacks and a thermos for coffee with a couch and two comfortable-looking chairs. "Please, let's sit and talk."
--------------
From the conversation that we had, it turned out that they really didn't have to do much at all. If the people who were making the presidents spin in their graves knew how much they were helping the country, then the presidents wouldn't spin as much. This, it turned out, was a covert operation--almost inception as much as it was espionage.
But there was also damage control as well, the machines could only handle so much spinning before they would have to be disconnected as to not break them. It has only happened twice and it resulted in national power outages. The repercussions of which were not easily dealt with.
"So why am I here?" I finally asked, now knowing the scope of this operation and how delicate it was.
"Well, Senator, there's no real easy way to put this." He paused for a moment and rubbed what had become a five o'clock shadow.
"You're a very up-and coming figure in US politics. Quite influential. Many people like you and your record is spotless. The old men really like what you're doing."
A pit formed in my stomach. The room started to spin.
"It's a balancing act, you see? We have enemies, Senator."
Vision gone, sounds muffled...
"They must continue to spin...
I do hope you understand."