It was the day we'd all been waiting for since the ascension of Christ: His return to Earth. At long last, after over 2000 years of anticipation and uncertainty, He had descended once more, putting to rest any doubt that He was the single true God of all creation. He came down in a great flash of light, and every living thing beheld the glory of our returned Lord.
It happened in Israel. Camera crews and hordes of excited people rushed to the scene, eager for a glance at the Messiah. But what we expected was not what we beheld. Rather than the friendly, bearded face of Jesus that we had all come to know and worship, we instead gazed upon the graying, middle-aged face of a seemingly disgruntled businessman. Many bowed in reverence, some simply stared in awe. But all were silent as we awaited what the great Yahweh had to say to His people.
He spoke in a strange language, the likes of which none of us had ever heard. And yet, we all listened and understood his words. "You humans seek knowledge above all else. For centuries you have sought to understand my creation. You have sacrificed a great deal to know what I know; to see as I see. And now, for the second time in history, I stand as one of you. But do not be deceived, for I am not here to grant you salvation. I am simply here to grant you the vision you so desire; to put an end to your hopeless thirst for knowledge. And so, in exactly 24 hours, I will stand where I do now and answer the questions that plague your species. Once all questions have been answered, I will return to my place in Heaven once more. This shall be the last time humanity ever gazes upon me." With that, he dissipated in another flash of white light.
Hundreds, thousands, millions of people boarded planes and ships headed to Israel. Within hours it was impossible to find any means of transportation to anywhere outside the country. Indeed, so many people were arriving in Israel that there was hardly room to move. Most were forced to sleep on the cold, hard ground that night.
As for me, I simply stayed home. Being an atheist my whole adult life, I had very much disdain for this God and all the suffering he has wrought upon the human species. I had no interest in wasting my precious time boarding a plane to see his miserable old face. While there was one deep, burning question I wanted to ask him, I decided it was not worth the trouble.
24 hours came and went, and in another flash of light, there stood the aging businessman, exactly as promised. The radius of the crowd consisted of at least a million people, all just scrambling for a glance at our Creator. A great uproar was taking place, with everyone all asking at once their questions for the great God of all.
He put his arms up to signal for silence, and all obeyed. He said, in his strange godly language, "I shall now answer the questions of humanity." People remained silent, waiting for him to continue. But in the solitude of my apartment I spoke at the television screen, where the man's face was plastered in plain view. I pointed accusingly as I said, "I have a question for you, o great God. Why is there so much suffering on this earth? Why is there such great pain? How can you allow millions and millions of people to starve, succumb to disease, die by the hands of their fellow humans? If you are truly an all-loving God, how can you just sit by while all of this happens?"
Suddenly, the man on the screen was looking directly at me. A cold chill ran through my spine as his menacing eyes penetrated my own. The air grew heavy with his presence and he began speaking once more. "Why do I allow suffering, you ask?" he said. My heart began pounding a million miles a second. Somehow, he had heard me. He was talking *to me. * I drew in breath shakily as he continued. "I will answer your question honestly, but you will not like it. I do not just allow suffering. I create it. I *cause* it. All of the wars, plagues, injuries and shortcomings of mankind are my own doing. I infected you with the bubonic plague. AIDS, cancer, terrorism. Simply the latest developments of mine.
"You see, when I crafted the the first living organism, I knew that it would multiply and diversify. I watched it eagerly, not knowing what would form but realizing that it would be my own doing. The dinosaurs were a monstrosity, and an accident. I looked upon the ugly behemoths in disgust. Finally it came to the point where I could stand it no more. I had a meteorite crash down and destroy the beasts, leaving only the smaller, frailer and more beautiful creatures to live and reproduce. I watched the mammals branch off and primates come into being, and soon after, humans.
"I took a special interest in humans because you were different. You were no longer just a random result of evolution that lived simply to survive. You had broken free of the binds of nature that I had created. You learned, perceived, experienced unlike any other creature. You had an affinity for artistic endeavors even in your earliest stages. But you had something else as well: an intense thirst for knowledge.
"From the very beginning, you wanted to know how and why things are the way they are. Many humans attempted to explain it through various deities and stories. Others took a more organized approach, and soon science was born. You experimented, gathered data, came to conclusions. You were manipulating nature in ways that I had never intended. Some of your creations were innovative and helpful; others were wicked and selfish.
"But I came to realize that humans valued knowledge above all else. The vast majority of you did not care whom you harmed in your endless search for truth. Hundreds of millions of innocent lives have been taken throughout the ages because of your intense thirst. Your machines and mechanisms have made the world ugly and gray. You are but parasites upon the earth, feasting upon its life for the sake of your trivial pursuits. I saw that I had created a monster far worse than the dinosaurs.
"Why didn't I destroy humanity directly from the beginning? I saw hope in you. For although you had grown beyond what I ever expected from my creation, you were the only species that shared my affinity for creation. I wanted to be among you, so I descended to Earth as the one you know as Jesus. I treated every person I met with the utmost kindness and respect. I healed and helped my fellow humans. Yet despite all this, you rejected me. You betrayed me, mocked me, and hung me on a cross to die in a state of agony and misery. It was then that I saw the full extent of the evil I had created.
"My hatred for your species runs so deep that I did not want to destroy you. No, death would be too easy. Instead, I subjected you to countless diseases and terrible suffering throughout the ages. I have brought you to the brink of death, but I always bring you back. I ignite your flesh, but put out the flame that I may burn you again. For all eternity I wish to put you through the same pain that your miserable species had put me through 2000 years ago.
"And that, my son, is why you suffer."