My name is Michael Webb. My mission: retrieve lost artifacts from the bottom of the sea. In particular, the bottom of the sea in the area of the Atlantic we now know to have been the lost city.
As it turns out, Atlantis was a real place, and their technology was unbelievably advanced for its time. Of course, there have been crazy conspiracies about aliens and such, but from what my archaeological team has been telling me, it seems like they were nothing more than an advanced civilization with an isolationist culture. Most of their technology has been worn down by the sea to the point where it simply doesn't work anymore, though a few pieces of medical equipment have been invaluable to the folks back home, leading the cures for all kinds of formerly-terminal diseases.
The most interesting piece we've found so far, however, has been a strange trident, reminiscent of the Greek God Poseiden. I know, I know, it's just a myth. We know today that there were no Greek Gods, but let me remind you that until just thirty years ago, we knew there was no such city as Atlantis. I've been told that our research team has discovered what appears to be logical circuits running along the inside of the trident via x-ray technologies. So far, however, every attempt to supply and electrical current to the thing has failed.
Oh, well, I'm more interested in what we'll find next down here; I live for adventure, not scientific discovery. Unfortunately, even my small one-man pod is incapable of exploring very far into the city, as it wont fit through the small doors into buildings, and we haven't yet developed anything smaller which can keep a man alive at these depths. It's an architectural marvel these structures survive the crushing weight of the ocean above them, and for some many thousands of years at that.
As I pilot the craft too closely around a corner, some sensors start screaming at me, and I make a *huge* rookie mistake. I bump into another petrified remains of one of the citizens. We've been finding these guys all over the place: I'm not sure why. They almost appear to be solid stone, perfectly preserved statues of the actual citizens of Atlantis, much like the guys encased in solid rock in Pompeii after the eruption of Vesuvius. What was weird about these was that they were under water, and none of the egg-heads back at the main sub could figure out why they were preserved in the same way.
Well, as I crash right through him, he crumbles to bits. I remain, fortunately, unharmed, but I know better than to go around destroying valuable artifacts for the guys to study. When the dust settles and I gain control over my pod again, I notice something falling more slowly than the rest of the wreckage (or should I say pieces of body). It appears to be some sort of crown, but not ornamental, more elegant, slender, like a tiara. I use the grasping on my arms to scoop it up and take it back to the main sub.
I decide it would be a funny prank to walk in wearing this silly little thing, so I put it on my head and, once the pressure equalization sequence is complete, I board the main sub, strutting in front of Tim, the head egg-head. "Ha ha, very funny." Tim says. "Actually, that thing looks like a pretty important artifact to study. Let me see it."
"Sure thing" I say as I remove the tiara. At least, I'm trying to remove it, but it refuses to come off. It's like the thing is fused to my forehead. "Help me, Tim, it's stuck."
"Quite joking, Mike. Take it off."
"No, really, Tim. It's stuck."
Time attempts to remove the tiara, but has just as much luck as I do. "Weird." He says. "Maybe it dried out and shrank during the pressure equalization process. Let's get to the lab."
My gaze is immediately drawn to the trident as we enter the lab. I don't know why, but I feel an instinctual compulsion to hold it, as though my life depended on it. I suppress this feeling, though; I don't want to boys worrying about their captain.
After a few hours of trying everything they could think of, the boys decide that we might as well just call it a day. The crown doesn't seem to be harming me in any way, and everything about my vitals seems to be normal. I agree, and everyone but Tim leaves the lab. "You coming?" He asks me.
"I'll leave soon enough. I want to try soaking it one more time to see if it will come off." It's a lie; by now I'm aware that water isn't going to take this thing off of my head, but I just need to be alone with that trident, just so I can hold it for a moment.
"Okay," he says. "Don't stay up too late. We'll be heading back to the surface to resupply tomorrow."
"I know" I say as he leaves, shutting the door behind him. I quickly bound across the room, grasping the trident firmly in my hands. As I marvel at its construction, the most unexpected thing happens: it fires a bolt of energy, a large one, right at the exterior wall.
Before I know whats happening, the undertow is dragging me out into the ocean. The trident slips from my grasp, falling away from the sub. This is it. I'm going to die. Any second now.
But seconds turn into minutes, and I live on. Somehow I'm not being crushed by the massive pressure of the depths, nor is my body temperature dropping rapidly in the nearly-freezing water. I'm nearing the edge of my lung capacity. Surely this will kill me, if nothing else, I'll drown. I open my mouth and breathe in the salty ocean water, and… I'm fine? How is it that I'm not drowning? There's no other explanation: I'm either dreaming, or this crown is much, much more than meets the eye.
I swim toward the trident. As I hold my hand out to it, it races toward me, coming to rest naturally in my hand. Instinctively, I hold it out in front of me, and it pulls me forward like a motorized dolphin scooter; I'm able to direct it just as easily as one.
I swim up to the periscope, tapping on it with my finger. They flick the light on, as if in response to detecting something. I find that I can fog the lens by breathing on it, and I can write about three letters at a time. I sure hope they're taking notes.
It takes a while, but I explain everything through writing letters on the periscope lens. Then I tell them: "I'm going to explore the ruins. Surface without me. I'll meet you up there tomorrow." Somehow, I know this thing will take me all the way to the top of the sea.
I swim to the most interesting building I could remember. We had determined that it either served as a kind of governmental building, or a central place of religion. I bring myself down to stand before the large doors and pull them open, something our subs had been unable to do, and I enter the ruins.
---
*If you like this story, please checkout /r/TheOboeMan, and consider subscribing. *