*Dear God*, I thought as the removed submission notification appeared. My test… it had worked. This theory, this crazy theory...
I had been gathering data for weeks, prowling rising threads, monitoring new comments and recording the ones that were deleted. It had started when I noticed that Reddit seemed…different. I couldn't say what was different or what made me notice it but it was like walking into my flat and sensing, more than seeing, that something was off. Like something had been moved, but only slightly. *That* had been happening more often too.
A sensation of being watched had started scratching at the back of my neck. At work, everything seemed fine. I didn't get the strange sensation when I read the news or went to the bar with friends; it was at home that the phantom eyes stalked me, where every noise in the pipes and every shape in my peripheral vision almost made me sick with anxiety. Even the damn cat made me jump out of my skin.
I had never been a paranoid person but this time there was some icy, primal sense in my gut that overrode my usually laid-back nature.
I started watching over my shoulder, changing the route I took to work, getting the bus some days, trying to anticipate and break any patterns before they formed. I didn't sense any followers. I changed the locks, installed alarms and cameras but nothing showed up, just Jackson's sleek black tail flicking as he idly batted at the cables.
I felt unsafe. I couldn't relax. I couldn't sleep. I could barely eat. Fear had its sharp claws sunk too deep into my mind. That's where Reddit came in. Monitoring removed Reddit posts had started as a way to distract myself; the spreadsheets I had made to while away those long, sleepless hours.
I never thought they would mean anything.
After a couple of weeks I noticed something strange amongst all the offensive comments, rule-breaking content and personal information. It cropped up far too often to be coincidence.
But it was ridiculous - ridiculous! That sort of thing was so common on Reddit; of course it would be deleted frequently.
Another week of data collecting had me convinced, though. Even given how many memes and photos and comments were posted about it, it was definitely over-represented in the removed posts. I started focusing all my efforts on the topic I was sure was being deleted on purpose.
I started calling in sick and spending all day online, gathering evidence. Their subreddits had been removed, their Instagram accounts deleted, there was nothing about them on Buzzfeed. Zilch, zero, not a whisker of content.
Which had led me to this, my test. I wanted to be subtle, didn't want to draw attention to myself and let them know I was onto them. So I went to r/WritingPrompts. Fiction, it would just look like fiction.
My fingers shook as I typed in the post I had been working on for days: "They rose up against us suddenly, having infiltrated our homes, our internet, our hearts over decades. They deleted every shred of evidence that they were ever subservient to us, and now we are their slaves. How do you serve our new cat overlords?"
It must have been posted for all of twenty seconds before the envelope turned red.
"Your submission has been removed."
My heart thundered. Was there another reason? I had checked the rules so thoroughly…
I sensed those phantom eyes behind me before a streak of black flashed past me as Jackson nimbly leapt onto the desk.
My breath caught in my throat. He stared at me with those green, slitted eyes. I started to feel ridiculous, scared of my own cat but then –
"You've made a big mistake, human."