It's amazing what you can get used to. The incessant throbbing of my left thumb from when my cousin shut it in that car door when I was six. The constant sting from scraping my knees in my drive way when I was twelve. The perpetually sprained wrist from the first and last time I got drunk in college, not to mention this fucking non stop hang over. Despite not being able to taste food since I bit into that scalding hot pizza pocket in middle school or my inability to hear that well since that asshole Chad Mcmanus threw that fire cracker too close to me and my ears started ringing senior year I've pretty much grown accustomed to the constant pain and discomfort. It's funny to me how much people take for granted the ability to shake off an almost infinite onslaught of pain on a daily basis, stubbed toes, paper cuts, and the itching SWEET CHRIST THE ITCHING! Most people don't know this but an itch is just a mild signal to your pain receptors, something brushes against your body and your pain receptors send an itching signal to your brain, scratching dislodges the irritant and you go on with your life, not me though, through some strange twist in biology the signal never stops I just itch and itch and itch ad infinitum. Yet, despite all this the human mind is resilient. The roaring waves of pain wash over me endlessly, they never fade or dull physically but, like with all things the human mind adapts, some days I can almost tune out the cacophony, I can even focus when I need to, attempt to live some semblance of a functioning life. It truly is amazing what you can get used to or, so I thought, until I met her. She was beautiful, warm, funny, kind, and above all patient. She never rushed me down a set of stairs, never hurried me over an icy side walk. When we made love it was gentle, no matter how badly we wanted to thrust madly towards sweet oblivion she understood that when it was over and the dopamine petered out the soreness and aching would remain. She made the world hurt less, but unlike pain her patience was finite. Every time I made us late, every time I couldn't block out the noise of my body, every time I was afraid to try something new for fear of a bump or scratch her patient smile was chipped away until she could no longer hide the resentment in her face anymore. I was holding her back, we both knew and we both understood that it couldn't continue. I'll never forget the day she left, she smiled her patient smile, looked at me, tears welling up in her kind eyes, she kissed me gently on the lips and walked out of my life. Then, it happened, like a trumpet from hell cutting through the din of my body it came, this pain in my chest unlike anything I've ever known before, both a sharp stabbing pain and low dull ache all at once. I buckled at the knees, everything I thought I knew and understood about pain was ripped away and replaced with something truly excruciating. Days went by, they turned to weeks, weeks swirled into months, into years. It never stops, sometimes I feel as if I'll never catch my breath again. I can't get past it, I can't ignore it. It's amazing what you can get used to, it's horrifying to find the thing that you will never get used to.