The envelope was heavy. Very heavy, especially considering that it doesn't cost too much to get a favorable review. Ron cut it open, and tipped out 100 dollar bills, and a bunch of pennies, taped together flat. They didn't jingle, they hit the table with a thud as hollow as Ron's promises.
He opened his laptop, and fired up a word document. He tried to start writing something, but it was all the kind of lies that made his fingernails itch. Ron wasn't averse to selling a mediocre book as if it were something of quality, or postulating that the great books he read would one day replace classics on the shelves of the wise. He liked a little bit of hyperbole, flattery, a little bi of white-lie to spice up a review. It was easier to be critical of a book, which is why Ron's column was called "High Notes," because he focused on the good. People liked it, people read it, and the local bookstore confirmed that he had an impact.
But he couldn't justify the garbage he had read. There was no way that Ron could convince an innocent person to open that tome, to read its words, to know the author's madness the way that he did. After three hours, two joints, and a few drinks, Ron was lubricated enough that he had a wicked idea; write positively, but make it incredibly clear that the book was awful.
"If you enjoyed Shakespeare's novels, or the brisk pace of Herman Melville's *Moby Dick*, then Scott Trifold's newest masterpiece will absolutely thrill you.
Its plot is dense like packing peanuts, and so tightly woven you'd swear it was a fishing net. The characters are well-developed like three minute wine, and their complexities make a blank piece of paper seem positively unknowable. The novel begins as many do, with something happening. Trifold, however, does not take the predictable route of either having something else happen, or explaining what's happening. Instead, he writes out the whole scene again, from the same perspective, with even more adverbs. This daring use of repetition is evident through the whole novel. Three characters named Molly appear at different points, and despite being different people, they are all described the same way, down to the spelling errors.
Trifold's disdain for the traditional rules of writing set him apart from his contemporaries, who focus on readability, or depth, but his efforts produce something much more exciting; the experience of feeling like a beginning writer. It is this critic's belief that Scott Trifold produced *The Witch's Tits* not as a novel, but as an experimental form of fiction where we see how a plot develops inside the mind of a simpleton, and it is absolutely breathtaking in how it accomplishes that. The occasional note from the fictional author to himself is heavy-handed at times, but nothing can make a sex scene- so realistic and invigorating that you'd swear it was stolen from a twelve year old's fanfic- better than a shopping list.
The book is almost certainly available for sale.
10/10"