"You're aware of how this works, right?" the priestess said as she brewed the potion. "You drink and enter a deep sleep. Only a few seconds...Or a few days. The stronger the power, the longer you sleep."
The young man wore only simple robes and badly worn sandals while she wore an elegant gown. With the silver chalice she brought over to him, inside held the potion. It both shined brightly while it was pitch black, was both light and heavy and filled the room with hope and dread. "Drink," she said as she handed him the chalice.
It didn't just enter like any other liquid. It slipped in like a slime, refusing to part no matter how much his jaw or tongue fought against it. He could feel it slide down into his stomach throughout. It had literally no taste, no feeling but it just slid further. He could somehow...Sense it. Only when it had reached his stomach did he feel anything else as he began to fall over.
He could feel the sheer scope of his powers, how small and large they were. He knew just how small and fine the world was, how it all worked. Atoms...Small packets of energy that everything was made up from. However, there were smaller things than that. Protons, neutrons and electrons, how they interacted with the world...But his power was over quarks, smaller then. He could change and control those smaller objects.
And light...He could control, make and destroy it. No...You can't create or destroy, only change...But that no longer applied to him. He now had sovereign control over the very concepts of life and death and could create and destroy to his will.
Then he saw the sheer scope. He could easily see the entire world...Several worlds, all spinning around the sun which he now saw for what it truly was, a large flame in the void. Soon, he could preceive hundreds, then thousands, then millions of stars spinning together into a sinlgle vortex...Before he saw millions of galaxies, all floating within a blackened void before he could only perceive them as he did the quarks...Before expanding itself millions upon millions of times...And he could see and control the small on the same scale as he did the large.
He could see the very definition of existence itself. He knew, he saw, he could, he would, he should - create, destroy, change, acknowledge, be...***EVERYTHING!!! ***
Within the smallest fraction of a second, he had reached his true power. It was too much for his mortal body which had violently exploded, destroying the mountain from which the temple was stationed along with everyone on or nearby. He only acknowledged it with a small slither of thought but he did regret the destruction caused. Within the same second as his death, everything was back to normal save his disappearance.
He was now the master of existence. He had the collective knowledge of everything that has happened, will happed and is happening...But he couldn't hide how...*giddy* he was. He had always been bullied by the others in his village for being the weakest and smallest child. They all or ceived great powers from the potion but they were microscopic - is that a word? Well, not until a Dutch spectacle maker invents it in the 1500s so...7,000 years roughy.
But he just didn't like how history unfolded! A group of fanatics always using the perceived existence of an all-powerful being to enforce a rule where so many suffered...But he just couldn't end suffering in the world. Of course, he'll create a kingdom the likes have never been seen!
But he needed a body...Well the universe was his body but that wasn't the point. He needed a form to interact with mortals and not frighten them, but one that showed he was above their station. So...Why not just create a new universe to be his body!? But that would be redundant...Ah, what did he care? The laws of the universe was his bitch and existence was his toy!
It wasn't too hard to create a new universe where there were creatures on each planet, in each solar system, in each galaxy, living and dying constantly...And he folded this universe into itself countless times until it was a vessel fit only for him. He scanned the minds for what they all considered perfect and used them to make a single form - old with a flowing beard of pure light to show endless age and wisdom, a stern gaze that perceives all and demanded respect, a powerful and perfect body of infinite and endless strength, 10 beautiful wings of pure white dove feathers that showed not only speed that he could fly through the universe but also endless compassion. He was draped in pure, golden robes signifyingneternal wealth but also sandals of pure red, smooth leather, signifying the endless journey that he could walk with a single step.
Over his head he placed hundreds of rings that floated above his head, each with beautiful jewellery which showed the endless kingdoms he now and forever ruled. The same meaning was within the throne made from perfect gold that he now sat upon, which also represented the endless sight from which he could see all his lands.
He was now within the centre of the universe and ready to rule but...He needed an army. Creating another universe, he tore out whole galaxies and molded them into his soldiers, the likes of which have never been seen before. Some were human, some were inanimate objects. He was proud of the Grigori, powerful dragons that could feed on suns at His command.
He stood from His throne and with a single step He and His army were now on the moon of His home world. He already knew the inevitable outcome, that He would be king of this world before it rotated halfway on its axis. He led the charge upon the world, ready to start His rule.
At the same time, had also discovered dinosaurs!
(First time lucky! Monotheistic deity physiology http: //powerlisting.wikia.com/wiki/Monotheistic_Deity_Physiology)