It had been just another night, Jack remembered. He had a particularly good time playing Dota 2 with several friends he met recently through the game. Shutting off his computer, he stood up, tired from a long day, to perform his usual bedtime routine.
Looking in the mirror while brushing his teeth, he couldn't help but think about how he had been a disappointment. How he lost his only girlfriend and prospective wife to drugs and lies. He had been sober for a year now, but it didn't make him feel any more alive. He stood there, toothbrush unmoving in his mouth, lamenting his nonexistent social life and lack of female interaction. "If only I could meet a nice girl somewhere, I'd be doing alright" he thought.
His work consumed him, and he knew it. Working for an oil company had him traveling to remote places for long periods of time, and tonight was a rare evening home in his cozy apartment on the outskirts of Denver. He was excited to get a good rest in a nice, comfortable bed, instead of a lumpy monstrosity he is accustomed to finding in various hotels in small towns across the midwest.
As he is checking his front door to make sure it is locked, he notices his hallway light flicker. A thought graces his mind about a lazy repairman before the light grows increasingly bright then bursts in a surprisingly loud BANG. Intrigued, Jack decided to investigate the unusual occurrence.
Walking outside, he finds himself shivering uncomfortably, despite the 80 degree summer night temperature. Looking around, he sees nothing unusual, save for the broken lightbulb flashing on and off several times per second. He made a note to report it to the front desk the next morning.
Maybe it was because it was dark, or maybe it was because Jack was exhausted, but he did not see the dark shape approaching from his peripheral until it was too late. All he noticed was a sharp, stifling smell in the air before he lost consciousness.
Jack awoke to find himself laying in his bed, waking just before his alarm signaled it was time for him to return to his busy life as an employee for a large company. As he walked out of his apartment long before the sun would rise, he couldn't shake the thought that the hallway light bulb was broken the night before.