Aug 8, 2034
Dear Son,
It is with a heavy heart that I write you these letters. You are not born yet, but already you are a man in my eyes. I imagine your hopes becoming reality, your hard work paying dividends. Success is what I always wanted for you. A long, happy life.
I'd always wanted a son. I never imagined the hard times—who does? I instead imagined all the clichés: games of catch, talks about girls, sessions in front of the mirror as I teach you how to shave. I wanted you beside me as we traded thoughts on life with a couple of fishing poles in our hands. Sadly, this will never come to pass.
I thought I was done crying, but here I am, bawling like a doomed man. That's okay, son. Men cry sometimes, and that's okay. But I can't continue this right now. My regret, my utter disgust, is threatening to overcome me and I have to put this aside for now.
Thinking of you,
Your Father
& nbsp;
Aug 9, 2034
Dear Son,
I cannot tell you how bleak my horizon is. I cannot ask you to understand the depths of my suffering. It's been only two weeks now since doctors discovered the cause of my growing pain and looming dementia: an infectious prion, source unknown. I have a mutation of a spongiform encephalopathy never before seen. It's lucky that I can write you at all. In mere days I would be reduced to a babbling mess of a human, and frankly that scares me to no end. It's okay to be scared, son.
But that's all I want to say about that. I'm not looking for your pity. All I have for you is love, and that is all I ask from you in return, even if that is something I do not deserve. I would hope that one day you would forgive me for not being there for you.
I write to you from a place of pure love, even if you never get these letters. You are doing more for me than you will ever know.
With a broken heart and broken mind,
Your Father.
& nbsp;
Aug 10, 2034
Dear Son,
Why can't I just say it? Your father is a coward. I am a coward. I love you so much, my unborn son, but I cannot live without you. Please do not blame your mother.
It was an accidental discovery. Something that would've slipped through the cracks were it not for my case. But science has no moral fucking compass and here we are.
Son, your embryonic tissue is the only thing that will save me. It is not a choice you get to make; it is a choice I am thrusting upon you, because I am a coward. Because I cannot live with desiccated mind and body.
I fought myself on this, believe me. I wish I had the *balls* to take my life, but I do not.
Son, I love you. I will always love you.
But I cannot live without you.
\- Your Father.