The stall, with its torn black cover and rundown tables, was located in an alley adjacent to the marketplace. A sign hung from one of the beams, the words carelessly engraved on a metal plate: Used Robot Parts.
The display did nothing to attract customers. Bolts, wires and circuits were scattered across the counters, watched over by a shabby-looking youth. He watched the passersby disinterestedly, and met enquiries into his wares with indifference bordering on rudeness.
A tall elderly man approached the stall. "Do you have Iridian Processing Boards?" he asked in a low voice.
The youth jerked his head in assent. "Specifications? Name? Number?"
"Give me..." The man scratched his white beard. "Something that begins with 021. I want to know their occupation before I purchase."
The youth typed some words into a round tablet that he held in a pouch around his neck. "021339, a botanist. Or 021999, a consultant for RemTech. Or 021870, oh, but I don't suppose you'll want this one." A scowl crawled on the youth's features as he lifted his eyes to face the elderly man. "Miner."
The customer let out a short laugh. "No indeed. I'll take the RemTech consultant."
"3000 Damats," said the vendor blankly. The youth unlocked the steel cabinet at the back of the stall, concealed behind a dark curtain. After a quick search, he pulled out a small glass vial filled with a clear liquid. On the tag around the cork, the numbers 021999 had been printed, along with the date of extraction and other details in minuscule writing. The man had pulled out a payment card, which he handed to the youth. It was undoubtedly untraceable and anonymous. The youth tapped it against his tablet and gave it discreetly back to the man, along with the vial.
"We thank you for your interest," said the youth in a tone that suggested otherwise.
"Give my regards to your boss," said the elderly man as he left.
Another man, this one younger and more conspicuously dressed, approached the stall. A stunknife flashed on his belt, visible beneath his cloak as he moved.
"Speak of the devil," said the youth, not bothering to mask his dislike of the newcomer.
Ressick smiled, showing perfectly aligned white teeth. He entered the stall and put his arm around the youth. "Sam, Sam, Sam. That tongue of yours...How's business?"
"Good, sir," said Sam.
"I am glad to hear it. But you'll want to be more gracious to our customers, won't you? Remember, you belong to me 065537." With another smile, he walked away.
The youth watched him depart with disfavour. He waited several minutes, then pulled out of his pocket a small glass vial and a dropper. The number 021870 was printed on the tag. Sam toyed with it between his fingers, then unstoppered the vial. He pinched the bulb of the dropper and drew some of the clear liquid. He faced away from the marketplace, and deposited a drop into his eye. Quickly, he put the bottle back in his pocket. He'd place it back in the cabinet when the next customer came. No one would miss a drop. Especially not when the memories had belonged to a miner.
Sam blinked. Blurry images swam in his mind. A woman laughing, in her hand a red flower. He had never held a flower. The woman was looking out towards the sea. It was not like the sea that Sam knew. The sun shimmered on a blue surface. White birds flew in the sky. The woman was still laughing, happiness visible in every feature.
It was almost unbearable. Out of all the memories Sam had stolen, the happy ones caused him the most pain. This memory, like many others belonging to members of the lowest classes, had most likely been sold for money. Those memories had less value and were considered less desirable. What knowledge could the poor have? What great events of worth could they have experienced? But still they held emotions and beauty Sam had never felt. He wondered, as he often did, what circumstances would lead someone to exchange the memory of such happiness for a pittance.
Drawn by the lingering image of the smiling woman, he placed another drop in his eye. This time, he saw young girls, bearing a stunning resemblance to the woman, dancing on the beach around a fire at dusk. The sound of laughter mesmerized him; it contrasted with the grey marketplace, and the harsh noises around him. Smoke filled his lungs. He longed for the clear air, for bright faces. Hesitating, Sam placed another drop in his eye. And another, and then another still. The bottle was now half empty. *One last drop*.
This time, he saw something else.