**The Villa**
***
* [UNS Odessa - November 3, 2154] *
"Computer, play Beethoven."
Tinkling piano chords filled the bridge as Captain Joseph Guerro leaned back from his console. He laced his fingers behind his head and let himself flow into the music.
They had been drifting for days, somewhere out beyond the orbit of Neptune, exactly where the mysterious message told them to wait. Normally, Joseph would have hesitated taking a private contract, but the message had included the first half of the payment.
It was enough to buy a second ship.
Joseph put his feet up on the dash, retrieved a syntharette from his pocket, and pulled the auto-lite tab. A thin line of smoke danced away across the bridge towards the vent.
He was shaken from his revelry by a shrill alarm, accompanied by a flashing red icon on the console. New message. Joseph leaned forward. "Computer, stop music."
He looked over his shoulder, but the bridge was empty. With a shrug, he opened the message.
*Captain Guerro, thank you for coming. Please follow the link below, we will talk soon. –E. *
The message included a link into the Net, the virtual world, the shared delusion. Guerro hated the Net; he was much more comfortable with a gun in his hand. But the pay…
"Yo Art," he said into the console's comm, "we got a message, you might want to get up here."
The comm sparked to life. "Great, one moment captain…" there was the unmistakable crash of falling pots, "just gotta … get this… soufflé… ah crap." The android had taken up cooking during the long hours of restlessness between jobs, and from the sound of it, and the taste of his past dishes, it was not a skill that came easily to those without taste buds. "Be right there captain."
Several minutes later the hulking android stepped onto the bridge wearing a comically-small apron and covered in flour. "I don't think you'll want to go into the kitchen and time soon for… a reason."
Joseph chuckled, then waved him over. "Take a look at this, Art, what do you think?"
The android, seven feet of cerasteel armor plating, leaned over the captain's shoulder and read the message. "Well," he said, "it looks like our mysterious patron wants to meet in person… well… personally at least."
Guerro nodded. "Think it's safe?"
Arthur shrugged. "Who knows. With that kinda money, whoever's waiting for you probably has some pretty beefy security, and I can't think of anybody who wants your hide that badly. And in any case, I'll be right there with you, watching the neural-feed."
Guerro took a drag from the syntharette, mulling over the invitation. Finally, he ashed the butt and looked up at the android. "Get me the helmet."
***
The transition into the virtual world was uncomfortable at best, and Guerro nearly vomited as it materialized around him. He could feel the reassuring weight of the neural headband, a comforting reminder that none of this was real.
With a deep breath, he opened his eyes.
Guerro had spent a decent amount of time flitting around the Net, chasing down wannabe hackers, number runners and the like, but he had never seen anything like this.
Instead of the traditionally gaudy and impossible landscapes of the main haunts, Joseph stood in a garden, overlooking the ocean. He could smell the salt air, feel the breeze on his cheek, hear birds chirping in a nearby olive tree.
"Wow…" Arthur said, his disembodied voice drifting on the wind, "quite the set-up, must have cost a fortune." Joseph nodded, and looked around. He was on a terraced hillside among a meticulously manicured garden. The ocean swelled out before him, dotted by delicate sea spires. He turned around, and saw, at the top of the hill, a scene out of a historical documentary.
"It's a villa, sir," Arthur said in his ear, "early Spanish, I believe. Note the red clay ti…" Joseph waved him away. "Mansion. Got it."
A floating green arrow appeared several feet down the garden path, pointing towards the villa. With a shrug, Joseph followed the guide.
As he neared the villa, the sound of revelry filled the garden, music and laughter. Must be a party, he thought. Wonder who it's for.
The floating green arrow drifted across a bright green lawn, terminating at a set of gigantic carved wooden doors. The music was pounding now, and he could hear the footfalls and laughter of what must have been hundreds of dancers. Joseph reached out, but they swung open before him.
As the doors opened the music stopped. Joseph stepped into a massive vaulted dance hall, far larger than the villa appeared from the outside. And it was empty, save for a single table, set in the center beneath a handing chandelier.
There was a creature sitting on the table.
"You see this, Art?" Jospeh asked under his breath.
"Indeed, sir. It appears to be a fox, relative to the common canine. They were hunted to extinction in the early twenty first century."
"A fox, huh? Never heard of ‘ em."
Joseph took another step into the villa, and the fox perked up. It watched him approach with beady green eyes. The light from the chandelier seemed to flow across its red fur.
As Joseph approached the table the fox, in a red-orange blur, leapt to the ground and circled the captain. Joseph held his breath. Something about the fox unnerved him.
Finally, after completing several inquisitive passes, the fox leapt back onto the table.
"Good morning, Captain Guerro, so good of you to join me."
Before his eyes, the fox twisted and grew, morphed into the very visage of beauty. There, seated on the table, sat a lithe young woman, red hair falling like flame down her shoulders. Guerro said nothing.
The woman held his gaze, her penetrating green eyes boring into his soul. Then she spoke.
"I'm sure you are wondering why I summoned you, captain?" Joseph nodded, but remained silent.
"Ah, the strong silent type…" The woman rose from the table, her hair dancing in impossible patterns as she moved. "Very much the wolf, I see your reputation is well-suited."
"The wolf?" Joseph asked, skepticism filling his voice. He had not heard that nickname in a very long time...
The woman stepped closer, ran a delicate finger down Guerro's chest. "The hunter, the shadow, the...killer."
Reaching the end of his patience, Guerro brushed her hand aside. "You call me here to kill someone? That's not exactly my cup of tea."
The woman giggled, high and musical. "Oh, my dear wolf, don't be modest. If you were not the right… tool for this job, you would not be here. Now, can I offer you something to eat? Drink?"
Joseph shook his head. "Just tell me what you want me to do."
The woman cast a mischievous grin. "Straight and to the point, little wolf. As you wish. Follow me."
The woman spun, her hair flying in an auburn wave, and she strode back into the deeper gloom of the voluminous dance hall. Joseph looked around, shrugged, and followed.
The woman led him deeper into the villa, past doors and alcoves, staircases and galleries. Whomever had designed this virtual world had paid excruciating attention to detail, and Joseph found himself captivated by the murals and busts adorning the walls. He recognized a few.
The woman stopped at a small set of plain white doors, turned, and beckoned him through.
Joseph stepped through the doors, and into chaos.
It was an alleyway, late at night, and rain fell in sheets. Joseph stood, transfixed, staring at the scene before him. The woman walked up beside him, lacing her arm through his. "Recognize anything, little wolf?"
There was a crowd gathered under a flickering neon sign, roiling, shoving to get a better view. Joseph floated across the pavement, dreading what he was about to see.
As he approached the crowd faded, and he was looking at a man, crouched on the pavement, blood covering his overcoat.
It was Captain Joseph Guerro.
"No…" he muttered, watching his digital self cradle the broken body of a girl, indistinguishable in the dim light.
"Yes…" the woman purred in his ear, "my wolf, do you remember that night?"
Joseph remembered vividly. He remembered it frequently. His stomach knotted.
"I… I'm so sorry… I tried to help…"
The woman pulled him tighter as they both watched the scene unfold. The digital memory of Guerro carefully rose, holding the body in his arms. He turned as the phantom image of Arthur came dashing into the alley, missing his left arm and limping heavily.
"I know."
The alley dissolved into a blinding white light. As Guerro's eyes adjusted, the woman was standing before him, but her face had changed, into one that sent Guerro's mind reeling back through the years.
Joseph felt the breath drain from him.
"Susan...what...what do you want me to do?" Guerro managed to ask.
The woman placed a cold, digital hand against his cheek.
"Avenge me, my wolf."
***