Finding good help around here is nearly impossible.
Do you think the kind of people willing to sacrifice babies and children to a supposedly bloodthirsty entity make good babysitters? Spoiler alert: they don't. They really, really don't.
So that leaves me, Satan, with—what is it now, like 250,000? —babies to take care of.
Throughout the millennia I have changed thousands upon thousands of diapers, prepared millions of bottles, and sung countless lullabies. And in case this wasn't clear enough, let me reiterate: I do it all on my own. Now, I'm not looking for praise here—although let's be honest, I deserve it—I just want to set the record straight on the whole sacrificing babies thing.
I'm actually a really nice guy, a nice guy who, as it so happens, never asked anyone to kill any babies. This baby sacrifice issue has been a serious blight on my reputation since the beginning.
All people ever talk about is the baby sacrifice!
Here I am, acting as a surrogate parent to a ton of kids that aren't mine, kids that I never even asked for, while everyone upstairs gossips about what a bad, baby killing guy I am. As if I don't already have enough on my plate!
Oh, and trust me, whenever I find out which one of these degenerates started the rumor that I crave "the blood of the innocent" and "bathe in the blood of the unborn," he or she is headed straight to Malebolge. Honestly, as if everyone down here doesn't already know that I bathe in mineral water. "Blood of the unborn," yeah right. Not with these sensitive pores.
Well here I go, officially setting the record straight: remove baby sacrifice from the satanic agenda. I do not want it, I never wanted it, please stop.
I'm at my wits end. I work day in and day out looking after all these infants, and for what? A reputation for being a big ol'jerk?
For evil's sake, I'm doing the best I can. If I ever come across as mean, cut me some slack. As a single father of 250,000, I think I'm entitled to being a little cranky once in a while.