The reunion was not disappointing, it simply lacked. The butterflies flittering about the stomachs of the attendees as they straightened their collars and curled their hair, never seemed to burst into flight, to have their existence justified. Meeting old friends, and old enemies, is a nervous affair that often fails to deliver on the promised significance. The Wilson High class of '95 seemed to quickly find themselves drowning in small talk and punch that was barely cool enough to not be considered downright "warm". Alex carefully stacked cookies on the tiny white paper plates and balanced the whole affair on top of his cup as he turned to face the ensemble of people that used to matter to him. He scanned the room for any vaguely familiar face and found one after his eyes took a few trips around the room. He stepped forward and felt his smile come right on cue as he made eye contact.
"Alex!"
"Maaaaaaaark."
The friends clasped hands and then pulled closer to semi-embrace.
Mark wore khakis and and a blue stafford long sleeve. He was average height but still stood a little taller than Alex. He seemed to study alex as he released the embrace and continued his pattern of small talk.
"how's the family?"
"Same ol, same ol. You know how it is." Alex half chuckled as he responded.
"I do."
Alex took a drink of punch as he looked around the room.
"Man we had some good times here huh?"
It was Mark's turn to chuckle.
"Yeah I guess we did. Do you ever miss it?"
"No, not really. I miss being that young, but that's about it."
they shared a laugh generated by the mutual knowledge of what it feels like to slowly lose your youth.
Alex cracked a joke about missing the girls more than anything and then they both took a moment to compare their evaluations of their former female classmates beauty. Some had aged well, many had not.
Mark held up his own paper plate which was previously laden with cookies but now held only one survivor.
"Honestly right now i'm just wishing they served real food."
"They never did back then, why would they start now?"
They both thought that was funny. Mark held up his last cookie,
"I've seen AA meetings that were better catered than this."
Alex seemed to laugh a little nervously but continued the joke.
"AA meetings probably have better seating too."
Their laughter trailed off slowly as the both took drinks and thought of something else to talk about.