I pick the next record from the shelf. Bill Evans Trio - Explorations. Took a while to get into, but the energy still feels like him, flows like him. I like this artist, he seems to play for everyone and no-one at once. Very loved or hated, not that I spend time with types who go around hating jazz standards. I let a foot tap, carefully. Not allowed to dance, not on the job. Never know how they could be watching. Easily, s'pose.
This burnt shade of shithole 3rd floor apartment is my current and next job, home, haven, and ball and chain. That is, until someone with a briefcase and bad intentions comes to take the package. Or order me where to take the package next. They do love their orders. I shouldn't call her the package. Well, I *should* to be safe, stay 'unattached', but that shouldn't be such a problem. I've killed prettier.
Three guys have come in already, trying ta' save her, kill me, whatever. First two were together, and in the wrong line of business. I crushed their heads, broke 'em in half and chucked 'em down the laundry chute. I'm strong like that, takes a while to get started though, I like sitting. Moving around, not so much. Things are a little slower when I start it up, people kinda blur around me, talk like buzzin' all high pitched an' defiant. Preachy. Oooh now this is a slow one.
So I'm sitting with my back to it's (her) door, and my front to the window, when a breeze comes in with the start of 'Beautiful Love (take 2)'. Like ***on cue***. Why they put the second take first, I'll never look up, but one things for sure, someone's tryin' ta stage a rescue. How do I know? The window was closed.
What? The third guy? I forget his name...hold on, lemme stand a second here hyyyaaaaoooww my back. They tell me I'm old. They tell me it's unusual for someone ta live so long, call it fascinating, among other things. I wouldn't know, how would I know that everyone who isn't me is normal? Everything my head ever knew tells me the exact opposite. I think I'll trust my head over them. Hell, I'd trust the girl over them, but a job's a job.
The guy's talkin' all at me now, I think. Can't be sure he ain't tryn'a show me his new mouse impression. Haha. Cause he squeaks? It's fine, you can't hear 'im like I can. Sounds like a mouse though, is the point. This'll be easy, is the point.
Alright shuddup already. The third guy *actually* broke her out and left. I'm kidding. Whaddaya think happened to 'im? In the chute.
I swing an arm in the guy's direction an' he crashes through the wall, shakin' the record player and scratching the record. Halfway through ain't bad, usually I only get ten minutes in.
How long have I been here?
Just today. Just a few hours. Three records amount of time. Not even dawn yet, long day ahead.
I might pick a little classical next. Tchaikovsky, Mmmmm...Yeah.
Edit: I realize now that this prompt probably came from watching Birdman. If so, I feel a little silly.