There isn't much chatter as the new students take their seats. The shuffle of feet and the creaking of old wooden chairs echo in the cold lecture hall but for the most part the students are silent. Some of the pluckier one's murmur to each other as they wait for me to begin talking but the long day has taken its toll on their spirits. The oppressive atmosphere due in part to the magical fiber of the building itself, and also the fact that already two students had gone missing during orientation. They strike me as very young, although I think this at the beginning of every school year. The ones that survive look a lot older by the end of the year.
"Good morning class," I begin walking up to the lectern. "I trust your previous classes have been educational. This is Basic Undead Lore and I am Professor Elana Marsh."
I feel a little sorry for them as I look out into the small crowd of pale faces. Half of them are likely here out of obligation to continue in the footsteps of forefathers. Necromancers tend to prefer placing the pressure on the first sons, while Witch Hunters typically give the honor to the 7th sons possibly because the first few children of Hunters die off rather quickly. The remaining half are the students that really interest me. As I shuffle through my notes I let my eyes wander over the faces, looking for the spark of genuine interest shining out of the fear. Only a few this year. A shame.
I have no interest in wasting time or scaring them further so attempting a soothing tone I start the lecture, "The undead fall into 3 categories- vessel, spirit, and beast. Your Summoning classes will focus primarily on vessel and spirit types, and your Slaying classes will deal with beast types. I can see by your faces that Professor Trapper has already acquainted you with some such undead. So perhaps one of you can tell me. Which undead would be classed as beast type?"
A few hands raise and I command one of the students in the front row to stand, who answers in an uneven tone, "Vampire, ma'am."
"Very good," I say approvingly moving my attention on to the next student, "What else?"
Eyes darting about as though one might appear any moment he mumbles, "Zombie?"
"And why would you say that?" I enquire clinically.
"Um well. It's sort of a monster isn't it? And dangerous." He looks as though he'd rather I stop asking him questions.
"No. Zombies are a vessel type undead. Can you hazard a guess as to why?"
"Because… it doesn't have a soul?" He looks about at the other students for help but they avoid eye contact. I let him sink back into his chair.
"Not a completely wrong answer. Vessel types are those undead who are manipulated by outside forces. They have no free will of their own, or their free will has been over ridden. Naturally the best vessels are ones that have no soul to begin with, such as corpses however even you could become a vessel if a force with enough power decided upon it. This is a standard possession, however if sustained past the victim's death they become an extraordinarily powerful undead tool. More so than starting with an empty corpse, as the soul is still trapped within the body. Naturally this is highly illegal and why we have Witch Hunters at all." I catch myself from rambling on. Best to stick with the basics on the first day.