The warmth of the bed was familiar to him. It was the same bed he had been born in fifty-two years earlier and that had been given to him as his own when his mother passed away. If he closed his eyes and concentrated hard enough he could still smell her somewhere deep within the bed frame - the scent of sunflowers and rain water and pure love. He missed his mother dearly and thought of her every day, thought of all that she had taught him. Things like love and tolerance. Of living in the moment and being open to new ideas and learning. Oh how she loved learning!
He knew he was dying. His cough had slowly gotten worse over the days - what started out as a tickle and rattle in his throat became a booming echo from somewhere deep within his chest. He didn't know what it was - a few others had gotten ill before him but all had recovered in a few days. For him it was different - was it his age? Was God angry with him? Oh how he wished his mother was still alive - wished they could investigate it together. One of his favorite memories was sitting up with her, late at night, whispering in the dark over theories and ideas of what the world was really like. What went on that they simply couldn't understand?
There was a knock at the door and a familiar face peered in, "Fisher? Are you awake?"
Fisher shifted in his bed, holding back a deep cough. "Yes Annie, come on in. I could use the," he paused as his voice caught in his throat. "I could use the company."
Annie closed the door softly and walked carefully over to the side of the bed. The room was dark and cold - the old man and the bed in one corner, with nothing else but a small metal chair by the door she had walked through. The metal legs of the chair would cause a lot of unnecessary noise, so rather than risk a beating she simply knelt down beside the bed.
The girl was twelve years old, dressed in a long off-white gown. Her hair was a dirty blonde that cascaded down to the middle of her back. She was thin and wiry, with a line of freckles across her face.
"I don't want you go, Fisher. You're my only friend here."
The old man smiled, remembering back to his own conversation so long ago with his dying mother. "I don't want to go either, honey, but it seems it's my time."
"Is it true, Fisher? Is God angry with you?"
His instinct was to agree. Everything he was ever taught would say that this was true - God was angry at him and was punishing him. God was the only absolute truth in the world and humanity was wicked and vane to ever question that. It was the biggest sin to question your Lord and desire for knowledge. Who was man to question and know? Who was man to *learn*?
Only one person ever spoke any truth to him. His mother was the only one who ever invoked a sense of curiosity in him. A sense of yearning to see the world; to understand it. She did not hate God and did not reject him, but placed in her son an understanding that God had created such beauty in this world that it must be lived and loved.
It had taken the last few years for him to realize how much this community was a poison. It had taken this little girl to show him how backwards this way of life was. She reminded him so much of himself when he was younger, that all his mother had taught him came racing back. All those years of "reeducation" had melted away at the sight of pure curiosity displayed on her face each night as she crept into his room, eager to hear tales of musings long ago and far away.
"I don't know, sweetie. It's possible. But so are many things in this world. Maybe he is angry with me...or maybe I have simply lived as long as this old body can live."
Annie seemed to perk up at that thought, "Tell me a story, Fisher."
"What do you want to learn about tonight, little Annie?"
"Where do people go when they die?"
The old man smiled as he looked up at the ceiling. People around here didn't like to think about death. They didn't like to think about what happened when they died. It wasn't for them to question. It wasn't for them to know. He let out a deep cough and wiped his mouth, "*I* think we go home."