He wondered what his memories hold. He sat beside the machine wandering if he should ever use it. On one hand, he is excited about remembering past experience. The first time he walked, the first time he wrote a code, the first time he found his meaning in life.
However, as a scientist, he could never stop considering the possible negative outcome of reading his own memory. After all, he couldn't pinpoint or possibly knew which memory to read. How could he know which year, which month, which day, which hour, which minute, which second to is the joyful memory he wanted?
What if he memorised the failures? This frightened him and his was already starting to recall the pain. The pain of dislocating his shoulder when he fell down his bike when he was eight. That painful memory lead on to another agonising memory. That test he failed when he was in high school and got taped to the bathroom wall. The dreadful and distressing and horrible and hopeless feelings crawled up his sleeves like the cockroaches that crawled up his trousers on that day in his lonely youth.
He stood up and decided not to use the machine. As he slowly walked out the door and left the room, he began to feel regret. He leaned on the door and started to think. It's odd that he could remember the nightmares so vividly and the most beautiful memories were just like half remembered dream. Maybe it was because it was the pain that made him. If it weren't for the difficulties he faced, he would probably never became a scientist and made this machine.
That machine is his life work. Years of hard work would be for nothing if he never tried it on. He was a scientist after all. Giving up on something just didn't fit the job description. He then thought about the possibilities of avoid unwanted memories. Perhaps if he could program the machine to avoid terrible memories. He was hopeful again.
Suddenly, he felt a sense of discomfort. Perhaps it was because of the long hours he spent on working. Or perhaps it was because he forget to take the pills for his heart. Then he became sure it was his heart because of the pain.
He reached for his pocket and took out a little cylinder container. He stared at the container and wondered why there was a mark of something being ripped off. His hands started to tremble and then dropped his pill. He rushed back in his room and search for a calendar or his cellphone. Anything that shows the date. Then he checked the machine. Quickly, he checked the time log on the machine. It was empty, as expected. But there was a wrenched feeling in his gut. Like his gut was tied and untied over and over and over again. "What's my name?"