I like playing games. I like to play hide and seek, I like to pin the tail on the donkey. But the game I like best is piñata. When we have a piñata, me and my friends get to hit the piñata with a bat until all the candy comes out, and everyone gets some candy.
But we don't always have a piñata, so sometimes we have to make believe. I like to pretend to be the piñata. I put on a blindfold because real piñatas can't see. It's part of the game. I stand in the middle of the room. Sometimes, they even put rope on me. We pretend I'm hanging from the ceiling like a real piñata. Just dangling there, like an object.
Everyone gets to take a turn. Each of my friends steps up, grabs their bat, and tries to knock the candy out. And just like with a real piñata, some people can't. Some of my friends hit really hard. They swing as hard as they possibly can. Other people try to aim just right, hit just the right spot. But even if they don't get the candy out, they still have fun. Everyone likes to take a turn. It's fun when all your friends are cheering you on when you're swinging your bat. Most people take at least two turns, sometimes three! I like being fair, so I like when everyone gets a few turns each.
Finally, after enough people have had a turn, someone will hit just right. When they do, I shout for joy! And like a real piñata, I have candy hidden, so when someone hits right, I throw my candy on the floor. Everyone in the room cheers loudly. They all like candy. Even after all the candy has fallen to the floor, some of my friends like to keep playing. They'll keep taking turns because they like to swing the bat.
Just like a real piñata, my friends untie me and take what's left of me down from the ceiling. There is usually a lot of candy left on the ground. Sometimes, someone has eaten some of it. But a lot of times, my friends are really nice. They let me have the candy. I get down on my hands and knees, and I eat the candy right off the ground. It's so tasty. And it tastes even better knowing everyone is watching me eat it. Cleaning up is important, and when I'm done, there's no more candy left on the ground.
And that's how you play piñata, even when you don't have one. In fact, I'm going to go play now. I have a lot of candy hidden this time!