*So this is my first post here. Probably a bit long, but I have no shame. I'm open to C & C, I don't do this stuff often, and I had fun anyways. *
I awoke face down. I drew breath, my throat felt dry and sore. My body felt stiff, as if I had awoke from a very long sleep. I rose to my feet, and took in my surroundings. I was seemingly standing on thin air, though the ground felt hard as stone.
I took a glance down and saw smoke and fire. Rivers of lava casting flairs miles high, and monsters with mangled faces carrying weapons and devices of the most grievous design and purpose. I glanced up and saw glorious light shooting down from great golden shrines and alters. Men, women and children danced upon immense clouds with silky wings. The air grew thick in my lungs. I gasped one deep, long breath. My heart raced, and I swallowed hard. I could guess where I was.
I glanced around for a moment. Suddenly, a flash. I swung my head to avoid the bright light, and dropped to a low stance. When I looked back, I saw him. Me. Standing across from me with a solemn face, hands at his sides.
"Hello Onyx_Kantus."
It spoke with an otherworldly, ethereal voice that seemed to echo off of the invisible boundaries of this place.
"I am your arbitrator. I have been the voice guiding you on your path, and watched you grow since the beginning of your existence. I am partially responsible for your creation, and now, I will be responsible for your role in the upcoming eternity."
The severity of the situation started to sink in. I dared to state the obvious.
"You are the one who decides if I am worth salvation, or deserving of damnation?"
"Yes." It replied.
I glanced around once more. Not for anything in particular, but for anything that might help me. There was nothing.
"I sense you are unsure of your current standings within the books of judgment." It remarked.
"Simply understanding my current situation." I replied.
Its face dropped to a frown, and it took a few steps towards me.
"There's little point in lying to me, nor can you delay your fate, one way or another."
It stopped a few feet away from me, and glanced down. I followed its gaze.
"So how does this work exactly?" I asked.
"Simple." It replied. "I will ask you a series of questions until I am satisfied. You will answer honestly, and then I will inform you of your fate."
Staring at the carnage below, I spoke.
"What kind of sin could be deserving of such a fate? I've never murdered, never walked with the intent to do harm to the innocent." I asked.
"But you have harmed innocents. Including yourself. Intent is only a motive that you are aware of. You haven't weighed neglect against intent, for one." It replied.
"What is the point of this?" I growled, annoyed at the response. "You already know my worth, and my answers. If Lucifer has me, then spare the games."
"The next few minutes decide if you spend eternity in agony or bliss." It replied evenly.
"Then clearly I am destined for purgatory, here, for that is where you stand, and you are me. You had a hand in my choices, you said yourself!" I fired.
"Flawed logic. I am you, but a replica serving a greater power. You are a stray soul with no home." It answered. "Time is short, and waits for no one. Are you satisfied?"
I sighed. There was no way out of this, and I was probably reaching the end of its patience. I stole one more glance above, and faced him.
"Alright." I began. "What did you need to know?"
"Good." It smiled. "What would you have done if allowed to live longer, but were not aware of your imminent death?" It asked.
"Honestly? I would have fulfilled the rest of my goals. I wanted an easy job that paid really well. I wanted a beautiful wife and a brilliant child." I answered, leveling my eyes with his.
"I see. You wanted to gain personal belongings." It replied.
"No, well...I never had much to give!" My gaze once more shot downward. "I was raised in one of the poorest parts of my country! I would have suffered if I gave what I had; it was hard enough just to protect it! Who deserved what little I had more than myself? I worked so hard for so little compared to most!"
"So you did not see anyone more deserving then yourself?" It asked.
I shot a glare at him, but understood my folly, and my glare faded as my eyes drifted across the scene below.
"I see." It began again. "We are nearly done. I have one last question. Would you have done anything differently?"
The question caught me off guard. I exhaled sharply. I considered it. But then I understood. What a pointless question, I thought. Even if I had known about this, would it have mattered? I began to see.
"Did I have that chance?" I fired again. "You were there, you were guiding me. You led me day by day, sin by sin."
I approached it, coming within inches of its face.
"What is the meaning of this? Of all of it!" I spat. "Was I just your plaything all along? How could I have known?"
"You had influence." It replied in unwavering solitude.
"You were always there! Sitting on my shoulder and whispering into my ear. From birth until death!" I screamed.
"I did not raise your fists, nor did I form the words you used." It replied
"But you taught me how! I was simple before you! How can you give me all these weapons, teach me their use and punish me for using them?" I said, grabbing it by the collar. "But now I see! I am free of your influence! Free to see the reason you brought me here! I have grown! You could not influence me for much longer! You are afraid!"
And with that, it vanished. I stood there angry and confused. And then I fell.