######[] (#dropcap)
"Aha! How are you, *mon ami*?" She hugs me, and I feel a small spark cross from her hand to my shoulder. Then she steps back, dragging the wheels of her carry-on across the brick floor.
"I'm doing fine, Béatrice. I'm glad I'm finally getting to meet you."
"You know, you are so much taller than I imagined."
"Really? I sent you my picture, didn't I?"
"Oh yes, I have seen it. You are much nicer looking in real life."
"Aw, you're making me blush."
She sweeps her hair back behind her ear and smiles. I wonder if she has the same crush on me as I do on her. It's too bad we aren't meeting under better circumstances.
"Where are we to go from here? This airport is very confusing."
"Oh! Uh, right this way. Do you have any bags to pick up first?"
"It is just the one. I did not have time to pack much."
"Right, of course. We can pick up some things from the store if you want."
"Ah! You are too kind, Francis. What I want first is to sleep."
We walk around the corner and through sliding doors, then make our way upstairs. Béatrice looks around, confused.
"We are going to your car, yes?"
"Uh, no. We're taking the subway."
"Subway? Is that not an American restaurant?"
I'm not sure how to respond to this. "That's not...I mean, it is, but, um..."
"Haha! I am joking with you, Francis. I know my English well enough." We walked into an elevator. "There are trains, yes? The *métro*."
"Hah, you got me."
"I must laugh about these things. It has been a long day for me."
"Oh yeah. I can understand that."
"My brother committed suicide at the train station in Lyon."
I stopped laughing. Béatrice continued to look up at the ceiling as the elevator wound upwards. She was still smiling, but her eyes were small and sad and tearing up.
"It was a long day for him too, when they passed the law. He had no one to help him."
"So you've told me."
"I just cannot believe this has happened to me."
I stop the elevator. There is an alarm ringing, but we both ignore it. She leans into my shoulder and sobs loudly, throwing her carry-on bag on the floor and wrapping her arms around mine. I feel another spark, a bigger one, as she holds me tighter than before.
I hug back. "It's going to be okay. We're going to get you help. All of us."
She nods, and squeezes me. Then she lets go.
"I should not be crying. It is the jet lag." Her voice was resolute, but it shook slightly.
"It's okay." I touch the elevator panel, and it starts moving again. "I'm sorry we have to take the train."
"I am not scared of it. I will be fine."
"What was your brother like? If you don't mind me asking."
"He was a strong man. You should have seen him. He would lift weights over his head like licorice."
"I've seen a few who can do that."
"Is it not fascinating?"
"Not as fascinating as you."
"I am sure you say that to all the pretty girls."
"I want to see you do it, though. In person for once. Can you show me?"
"Ah!" She pretends to be offended, putting her hand over her heart. "We are in public!"
"We're in an elevator!"
"Later. It takes a lot of energy. I am too tired right now."
"Okay, sure."
It is a long ride up to the subway level. The elevator is slow, groaning as it moves.
"Let's get out on the next floor." I press the button.
"This is our stop?"
"No, but this elevator is being weird. I shouldn't have stopped it; I think I broke something. The escalators will be faster."
"Ugh, walking."
"Sorry."
We get out and roam around looking for a way upstairs. We're in a food court.
"I am feeling hungry. The food on the plane was no good."
"Okay. What do you want?"
"Pizza, I suppose."
We get in the line for Sbarro's. Béatrice focuses on her phone while I glance around. People are eating, paying attention to their food and their bags and their electronics. Everything is normal. Then my eyes catch on a TV suspended from the ceiling. There's a news channel on that is showing mugshots.
One of them looks familiar.
"Béatrice? I need you to go to the restroom."
"*Qu'est que c'est? *" She looks up at me, then follows my gaze to the screen. "Francis, what-"
"Go to the restroom and, y'know, *change. * I'll get the pizzas and we'll go."
"We should run."
"No, that'll make things worse. Go! And leave your bag."
She leaves. Fortunately, no one else seems to be watching her or the TV. I pull out my phone and make a call.
"Yo."
"Dexter, hey. I think we have a problem."
"Lemme guess. CNN?"
"I'm looking at Fox."
"Yeah, we've been monitoring. It's only been up the last ten minutes. Are you guys out of the airport at least?"
I mouth "two cheese" to the cashier and pull out my credit card. "No, not yet. I sent her to the restroom to change. How did this happen?"
"French officials caught onto the fake IDs a few hours ago, while she was still in the air, but things got messy and the US didn't find out until after she got through Customs. Apparently they were throwing a hissy fit until the US agreed to extradite them all."
"All of them? They can't do that."
"Everyone who's already in the States is untouchable. Don't worry about it. For now, just get Béatrice to the safehouse. We'll have to talk later."
"Yeah, okay. See you soon." I hang up and take the pizza box from the cashier, then I roll Béatrice's carry-on to a table and wait.
"I am not sure how long I can keep doing this."
I look up. I can hear her, but I can't see her at all. Perfect.
"It's just for a few minutes." I stand up and grab her bag.
"It is harder when I have not slept."
"Shh, quiet. You can relax once we're on the train. Put your hand on my shoulder."
We walk together to the escalator. We're still a long way from the subway. I keep her suitcase tucked behind me so that no one will try to pass and accidentally bump into her.
"Can you not make this thing go faster?"
"Just one more floor." I look down. Someone in a uniform is walking up behind us. No, two people.
They're onto us.
"I do not feel well." We step onto the landing, and I look around. No train. Shoot.
"Excuse me? Sir?" Another officer walks over from further down the platform. Now we're surrounded. We could go back down, but then we'd be trapped in the airport. Béatrice's grip on my shoulder is weakening. The officer looks at me expectantly.
"Um...Yes, officer?"
"Sir, we're looking for a young superhuman woman. Have you seen her?" He holds up his phone, with a photo of Béatrice.
"Um, no."
"Oh?" says the second guard. The two that came up on the escalator are now right behind me. I feel Béatrice shifting around as they come to stand next to the first guard. "Then how do you explain this anonymous tip?"
Another picture, of me and Béatrice in the line for pizza. I try to feign innocence. "She was right behind me?"
"Nice try, buddy. That's her bag you've got with you."
"No, it's mine," I say weakly.
"Then you won't mind consenting to a search," says the third guard.
"What did I do wrong?" I ask. "For that matter, what did *she* do wrong? I thought the US was granting asylum to superhumans."
"Not if they come in with forged passports," says the first guard.
"Well, I'm not consenting to a search. You don't have enough evidence." I back away from the guards. "You guys can go-"
"*Uuuuuggghhhhh. *"
Béatrice collapses, her body fading into visibility as she falls onto the platform. The officers' eyes widen. Then one of them pulls out a gun. The other two pull out handcuffs.
"Sir-"
"Hey, stay back!" I hold out my hands, and lightning crackles between my fingertips. They stop.
I put my hands down quickly. I'm out of power. For a moment, I'm tempted to call out for help, but of course no one would. Amazingly, no one seems to be paying attention.
The second guard pulls out his own gun. "Sir, don't make this harder than it needs to be."
Distantly, I hear the screech of a subway car. But it isn't enough. I need to keep them away from Béatrice, and to do that, I need more power. If only the train would come faster...
"Sir," says the first guard, "you are under arrest for aiding and abetting-"
*Maybe I can knock out two birds with one stone...*
Standing here on the platform, it's amazing how nobody seems to notice me. I guess it makes sense. I am average, I am nothing to look at. My jeans, flannel, and beanie make me blend in, not stand out. And people just want to get on the subway and go about their day. But I wish that just for a moment someone would stop to look at me and think "I wonder if he is ok?" They'll know that I'm not soon enough. Ah yes, I feel a breeze signaling that a subway car is headed our way. It's now or never. I've already made my choice. I walk up to the line where it says MIND THE GAP. And I jump.
***
[Visit my sub! There MAY be more stories about superhumans?!?] (https: //www.reddit.com/r/TheCastriffSub)