It was a strange occurrence, honestly.
At first, you're sitting in your office, fiddling about with the newspaper you forgot to read earlier that morning, and then you get a phone call. Now, don't get me wrong - This isn't peculiar for me. When you work late, your fiancee gets worried. I totally understood every time she called. However, this phone call was a lot different.
I was sitting around with the newspaper, casually glancing at my computer screen as the data from the day's astronomical scan ran through my system. Before I could take a sip of the late-night *kaveh, * my phone rang. As I was about to mutter sweet nothings into my girl's ear, I was hastily interrupted by a gruff voice. He was my superior, Master Gregory.
"Harry," he said, his voice unsteady from panting. "I need you in the observatory at once." I was concerned for him. It sounded like he was about to die.
"Master," I replied with a brow raised. "What's wrong? Are you alright?"
"No, no, nothing of the sort. Master Sanderson has just discovered something on the outer observatory post on the second satellite. He wants to stream the feed directly into ours. Get down here as soon as you can!"
As he hung up, I quickly pulled my jacket from the hanger and pulled it on, grabbing my *kaveh* before sliding the door open. Thankful it was in an aluminum container, I rushed downstairs as the *kaveh* sloshed about in its housing. It took me a few minutes to run across the complex. As I reached the domed building atop the westerly mountain, I took a quick glance above, looking at the second of our planet's two satellites in the sky. Sliding my hand into the groove of the door, I slid the observation's sliding doors into their pocket and stepped inside.
Master Gregory clasped my forearm in greeting as he pat me on the back, leading me to the domed facility's interior. Approaching a console in the middle, the screen that was streaming the section of the night's sky our planet-bound telescope was observing changed to that of another perspective; An older gentleman's face was plastered on screen, with the expression of an excited schoolboy.
"Masters Gregory and Anastas," he greeted us. We bowed at his image before he continued. "We on the second satellite are so excited to reveal a remarkable find. We're not sure if it's confirmed, so we're sending the images to you." Wanting, Gregory and I leaned on the railing next to the center console. As the images loaded up, we could not believe our eyes. It was a structure, we knew that much.
"Master," I asked, clearly dumbfounded. "Is this an actual, artificial structure?"
"Very much so, Master Anastas. And before you ask, no, it's not one of our own scouting drones. Its design is nothing in our schematic database."
"Any transmissions?"
The old man tapped his chin in thought. "Sort of. It's a line of beeps that's reminiscent of the old Boors code. I'd say that it was one of ours, but its difference in code is so different."
"Are we going to notify the government?"
"The Bureau of Outer Space Affairs has already been notified. We've been prepping a shuttle in the time we've been speaking." We nodded and continued to inspect the construct on screen. The images that were on screen were clearly alien. An elongated spacecraft, with some sort of engine sticking out of the back and wings on the sides. This was intended for atmospheric flight. I pulled on my tie to loosen it. This is very disconcerting. I raised my concerns.
Sanderson assured me. "We're lucky to have bases on both the lunar surfaces, or else it would've taken weeks to prepare for a launch on the planet. We'll have our answers here within the hour. In fact..." He trailed off and pressed a button on his own console, exchanging the static images for a live feed of the white shuttle approaching this otherworldly object. We saw the shuttle slowly approach the vessel over the course of half an hour. The feed switched from satellite-based cameras to the shuttle exterior as it oriented itself parallel to the alien vessel.
"We've established physical contact with external clamps," the shuttle's captain confirmed on the radio as we wiped our brows. "Scans show that there is a hatch on the dorsal side. Lieutenant Crothers has volunteered for the space walk."
All of us observing were on the tips of our toes. The video switched to a primary camera based on the outside of Crothers' helmet. His microphone picked up his heavy breathing; He was scared, or nervous. Probably both - I knew that if I were in his position, I'd be.
His hand approached a button that looked like a symbol to open the ship. As he pressed it, an unseen hatch exposed itself. A discharge of air pushed itself from the creases as it pushed itself outwards. I chortled as I inwardly remarked how odd it was to have swinging doors.
However, as I began to overtly note it, I saw a sight on the screen as the cosmonaut's feed didn't showcase the interior of the ship, but *an actual being* poking out from inside. Crothers had his hands extended, showing he had nothing in his hands, unlike our guest, who had a glowing weapon in her own. It wasn't the fact that he had a clearly advanced piece of technology, but it was another person. A *human woman*, with what looked like a suit intended for vacuum combat, yelling at us silently from behind her helmet.
"I see similar symbols to ours, but there are no solid matches!" Gregory exclaimed. "Damn it, who are these people?"
"I don't think they're from here, Master," I replied. "But I don't think we should start pissing them off."