I don't usually do these often so sorry if it's bad, I just really liked the promt.:)
- - - - - - -
"So you all wanna' hear about the Angels do ya'?"
The closest child to her piped up instantly.
"Yes Nana!, Uncle Naru told us to get you to tell us about them, the angels in the stars!"
As the crowd of small children began to grow, the hushing from their soft, young voices began to unify as the smile on the elderly womans face began to widen.
"Well then," She began as she pushed off the blanket she was covered up in. Standing up she looked around for her stick, scanning the most likely of places she would have left her aid.
"One of you little ones best be gettin' me my stick, wherever the damn thing is.."
"Mother! Language!" cried the lady from across the room, the device she was working with lay on the table in various pieces.
"These children are here to play, not be filled with your curses." She said sternly, despite the slight smirk on her face.
The old lady gave a laugh. "Sorry Juli."
She took another scan of the room and gestured to one of the small children to a small metallic tube that lay on the floor nearby. The little one held it up like a trophy, and presented it to her. She took it and with a sharp flick of the wrist it began to deform and elongate and morph into an ornate wooden stick.
Taking a moment, she shakily took a step from the chair she stood in and walked to the center of the room. The children naturally formed into a ring around her.
She loved telling this story, and her grin probably gave that away.
"Long ago, back when all humanity lived an' breathed on mother Earth, men an' woman from all the world over would brave the challenges of the great expanse, an' would journey out in thousands of small ships that would use the power of the stars to fly great distances ta' new worlds. Do any of ya' here know the name'sa these people?"
One of the smaller children at the back raised their hand.
"Go on love". The lady said.
"Well um, My daddy once told me about the Mur-Ed-Een heroes and about how they all flew far away to find the stuff and things we know today." said the child.
"Yes thats it! The Meridian heros!" said the old lady.
Whispers began to break out among the children.
"In those days, stars ships were nasty an' cramped tin cans full'a gas and flammables. An' all the food they had ta' eat was crammed in with 'em! Imagine that! Food buried ya' up to ya' eyeballs!" She continued.
Children laughed and giggled to themselves.
The old lady hunched up her back, and lowered her voice slightly.
She really did love telling this story, she figured that she had the theatrics down to a tee.
"An' on those long an' dangerous trips, sometimes them Meridians would would come back all different like, changed men an' women, scared crazy from the things they'd seen out there."
The whispering grew louder, and even with her dulled hearing she could hear the word 'angels' being said.
This was it, the cue she needed.
"Some a' them would come talking about, "the Angels!"
More rapturous giggling from the crowd.
"Stories about how these great big things like you'd pull outta the oceans a' Earth with glowing bodies an' long arm like things in the hundreds flyin' right up ta' those old tin cans, stories 'bout how they had no engines or sails, but eyes an' tentacles an' thick, colorful shells that'd hypnotize a fella' if he stared too long into it."
She wiggled her fingers at the word tentacles and twirled them at Hypnotize.
She noticed that her daughter back in the corner of the room was also watching the show, and she suddenly remembered telling her this story when she was of similar age.
Fond memories would not bring her show to a stop however.
"Some a' them folks that'd come back would say how the angels would talk to 'em, no words or writin' or nothin' but with thoughts and feelin's!" She said, making sure to wiggle her stick carefully around a few of the children's heads.
"I remember hear'n tales from them myself from I was just a lil' girl. Long time ago mind you. Mad stories about how the angels would grab ya' ship with them tentacles and pull ya' right ta' it's great big ol' eye. An' it would scream, oh boy how'd it scream loud right into ya' head about it's 'god'. An' if ya' didn't listen', if ya' tried to run away.."
Despite the great pain of doing so, the old lady hunched her back over even more, dropping her stick to the ground and put her hands out in front of her like two great claws.
"SNAP!" She yelled, softly pinching the noses of two of the small children.
"They'd get 'em!"
Frantic giggling broke out among the kids, now wired on the notion of space monsters eating their friends up whole. The story was over, and their energy quickly drove them out into the garden, where they soon ran out of sight.
The young lady got up from her chair across the room walked over to her Mother, helping her back into the sofa she was originally curled up in. The old lady was glad, her back now pained from excessive movement.
"You know Mother." The daughter said as she began tucking her mother back into her chair. "You've still never told me if those stories are true."
The old lady took her daughters hand, and smiled.
"Truth is usually stranger than fiction love."