In all honesty, the invasion was a bit of a letdown. Sure, the weeks leading up to it were interesting. Ever since NASA had announced that an object moving at an unthinkable speed was heading straight towards Earth, it appeared as if the entire world had been knocked off its rocker. Speculation ran wild. Was it aliens? Probably, an unassuming UN spokesperson had announced to the world one Tuesday morning. Conspiracy theorists everywhere rejoiced. Google searches or the benefits of tin foil hats skyrocketed. You could hardly walk through the park without someone somebody asking if you had a moment to talk about our Lord and Savior, Aten the Sun Disk. While the UN prepared speeches and practiced their handshakes, militaries around the globe united to point every sharp, explosive, or vaguely threatening thing on the planet towards the assumed threat. Just in case.
As the object entered the solar system, tensions rose. NASA provided us with our first glimpse of an alien species through some very high resolution pictures of an one mile long black tube. Radio messages carefully planned by world leaders went unanswered. NASA announced that the craft would reach earth within twenty four hours. Panic ensued. Some people retreated to their hastily built back yard bunkers. Others, mainly the youth of the world, decided they would much rather not remember their last night on Earth, and threw the party to end all parties. Militaries around the world resharpened their sharp things, rechecked their explosives, and put on their scariest uniforms. Just in case.
Being the sensible person that I am, I went to work early. I made sure my little deli looked spotless. If the new alien overlords have a taste for Rubens, I might as well make the place look nice, I thought. I opened the deli at the normal time, as always. Quite expectedly, no one came. The hours passed uneventfully. The small T.V. in the corner of my store informed me that the ship had parked itself in low earth orbit, taking out a number of unofficial spy satellites. No movement had been seen from the ship, but a bright flash had emerged a few minutes before. I clicked off the T.V. as I prepared to close for the day.
Before I had finished my closing inventory, the bell on my shop's door alerted me to the presence of a costumer. I rushed out of the storeroom, eager to greet the first costumer of the day. Instead, I was greeted by a small, slightly transparent green haze. I stared blankly as the cloud moved up to the counter and deposited an everything bagel onto its freshly cleaned surface. The cloud hovered motionlessly for a moment, as if it was waiting for me to react. Being the sensible person that I am, I stared some more. The cloud, apparently tired of waiting, dropped a five hundred peso note onto the counter, swooped down to collect its bagel, and casually blew out the door. I didn't even have the chance to tell the cloud that it was a little too far north for its money. I stared in shock at the door for a few more minutes, before I regained my senses and turned on the T.V.
The global community was shocked. After an 11 hour stay, the black rectangle had departed as quickly as it came. World leaders were confused. Military leaders gave speeches saying they were glad a crisis was averted. However, it was clear to see that they were slightly disappointed. Conspiracy theorists around the world wept.