Ricky remembers little of his life before he decided to join the army. His parents were against it, though, that much he's sure of. Everybody was against it. But his will was stronger. He wasn't gonna let the very first nation in the world fall down on its knees in front of the enemy without putting up a fight. He believed he was doing what every young man his age should do, really.
The chances of him coming back were slim and he knew it. If you had asked him, he'd say he wasn't doing for himself and he was right at that. He'd pitch some half-thought speech that he had rehearsed some times before, about the nation and the importance of his duty and how he wouldn't take anything less than a victory for his country. The guys who had a chance to listen to this realized at the time how right he was. He had a point, young Ricky.
Thing is, Ricky's memory of the time before the army was kind of hazy. The training was very intense, every soldier said the same. The army wasn't preparing just their bodies, but their minds, too. And that involved a lot of military drugs; to make sure kids wouldn't freak out in the middle of the battlefield, minimize the ocurrence of shellshock, all that psychological stuff that the government had found a way to deal with.
Of course he remembered his parentes, being a kid, growing up as an awkard teenager and everything. It was just the period right before the army that was a little fuzzy in his mind. He payed no thought to it, though, as none of his friends ever did. His mind was occupied with much more important things. He had lost some friends, he had killed some guys, he had done the whole lot. All in the name of duty. He'd been promoted to sergeant and got some medals along with it. He hadn't been able to talk to his parents, but he was sure they were proud of him, if they were getting his letters. They never got to answer them, since he was always moving from one place to another.
This one day Ricky went to the Major's office to request his vacation, like he would always do. He'd been stationed at the camp for about two months then and had been serving for 3 years without ever getting a vacation. He really missed his parents and his young brother Arthur. The major denied his request, as always; something about lack of manpower, which sounded as bullshit to Ricky. He never questioned it, though, couldn't have. It was the major's word and that was that. He could only come back in a week and ask again, wishing for better luck next time.
But on that specific day, something on the major's office caught Ricky's attention. The newspaper on the major's desk said something about some Arthur Holler, a sixteen year old boy. That could very well be Ricky's brother, he would be about that age then. There was no papers in the army camps, to keep the young killer minds focused on killing, so Ricky had to stole the major's if he ever wanted to read it. And that was exactly what he did. Of course this would have no bigger consequences, even if he got caught.
He read the news with a big grin on his face. It really was his brother, by the likes of it: Arthur Holler, sixteen year old, Old Hamilton High School. Everything was a match. Apparently, his brother became some High School hot-shot. He had made the touch down that got his school the national prize. Ricky was very excited and happy for his little brother. He always knew Arthur was going to be big.
But the excitement went away rather quickly. There was a picture of Arthur holding the cup on the other page. He was next to a guy that looked a lot like Ricky. A lot, except for one little detail. On the guy's arm there was no number, and Ricky had had the inscription "1005941" on his left arm since he joined the army. But he had a little scar next to his right eye, the same Ricky had since he fell off his bike when he was just a little boy. And suddenly he got it all. He remembered the scientific experimentation that was going on a little before the war started. The new way of warfare that the army has been developing, according to the news of the time. He realized he wasn't really himself.
He stormed in the major's office, who was already on the phone asking for someone to find him. Ricky demanded explanations. The major said everything would be answered with a file he kept on his drawer. Ricky asked to see it, but the last thing he saw was the metallic colt.45 that the major had as a souvenir. Rick had time to think the gun was too old to fire a bullet before he had hit the ground.