Your message was shocking for all of us, it used any taught plane as a speaker so that every window, metal panel and strung wire had screamed it out, we noted after international communications had been restored that it came in the form of the local language everywhere, simply figuring out how that was done had been the subject of much debate for years afterwards.
Now that we knew there was something to look for we spotted some, maybe all, of your technology that drifted round the Sol system.
When we pinpointed the broadcast location in Mercury, so long thought to be a planet, now turned out to be a solar power plant, we discovered the directed energy beams that pulsed off it with mathematical regularity those allowed us to find the rest.
The Kuiper belt turned out to have millions of drone satellites circling in it, whether the satellites or the belt came first has not been determined, but that it was one of these that killed Voyager was not in debate. Spectroscopic analysis of the beam that killed our first extra solar"ship" showed us whole new vistas of wavelengths and frequencies and immediately both regressed and massively advanced our understanding of the universe.
For the first decade we panicked as new discoveries and the realization of your overpowering technology was uncovered day after day, Saturns rings were found to contain uncountable nanites, Jupiter had several"somethings" lurking deep in the gas layers and on and on, with each power transfer from Mercury we found some new, and horrifying.
So we worked, feverishly, to try and counter each new discovery. We launched massive radiation cannons to fire focused x-rays at the nanites and sunder their atomic bonds, we used every nuke on the planet to bombard the 13 Jupiter locations until Mercury no longer tried to charge them, these and a thousand other plans and schemes were launched some successful, some not. The Moon has proved particular difficult as it seems to be a massive piece of machinery that we dare not attack as forcefully as is needed lest we doom ourselves with radioactive bombardment, now we walk its surface in the thousands digging and prying trying to exploit its mechanical depths and destroy it from within. We have not yet managed to enter it but even scratching the surface has revolutionized the sciences of chemistry and metallurgy, indeed most of the new weapon systems being made rely on the alloys and materials the saboteurs so carefully pry free.
Since the"frantic 30's" the Earths people have calmed and the threat of an outer power has united us in ways never dreamed of by even the most idealistic of politicians, war after all is good for the economy and we are facing a war unlike any ever dreamt. We have united under one government and one language, Esperanto for so long a joke is now how scientists and engineers the world over share their thoughts and advances and the general population is quickly following suit. Massive engines of war have been created and sadly in our desperation for materials many rare and vulnerable species have been destroyed though we have saved as many seeds and as much D.N.A as possible, should we win we will bring them forth again. We have conquered disease and are close to becoming functionally immortal so much the better to build weapons and crew ships, and the ships themselves...massive daggers of barely contained fusion power that even as we speak race to the Kuiper belt to see what may be done.
Now our thoughts turn to you, whomever you should be that threaten us from the sky, we know that Mercury beamed a tremendously powerful signal upon Voyagers destruction and we know the star that the signal travels to. Constrained as it is by light we know that we have another 63 years before it reaches you and we thought you should know what have accomplished and how much of your technology we have defeated in a mere 27 years. You may be already on the way to us when you receive this trailing broadcast but the Earth and all its people want to tell you with one voice"Come fucking get some!".