All of this should be such a joy, a wondrous time where people all around the world are brimming with love and excitement over what they might have been brought. But it's not, I'm worried, I'm borderline panicked. Every single year, I've felt my anxiety grow as the temperature drops, all because of one question nagging me between the ears. Am I on the naughty list this year? And there's no answer, there's never an answer because we weren't given a guideline, there's no clear line drawn in the sand that we must not cross lest we end up on the naughty list. So we're left to our own devices, trying to live our lives as best we can, but people slip, they always slip. There's not a soul who doesn't know someone who made it onto the naughty list, I've been to the funeral of three of them alone. I've hugged my crying brother-in-law after the small explosive took my sister's life. And what'd she do? I don't know, neither does he, all we can be certain of is that she made it onto the naughty list. And she was among some of the more fortunate.
Part of me is glad she got off that easy, we've all heard the classic tales, people appearing on the local news every Christmas day telling the harrowing tale how a gift mutilated them and showed them the error of their ways. But that's all bullshit, you can see it in their eyes, it's fear motivating them to tell their tales. There's nothing they wouldn't give to have back their hands, their eyes, their legs, they'd all happily be the same scumbags they were before their gift was dropped off.
Yet that doesn't change anything, millions of people die every year because of this crap, and we're supposed to rejoice? Spread holiday cheer around, and wish our neighbors a very merry Christmas even knowing that there's a chance that their son or daughter was maybe a bit too mouthy in school this year, and will be added to the ever-so-mournful Christmas obituaries. You'd think the death toll would've gone down after the first few years, but it's still growing. Every. Single. Year. There has been more, and the answer to the question which all news stations ask when the death toll gets released is; we're inherently assholes. You, me, your grandparents, all of us. None of us are perfect, it is impossible for us to be. But we used to embrace this aspect! We used to consider our imperfections to be what made us beautiful! Now? We dot our I's and cross our T's, we don't say a mean thing about anybody ever, even when they deserve, we never curse, we always look both ways before crossing the street. People used to think it was our government that would turn us this way, sterilize our culture, make us all become non-thinking robots, afraid to act outside the norm. But no, it was him.
I don't have a question to ask this year. I knew the answer sometime late in July. There was never a doubt in my mind that I was going to be on the naughty list, I'd sealed my fate. It was a normal get together, few couples around a friend's place for a dinner night. We all laughed at each other's jokes, we all complimented the way each other looked, stories that would be appropriate for a choir boy were told. It was good, sterile fun. But George, as ever, pushed his luck. This motherfucker for years, has been fondling my wife. Nothing overt, just a brush of the elbow against her tits as he brought her a new drink, or a trailing hand that slaps her on the ass. I have no idea how this prick had never made it onto the naughty list, even if it had happened in the old times people would've said it was egregious. But I never did anything, I never stood up for her, I never consoled her about it when we got home, and it remained unacknowledged, because we both hoped eventually he'd get put on that list. I saw the look on my wife's face, that helpless despair that makes her skin pallid, all because she knows she can't tell this creep to get bent. So, I hit him. Square in the jaw, he crumpled like an aluminum can, and we left.
Claire, my wife, did nothing but cry on the way home. She knew what I'd done to myself. But when she resigned herself to my fate, she thanked me. Part of me hates her for that, cause there's a small chance just that tiny acknowledgement gets her put on the list right next to me.
I've had five months to reflect on my actions, to really think if that one punch was worth my death. The answer was easy to figure out – no. I'm not that stupid. But in my half a year, I've found freedom. I can have a drink after work if I like, I can fuck my wife, I can say fuck! I can throw on an old R rated movie and watch Arnold Schwarzenegger blow some shit sky high. I'm not saying I've been around the world on a pleasure cruise, living like a playboy for my final year. But I have lived, for the first time in seven years, I've lived.
Undoubtedly, when this is found, I'll be dead, destroyed by some trap present that was left at the foot of my bed. So, Claire, my love, I want you to release this, post it online, send it to the news outlets, do whatever you want. Just make sure it gets out. People have to know that what they're doing ain't living. They're machines, just going from day to day with no hope of anything new or exciting ever happening, but being forced to deal with the same heart break year after year. I know it's scary to say fuck it, and know that your life is coming to an end, but hey, I only had five months, you'll have twelve! I can't tell you all how much fun I've had, how free I feel now. Don't be enslaved by the jolly prick any longer. Just stand up on the 26th and say what I've been screaming north for five months with some pride.
Fuck you, Santa,