You could easily tell when somebody had gone, "to the wild".
Usually their human bodies randomly twitch, and their closed eyes suggest they're in the deepest of REM dreams. They'll have their mouths open, with dribbles of drool seeping into their clothes. Its honestly, appalling.
Of course, it was frowned upon to do this in public, but you still saw it anyways. Some people would slap on some sunglasses, pick a nice shady area in the park, and pass out for hours. Yet, they weren't truly there, in spirit.
No, they were stalking prey in the lush and suffocating rainforests of the Madagascar; or they were soaring above the Serengeti, using incredible vision to survey the land. Some people would rest stationary within a towering redwood, listening to the whispers of the wise trees around them.
There were some that crept around the Mariana's trench, dangling a lure around, waiting for an unlucky meal to chase their trickery.
Some would swing from trees with expert agility. Some would feast upon shrubbery, yet use their keen hearing and powerful leg muscles to avoid the dangers of the wood. Some would even transfer into a squirrel 3 blocks away, and deviously prank their friends and family with it.
When somebody is asleep, they are awake elsewhere. They thrive along their companions, using their human intuition to help their animal friends survive. If you asked somebody about their gift; regardless of which organism they lived their second life in, they would tell you it was amazing. That it was a special 'coming of age' gift; and when i was ready, i would know. I would begin to have vivid dreams and then slowly begin to take control.

I was extremely excited, i knew i was close. I just knew it! Even though the kids in my grade had already began to brag about theirs last year, I knew that if i held out a little bit longer, i would be rewarded.
I'd spent countless hours daydreaming about what it'd be like to be a bird of prey. I was hoping, *hoping*, that i could become a Peregrine falcon, my favorite species of animal.

There...were dreams i'd had already. But i didn't believe that those necessarily counted. I chalked those up to my childish imagination, playing devilish tricks on me while i patiently waited.
Although, I couldn't necessarily *complain* about the dreams i'd been having.

After a few weeks they were pretty exhilarating, and the exploration always kept me coming back. I would climb *behemoth* sized sand dunes, and cross massive open deserts. I could camouflage myself from danger, by sinking into the sand; and i could jump incredible heights.
There were types of animals and predators, that i couldn't begin to explain. Catlike beings that stood upright on two legs, with their chest puffed out like a humans. They had decorative, Native American like headwear, and war paint. I remember seeing one of my friends taken by those savages...I wept along with the rest of my kin.
There was an extremely large tunnel system that i would traverse.... my god was it beautiful. Cascades of water would rush through, and others like me would live amidst the dark. Yet, it wasn't dark to us. We could see perfectly fine; It was a surreal experience that i knew i would never be able to comprehend as a human.
There were entire cities below ground! With merchants peddling their wares and families being raised; inns for weary travelers and pubs for...well, weary travelers; bakeries for pie and butcheries for strange, yet succulent meat! There were street magicians that used *real* magic and city festivals, with couples falling in love; all underneath the glow of the cavern lichen.
I eventually started to take trips to the bathroom at school. Just so i could go back to this mystical world. I couldn't explain it, but these individuals, were much happier than anything i'd experienced. I could communicate with them flawlessly, in a tongue that i felt like i'd been speaking since birth.
I began to study my brethren. Their height, and weight seemed very similiar to humans. Their faces, were unlike humans completely, yet nearly the same as far as diversity goes. Their skin was much paler, but the closer i looked, the more i started to recognize the true diversity of my newfound species. Everybody had their own colored glow, like an aura. There was bluish-green, deep reds and bright reds, yellows and golds, and even some colors that i had never seen before. It brought tears to my eyes; I finally knew what it felt like to ha-
A sharp noise broke my concentration. Had i been daydreaming? Here I am, back in this disgusting school bathroom
*My head is pounding...dear lord...*
"Yo, James. Is that you in here??"
The familiar voice of Kramer echoed its way to the stalls.
"Yeah, yeah. Was i taking too long..?"
"Yeah dude, you've been under for like an hour. Mrs. Hollins is pissed! But there's something weird on TV, you should come check this out! It's freakin wicked!"

And with that i could hear the door slam shut, and his frantic scurrying feet making their way down the hall.
*I don't care...But an hour? Really? *
I fumbled for the lock on the stall, and lethargically made my way back to Mrs. Hollins room. As i'd gotten accustomed to, the class all turned their heads towards me as i walked in. I gave them a shallow smile and returned to my seat. Strangely, the news was being played on the overhead...This had never happened before. Mrs. Hollins was too boring to let us watch TV.
"James, what have i told you about going into the wild at school? **Save that for nighttime young man**!"
"Alright, alright, i'm sorry Mrs. Hollins it won't happen again."
"Yeah, that's what you said last time. I should write you up!"
I opened my mouth to retort, but she cut me off blatantly.
"Don't talk back. Just watch the news like everybody else, and shut your mouth."
"Yes ma'am."
I looked up at the overhead just as the news station was coming back from commercial break.
The obnoxiously large "BREAKING NEWS" graphic filled the screen, and the cringe-filled fanfare music of channel 8 began to play. A man that sounded like a crime drama narrator from the 50's began to speak.
"*In a shocking discovery, that's out of this world....*" He put an emphasis on 'out of this world' and gave a sly grin into the camera before he continued.
"*NASA has just confirmed, that an alien life form has been discovered on Mars! This photo was taken just moments before the Curiosity rover was destroyed. *"

As the image popped up on screen, it all hit me. I stood up...shaking uncontrollably.

The picture was that of a feline standing straight up on his hind legs, with Native American like headwear, and war paint doodled beneath his eyes. He was looking straight into the camera, with his tribesmates in the background.

I threw my fist in the air and screamed.

"FUCKIN COOL!"