"Are you sure this is correct?" asked Agent M as he placed the document on the table, his voice as lifeless as it had always been.
Genuinely surprised, Rohan turned his gaze from his sandwich, to the document, then to Agent M. M's brown eyebrows clenching furiously that they seemingly meet in the center. In his heavy Indian accent, Rohan replied, "Ahh, Michael! I didn't expect to see you here."
"Keep your volume down."
"Since you're already here, why don't you go enjoy the comic con, take a break?"
"Look, you're the one who gave me this job, why?"
"You remember Naimoli, right? His group recently lost half a million, M. Half of their annual profit! A couple of the other guys tracked down transaction, and apparently, your little miss innocent here is to blame. You may be a fan of Ceesharp, and she may have kept your hand clean of a few people, but she messed with the wrong people. Naimoli wasn't even gonna use that money to fund his little gang, he was saving it for retirement. This mission isn't a request, it's an order, now go! We're done here." Rohan, finished his sandwich, then began to walk towards the line for the costume contest. Agent M headed slowly towards the exit, still unsure about his assignment.
Anita Devose, more commonly known as the hero Ceesharp, isn't a murderer, a rapist, or a thug. She is and a thief, but she never took a dime from her gains, they were donated to those less fortunate. Whenever she wasn't stealing money, ms. Ceesharp would be using her skills to expose the criminals in Virgo, a city infested with black market traders, murderers, rapists, and thieves. Agent M is a fan of her work. Even though she may not realize it, Ceesharp has spared countless lives from Agent M's hands. Borr the strong, Harry the psycho, and Katie the murderer, were amongst the many people arrested before Agent M was assigned to eliminate them.
Agent M parked his car a block from the designated house. He made sure to bring along his trusty Mark 23, a hunting knife, a rope, and a few cyanide pills. The walk from the car to the house passed by quickly for Agent M. He felt a rush of adrenaline, causing his hands to shake. He used the imitation key Rohan has provided, and silently opened the door. The lights were off, no appliances turned on, dishes from the previous night still rested on the sink. He quietly made his way upstairs, and opened the doors one by one. On the master bedroom, Agent M found Ceesharp soundly sleeping. She looked younger than her reported age of forty, she had dark skin, puffy black hair, quite beautiful according to Agent M. Because he had no intention to kill her, Agent M started to look around for around for clues for the stolen money. After about ten minutes of carefully rummaging through shelves, closets, and cabinets, Agent M turned his gaze towards the laptop. He powered it on and was surprised to find that it had no password. He went through Ceesharp's highly organized note and found the information he needed. The money was sent to Jack, CEO of Virgo's most popular construction company. Ceesharp planned to use the money towards building the city's first homeless shelter and orphanage.
"Maybe if I get the money from Jack, I won't have to kill her," Agent M thought to himself. Before he could turn off the laptop, he heard a scream. Ceesharp quickly ran towards her secret closet and acquired a pistol. She cocked the pistol, pointed the weapon at Agent M, and shot. Agent M laid on the floor, trying to contain the blood from his neck.
"I know you're here to get the money back!," Yelled Ceesharp. "HAH! Naimoli is going to have to go through my dead body before he can stop me."
Agent M gazed at Ceesharp's eyes and found no sense of hesitation. Ceesharp made a name for herself by her willingness to break the law for the greater good. On April 8th, 2015, however, she unleashed her wrath at the wrong person.
When his life flashed before his eyes, Agent M realized that killing all those criminals, as bad as they may be, was not justice. Although he never got the chance to explain himself, he felt a sense of relief that he died at the hand of his hero.