She wakes up in stages. The light in the cottage bends along the curves of her shoulders and I wonder if there could ever be anything in the world as soft as this. The door to the patio is open and spring breezes carry in the smells of a world being reclaimed. Whatever I was thinking about is long gone. She makes a how-about-coffee kind of noise while stretching out across the bedsheets.
"Sure. Same as normal, or something different?"
"Why?"
"Well...because things are different today. You know?" I get up and consider putting clothes on as I talk. "This is the beginning of a whole new life for us."
"I think—" she clears her throat, "that it's going to be a whole new life with the same milk, no sugar."
"Hmm." I'll stay naked. "I can see this isn't going to work out then."
She rolls over and drops her face into the pillow. Whatever she says doesn't sound very perturbed. She makes me smile so easily. I think that's the real mystery of it. Everything I've done in life and she can make me warm and fuzzy by muttering into a pillow. I'm insane. I'm in love. You have even my smile to entertain yourself with.
She bought me one of those plastic cup/single serving machines but I threw it out. That was a little testy but it's disgustingly wasteful. She conceded when I pointed out the volume of shelf space the cups take up. The relative density to traditional packages. Better, I think, just to not drink the stuff, but life is not all about efficiency. It's a balance. We respect each others' boundaries. A lot of my work seems to teach me about successful relationships—or at least the thinking about work.
I got a french press instead and, though I find myself making the coffee most of the time, I like the doing of it. There are steps, and flourishes. All the meaning in life is made—crafted. Living itself is a craft to be mastered. As I pour out hers I realize I'm daydreaming and check the time. I could miss almost anything to spend a few more hours in bed with her. Almost.
She's asleep again when I come back into the room. "Coffee, babe." She sits up reluctantly and takes her mug, careful not to spill it onto her chest. The image of a drip of coffee rolling down her chest as she blows steam from the cup is an incredible turn-on. She notices.
"We've got stuff to do today, no more of that."
"I know. I was just...” I don't know what I was just. "I'm so glad I've earned your trust."
She sips, furrowing her brow. "You're shit at saying romantic things."
"Would you rather I didn't try?"
She smiles so warmly I lose my mental attempt to lose the erection. "Hey, what time is it?"
"We've got time." I set my drink on the bedside table and sit down. She leans over and gives me a sweet kiss on my cheek. The aroma lingers.
"Get dressed."
She finishes the coffee and starts moving around the room, getting her clothes. My suit's already laying on the chair. I'm dressed well before she is, admiring the cut of the jacket in the bathroom mirror. I have to edge past her as I step out to let her in. I step out onto the porch and pull out a smoke. If I have to give it up, I'll at least finish the ones I have left. My watch beeps. I wish the car was here already. Probably only a few minutes out. I'm flicking the lighter when her voice comes out muffled from the bathroom.
"What?" I pull it out of my mouth from habit.
"Where are my earrings with the red stones in them?"
"I don't know. Did you take them out?"
"I think so."
"Well forget about them. You're just perfect as you are."
She makes a loud puking sound but she comes out and floats around the bed to join me. The valley to the south is alive with the waves of wind that tear across the canopies, warm and dry. In the distance, on the low hills, I can see cattle grazing. There's pollen in the air. It's a smell that makes you breath greedily. My watch beeps again and I drop to my knee.
"What now?"
"I want to give you the brightest diamond in the world, but every time I found one it ended up just being another trinket. Junk for consumption."
"This is my diamond?"
"Yes. The cleanest, purest one there is." I remember the smoke in my hand and pop it into my pocket for a moment. "I've given up everything for you. The whole world."
She tries to smile warmly for me but there are tears in her eyes. They become God's own jewels as the horizon lights up. She takes me in her arms and holds me tight. "It's perfect."