Be calm Sarah, there is nothing to be worried about.
I sat in the student-pickup loop, repeating these words as nothing but foreign cars past by. My mother was usually the first person in line, but today that streak was broken. In fact, I had been sitting on this bench for almost 20 minutes, and still she refused to dispel my growing fear.
I almost started hyperventilating when all of a sudden from the corner of my eye, I spotted my crush. Trevor Miles, Mr. Popular but still talked to everybody without fear of judgement. He was perfect in a rugged way; his dreadlocks and slight 5 O'clock shadow danced with his perfect lips and infinite eyes. I once was caught in his gaze when he picked up a pencil I dropped in homeroom, and I felt like I was going to go insane if I kept staring any longer.
All of a sudden he noticed me staring at him, and I quickly looked away trying to be as smooth as possible. I guess I failed, because he started walking towards me now. Oh god, no. I am already panicking Trevor, please don't finish me off.
"Hey Sarah, your mom didn't come already? That's a first, I'm normally the last person here." he said with his unfair smile, destroying any semblance of control I had over my manic state.
"Uhh...yeah. I guess she got caught in traffic or something. Or maybe her car didn't agree with her driving habits and went on strike or..." I said before shutting my idiotic mouth. I never had a boyfriend all throughout high school, and I swore it was my inability to just play it cool. Every time I started mouthing off clever jokes, they were met with laughs, but subsequently all the date offers whizzed past me. I could see him smirking at my comment, and I accepted that my future with him ended so abruptly.
He started since I stopped talking, "Ah well no matter, its cool to have someone else here with me for once. Remind me to thank your mom's car for the company."
I giggled, but for a fleeting moment. This smooth son of a bitch didn't understand how rude he was being. Someone so cool, trying to flirt with someone like me as if anything will come of it. Sure I was pretty, but my social standing was anything but. He was maneuvering like I won't catch feelings and hope that I could actually be his girlfriend, and that all the girls wouldn't treat me like shit after seeing him giving me attention. It was cruel in hindsight, harmless in the moment.
"Well, I just hope she's alright. It's freezing out here." I muttered under my breathe.
He saw me starting to shiver when the wind blew, and responded," Do you want my jacket? I'm fine."
No you asshole, I don't want your pity attention.
"S....sure, thanks."
He wrapped his warm coat over me, and lightly cuddled with me on the bench, like the unaware douche bag he was. I hated him, but I was warm.
I sat with him for about 10 more minutes until my mother arrived, and I had just remembered I was freaking out about her moments ago. Trevor completely erased my worry, so quickly I forgot something might have actually happened to her. She jumped out of the BMW, apologizing profusely, going on about her car randomly dying on the highway. Trevor smirked, and I elbowed him in his side, laughing to myself. Just before I got in the car, and right as my mom turned her back, Trevor whipped me around and gave me a light kiss right on my forehead.
"Wh...what the hell was that for?" I asked, slightly angered while my heart was racing.
"Well I thanked the car..... might as well thank you too. You can keep my jacket till tomorrow Sarah, I'll get it back from you after 2nd period." he said, looking towards the entrance of the school as his sister pulled into the loop.
"But everyone will think-" I started, but he stopped me.
"Exactly, now go home girl." he said with his god damn smirk.
I hated him more than ever.
"Alright lover boy, see you tomorrow." I said, wincing at my terrible comeback.
I got in the car, flustered, and promptly berating my mother for being late, followed by requesting she picked me up later from now on.
(I am a male, so sorry if it sounds exaggerated)