**Crosspost from [this WP] (http: //www.reddit.com/r/WritingPrompts/comments/2op8xl/wpwrite_a_story_about_a_german_soldier_in_ww2_so/) **
It's ironic, don't you think, having to pretend to be a Jew after what we did?
Of course I know what happened. Like everyone else, I didn't believe it at first.
Adler, yes, Adler, the guard from block A, he used to be an SS, as you know, he's the one who told me about it. He said I needed to know everything so that you would believe me. So I asked him, and he told me. We would sit together, a couple of times a week, he would tell me the stories, and I would take notes.
Of course, it would have been easier to pay someone off, but I couldn't afford it. Not anymore. We lost everything during the war. Because my father was a doctor, and my mother's family owned stores, we weren't hit too badly after Brest-Litovsk and Versailles. My father was a good man, and a hard worker. He was wounded at Cambrai, and he was young, so he recovered, even though his lungs never really did. Luckily, it was too late in the war for him to be sent back.
No, he wasn't a Nazi. He'd seen enough. My mother didn't like them, either, they thought they were vulgar. Of course, they couldn't tell me that. But they tried to stop me from joining the youth groups. I didn't understand. They'd told me to say I wasn't interested. But I was. So I told the teacher, Fraülein Grüber I wanted to join. They were furious, and they couldn't show it. But I felt it, and I didn't understand. I mean, Staatssekretär Von Schirach was her third cousin, once removed, what was there not to be proud of? Maybe I could be like him, too - after all, it was in my blood, too… One day, when we were out on a field exercise, I told Hanz about it. And that idiot Hanz told Heinrich, because he wanted to suck up to him. And Heinrich told his cousin Fritz, who was jealous of me and Lieselotte, I guess. But I'll never be sure why he told his father. They came early in the morning. With what they found, Vater was lucky that my mother had some pull, in a way - he was given the choice. He figured he would be more useful on the Eastern front. And he never came back.
She managed to smuggle herself to Switzerland with Konstanze, we have family there, you see, and they told everyone else he died of pneumonia on the train, of course. The party trusted me now. But I didn't trust them anymore. I didn't have another choice than to pretend. And wait for the right time. I got lucky in Poland, many times. We were retreating. A family hid me from the Russians. And then I made my way here.
I was worried I would be arrested if I went back to Germany. And there was nothing left there for me, anyway. Our house is gone. My family is is gone. So I hid, in plain sight. I went to the cafés, went back to university, learned to paint.
What do you mean, "just like the Führer"? Not at all! The Führer would have had the Schule des Sehens burnt down, and everyone arrested, and I was there studying with the others this summer. Of course, the faculty has been gutted. I mean, Vienna isn't Freiburg. And yes, of course Heidegger joined the party. At the time, I was as disgusted as anyone else, but I too had to play a part, and I figured he was playing his. Anyway, it isn't like importing German professors because they can't find jobs back home bothers the administration, or the Austrians going to Germany bothers us, right?
Yes, I heard that some of your guards had come back as well, I heard about Adler. He's a smart man. He kept the numbers of those whom you registered, but died after you liberated the camps. Of course, he made sure the bodies couldn't be found. Quite a miraculous recovery some of them made, don't you think? But the truth is, there is no other choice for people like me. Because of what happened with my father, Mutti never replied to the letters I sent her. Konstanze, either. So I don't have a family anymore. Here, there is no future.
Of course, I'm less of a victim than the Jews were! Yes, yes, I understand that what I did was bad. But I was also honest with you. I told you what I know about Adler. Now, all I want is to be able to build a life.