*The Value of Being Interrupted*
"You can't be serious about going on a trip to Tokyo for New Year's."
"Um, and why not? You didn't have a problem being there during Jenny's fifth birthday."
"Really? You're bringing that up? I've told you a hundred times it was an emergency client meeting. I would've lost my job if I didn't go."
"Oh sure, always worried about losing your job. Never worried about losing your wife."
"Yeah because losing my wife would make my life easier, not harder."
"Please! The only thing that makes your life hard anymore is that little slut in Roppongi. Oh yeah, you thought I didn't know about her, didn't-"
"Um. Excuse me."
"What?"
"What do you want?"
"I don't mean to interrupt, but could you two slow down a bit? I'm having trouble keeping up typing everything."
"Oh, sorry about that."
"Do you need us to backtrack on anything?"
"Yeah, actually. Which birthday was it that he missed? I have it down as sixth here but I don't think that's right."
"It's the fifth. And… yeah. I mean, shouldn't have said that. I know you had no choice, and it was really sweet when you Skyped Jenny and helped blow out her birthday candles."
"No, you're right. I could've been more supportive. I didn't even say thank you for watching over all those sugar-rushed five-year-olds all by yourself. You were counting on me to help you, and I wasn't there."
"Um, excuse-"
"Oh don't say that! Jenny loves that stuffed Tokyo Tower plush you brought back for her. You know she can't sleep without it. That was so sweet of you."
"Hey, that was all Ms. Takahashi's idea. And there's nothing going on between us, you know that. She's my boss. Coming home to you and Jenny is the only thing that gets me through being over there."
"I know. I just… miss you sometimes. And it's easier when I can be mad at you instead of just mad at our situation."
"Um, excuse me."
"What?"
"What do you want?"
"Should I be typing this all down? I know I'm only supposed to record arguments, but does this count?"
"Wait, what were we arguing about?"
"I don't remember. Stenographer, what does the record say?"
"Your wife wanted to go to Tokyo for New Year's."
"Oh. Right. Sorry about that; it sounds so silly now. Yeah, don't worry about it. It's not worth the expense and I know you're sick of the place."
"No, actually. Maybe it'd be fun. Jenny's always wanted to go, and I can probably wrangle up something with Ms. Takahashi."
"Really?"
"Yeah. I could show you my office, we can go to a cat cafe, take Jenny to Disney Sea."
"Oh that sounds great!"
"Perfect. I'll call her right now actually. She should be just getting into the office right now."
"Um, excuse me."
"What?"
"What do you want?"
"Are you going to pay for my plane ticket too?"