*… fully operational. Repeat, the experiment is fully operational! *
Topluk hunched over the communicator and tapped frantically at the controls. Even encrypted as it was, sending the message over all available channels was a clear breach of protocol… but this was too big, too potentially disastrous to risk the message not getting through. His cerebral implants hummed softly as they synced with the device in front of him and uploaded both his warning and his memory logs. The lights in the tunnel dimmed slightly as the communicator opened a miniscule singularity and established a connection with the listening post a few light years away. One minute passed, then another.
He felt the chill of the voice before he heard it.
*Acknowledged. *
His implants went dead and Topluk tucked the device away. Swallowing the bile at the back of his throat, he walked back into the control room amid raucous hollering. One of the humans charged at him, teeth bared, and Topluk flinched instinctively. The human stopped short and wrapped its arms around him, uttering a barking laugh as it did so. "We did it, Paul! We actually fucking did it!"
Topluk bared his teeth in a smile. *Such repulsive creatures, * he thought as he shook the human's hand. "That we did."
The human turned his attention to a monitor nearby. "Counter-clockwise circuit is almost complete. Had some fluctuations with the cryogenics a few minutes ago, but everything's running great now." He turned back to Topluk, frowning. "You feeling alright, Paul? You look a little green."
"Fine," Topluk replied. "Just more excitement than I'm used to." A familiar hum echoed in his mind. "I'm gonna go grab a bite to eat," he said as he edged toward the door.
The human nodded. "I'll catch up in a few."
It was everything Topluk could do not to sprint down the hall. As soon as he found a secluded nook, he fished out the communicator and downloaded the message from Central command.
*Projections revised. Prognosis dire. Completion of project ahead of our predictions suggests underestimation of human ingenuity and perseverance. Immediate action required. *
As the plan filtered into his mind, Topluk nodded. It would buy them some time, at least. He just hoped it would be enough.
*****
"Bringing LHC sectors online now."
The small crowd of physicists was silent, watching the monitors anxiously. Topluk stood with them, watched with them, but he was anxious for an entirely different reason.
"Sectors one, six, and seven at nominal field strength."
The crowd murmured excitedly. Topluk felt a bead of sweat trace its way down his forehead, but ignored it.
"Two and eight on their heels."
Time crawled to a halt. Five down, three to go. *Please, * Topluk thought. *Please. *
"Sector five is up and running!"
The murmuring intensified into a low buzz. A klaxon cut over them, and between pulses of the blaring horn Topluk heard disappointed groans.
"Magnetic quench in sectors three and four. God *damnit. *"
Topluk feigned disappointment as he fought to keep a grin from his face. Hands in his pockets, he strode from the control room and keyed the communicator.
*Sabotage successful. *
*Acknowledged, * came the reply. *With perseverance and ingenuity metrics revised, we estimate a minimum two month downtime. Stand by for further instructions. *
He sat back, resting his head against the wall. *Dangerous creatures, these humans. They breathe a poisonous gas, drink large quantities of a polar solvent, can sustain massive physical trauma and survive. They've spent most of their brief existence conquering each other and the planet they live on. If they learn the secrets of the universe, they'll do the same. *
*Earth is their cradle. For the sake of all life, everywhere, it must also be their grave. *