When I was young, I was obsessed with lucid dreaming. I would always browse the internet for tips and instructions on how to achieve that coveted state - where one was in full control of a fake reality. I imagined nightly trips to exotic worlds, and a place where I could stand up to the bullies and always, always get the girl.
I gave it up after the first night. Instead of being transported to a beautiful fantasy the beckoned at my every whim, I became frozen in place within my own body, forced to watch as malicious creatures seemed to crawl towards the bed. I felt something sit on my chest, slowly and inexorably exerting pressure. *Oh*. My breathing drew up short. *So*. I felt as if I would throw up. *Slowly*. I could've sworn that I heard a rib crack.
Of course, when I woke up I found that none of those things had actually happened. I was fine, and what I had experienced was simply a side effect of attempting to reach a lucid dream state. Needless to say, I did not try ever again, and slept with my parents for a few weeks afterwards.
I never did forget that feeling of helplessness, though. Watching what was happening, fearing the inevitable, with no power to stop it.
I'm a grown man now. It has been many years since I was last afraid of the dark. Since I last thought of helplessness, and creatures in the night. But now I remember again. Now I am afraid.
It was such an innocent looking thing. A tiny chip. It could've been anything - my optical implant, intelligence enhancement, hormone regulation. In fact, if I were any other person, I probably would've just shrugged it off. But I knew. It could not have been any of those things.
How long had it been there? The question burned in the back of my mind. Who had put it there? What did they stand to gain?
Was my whole life a lie? Did I truly have any free will? How long has this thing been influencing me for? Which decisions were my own? Did I really love my wife? Do I really like my job, my children, my friends?
I have to get it out. I know how; I've done it before with more complex implants. I just need access to my workshop and time.
I'm taking it out tonight.
---
"Tonight" has come and gone. Chip's still in.
That evening, as I strode through the door in a daze, I came to realization. What if it wasn't just me? What if...it was everybody? What if we were *all* the playthings of some person or group, being directed and nudged towards certain goals? What if they could tell that my little light had gone dark on their screens?
No, it's too dangerous to take it out right away. Not until I know more.
---
I did some diagnostics last night. The chip definitely is some kind of control apparatus. It gets a little ping from an unknown signal, adjusts dopamine and hormone levels *just so* when the target thinks of something in particular - be it a job, a person, or what-have-you - to influence them into making certain choices. Then, like the good little machine it is, it sends a return 'ping' to confirm success or failure.
I thought of my wife first, fingers trembling on the receiving device that I had built out of spare parts and an old radio.
*Ping. *
My children.
*Ping. *
My job.
*Ping. *
My ambitions.
*Ping. *
The shit I took an hour ago.
*Ping. *
Huh. Must be something wrong with the damn thing.
---
I got the machine working a few hours later. It's still on in my workshop, crackling static every once in a while and emitting a faint light.
I tested it out. I'd rather not talk about the results, but it will suffice to say that a lot of who I am is not entirely my own.
I've spent the last week thinking about it. If someone out there really does control my chip, and potentially others', surely I couldn't do anything about it? Even if I removed mine, I would be stuck in a world where I didn't belong, miserable in an otherwise happy society.
I mean, I'm pretty damn happy, right? My wife loves me, my kids are amazing, and my job pays well. If this is life as a puppet, I can't think of anything I'd rather be.
I'm going to destroy the damn receiver.
I'm going to leave the chip in.
I'm going to try to forget it's even in there.
It's for the best.
*Ping. *