My eyes close, the pain fades, and I rest for a while.
What wakes me is a shuffling sound. It's the sound sandals make when they're dragged across a stone floor. Oilsmoke fills my nostrils, and heat presses in on my skin.
I open my eyes.
Torches in sconces on the walls light the stone room. The ceiling hangs six inches above my head. Wooden tables are evenly spaced throughout the room. Every table is set with six wooden bowls, wooden spoons, and wooden cups. Rushes cover the ground. Dirt pokes up through the spaces between their fronds. The shuffling comes from somewhere past one of the walls.
"Hello?" I call out.
I hear a sharp yelp, much like the sound a dog makes after its tail has been stepped on. "Who's that? Who's there?" The man's voice has the texture of pocket lint – worn, grey, fragile.
"I don't know how I got here."
"Neither do I," the man says. The shuffling begins again and not long after he comes around the corner of the wall. His robes might once have been white, but they've become so stained I mistake them at first for burlap. His beard reaches to his belly-button, and it houses dust, twigs, and bits of bread. He comes right up beside me and peers into my face with his watery blue eyes. "You're dead."
He says it matter-of-fact, not as a question or a exclamation, but rather the way a droll teacher might address a student who has arrived late to class.
"I fell down those stairs at the tram station. I know that much," I say. "But if I'm dead, how come I'm here and talking to you?"
"That should be pretty obvious, shouldn't it?" The man pulls his beard apart with his two hands and reveals a silver medallion on a leather thong. The medallion reads Santo Petra.
"This is heaven?"
He snorts. "It was."
"Was?"
"Nobody comes here anymore. God's had the place decomissioned. He's built a newer, better heaven and said he'd have no need for me as gatekeeper anymore."
"This is a joke. You're joking."
"One of the newer saints, some Italian hotshot who wears leather vests and gels his hair in points, recommended that God dandy up the place, and, wouldn't you know it, but after millenia of asking the big guy to make some changes, he goes and decides to build a whole new heaven. Now they've got Saint Guido on the door and I'm left here to tend to the furniture and to move along the sad cases like yourself who end up here." Saint Peter slumps onto a wooden bench. He picks a bowl up, waves his hand over it, and desultorily begins spooning up the stew that appears inside. "You'll be wanting to move along now, won't you? Off to Heaven 2.0? The big party in the sky? I don't think they even call it heaven anymore, to be honest. It's got some greasy hip name, something like Blade or FaNaTiK. Ridiculous." He waves his spoon around and fails to notice the glob of stew that falls into his beard.
"Doesn't sound all that great, to be honest. Probably lots of loud music, tight clothes, and orange people? Not really my scene."
Saint Peter shakes his head. "Oh, they all say that, but after a couple of years they come around. Just last year I had a dyed-in-the-wool social reject in here – this guy hadn't left his house or showered in five years. He died from an infection he got from pooing in the bathtub – was in H2.0 for two months and he made the decision to lose the weight, orange up the skin, and hit the dancefloor. Unbelivable. But it goes to show you'll be happy if you move along."
I join him on the bench. "For real, that sounds terrible. I'd rather hang out in the quiet here with you."
"You can't be serious."
"Really I am. I'm a quiet book person. Noise is the last thing I want to be around for eternity."
Saint Peter looks left and right out of the corners of his eyes. "Definitely?"
"Yah, for sure. Get me some old robes and pass me some stew."
"Call it off, everybody." Saint Peter gets to his feet. "Call it –" An air horn cuts him off.
A banner unfurls behind Saint Peters table. YOU JUST GOT PUNK'D! The stone in the walls around me collects into drips and drops and they spread out in puddles on the floor. The rushes fade away and what's left behind is a black reflective surface, in which I now see reflected laser light. A heavy bass thrum builds out of nowhere, and over it I hear a staccato piano melody rising and falling. People stream into view, all of them dressed in tank tops, crop tops, board shorts, mini-skirts, and flip-flops. Their skin glows orange. I catch snatches of the words they're shouting: "Shots...slammered...crush pussy...skank...jagerbombs."
Saint Peter pulls off his robe to reveal similar clothes underneath. His pale skin oranges. The music is so loud I can barely hear him. "It's a game we play with new people! Nobody likes lame medieval heaven! But I promise, if you give it a couple of months, you'll learn to love it here!"
Cold gel is slapped into my hair. Cans of spraytan erupt all around me. The sleeves of my shirt are torn away.
"You'll love it! I promise!" Saint Peter hi-fives people around him. "After all, this is heaven!"