This may be horrible
He lay there dying my mother next to him, the doctor said that the crash would probably kill him, and my mother I loved them both, my dad motioned for me and said there is something i need to tell you I had known him my whole life, I thought that I know him, but then; He said it he told the story. I have never told you this but I feel that i need to, or I will die a mystery. When i was young i was orphaned this was not because my parents were bad I suspect or perhaps i just want to believe that I don't know when, but i was put in a foster home run by a gay couple of whom i remember very little of but from my few memories is that they were great, caring tolerant people who loved everyone. However when i was about 4 I was moved to a new foster home. These foster parents strictly upheld hierarchy where the "man of the house" was at the zenith and i was at the bottom, I was at the time told it was because i was evil and and doomed to hell, at the time i had nothing else to believe so i believed them. They convinced the other kids that i was evil and needed to be punished i was beaten almost daily by both the kids and the parents, i was lead to believe that i was just bad and that it was just how life was. around when i was 18 i left. at first i thought that i would just live and life would be the same but when a social worker asked about my experience i told her the whole story the whole time just assuring her that it was a normal life while explaining my horrible life. she said that that was horrible and she had had a similar experience. And we talked about life and as i readjusted to life she helped me realise that i didn't need to be like my parents. She later quit and we started hanging out then eventually we started dating.And that is how i met your mother my mother smiled as they held hands and with that they closed their eyes and my father shed one tear. I had no idea about this, this left me wondering if i really knew that man or my mother, it left me wanting to have more time, but I couldn't, I wanted to forget that moment and remember him as the man i thought i knew but I couldnt, he was gone.