I stepped out of the shuttle pod and onto the smooth metal of the landing pad near the top of our apartment complex. My hover suitcase followed me faithfully, floating from the vehicle's rear boot before the lid closed automatically behind it. With a loud hum from its antigravity turbines, the hovercar took off, shooting off down into the city centre.
I walked across the wide landing pad, which jutted out like a chromed lily pad from the side of the elegantly curved building. My cloak rippled slightly in the breeze as the double doors slid open silently ahead of me. The thick blue carpet felt soft beneath my booted feet, and I stood there for a moment, just breathing in the familiar faint scent of vanilla that wafted up from the freshly cleaned floor.
I smiled to myself as I strolled across to the elevator, which was already waiting with its doors open, and selected my floor. A few seconds later, I was stepping out into a different corridor and walking down the hall to our apartment. I placed my palm upon the lock, which winked green and beeped. The door slid back to reveal the spacious room beyond.
I stepped through, the suitcase coming to a stop beside me and gently lowering itself to the floor.
'I'm back!' I called, shrugging off my cloak and throwing it over a nearby table. There was no reply.
'Rebecca?' I said, walking towards the short passage that led to the bedroom my girlfriend and I shared. I thought I had heard whispering a moment before, but now I could pick up no sounds coming from behind the door.
I crept up to the door, pushed it open and peered inside. My eyebrows rose in surprise.
On the wide, low bed lay my girlfriend Rebecca, with my other friend Kelly sitting with her back against the headboard on the adjacent pillow. Some sort of device lay on the covers in the centre of the bed, a sort of capsule or something. It was spherical, with tiny golden lights winking on and off inside like a swarm of trapped fireflies.
'Hey,' said Rebecca, smiling dreamily. 'You're back early.'
'What the hell are you doing?' I said, coming to the foot of the bed and looking at the capsule more closely.
Kelly and Rebecca exchanged glances. 'You tell him,' said Kelly, hugging her knees.
'Okay,' said Rebecca, looking back at me. 'Luke, have you ever heard of hive minds?'
'Hive minds?' I repeated. 'Sure.'
'Well, Kelly and I were talking about them, and we decided to research them a little. They're actually really cool, Luke!' she said excitedly, her eyes lighting up. 'People who have joined them say it's like nothing you've ever imagined. You can hear other people's thoughts, and they can hear yours, and everyone helps make each other's decisions, and—'
She stopped when she saw the look on my face.
'So what is this?' I said, pointing to the capsule.
'It's a relay,' she replied.
'A relay for what?'
'This.' She turned her head to her left, revealing a round metallic disc attached to her scalp just behind her right ear. Tiny lights flickered in it, similar to those inside the relay capsule. My eyes widened.
'I'm linked in too,' interjected Kelly, turning her head so that I could see the identical device on the side of her head. I looked back to Rebecca in disbelief.
'You two are in a *hivemind* together?' I said. 'Like, actually linked to each other?'
'And about two dozen other people,' said Kelly. 'That's what this relay is for. So we can keep in contact.'
'And you didn't think to maybe ask if I was OK with this?' I said to Rebecca. She didn't reply, but blinked a couple of times quickly. Kelly suddenly sniggered quietly.
I looked from one to the other. 'What?' I said. 'Are you two talking to each other right now?'
'Us and the rest of them, don't forget,' said Kelly. 'There's currently a bit of a debate going on as to whether she should try kissing and making up now, or let you cool off in your own time.'
I didn't bother to reply, but instead stormed from the room, slamming the door behind myself.
Neither of them followed me, but then why would they? They had found their own new little world.