Initially, I didn't think much of it. It was my first night visiting my parents' home in over a year, and I wasn't too familiar with the layout of the house. I figured it was my mother in the other room, probably clearing her throat as she tried to fall asleep.
But when I heard it again, I remembered: *My parents aren't home yet. * They had left earlier this evening to go see a play in the Opera House. I glanced over at the clock. It wasn't even midnight yet.
A faint chill ran down my spine. If that wasn't my mother coughing--then who was? Maybe it was just a squeaky pipe or something. I crept out of the guest bedroom and walked down the hall toward the adjacent room. I put my ear up against the door.
*Nothing. * Maybe it was my imagination? I opened the door and swung it open. Inside was my dad's study, dimly illuminated with an office lamp sitting on his desk. I glanced over at the piles of old papers stacked against the wall, a remnant of when my dad used to work for the city...
The sound came again. It was a faint woman's cough, just like before. But this time it sounded like it was coming from the guest bedroom! I ran out of the study and back into my room. There was nothing in there but my laptop and bed.
As if taunting me, the sound came a fourth time, coming from--you guessed it--the study room next door. "God dammit!" I yelled out loud. I raised my fist and threw it into the wall.
I wasn't expecting my hand to break through. The wall crumbled away like it was made of paper, and a large hole formed around my fist. Inside the wall, my hand had landed on something... sticky. A putrid smell surrounded my nostrils. I immediately recoiled.
From within the wall, a single shape appeared, illuminated by the dim light of the guest bedroom: a human eye, staring at me angrily. It blinked.
"What the fuck!?" I screamed out. I jumped away, running down the stairs and outside of my parent's house. I ran down the front yard toward the street--
A woman, dressed in black, appeared out of nowhere. It was dark, so her dirty face was only partially visible underneath the streetlamp. She had the same eye, staring at me.
I screamed, but nothing came out. The woman-thing approached me, her eyes burning into the back of my skull. She reached out a hand and touched my temples.
A vision flashed in my mind. A woman was laying in bed, coughing hysterically. "Please," she said between gasps of air. "I think I should go to the hospital." I didn't recognized her at first, due to her nappy hair and blotched skin, but soon the realization dawned on me: this woman in the vision was my mother.
My dad walked into the room, holding a glass of water. "No, honey," he said. He turned away from my mother and removed a small vial from his coat pocket, pouring it into the glass of water. He turned back around and offered it to my mother. "Drink this," he said. "It'll make that coughing go away."
My mom sighed. "Ok, if you say so." She took a big gulp of it.
The image faded away. The next thing I knew, I was standing in the front yard, the woman-thing staring at me. A single tear fell from her cheek. "Mom?" I said.
Then, it hit me. I hadn't seen my mom yet since I came back. When I arrived earlier today, my dad told me she had already gone to see some friends before the show. "She'll really hate missing you," he said with a grin on his face.
The apparition disappeared as two bright headlights approached from down the street. It was my parent's car, with only my dad sitting at the driver's seat. He pulled into the driveway and got out of the car. "Son? What are you doing out here?" He said, walking towards me. "Anyway, the show was great. Mom's talking with director's wife, you know how women are." He chuckled. "So she probably won't be back until tomorrow morning... "
"Dad," I said, trying to compose myself. "What did you do to mom?"
He curled his eyebrows. "What do you mean? I told you --"
"No!" I said angrily. "Did you kill her?"
My dad stepped back. "Son," he said, a worried expression on his face. "Why would you ask that? Are you... feeling okay?"
I ran away from him, going back into the house. I hopped up the stairs and sprinted into the guest bedroom, where I made the hole in the wall. The room really smelled like shit at this point. I peered inside the hole--and instead of the angry eye, I saw a half-decomposed skull staring out at me. My mother's body.
I fell onto the floor, reviled, with tears of terror streaming down my face. I picked up my phone and dialed 911. Outside, the car engine started and tires screeched as my dad's car bolted away from the driveway.