We were gentle, once. I don't remember it clearly anymore, but I can see it on the faces of those who knew me, and the others. Now, we are neither gentle nor hard. We are not benevolent, nor cruel. Not saviors, nor tyrants. Not children, nor grown. We simply are. We are simply 'Candidates'.
The title should give you some glimpse into our past, as well as our future. Especially today, the day before our graduation and our selection. All but one of us will have failed...HAS already failed. So many decisions led us here, so many twists and turns, as humanity has forced us into a mold that perhaps none of us were meant for. Perhaps humanity was not meant to be led by a single person. Or perhaps we were chosen for this process in order to save the humanity of others at the cost of our own.
I remember the day they came. My parents were so proud - I had been chosen. I, Stanley Nicklaus, the only Candidate from Detroit. And not just from Detroit, but from the worst parts of Detroit, the downfallen dregs of what was once a great city in the old America - before it, and the nation that formed it, collapsed and were pitched into the trash heap to which all empires went...to which this new empire of humanity will go, unless the chosen Candidate succeeds.
I remember that day like it was yesterday, though 11 years have passed. From 5 years old to 16. Chosen not for brilliance or ruthlessness or wit, not any of the things that once were considered important qualities, but for our humanity. For our willingness to give everything we had to others. And perhaps that is why I was chosen, though we were poor - because my parents showed me how to give when I thought there was nothing left.
All of us have similar stories - Paulo, from the slums of Rio. Deanne, from Ireland, devastated by famine time and again. Sergei, from Russia, beaten so many times for its war-mongering that it had more craters than cities. Indira, descended from prisoners of the Chinese-run New Delhi re-education camps. We are all that is left - five Candidates, from a pool of 120. Eleven YEARS of tears and sacrifices. We have killed for our species, and we have lost for our species. We have been trained to forgo our animal desires, and to restrain our baser instincts. Indira, missing two fingers from her left hand to prove she wouldn't break. Paulo, his face scarred when he saved Deanne from a fire that should have killed her. And me, with my cyborg leg - the others joke that no one tests me anymore because I could kick them into lunar orbit, but really they don't test me because I have nothing left to give.
I won't be selected, and I know it. I know it because they don't test, they don't prod at me. I let Janine die, simply because to save her would have killed us both. They wanted self-sacrifice, but cold pragmatism stopped me. We were friends. In another life, maybe lovers, had we met. But I let her die anyways.
We were gentle, once. What are we now?