I hated him nearly as much as I hated myself. Stupid fat Yuki, the type of ham-fisted ball head triple chinned Jap that you see in animes being bullied, rather than in schoolyard brawls beating the shit out of the Gaijin. I didn't choose to be a Gaijin either, the kids here stuck it on like a label and decided never peel it off. I gave up Robbie, except at home, in the classroom, I was punk-Gaijin and *Lo-beh* to my teacher. They've got a real problem with R's and L's on this side of the world.
The three o clock bell couldn't have come faster. Shifting a look over my shoulder, I darted to the school corridor and for the hover board docking bay.
Lo and behold, fat head was waiting with two of his cronies. They stood near the hover board bay gate with arms folded and shark grins adorning their pudgy mugs. Yuki, the one in the centre, wore a black suit uniform with a white shirt that threatened to burst over his stomach. His two pals let their coats hang open and their collars twisted in all sorts of random angles. They were textbook baby Yakuzas and I was having none of it.
"Step off, Yuki. Unless you want Principal Joku down here," I said, stopping two feet from the entrance.
Kids began piling through the school doors behind, only to notice Yuki and the Gaijin facing off before joining the crowd.
"Kowai desu ka?"
*Are you scared? *
The twerp knew enough english to make chit-chat, but he chose to respond in Japanese to make a point. You see, in this world you're either Japanese or you're not, and assimilating doesn't allow you to make the cut. I was the sore thumb in a row of neatly curled fingers and in Japan there's nothing worse than standing out. Yuki had taken it upon himself to make sure this problem would go away, and most of the other kids secretly agreed with him. Either that or they were too afraid to help out--experience leant toward the former.
"You're not dumb enough to get kicked out of school? Are you?" I asked, shifting back toward the crowd.
Yuki inched forward, a giant on the prowl. "Anata no korosu tsumorida."
*I'm going to kill you. *
Some of the kids in a rush had poked out from the sides of the crowd and past his cronies, into the docking bay. Now that the gate was open, I could maybe make a run for it.
"Good thing fatsos can't run!" I yelled, turning and pushing into the crowd.
Yuki jumped for me, I felt a hand grip my bag but was able to shake it off. The kids drifted away, like water separating for the passage of a foreign body. In this case, it gave me more leverage to push into them and keep them in disarray, making the job difficult for Yuki.
His cronies joined the search, chasing for the yells from each student I bumped into. Someone pushed me and I rolled centre circle, only to notice Yuki and his pals on the other side of the students now and fighting to get to me.
I darted into the hover board bay, grabbed my Jetson 220--one of the latest and greatest. It could keep up with motorbikes and clamped your feet in so there was no fall-chance. This board was about as big as my forearm and its width was slightly longer than a skateboard. The jagged edges meant that it could slice grass and other frail material.
The board lit up red from my touch - owner recognition - and clamped me in as I jumped on.
Yuki and his Cronies were through the crowd now and beelining it for the hover board bay gate, no doubt they planned to shut me in.
I grinned at the idiots. There was nothing quite like the thrill, those few moments before the board shuddered to life and blasted from 0 to 100. It's the type of energy that preceedes a lightning strike or the tension that occurs right before elastic snaps. The board levelled out above the ground, thrusters powering on and causing the hair on the back of my neck to rise.
My heart thudded, both from the adrenalin and the thrill of the hoverboard. When I'm on here, I forget who I am, and that there are people like Yuki in the world. For the sixty minute ride home I'm away from Japan, and in my own reality, wherever I want the board to take me is where I go, and there's nowhere out of reach. It's a reminder that bad things are only temporary and that happiness always comes in the end.
I pushed forward with all my strength. The air around me cracked as I zipped out, swerving past Yuki and his cronies. There was a huge dust cloud in my wake, and the group of students were left coughing. I dodged pedestrians like obstacle cones and swung hard right onto a biking lane. And then I was off, my problems at my back and the sunset ahead. But none of it mattered because I was here, happy, on my hoverboard.