I was having a pretty normal vacation until today. I was lying at the beach, browsing Reddit and getting a tan. Suddenly, everything got dark and before I knew it, I heard the sound of a huge explosion and a lightning bolt flashed in front of my face. The shock traveled through my body and I fell to the ground.
I remember waking up in the emergency room of a hospital with a doctor standing beside carrying some papers. As I regain consciousness, I feel different in a way I can't explain. The doctor tells me that I'll be fine and that no serious injuries occurred, thankfully. As I resume normal life, I feel infinite, like I can do anything if I set my mind to it. As I enter my house, everything seems to fall into place and I take a mental inventory of my life upto this point. This all happens in an instant.
I observe my surroundings, immediately, I notice everything wrong with my place and my body acts of its own mind and begins cleaning my apartment. I had wanted to do this at some point in my life, but now, I feel like there is no excuse for me not to do this. Fifteen minutes later, everything about my room seems so perfect and it looks like a place I would want to live the rest of my life in. I lay on my couch for a while, but I am restless. I want to do something, the first things that comes to mind is writing. Yeah, I am a writer, and yeah, I have not written a single word the past year. As I begin to write, everything seems to happen automatically. I put one word in front of another until I have written an entire chapter. When I glance at the clock, I realize how much time has passed, I was so lost in writing that time passed me by really quickly.
Immediately, I put on my workout clothing and go to the gym. As I walk there, I am thinking about how perfect of a day this will be. I am loving this. I am careful not to over-train as it is my first day but after the workout is finished, I feel a sense of accomplishment and this makes me really happy. A huge smile spreads across my face and I feel infinite.
On my walk back home, I think of all the relationships in my life and how I was so careless about them. I make a decision to remedy this, I call up my best friend who I had not talked to for about a month and make plans to meet up at a nearby cafe. At first, he is a bit reluctant and aggressive about me not returning his calls. I apologize for my actions and explain to him how I want to maintain our friendship. I genuinely believed what I said.
I inquire about new developments in his life, how his wife and children are, how the new android application he is developing is working out. He seems to have changed a lot and appears happier. He tells me about his exciting adventures and how he works from home now and travels the world with his family. During the conversation, I, suddenly start to feel miserable. I try to cut the meeting short by claiming that I forgot about the important meeting I have tomorrow morning and I have to go to bed early. He seems completely okay with this and leaves me alone.
As I walk home, my head is constantly tilted down, not like in the morning, when it was proudly up. Tears start falling from my eyes for no reason I can think of. I begin to see everything negatively and believe that I was never truly happy at any point in my life, even today. As I enter my room, I close the lights and sit on my bed in darkness. I just want to think about my life. I start to think that today I was not me but someone else. I felt like an impostor. Suddenly, this feeling that life will not get any better in the future started to surface. Rationally, I knew this was not true but emotionally I was convinced. I don't want to continue on living, I think to myself, if this is what life is. Life is meaningless, I tell to myself, the universe doesn't care about you and that I am not a unique and special snowflake, that I am insignificant in the grand scheme of thing. The only honorable thing to do would be to kill myself, only in death can we be heroes. When I woke up, I never knew that suicide would be the thing I would set my mind to, but we don't always get what we wish for. I proceed to jump out of my apartment window while keeping my eyes closed so that I do not back down from my decision.