The doctor always said I had a problem. What they meant by that, I don't think I will ever know. I guess the way I live my life hasn't been entirely right but in the end what can I do? I live how I feel I should and will continue to do so. Unfortunately that type of thinking has placed me in Boarding Group B on American Airlines flight 1321 to Atlanta. Apparently there are people who explain to me what exactly I am doing wrong. Until then, here I am in line waiting to take my seats. After a while I notice a lovely blonde standing a few people in front of me. Maybe I should talk to her. Am I even capable of talking to a attractive woman? I used to think so when I was a bit younger but after several bad rejections I think it would be best to just forget about her. Yet what is this? She begins to show consideration for the family that stands behind and in front of her. "You all can get in at the same time, I'm by myself and I have no problem letting you guys get situated without me in the way." She says cheerfully. She is like a breath of fresh air. In my experience, with looks comes arrogance, yet with such a minor yet gracious act she begins to unravel my previous notions. Soon this wonderful creature stands before me. The smell of her perfume is intoxicating, almost to the point where I can't think straight. She hums quietly to her self as she puts on her ear buds. I can hear the muffled music playing from them but the sound suddenly stops after a few short moments. She seems frustrated as she removes her phone from her pocket only to notice that it had died. "The battery is dead, damn." She says quietly.
Dammit, I can do it! Say something! "That sucks." I say shakily. "Did you forget to charge it?" She looks up from the blackened screen in front of her and removes an ear bud. "Yeah, I guess so." She says with an awkward chuckle. I finally get a good look at her gorgeous green eyes, spectacular. "I have a charger for that phone with me if you want to borrow it for a bit before we board, there are still a few more minutes left." She smiles slightly at my gesture of kindness causing my heart to throb uncontrollably. I can barely breathe. "Thanks, but no thanks. It's no big deal. I can read on the flight." She replies. All at once I am crushed. I never expected something so small to affect me so much. I smile back for a moment and return to my thoughts. How can someone in need reject such an offer. She obviously wants to listen to her music, and I have given her an offer that would satisfy her wants, yet she declines. Maybe I was wrong about her. She is just like the rest of them: arrogant, cold, disheartening. Her small and sensual frame must be her only true virtue. Everything she says must be an act of some kind, I know it. I can see it now in that beautiful yet deceitful gaze of hers, shes better than everyone else and she knows it. She doesn't do anything out of kindness but out of pity for those she deems underneath her.
While I drown in anger the plane begins to board. The line slowly moves forward as people ring their boarding passes. The succubus in front of me is next in line. She rings her pass and soon afterwards I do as well. As we walk down the ramp towards the whining engines of the jet liner I realize something. I had almost been taken in by the epitome of what causes me heartache. There is only one thing left to do. I must save others from feeling the same way I do. I can't allow her to sow more and more disdain. She's small, and said she was traveling alone. Once we reach our destination I will become the champion of the heartbroken. I'm sure my hands could fit around that elegant neck of hers quite easily, and due to her serious lack of appreciation for random acts from kind strangers, she is without a phone.
The doctors always said I had a problem.....