Jerry H. Vah pulled into the parking lot of Amalgamated Multiverses, Inc. He was late.
The day had not started well. Actually things started to go down hill last night. He called home after work to say that he would not be home for dinner as he and some work friends were going out. His wife Sheila did not answer the phone, so he left a message and got on with his evening. She'd be cool with him going out. Sure, it was Thursday, but it was a celebration at work.
That was the first mistake. First and second really. Sheila did not answer the phone because she was in the shower getting ready for their evening. It's was their anniversary and she had made his favorite dinner and sent their son Joshua to spend the night with a friend.
But Jerry did not know any of that because he had forgotten his anniversary and decided to go out with friends and left a message. Of course, out with friends meant drinking. And drinking meant too much drinking. And driving home.
Jerry thought he made it home safely, albeit very late, stumbled in, and found a beautiful cold dinner on the table. He went to his bedroom door and found it locked.
"Sheila! Sheila honey open the door".
"Go away Jerry".
"Sheila c'mon dear lemme in".
Silence.
Jerry stumbled to the couch, lay down, and passed out.
He awoke. Bright lights. Headache. Sheila.
It all came back to him and now he remembered yesterday was his anniversary. Of course, Sheila had informed him of that as well in no uncertain terms.
He looked bleary eyed at his watch. He was going to be late again.
"Sheila, I'm sorry and I promise I will make this up to you, but I need to clean up and go to work."
She was still ranting at him, deservedly. He showered, shaved, got dressed, apologized again and left the house.
To see his beautiful car that he got after his promotion to Architect. His beautiful car with a smashed in headlight and front bumper crumpled. It looked driveable, so he took off.
"Late late late late late".
Speeding ticket.
"Really late really late really late".
Jerry H. Vah snuck into his office and logged into his system. Message from the Big Boss. "See me when you get in".
The meeting with the Big Boss did not go well.. Management was not at all happy with the Saurian life forms on the dominant planet. He was told to get rid of them or have the project re-assigned. He was also on "probation" due to some incident last night involving another staff member. Louie was a jerk and always was messing with Jerry. Evidently Jerry had had enough and...it was a bit of a blur...but Louie ended up filing a formal complaint.
He got back to his desk and mumbled to himself. "Don't like Saurians, do they? What do they know? I think they're awesome. Whatever."
He chose the SMITE command and chose the "meteor" option. The Saurians were no more.
"Let's see how they feel about apes." and got to coding.