I was feckin' sloshed, mate. First time I ever was in the Big Lemon, and I'd found me the best feckin' pub I could imagine, I tell ya what. So I stumble out when it was closin' time, musta been 'round 4 o'clock in the morning, and made my way through some alleys to find the quaint little AirBnB place I'd rented for the week.
A'course, that's how many a horror story starts, ainnit? But it was all fun and games at first. There was this bloke I saw comin' towards me in the alley, dark as it was with only a few lights from some apartments overhead, where the folk were still awake. At least, I thought it was a bloke, but he looked more like there wasn't something right with the whole alleyway. Like it was a painting someone had gone and ripped with a knife for some reason, fecked-up as it all looked, and the cut looked sort of weird and silvery, and wavy like a heat haze comin' from a welder's torch.
Now this thing must've been a good foot or five taller 'n me, but sloshed as I am, I just take off my hat and give it a good "how-do-you-do", 'cause I'm a nice fellow and I wanna pass, y'see? Now this thing up and goes give me a "mighty fine, how about y'self, sir!" I feckin' quite pissed my britches! More in surprise 'n anythin', really, but I keep my composure and just sorta try and pass'm as he walks past me with his long, spindly legs as silvery as the rest of'm, with his feet makin' noises like he's wearin' cowboy boots with those thingies on'm. But then that moment stupid old me finds I forgot my lighter at the pub, and so I turn and ask spindleboots there if he's got some fire for me.
Darn buggerer turns around on the spot faster 'n my eyes can see and says, he says "sure! I got your fire here." And the feckin' thing stretches out one of his spindly legs and wraps it around me like a cobra and pulls me into itself. Devil's pits, that felt like I was bein' burnt layer of skin by layer. He sure got me with that. Good feckin' joke, mate.
Must've been out like a light for ages, but when I woke up, I find myself here. So tell me, Doc: are time travellers really that sought after as subjects of study? 'Cause I know you found me in your fancy cyberwebs database thing and I can't be three hundred years old as my passport would say if I had one, but I'd really like to not die, y'know? What do y'say, wanna go and grab a beer at the pub?