The station was near empty this time of night. The cold grey fog had swept into the corridors turning the lights into hazy yellow clouds. It was perfect, after weeks of scouting the stations on the J line I had found a time when the trains still ran, but had minimal people. As I come up to the end of the platform I glance down. The distance to the rail seemed much higher than I had remembered. Not that it would matter soon. I check the sign. 10 minutes.
The wait is agony. I pace back and forth scuffing my shoes against the yellow raised dots marking the drop into the train rails. The recessed dark metal and stone that would likely be very close, very soon. Maybe if I were blind I could have just pretended I didn't notice these and-
Tak. Tak.
Someones here? I turn. A pale woman with pitch black hair and heels emerges from the fog. Her chiffon mermaid dress bounces as each stiletto marches closer towards me. The scarlet of her lips stand out against her lovely skin. The look on her face, all-knowing and poised. I've never seen a more beautiful woman in my life.
We stand face to face, and I can't help but stare into her eyes. She's not saying anything, nothing at all, but it's as if we had been speaking the entire time. The feeling of familiarity and safety draws me closer and closer. I stare and stare, my eyes drawn to every portion of her frame. She stares back with confusion at first, then understanding. After what felt like an eternity she brings her hand to her face, and coyly drags a finger against those scarlet lips. I swallow.
A low rumble starts in the distance followed by a whistle. Its the train. I came all this way, all this time but I just couldn't turn away.
"You're...Beautiful."
The woman smiles, and walks towards me, crowding the space around me. My heart races, and I make no move to stop her, close enough that I can feel the cold off of her skin. She makes a spinning motion with her hands. Must mean...
Icy hands brush up my back. The feeling of her fingers and palms tracing up my back makes me shudder. The train approaches swiftly, growing larger and closer by the second. For a moment I think she's holding onto me. Clinging onto my torso.
"I have never met someone who looked at me the way you do. You've made an old woman very happy." She whispers into my ear.
"Who are you?" I ask placing a hand on her wrist.
"The one you've been waiting for."
Before I can respond she withdraws her embrace and suddenly her hands are against my back. With a gentle nudge, I'm pushed off the edge.
_____
Welp looks like I missed the first part of the prompt. And here I thought I was already fudging it.
Edit: wording and grammar