"Hello Angel, up for a bit of fun?"
I gritted my teeth, leaning on my scythe as I tried to keep the rage from my eyes. It didn't do to antagonize him. "No… Thanks."
Lucifer grinned, the serrated edges of his teeth gleaming in the flames. "Ah come on, baby. You'll always remember your time with the Devil."
Vile. He was vile, disgusting and depraved. I'd seen what he had done with the poor souls I had brought, the games he played, the deals he struck just to watch the hope burn and then die in their eyes. I raised my hood, taking in slow, deep breaths. When I got agitated, good people tended to die. The "nice guys finish last" clause had that effect. Another thing to bring up in my weekly meeting with God.
The fires of hell burned around me, my latest batch of deliveries shrieking and begging- their cries adding to the cacophony of suffering. I tried not to listen. In their screams they cursed me… Only ever me. Never the sadist responsible for their suffering. I looked up at Lucifer, freezing as I took in the hunger in his eyes.
"That cloak looks good on you." He smirked, "Although I know what would look better."
His hand snaked out to grab my wrist and I yanked myself away, using enough force to actually crack the bones in his fingers. He snarled, drawing back his injured hand and immediately healing his new wounds.
I barely had time to smirk before his power caught me, blasting me backwards and into the sulphur-covered ground, my entire body barking with pain. He took a step forward, ready to strike another blow, but at that point a halo of light surrounded me. It's brightness burned him like a brand- forcing Lucifer to hop backwards, hissing.
"The Big Man isn't going to be around forever, Darling." He spat, "And when he's gone, there'll be no one left to save you."
I scrambled to my feet as quickly as I could, ready to fight. The Devil just chuckled, melting into the shadows of his realm and leaving me behind, shaking.
As I flew out of Hell I could feel my heart pounding in synch with each beat of my blue-black wings. As much as I hated to admit it, the Devil was right. I mean, God was amazing- he took the humanitarians, the peacemakers, the freedom fighters, the saints. But what use did those souls have against the army of the Devil- the dictators, the killers, the *lawyers*! When the final battle came, Lucifer would win. And there would be no rock left for me to hide under.
Above me, the humans lived out their lives. I felt the pull of a few tonight, not as many as last week. Their medicine was improving. Above me, huge cities grew and teemed with life. Even a few of those could turn the tide.
I knew the consequences of my choice before I made it. I knew the burden, the rights and the wrongs. I knew my punishment.
The decision was my own.
Over the next few years, close to 100 million souls were taken before their time. I wasn't good at this- bringing untimely and unsanctioned ends, and I'm sorry to say that they likely suffered more than they had to. A small consolation is that nearly every casualty received immediate salvation- a free ticket to heaven. God's ranks swelled with fighters, kings, tacticians, scientists.
The humans had a different name for me then- *Black Death*.
When Lucifer and his demons found me, as I knew they would, I was kneeling by the banks of the river Thebes. As they approached me, I could only smile.
It was worth it. Every cut, every scar.
Sometimes now, when I catch my reflection, I feel sorrow. I miss my wings- those beautiful black spans that could carry me into the heavens and the depths of the Earth. I miss my smile, my dark eyes and thick hair.
But then I remember...And the regret fades away.
The Angel of Death was weak… But the Reaper bows to no one.