When the new girl walked into class, the teacher smiled and gave her the warm greeting she gave everyone. At the end of the standard speech she asked when Jessica's birthday would be.
"It's on the 25th ma'am."
"Of this month?"
"That's next week then! How delightful. That's also Tom's birthday, so we'll have a class party for the both of you! Won't that be delightful?" Jessica nodded.
She sat next to me at lunch. "So you're the kid who has the same birthday right?"
"Yup. Are you gonna be turning 9?"
"Yeah! You too?"
"Yes. It's kind of nice to have another member of the short end club."
Her brow wrinkled. "Short end club?"
"As in short end of the stick. Ya know, because of the day we were born?"
"I don't follow you."
"You know about how people are born with magic powers right? Most of em are really weak though."
"Yeah, unless they're born the day after a massive upheaval or something. So?"
"Well, you know what happened the day we were born right?"
"Uh uh, what?"
"You never heard about the Mid East Massacre? The ISIS attack on Israel that turned the whole world against them?"
She scrunched up her face. "I think I saw something about it on a documentary from the Discovery Channel or The New History Channel. It was like a big war that started like...a long time ago."
"15 years. But the big turning point was about 9 years ago like I said. They wiped out almost an entire country in one day. The very same day you and me were born."
"So how's that make us..." her brow wrinkled again. "Wait...you're sayin' if we'd been born a day later..."
"We'd be among the most powerful Wizards and Witches the world has ever seen. We'd be at that government school in Westchester New York, or maybe even sent across the ocean as exchange to that one in Scotland that's always in the news. We'd be powerful and rich and famous someday. Instead, we got, y'know, the short end of the stick."
"Well, that's true I guess. But we could have ended up in a lot of places. Like the one in Los Angeles, or Miami, or Madrid. At the very least we'd probably never have met and we wouldn't be talking right now." She smiled at him. Tom's heart fluttered for a moment and he smiled too.