I had about 5 seconds to get used to lying on my back and frankly I was comfortable there until the 6th second rolled around and someone kicked me in the gut. You know what that feels like? A good solid kick in the gut that wakes you right up and rearranges your priorities in a hurry starting with "make that not happen again, please".
So I was pretty pissed when I opened my eyes, breath gathered ready to swear the first person I saw into oblivion. That it was me made me pause halfway through "Sonovvua-"
It was me.
I'd kicked me.
Or at least me with breasts, muscles and glasses, none of which I remembered having. I put my face in my hands, rubbed my eyes with my palms and opened them again to see, yup. Lady Me. Me'Lady in fact. There could be no question.
"Uh" I said like the eloquent conversationalist I am.
And she responded with, in my voice but falsetto, "Shut up. I know you have questions. Frankly we all do. But if you're anything like the others you'll wait like we've been waiting too."
This didn't help. So instead I edged myself onto my elbows and looked around. Me and Me'lady were in a bright white walled room with one transparent wall that looked onto a corridor with other such rooms.
She'd planted herself (myself?) against the opposite wall and it took me a few more seconds before my head was clear enough for words.
When I did, it was, "Hello" because you've got to start with hello.
Or not, because she didn't reciprocate.
So instead I asked, "So....there's a lot of those eh?"
"Those? ", she raised an eyebrow and it looked just like I'd always thought I looked like when I did that.
"The rooms with....us...in them"
"Yup. Listen do you remember anything?"
I couldn't. And I had a feeling she was expecting that to be the answer. So instead I asked her, "Does any of us? Also, why did you kick me? If you broke a kidney and I need a replacement I know I'm taking one of yours."
"Pipe down smartass. And no, none of us remember. There's a girl 3 rooms down who says he's been here for an hour. No one across from him knows morse so we don't know how many of...us there are. And I kicked you because the alternative was listening to you snore and these rooms are soundproof. You know that by the way? You snore?" That voice, it was mine but different. Like if I'd pinched my throat and done an impression of a lady. Like that, but...natural. Real. And lovely. Apparently I loved hearing the sound of my own voice.
Suffice to say that presented more questions than it answered and I'd only just thought of the first I was going to ask when a voice boomed through the room and we both looked up at the perforated surface of a white painted speaker on the wall.
"ATTENTIO-! Oh, sorry about that, is it low? I lowered the volume, it should be okay now. Anyways. Hi! I am Cid. Yes, yes I know, we're ALL Cid, it's very droll but I'm Cid the original. Cid in fact, of this universe. Which none of you in fact are. of this universe that is. I'm really really sorry about that but uh, apparently, there are side effects that we weren't really ready for, and after the first dozen of....us, uh, we, just kept coming and coming. We didn't even have a place to store and categorize all of you until a few hours ago. Sorry about the rooms by the way, it was all we had until we could sort this whole mess out.
Hm.
Speaking of which, I guess I should tell you all, me? Us. I should tell all of us that this is, technically, and I cannot stress this enough, ACCIDENTALLY, my fault. Ish. Sort of. Look I'm just saying no one could have seen this. Like no one could have predicted this would happen. We just turned it on for a few minutes and then you, I, we started just streaming through like it was a house party. And then we couldn't turn it off and on again because it wouldn't turn off and we don't know why it's still on except we can't turn it off. You see, one of us, across multiple dimensions, mine in fact, the one you're all...we're all in now was a scientist at CERN. Me in fact. Working on the ol' LHC. That's the the Large Hadron Collider. It uh, broke the dimensional barrier. But I'm sure I can fix it. We've called Brian Cox already and he said to turn it off and on again like we haven't already tried that, the sellout. Just wait and don't do anything rash or....erotic which I notice some of you..me..us...ew. Just ew. Just keep your pants on guys. And gals I guess. I guess I'm only single in THIS dimension then. Brilliant."
There was the brief thud of a mic being put on a table and a distant, "Shit, I turned the speaker off, is still playing?"
And then there was the whine of a fading tannoy system.