"Shit, there goes another one." General Turr mumbled to, Taek, his first officer, "They're getting a lot more accurate, they used to miss by a few thousand kilometres."
Turning the ship towards the newly arrived HomoSapien space liner, the Exerprise H56, the Kantian war ship set about tracking the liner and getting all of its clearances and passes checked.
"Yeah, but they are still missing the safe zones. If it weren't for the jelly shields of the Salec's their FTL travel would've been banned."
The liner is easily one of the smallest ships currently docked at the way spacion, the HomoSapiens had only discovered their FTL travel 20 years ago. The Kantian's, Salec's, Maltuin's and Delfanit's were shocked, never thinking that a species with only two arms could create such technology.
"It's Unorthodox, Unsafe and Damn Stupid! It UUDS!" The council meetings had been plagued with these words for ages.
Taek, going through each clearance code with a meticulousness that only he could, motions to the debris trail left behind the liners "If we shared our technology with them, they could travel through the gates."
"It would also decrease the bloody clean-up required each time."
"You know we can't, the treaty stands and the human ships aren't dense enough to handle the radiation." The general replies, not mentioning that the few ships that have tried it crashed into each other.
"How, exactly do they even travel this far anyway? It would seem that their ships and bodies wouldn't be able to handle the forces." Taek asks for the millionth time.
"Well, they have this theory of relativity, which says the faster you travel the more mass you have. It overcomplicated all of their scientific endeavours." The general begins, earning a collective moan from everyone awake in the warships control room.
"So when they started travelling at close to light speed they just assumed that they couldn't travel as fast or faster. They built engines that can get to 80% the speed of light, which is something our ships do with impulse engines."
"That only took them to the edge of their own solar system, something admirable but it still confined them to their own corner. The Salec wave riders were considering helping them to travel faster, however, about 21 years ago when they sent a probe ship, they found rings the size of moons being placed on the edges of their solar system." He pauses to ensure that Taek is still listening, which of course he is.
"Curious the Salec's stood back and watched. The humans had somehow discovered how to warp space but only between two set places. Their warp drives also temporarily increased their speed to 3 FTL, which they still haven't entirely realised."
This next bit is where the council is still struggling to accept the HomoSapiens as a race, the council usually worked well together on making decisions, but dangerous travel that still worked was a grey area. Every other race were too cautious to attempt something unkown.
"Well, to start traversing through space, the humans would travel from their home planet at the maximum speed they can travel. Aiming straight for the warp gates, at first, but eventually at different angles. This caused them to easily travel to new solar systems. It also made it difficult for them to actually stop."
"Which is why their first three ships flew straight into, in order or severity, the council war fleet, the council's moon of operations and the dwarf star of the Antraci system. Total count of death combined was well over 100-million."
"Of course after catching the attention of the council and several other alien races the HomoSapiens eventually made contact with us and we were able to stop their exploration ships before more damage could be caused. The thing that surprised most races was that after three failed attempts the humans were still attempting FTL travel."
"It wasn't until first contact that the Salec's realised that humans were still using Radio waves to communicate across vast distances. But, that advancement in their tech is a whole different story and involves several strange messages that either offended everyone or caused peace treaties to be made with the Andromeda Galaxy."
- Recorded on the bridge of the JJK98 Farbelus Warship, 200 0000 km long, conversation between General of Knowledge Turr and his First Officer of memory Taek. Annotations and missing information filled in my Salec History Keeper Urder V, the second.