The village was always peaceful at night. The sun setting in the ash-gray sky mixed with the twinkle of the light-drones floating by set a happy mood that contrasted with the way we were all feeling. Many of us would leave this very night. Not many of us would come back.
I held my daughter's hand for what might be the last time ever, the twin red ribbons on my head snapping lightly in the breeze. The rest of the men were gathered in the center of the town, waiting for instructions to come in on the once-new projector mounted on the town hall. The Alliance would be sending missives tonight, ordering the troops out across the frontier once again.
This war was breaking apart families once again. I never thought it would be me dying out there until I saw the blood red envelope waiting for me outside my door a few months ago. Red is the color of the elite troops in the Alliance's so-called Glorious Army. Many say they used to have white ribbons, but they were covered with so much blood that they decided to keep that color.
With the rifle issued to me heavy on my back, I squatted and picked up my daughter. Her name was Dawn, and she was the reason I was going with the elite guard. I was fighting for her freedom, my wife's freedom, the village's freedom. The resources being fought over mattered little to me.
I kissed Dawn on the forehead, then took her over to her mother. I put her gently into my wife's arms, and then looked at my wife. There were tears in both of our eyes. Before turning away, I stroked my daughter's ribbons and hair one last time, and then turned away from them. The screen had come to life, and a grizzled general was issuing orders to the troops across the nation.
There was a saying among the elite guard. Those who fight for their country would die for it, and those that fought for themselves might survive. It was a dishonest, horrible practice, but the self-preservation that most of the soldiers had in mind was the only way that they could survive. I had sworn to never be like those men.
I would fight and die for my country, my town, my family. My life might be taken, but for their sake, I will freely give it up. I had sworn to be a good man, but at that moment, I remembered what the other men had said to me in training.
The good die young.