I stare at the phone skeptically as it continues to ring. After the third ring, I answer. Hello? who is this? "Hello, Mr. Ross. It's good to hear you found it, and right on time, it seems". What? How do you know me? When did you put this phone here? *looks around*....Where are you? "Why do you ask? Are you concerned that I might be hidden somewhere nearby? I can assure you, I'm not. But if you're really that worried I'll give you some time to search the area and collect your thoughts. I'll call you back in exactly fifteen minutes"............He hung up.... No number in the caller ID either...
I look around again. I'm in a small clearing, in a wooded area, about two miles from the road, on private property. At an old campsite I used to use when I was a kid. There's no trace of anyone. It's mid autumn, so the ground is strewn with fallen leaves. The plot where my time capsule was supposed to be appeared untouched before I started digging. Mostly covered with leaves, a little grass. How did he know when to call?
I spend about ten minutes exploring the area in search of a camera. First I look for any incoming wires that I might've missed on my way in. nothing. maybe it's wireless and there's a transmitter nearby? That might explain why the phone has signal here. Or maybe a motion sensor in the phone triggered the call. Who would do something like this?
Is it a prank? I didn't tell anyone I was coming. Hell, until this morning I didn't Know I was coming here. So how would anyone else? *riiing* *riiing*. Hello? "Time's up Mr Ross. Did you find anything". Not a thing. What do you want? "My my, impatient aren't you? Perhaps we should get to know one another first." Sure thing, just tell me where you are and we'll have a nice long chat. "Very well. Meet me at your favorite caffe. You know the one". *Click*. What caffe? I haven't been to a caffe in.... how could he even know that? I've never told anyone.
(I've never really written anything before, so if this sucks, I'm genuinely sorry. I know the story seems vague so far but I have some interesting plot points in mind...I just don't know how to add them without extending the story...and being that I'm not a writer at all..... this is hard....But if anyone happens to like it I can keep going)