Samson stood up out of his car and stretched out as he shut the door behind him. It wasn't a long drive to get there, but with the sun's rays warming him in the brisk morning, he couldn't help but stretch and bask in it a little. This was the kind of morning Wanda would go out in a swimsuit and get some basking in herself if she were awake at this hour. Samson figured maybe if he hurried he could get back in time before she woke up, maybe suggest it was a good day for basking, 14 years of marriage and he was still excited to just glimpse her in a bathing suit.
If the thoughts of seeing his wife didn't hurry Samson up to the front doors of the building, the putrid odor from the cigarettes the guards outside the doors were holding sure did. Samson, who was usually a very open minded man about people vices, glowered at the guards who for the most part ignored him as they seemed to be inhaling as much as they could through their sickly white straws.
When he got through the doors though, he had a bit more empathy for the guards, he surely would have turned to something unpleasant to help him deal with this place. It wasn't a gross place, or even disorganized, in fact it was quite the opposite. Such a clean sterile, environment shouldn't have such a negative aura, but this place did. A man coughed to Samson's left, obviously to get his attention.
"Mr. Baker, the man inquired?"
Samson, took off his his beanie and turned to face the shorter and much plumper man before him. "No sir, Samson, sir. I'm covering for Neville today."
"I don't blame the man for missing an appointment with Jack, it's all routine anyway, nothing ever changes, come come though, no need to let this place creep in on you longer than it needs to." The man turned surprisingly fast for his plumpness and led him down into a long hallway lined by doors, the whole time talking to him and fiddling with the keys. "I don't suppose Neville has told you anything about this mans story has he, I suppose it will be good to get a fresh perspective", he said not waiting for an answer.
"Here we are Mr. Samson, see if you can get him to give up his angel." The plump man opened the door and gave Samson a grin and a wink as he gestured him in. Samson, determined not to be unnerved, stepped through the door calmly and professionally, barely flinching as the door closed and locked behind him.
The place Samson found himself in was even more at odds with it's looks and its feel than the entrance was. It was homely, almost welcoming, but the feeling of the room carried a distinctive haze. In fact it reminded him of the one time he had tried refer, calm and relaxed but out of it.
A man sat up on his bed and beamed a huge smile at Samson, who was taken aback by the warmness of the man who must be Jack.
"Come on in sir, I've been expecting you, can't say I'd have thought you would have come so soon, but I cannot complain about such haste, as it can only be to my benefit. You may have a seat right here and I shall sit across from you", Jack spat out hurriedly as he gathered chairs and sat them across from each other.
"Thank you Jack, I did not think you'd be expecting me, how did you know I would be here today?" Samson sat down as uneasily as his question came out. Jack was not at all what he expected, but for a man who was touched by an angel, his cheeriness did make sense.
"Well, you can come sooner, or you can come later, but you will come, so I will be expecting you to come, it all makes sense."
Samson was not quite sure as to the logic behind that, but he didn't feel the need to press Jack on it. "If you don't mind, I am going to begin right away." The plump man was right, Samson did not need to be here any longer than he had to. He pulled up his briefcase and reviewed some files inside, after getting a good read on what was written he pulled out his badge and handed it to Jack. "This is to assure you I am here on good intentions, the law protects you, you don't have to give up anything you don't want to, and you will be safe here with me."
Jack instantly pushed the badge back into Samson's hand after Samson pulled it out. "I have faith sir, I don't need proof, I know why you are here."
"Let's make this fast then, where did you first see this guardian angel?" Samson took out a pencil and paper for his own notes, and a tape recorder to get the transcript of the conversation and listened intently as Jack started to speak.
"No, no, no, MY guardian angel, Ileyana, she is mine, you should know this." Jack looked confused when he was telling this to Samson, but quickly got lost in his story again. "But I first met her when she saved my life, and I instantly knew exactly what she was, and that she was the one for me." Jack poured himself something clear from a teapot that Samson swore looked exactly like water, and continued to speak to Samson. "She saved me from more than just death that day, she saved me from myself, I wasn't always a good man, that is how I got put in harms way. I was shot you see, right here." Jack lifted his shirt to show a bullet scar surrounded by a multitude of other scars. Samson made sure to write down the description as fast as he could before he lowered his shirt. "I remember laying on the ground, thinking to myself, shouldn't this hurt, I mean, cheese and rice, I just got shot in the chest, I should be crying in pain, but I wasn't. I just kind of lied there all tired, didn't really know what to do, and then she came down. That's why there was no pain, she took it all away, even before I saw here, but if I had an ounce of pain in me, it would have evaporated at the site of her beauty. She gracefully...so very...very gracefully, came down from the sky above me, and gently put a hand on my neck, firmly placing head to look into the shining rays of heaven coming from her hands. Then she raised me up and closed her wings around me, and she was so soft, it was like laying on a bed, and I could feel her ethereal tendrils, poking into my veins, giving me warmth, I thought I was off to heaven, but no, she was saving me, a real guardian angel."
Samson raised up a hand to stop Jack from speaking so he could ask his own questions. "But you had a personal relationship with Ileyana?"
"Before this, nothing, I guess my life had never needed saving bad enough for her to come down, had I known though, I would have put myself in danger much sooner and much more often, which is actually how we developed our romantic ties." Jack beamed with pride as he related several ways over the subsequent months following his first meeting with her that he put himself in danger to meet her again and again. "She was always telling me how she didn't want to see me here again, telling me I needed to be careful and not hurt myself. Eventually I suggested to her that we become involved so I don't have to hurt myself, but she said it was against the rules, she wasn't allowed, but I eventually wore her down." After saying that Jack looked up at Samson with remorse painted over his face and dropped down off his chair. He folded his hands together and dropped to his knees, hands falling in Samson's lap. "That's not why you're here is it?! She can't get in trouble for fraternizing with a mortal, it was my fault, see. I made her, I put myself in danger so much she had to, she was just being a a good guardian angel, she isn't losing her wings is she? Not because of me?!"
It was all Samson could do to stay on the chair with this man putting his weight into him, begging on his lap. His briefcase slid to the ground as he grabbed Jack's hand and led him back to his seat. "No, Ileyana isn't in trouble, this is just a conversation between you and me Jack. Would you mind telling me more about your relationship though, she sounds like quiet the catch."
Instantly Jack was back in his seat and resuming his story. "Yes of course, where were we? We were together romantically at last, that's where, a happy time, almost as happy as now. But it wasn't all happy. Since she no longer had to save me she had to save other people, and that just wouldn't do. So I came up with an idea. If I went to heaven, we could be together no problem, and she wouldn't have to be a guardian angel any more, we could just be regular angels. So I took her up to the highest building I could find. I needed to be as close to heaven as I could be so I wouldn't have to wait as long to get in. And I remember telling her 'We're gonna be together forever Ileyana', I told her, 'you don't have to, but if you wouldn't mind, I'd like this to not hurt me.' Then I fell, and I remember some pain, but then I felt her warm, bed like body pressing up against me, and her wings closing around me, and I knew I was on my way. Then I just remember being here, just waiting for you so you can let me in."
As confusing as the story was Samson could at least follow it before, but now he was utterly lost.
"Where am I letting you into Jack?"
"Why into heaven of course, so I can go see Ileyana"
"Jack, where do you think we are right now?"
Jack beamed proudly as he prepared himself to explain to Samson their whereabouts "Why sir, we are right outside the pearly gates waiting for my induction to heaven sir!"
(continued in comments)