Growing up in the city with two brothers, I valued being alone from a very young age. I often used to (and sometimes still do) dream of being the only child. Not because I wouldn't have to share or because Mom would spoil me a little more. I just wanted to be alone. I think that's why the week with Grandpa each summer meant so much to me. It wasn't that I didn't or don't love my family, it's that I wanted to know what it was to be me.
Grandpa understood being alone. I hadn't known my Grandma. Well at least I didn't remember. There some pictures of her and I – me in a diaper and her holding a cocktail - but they could have been any other baby and I wouldn't have know any better. Grandpa never talked about her and I'm not sure that he really missed her. By all accounts they had been very much in love, but Grandpa was a pragmatist and never seemed to dwell on things.
Mostly during that week each summer, Grandpa would leave me alone. I'd explore the channel behind his house or dig through the barn looking for forgotten treasure. When I was a little older, I'd read a GooseBump or spend the whole day watching TV. Grandpa didn't much care what I did.
Grandpa – like all adults in my mind – was concerned about things that were neither important nor interesting. He did a lot of rummaging. Seemed to need to go on boring shopping trips all the time. Spent a lot of time with the newspaper. I never gave any of these things any thought.
Occasionally I would have to do some chore. Painting a railing, cleaning an attic or some other project that needed to be done, but really didn't need to be done. These generally lasted less than a day and were more for the sake of him being able to tell my mom how he had whipped me in to shape more than anything else. We were in the same space, but weren't sharing the same time.
The summer I turned 14 was the first summer I remember not wanting to go to Grandpa's. I had been allowed some small freedoms at home and the allure of being alone with my Grandpa for a week evaporated quickly. I didn't need this anymore now that I finally had my own room and was allowed to stay out till 7. Plus my girlfriend who I was madly in love with was definitely going to dump me if I didn't see her for a week.
On top of all that it rained all week. I did what any 14 year old stuck in a house for a week effectively without an adult would do. Lots of tv. Lots of computer games. Lots of texting. Lots of masturbating. Grandpa didn't bother me outside of breakfast and dinner. Even then we barely spoke. He asked me about school and girls, but I gave him the same canned responses I gave to every adult. I don't think I asked him anything.
The week passed uneventfully as it always had. On Thursday, Grandpa let me know that the chore for this week would be organizing the basement while he went to whatever the VA was.
"Now when you're down there make sure to sweep and clean up as much crap as you can, but don't go lookin where you don't need to"
Like all adults Grandpa was so easy to ridicule. "How will I know what I do or do not need?", I replied in a voice that only 14 year old boys who think they are smarter than god can muster.
He stared at me for a couple of seconds before sternly saying, "Don't open the box that say ‘ bones'on it."
"Oh, Okay Grandpa." How old did he think I was? Like he would really be storing bones in the basement.
We didn't say anything else. He finished and left. I watched some TV and texted my girlfriend about watching out for bones in the basement. Eventually I sauntered downstairs.
The basement was surprisingly empty. A little dust, but really there wasn't much to do. As I swept, I absentmindedly scanned the boxes in front of me smiling thinking about the box of bones and my Grandpa the serial killer. At some point I realized that I had stopped sweeping and found myself staring at a cardboard box. Neatly written on the side "Bones – Stay Out."
I braced myself. What the actual hell man? I picked up the box carefully. It didn't rattle. It didn't smell like the dead rats in the garage. It was heavy. Whatever was inside shifted slightly. The box looked and felt like a moving box. A normal cardboard box. That didn't stop me from shaking.
I slowly pulled back the lid and looked inside. No bones. I felt cheated, but relieved. Still what was this box?
Photographs. Letters. Old office papers. The letters were addressed to and signed ‘ Bones ’. I recognized some of the names who wrote the letters from a family reunion, but a lot were from someone I didn't know. Who was Penny? She seemed to like Bones. The papers and pictures were all faded, but showed men who looked like GI Joes smoking cigarettes and smiling in the Jungle.
The next day at breakfast I asked my Grandpa who Bones was. I never really looked at adults the same way again after that week. I don't think that was the moment I grew up, but as I become more boring and notice children presenting me with the same bland answers I used to give adults I can't help but think of my own box in the basement.