"Jerry...Jerry!"
Jerry jerked his head up, looking left then right at the millions of angels staring back at him. The podium was empty! Coming to his senses, he felt the soft hum of a trillion tappings of tiny, bored fingertips that reverberated across the Infinity Boardroom to the end of the universe and back.
"Jerry," God sighed patiently, "Please. If you may. It is your turn."
"Y-yes," he stammered, echoing his uncertainty across The Loudspeaker. Now biting his tongue, he galloped up to the podium, still mid-blush. Placing his palm on The Dial, screens appeared down as far as the eye can Holy See.
Clearing his throat, finally, he began:
"Your Majesty. Winged souls. Betty..." — he could just make out Betty mouthing 'Oh, stop it!' in the distance — "My team and I have read through His Holy Source code...with His Divine Permission" — God nodded in approval here — "and it appears we had overlooked some of our Loop functions." Knowing nods across the Universe sent ripples through the ether, followed by a quite beautiful and harmonious 'Ohhhhh' beginning to sound. "Humans can in theory Loop in as many souls as they wish. Which is exactly what they are doing. Which is why a good number of you are here..."
Jerry rotated his hand on The Dial. "If you take a look at the screeeennns...." — he over-emphasized the last word — "you'll see our Soul quota for this era, which has been absolutely eclipsed by Humans' ingenuity recently. For the older souls here, the red line on the bottom indicates how many Souls we should be producing...quite flat, mostly...and the really fat blue line on top is how many are actually being produced. You see that up-tick near the end?
"I am afraid that with their near-daily and quite honestly, exponential, advances in Artificial Intelligence, engineering, physics...we are spelling the end of the Universe as we know it. It's only a matter of time before **they** tap into the Source code itself...
"So my team and I are going to turn off Time Production – yes, literally stop Time – until we figure this out. Our soul output will stall for a few Biblical Days...It's the best we can do."
God clenched His Dial, projecting an empty image with a floating beard onto the Infinity Boardroom's many screens. "Hold on one moment, Jerry. I'd like to get Satan's input on this. This relates to his department."
There was a long silence that felt like an eternity. Sure enough, an eternity later, Satan's face was occupying the top right corner of the screens.
"Hey!" Satan said.
"Hey," God said. "Jerry is just with me right now. Jerry?"
"Yeah, I'm here. Satan, do you hear me?"
"Perfectly," Satan said.
"Great," Jerry continued, "As I was saying, we can't have one soul going to Hell with another to Heaven. It's defeating the whole purpose of our merit-based system."
"Or demerit-based system," Satan hissed. "As it were."
God interjected: "Satan, do you have enough souls to operate the machinery Down There for a few Biblical Days? We need to have a look at the Source code, so we'll have to stop Time herself, but we don't want to muck you up."
"How many Biblical Days are we talking about?" Satan asked.
"About five."
After another eternity, Satan gasped: "Five?"
"Yeah. Five."
"Alright. I can make this work. Jerry, keep me updated." And his image flickered off the screen.