After the set time for my waking up which I set last night at 7:00am passed, I opened my eyes to me standing up.
I, however, thought nothing of it as it happens everyday. What I thought about however, is that my food meter is
nearly depleted. And nobody likes it when their food meter is almost depleted.
So I walked, or more accurately, slid my feet down the stairs then walked straight towards the "Winter-Chest".
I grabbed the first food that I found that needed the least cooking skill to cook, hotdogs and some bread, threw
the hotdogs into the micro-fire oven, then ate them, resulting in a nearly full food meter.
But due to the sound the micro-fire emits, a certain level 40 upstairs woke up then went crashing down the stairs
and started blabbering about matters that I shall not list.
"Yeah, Yeah. Okay I get it mom, geez." Is the magical incantations needed to make her stop.
"Whatever, just get yourself ready for school, bus is almost arriving." Powerless against her, I just did what I
was preparing to do in the first place. I then did the neccesities for venturing outside, then waited for the bus
at the bus stop.
[Currently travelling. Destination: Some High School]
Basically, I don't like doing this quest line. But it's necessary to prepare me for the events that will
soon happen happen after level 18, apparently. Like getting your preferred job class or whatever since the
more beneficial (beneficial as in lots of gold income) jobs require high number of INT and WIS, which you need
for those classes.
"Oh, it's almost class time, see ya dude!" One of my party members told me then made his way to wherever his class is.
'Might as well' is what I told myself as I made sure my books, pencils, and whatnots are inside my inventory.
So, as I said, this questline is quite boring. Other people will argue, and I see where they might
come from. "But there's lots of sidequests to do!" is one of the most spoken arguments about this. But being the
lazy player I am, I just don't want to, I mean, it's really a hassle. For example, the romance questlines are quite
complicated and the mean success rate among male players is somewhere around 50%. Not to mention, you might get the
"Ex" encounter, or if you manage to get far into the quest line, you might have to face the "Parents" final boss.
That quest line's quite a hassle. Although I can see why people would do that.
"See ya tommorow, man." I said to my fellow clan member as the end-of-the-day bell rings.
"Yeah, you too bro."
On the other hand, clans, a little version of guilds, I find to be quite interesting. And in fact, joined one.
In particular, I joined the robotics club, due to a simple reason: you're gonna need that to unlock the robotics
skill tree, and in turn, little robot minions. It's quite simple.
[Daily quest: Go to School]
[Status: Completed]
[Classes Completed: +4 INT, +2 WIS, +1 STR, +1 DEX, +1 AGI, +100exp]
[Clan Task Completed: +1 INT, +1 WIS, +1 CHA, +50exp to Robotics skill tree.]
[Currently travelling. Destination: Home]
So after school, I essentially turn into a slime, and by that I mean I will do absolutely nothing until night time.
And by night time, just before opening the sleep interface, I like to open up my quest journal to see what I quests
and sidequests I still need to finish.
[Main Quest: Finish High School]
[Side Quest: Unlock Robotic skill tree]
[Side Quest: Improve Artistry Skill]
"Ugh...lot's and lot's of side quests..." I mumbled to myself as I panned my eyes down the list. Until one thing
caught my eye.
[Side Quest: Find a Girlfriend.]
I sighed to myself, then smiled.
"Well, we're gonna have to work on that one" As I pressed the okay button in the sleep interface.
P.S. Still somewhat new to writing, so pardon my amateur ways.