I'm quite late to this, not sure if it will even get read but here goes...
It was 7:15 on a lousy evening in Jindabyne as Sean drove along the dark, icy road. This winter had been particularly cruel to Sean; fewer people had been staying at his lodge which forced him to cut the cleaning staff. Sean had been struggling to run the lodge and clean it. He felt he deserved some fun, something to fill him with such satisfaction and happiness. Driving along the road, he smiled. "Where are you?" he muttered. As he drove around a bend, there she was. She was young, probably around 21. Her blonde hair blew to one side in the wind. She was clinging on to her backpack and stood stiff like a post with one arm out. "There you are." Sean said blissfully. There she was. Sean pulled up the fixed blade in his boot, just touching it made his heart race. He pulled to the side of the road and opened the door. "Do ya need a lift, love?" He yelled over the wind. She stared at him, Sean worried he had already scared her, she's so small and helpless he thought. "I can call you a taxi but you might be waiting a while." With that she gathered her things and got in the front seat. They sat in silence for a while, Sean was trying to be patient, he didn't want to seem too eager but he had been longing for this for quite some time. It had been almost 8 months since his last kill and 8 months wasn't enough to suffice. "You know where you'd like to go?" He pushed. She turned to him and he almost groaned when he saw her sad, grey eyes. "I'm hungry." She stated. So am I Sean thought. "Alright, well I can take you into town? Get you a nice hearty meal, what do ya say?" Sean said in fatherly voice. The girl nodded. For the first few minutes Sean and the girl said nothing. Sean was excited, too excited. He could smell her lavender shampoo and it was driving him crazy. He kept thinking of what her name might be, how when the moment that she told him her name, he would never forget it. She was his now, no one else's. "How long will it take to get there?" the girl asked, interrupting Sean's train of thought. "About 35 minutes give or take" Sean said, smiling. Make her feel safe he thought I want her to feel safe. A few more minutes passed until Sean could take no more silence. Who are you, where are you from, why are you here? He thought. He had to know. "I'm Sean by the way…" He said, indicating a response. The girl nodded politely and looked outside the window. "And your name is?" He pushed on. "Amity" she replied, still looking outside the window. Amity! Oh Amity, Amity! You will make me a happy man. "That's a beautiful name, Amity." She turned her head and smiled wryly "I've always hated it actually. I plan to change my name one day" she said as she began to play with her bracelet. "What would you change it to then?" Sean asked, almost in flirtatiously. "Jane" she said with a pause. "Plain Jane, that's the name for me" she said sweetly. I love you Sean thought. How can I love you, if I want to kill you? "Well, I like either of them. They both suit you" Sean replied, now feeling uneasy about what the night held for him. What was happening to him? How could he even feel like this? I will go through with this, it's what I want, it's what I need! He told himself. He began to struggle to find himself, he looked at his watch, ten minutes had passed, and he needed to get going if he wanted this to happen. Just before he went to ask her a question she got a flask out of her backpack. She looked at him and smiled. "I'm not a big drinker but I find this warms me up." She went to take a swig but then paused "Sorry, I'm so rude. Would you like some?" She said her eyes still so sad. I love you, I love you, I love you! Sean sang to himself. Maybe a drink will help? I have to go through with this! "Sure, why not?" Sean said shrugging casually. He took three decent gulps and handed it back. "Bottoms up" She said, smiling at him in such a way that made him feel sick. Sean took a road taking them further from town, unbeknownst to Amity. Not long now my sweet Amity, I'll make it as painless as possible He thought. "You live by yourself?" Amity asked. Sean nodded; he didn't want to continue talking. The more she spoke, the weaker he became. "Mmm solitude is bliss" Amity said softly. "I never understood that meaning up until about three years ago. I moved out from my mothers, went to another state and have been by myself ever since. It really is pure bliss, isn't it?" She said. He couldn't take much more; she was perfect, just perfect. I want solitude with you and your lavender scent he thought achingly. "Do you ever get lonely?" she asked, pushing for a conversation. Sean cleared his throat, "Sometimes, yes. Do you?" he asking, trying to remain calm. "Mainly on cold nights" she said, staring at him. Sean lost all the moisture in his mouth while his forehead began to feel clammy. "It's especially cold tonight" she said, now moving closer to him. Sean felt ill and started to feel his body turn limp. I can't do this, this isn't right! I can't even control my body! Sean began to pull over in to an abandoned warehouse drive way. "What are you doing?" She said in a panicked voice. Sean turned to her and smiled sheepishly. "I'm sorry that I have to do this, Amity, sweet Amity" he said, struggling to get the words out. Then when he went for his fixed blade tucked in his boot, his whole body fell to one side. Sean was now pushed up against the driver's door, he tried to grab the knife again but couldn't, his arms had given way. What is happening? Sean screamed to himself. He began to panic. She's going to get away! What if she goes to the police? Sean thought. He was then interrupted by Amity laughing. He tried to turn his head but couldn't. She then moved his body in the centre of the seat and sat on top of him. He was confused. What was she doing? Why wasn't she running? She then followed his hand and found the blade. She showed him the blade and shook her head at him mockingly. "Now that's not very friendly, is it?" She said. He tried to scream but only managed to grunt loudly. "Hey hey hey, Sean, there's no need to be dramatic." She said while she stroked his hair. Sean started to lose consciousness, he tried to fight it. "You know, I almost didn't go through with this. You seemed like such a lovely guy. But then again, I've never had much willpower." She said as she continued to stroke his hair and hush him like a loving mother to her newborn child. Will I ever see you again sweet Amity? Sean thought to himself. Amity then presented her own blade and held it to Sean's throat. Just before he lost consciousness Amity put her mouth to his ear and whispered "You're mine now."