"You know, I still like the Saw voice better, but I can dig it." Jake said "Is it on Android or iOS?" He turned around to face the mystery voice, but as he did the noise of the party suddenly died out and he found himself standing on an empty street, his only company the long shadows cast by dim streetlights.
He quickly turned back around only to find more empty street, more dim streetlights and more long shadows. There was no rustle in the bushes from the wind, nor did any lights escape any windows, and the night sky was devoid of stars. Jake started to panic, as one does in these situations, but couldn't force himself to move from the worn and cracked sidewalk.
Fuck! If Barry hadn't roped him into going to that fucking party he'd still be out there scaring kids with his dope ass costume he made instead of, what he could only assume was, unconscious in an ambulance after a bad trip. He didn't really know how drugs worked, he'd never even gotten wasted before, but he *had* watched a ton of movies and was pretty sure this was one of those drug moments.
The wind suddenly picked up, biting cold eating right through the ebony fabric of his cloak. In front of his eyes, Jake's elongated shadow rose up from the ground a being made up from the very absence of light itself. It started to vibrate slightly and before Jake could explore as to why he heard the same voice from before, laughing.
"Do you know why humans fear the dark?" The shade asked him.
Jake didn't know how to respond, and even if he did the clump is his throat was unlikely to let him, so he just stood there. Staring.
The shade leaned in closer narrowing what, for his own sanity's sake, Jake assumed were eyes. "Because it represents the unknown, and what is unknown cannot be controlled." It tilted it's head slightly. "And humans love their control, don't they Jake?"
He was close to forming a cohesive thought at this point, but articulating was proving difficult. Eventually he managed to stammer out a wimpy "W-what do you want?"
"You see, Jake." The shade said "The thing you want the most, is right in front of you. I will allow you to have the same control of the darkness, of the void, that I have wielded for many years. For one day."
"One day?" Jake sniffled back
"No more, no less." The voice answered back. "Should you choose to accept."
"I don't want to kill people." He responded, more comfortable with the conversation now.
"It is not about killing, **Jake**!" the voice said sternly "The darkness is much more than merely death. The very idea of absence Is a power I control as much as it controls all of you, and seeing these poor souls to the void is the duty I bear to obtain that control."
The shade leaned in close enough for Jake's vision to be covered in darkness before he continued. "I am offering you the chance to be the master of everything you could never understand, the emperor of the unknown. Where your peers cower in their fear of death, darkness, or mysteries, you will stand tall!
"You!" The shade paused for effect. "Can be the counterweight to the light of countless stars, the reaction to their action! All you need to do is accept the mantle, for but one full day."
Jake was lost now, he knew that there was no reason left for him to resist. He needed it now.
"All right." He said "Where do I sign."
Coming from a visage of pure void it seemed impossible but, for the briefest of moments, Jake swore he could see it smile.