The storm came on slowly, looming ominously throughout the day until the fading light vanished beyond the horizon, and with it, peace. The winds howled furiously, the trees' branches shaking violently, the weaker ones snapping off. Then the black clouds unleashed the might of their rain The torrent drowned out all other sound. Only the terrible crack of thunder rose above the din, thrumming with deadly ominousness. Dust turns to mud, roads into rivers. Animals are driven inside with frantic energy as their minders urge them onward. Elsewhere, others race about in urgency as well.
Up on the cliffs overlooking the port, the castle is awake in the storm. Staff enlist the aid of the palace guards, sending them to and fro bearing buckets as they struggle to prevent the leaks from damaging the castle. Throughout the castle can be heard the *Drip, drip, drip* of tin buckets and wooden pail as they rapidly fill up. The housekeeper directs battle-hardened soldiers as they race to keep the storm from ruining any of the priceless items within the palace.
Perched up on the banister overlooking the great hall is Sir Lawrence, garbed in his cloak of office and badge of rank. Leaning against a tall marble column, he lets one of his booted feet dangle freely in the air, tapping absently to the sound of the nearest filling bucket. His eyeless sockets stare out emptily over the teem mass of servants and guards, taking in the scene like twin black holes. A skeletal hand is hitched on his sword belt, the leather well worn and oiled. The other scratches at a beard that hasn't existed for a hundred years.
Thunder roars. Then lightning strikes the castle, blinding the castle's staff and Lawrence's soldiers in a feverish light. Several cry aloud at painful brightness before it abruptly vanishes into lingering nothingness.
Slowly, the work is resumed, men and women reorganizing the brigade of buckets and moving irreplaceable carpets and furniture to drying quarters. Sir Lawrence however has his attention directed elsewhere.
His rotting head raised in alarm, he swings his hanging leg back over the railing and breaks out into a jog, chain mail rippling with his movements.With his left hand, he loosens the sword from its scabbard, readying it in case.
*That was unnatural. Thunder before lightning? Impossible. Save for one reason...*
His heavy boots thud against the cold stone of the floor as he races past the portraits of previous rulers, their usual stern gaze darkening. Eyes drip like melted tallow, leaking darkness onto the grey stone. Mouths widen sickeningly, growing wider and wider until their smiles stretch from ear to ear. Needle like teeth are planted in gums black with rot grin at Lawrence as he begins to sprint. Dark parodies of his own affliction laugh at him, hissing in delight as a cold knot forms in his mummified throat. Rain drips onto Lawrence's shoulder. Stealing a glance upwards, he witnesses the fresco overhead writhe in horrific fashion. Hundreds of beasts tear into one another. Hydras duel with griffins while phoenixes claw dragons before being roasted in bale-fire. Manticores are turned to stone upon gazing into the eyes of the Cockatrice.
Lawrence pays them no heed, instead barreling down the hallway and slamming the door at the end clean open. The inch thick oak cracks as he enters the room.
Queen Malvina is sitting down amongst physical darkness blacker than death itself. Kicking it up like fog as he makes his way towards her, the corners of his eyes glance around the room, at the corpses within the paintings that hang on the walls. His boots squelch from some unknown source hidden in the inky fog. Cradled within Malvina's arms is the limp body of Dieter, portions of him visibly rotting, his bright shining teeth revealed through the gaping wound in his cheek. One arm is but bone with shreds of ligaments hanging on. His open eyes are pale and dim.
"He's dead..." She says softly, tears dripping down her cheeks.
Sir Lawerence kneels down, gently taking the form of Dieter from her hands. "No. He's not."