She knows what happens next because we are the hurricane and we are the flame.
Her wings are wet when she returns home to me tonight. The circle of fire that binds us together reflects in the tiny droplets on her blackdark wings - she lands, alight with the flame on my outstretched hands. I hold her close and she rests her weary head against my cold, white neck. I know that the rain has begun and nothing will stop it until the wicked city is washed away.
I know because I brought the rain. I brought the rain because I've been watching from a dark and dreamy world away. The night she first crash-landed into my arms, she cried and told me the story of how she came to be so battered and bruised. She took me to her home and I watched while her world was ravaged by fear and by hate. I watched and held her at night while she cried and begged for my help. I laid by her side and I strengthened my bond to her tortured world until I was strong enough to bring the rain that will wash it away.
And now here is my darling, worn weary from the battle she so willing fights, traveling faithfully between our two worlds. Her wings beat ever so softly against the fate of her world, creating new and beautiful patterns when she flies to my side. She is shot from the sky time after time, and still she returns to me, bruised and sometimes broken. I hold my precious, wounded bird gently against my heart.
I promised her rain. And after the rain, I will bring the fire.
I studied her world while she slept. I mastered the laws of nature in her world as I have in mine. I learned to control the tide that is tethered to her beating heart and the winds that are now controlled by her sleeping sighs. She doesn't know the power I breathe into her when we meet in her dreams. I protect her from the chaos that she helps me create by clouding her memory of me while she's awake.
I have whispered my secrets into the girl's ear while she sleeps. I have wanted her to know what I have planned for her world. I want her to know because our fates are now one and I know that one day she will remember. I need her to live so that she will continue to dream. In her dreams is where I find her, and from there that I work.
When she wakes, her sheets are damply tangled around her bare legs. She feels something lurking, perched in a far corner of her mind. There is a light tapping at her window and she recognizes the soothing sound of summer rain. Pulling aside the curtains, she smiles at the kids that are already splashing happily in the growing puddles.
"I hope you know how to swim," she cheerfully whispers.