It's kind of a dick move that they sent me alone.
Not complaining. Mr. Alien Overlord said they only needed one guy. Mr. President asked Mr. General to recommend
a Mr. Best-Marine-In-The-Army. Mr. General recommended Mr. Myself here.
So they stuck Mr. Myself here on a rocket and shipped me off to the Andromeda Galaxy.
"Relax," Mr. Alien Overlord had said, "It'll be fine."
They gave me a small device like an iPod with a single button for a display and said, "That is our technology. You don't press the button until you watch the instructional video."
"Where's the instructional video?"
"We'll send it to you when it's time."
Yeah. Ok. Of course I'll do it. Racist aliens that want to eliminate every other species in the galaxy? Yeah, I'll help
you fight them. Yeah, I trust that this box with a button will help me defeat a planet. Yeah, you got it under
control.
But now I'm getting closer to the planet. And no instructions. Nothing.
Dick move. For real.
I check through the windshield outside – the planet is red, and it's growing closer.
What do I do if I get there and there's no instructions? Ask for directions? Tell them I'm lost? Join them and become an intergalactic racist so I don't die?
I pull the button-device from my pocket and study it. I've contemplated pressing the damn thing like a hundred times in the week it took for me to get here.
But they told me to wait. They told me to wait, so I'm waiting. The dicks.
"Identify yourself," comes a voice through my speakers.
Shit.
I look down at the button again.
"Identify yourself now or we will open fire."
They see me. No more time. Crap.
I hover my hand over the button.
I hear the Overlord Alien's voice, back at the meeting on Earth: "*It is essential that you wait for instructions before pressing the button*."
"This is your last warning. Identify yourself or we will –"
The voice dies away in a hiss, like a radio switching between stations. I look up and my windshield is taken over by
the Alien Overlord's face.
"Hello, Mr. Austin," the video starts. "Thank you for waiting for the instructions before pressing the button."
"How did you know I didn't press the –"
"A quick overview, before we talk more about the device you carry with you – our species has recently found out
that the universe we all live in is – in fact – a simulation."
"What?" I ask, like the video can hear me.
"After some debating, we decided that this didn't really matter, since we had no way of getting out of the
simulation. So we carried on with our lives."
"Well, that does make sense…"
"Like all simulations, however… Universe has some… glitches. Bugs you can exploit, if you get access to the source code."
I look down at the button again.
"That is all you need to know. Please use the device in your possession with responsibility, and return it to us once
you've finished your mission. Best of luck and… have fun."
The Overlord disappears, and my windshield goes back to reflecting the red planet, where a bunch of black ships are now hovering in front of it, their laser guns pointed my way.
"Ready to open fire!" comes the voice again.
The button looks up at me, and I look down at it.
"Fuck it," I say, pressing down on it.
A screen rises from the device like a hologram, flashing in blue. A menu.
***CHEATS***
*INFINITE LIFE*
*INFINITE AMMO*
*EXPLOSIVE BULLETS*
*GIANTS HEADS*
*ALL WEAPONS*
*SUMMON MR. MEESEEKS*
*ARMOR UP*
*LIFE UP*
In slow motion, I look from the menu to the windshield, where more and more ships gather around me.
"Open fire!" comes the voice, and the laser guns shift my way.
"Oh, this is going to be fun," I say, feeling a smile creeping into my face as I press the first option on the menu.