I hated doing this, ibutI had to. It was always the same. The peeling wallpaper in the train compartment, The uncomfortable seats, the boring English countryside, father's breath ticking away the time. I had to sit perfectly still or father would start to get angry, and he did terrible things while calm, he was horrible when he was angry.
"You must be calm. This is a dance we are doing. We must be perfect or it will all go terribly. I would be most upset if things went poorly." My father spoke with a perfect cadence, every word a measured thing.
"I know this, Father. I hate that you do it this way. That you must make me do these things. It's terrible." I mumbled softly while watching the clock. It was three fifty-seven am. The plan was to go into effect at four.
"We have spoken on this. You will continue to do as instructed. I will hear no more of this." Father explained, his voice hard and cruel.
The next three minutes were horrible. We sat there in perfect silence, both of us watching the clock. Once it stroke seven I stood and opened the train door. I waved down one of the workers, She waved back and started walking my way. The plan had to start exactly at four, four hours after the train set off from London. This was the time when the worker would be finishing her rounds and not be noticed for another three hours.
I stepped back into the carriage and sat down. Father smiled at me from where he hid behind the door. The stewardess peaked her head in a question on her lips. I spoke my lines, they had been practiced a thousand times before father said I got them right. "Oh. I don't mean to bother, but the blinds on this window are tricky and the sun is blinding." As I spoke I knew the girl's fate was sealed.
She stepped into the carriage to fix the blind. My father moved quickly, as he plunged a knife into the girl's neck. She did not have time to scream before crumpling to the floor. "You see boy. Nobody can take this from us. This was a perfect plan. Nobody will know what happened to her. All the waiting was worth it." He always loved his speeches after a kill.
I moved just as quickly as he did when I buried my own knife into his spine. "You always plan to much old man. I had to wait months for this kill. Why spend months planning on ten seconds of bliss. I'm done with you father." I hissed in his ear as his body collapsed onto hers. Father's plan was perfect. Exactly at this moment, the train was moving over a bridge, so nobody noticed the bodies being pushed out of the window to plummet into the icy waters below.
I laid down for the best sleep I had had in years.