its been 5 days. no, maybe 6. At this point the number of days doesn't seem to matter much. Im much more concerned about how we will get food and water. Theres only three of us; me, my Co worker Tommy, and a random named Jason. Our best guess is that an all out war broke out and there probably aren't many people left in the city that we're in, we got hit pretty hard. I could see nothing but plains, trucks, tanks, missiles, and bullets when i was on my way to grab a late dinner and head back to the office. Not only was there an overwhelming amounts of military presence, but there were some strange aircrafts that I, nor Tommy could identify. We took refuge in the basement of the office, i guess working late finally paid off because my apartment building was completely demolished from what i could see. We saw a man running for his life jus before we headed for the basement so we let him in, introduces himself as Jason, and that was that.
Day 7: So far we've been pretty understanding as to why Jason has seemed a little...off. I mean, the man says he has a family that he has no idea if they are okay, nor would i guess that they are. The entire world as we know it could be crumbling and or completely gone by now; we're all a little stressed to say the least. But Jason seems to have a certain trait about him that we can't put our finger on. His slouched posture, very long arms, and almost always bent knees give him an eerie appearance. His words are slurred and jumbled to the point that you would think he's either wasted or just learned the language...we're going to be keeping an eye on him.
Day 8: We broke into a locked supply closet on the 4th floor and found a couple cases of water and granola bars mixed in with office supplies, so we've bought ourselves a little bit more time. Once again, Jason has given me more reasons to be suspicious of his motives. We all decided to check each floor for supplies since our situation was getting dire and we needed food and water. I took the 2nd, Tommy took the 3rd, and Jason was given the 4th. After searching to no avail me and Tommy met back up on the main floor and doubled over each of our floors to make sure we didn't miss anything. Jason then met us soon after on the 2nd floor and said he didn't find anything either. "okay" i replied, "we're double checking each of the floors just to make sure we didn't miss anything. help us clear this one and the 3rd then we'll go up to the 4th and check that one again as well." Jason then seemed very reluctant to the idea and even accused me of not trusting him. That's okay, were all hungry and on edge. I calm but firmly tell him that our only motives are to find some supplies to help us last a little while longer until we can find some better placement other than this (office that i love being in so much.) So, as a team, we make it to the 4th floor and conduct our search. not 10 minutes in we come across a locked door that almost looked like someone was trying to hide it. strange, i thought. how could Jason miss this door that was pretty much right infant of your face when you walk up the stairs. i shrugged it off and said "lets bust it open. Theres bound to be something useful in there." Tommy, mirroring my confusion of Jason, was down. Grabbed a chair and made his way to the door to help me bust it down. Its been a few hours since and Jason's only take a couple sips of water and hasn't touched the granola bar. Im not sure how he's still standing considering how long we've gone without food or water. More for us i guess...
Day 10: Tommy's gone. I finally found the ease of mind to take a nap for a little while and upon waking up i see Jason in his corner and Tommy's nowhere to be found. "uh..where's Tom?" i ask Jason, "Oh I'm not sure. he said he wanted to go check out the 4th floor again for more supplies. He should be back soon." he said in a very calm tone. That's reasonable, i thought. "Ill go join him, I'm pretty curious as well." "NO" pleads Jason," what?" i replied, "i mean, uh, I tried to go with him too. He said we should stay down here. He wanted to be alone for a little while." "...alright. i guess ill stay here then." That just doesn't seem like Tom to me. My watch broke when breaking into that closet but I've got to imagine Its been close to 4 hours since I've woken up and he's still not back. Im going up there to look for him if he's not back soon. With or without Jason.
Night of Day 10: Oh god i hope he's not wondering where I'm at yet. Jason was beginning to nod off so i slipped out of the basement and made my way upstairs to look for Tommy. I didn't have to go more than one flight of stairs before i saw a trail of blood along the walls and hand railing. That, and half of his shirt, are the only things I've found of Tommy so far. I was wondering why the hell Jason had only his undershirt on when i woke up. What the fuck did he do to him? Honestly thats not something i really want to know right now. All i know is i need to get the hell out of here befor
*first time posting, would love feedback!