Paul's technique was so simple that a few years ago the department had paid him a large bonus to help publish a training video with the hope that other detectives would be able to adopt his strategy and begin closing their cases at a higher rate. Paul's 100% conviction rate was unprecedented and the higher ups wanted more than anything to crack his code. Problem was, and Paul knew this when they had asked him to make the video, that his technique wouldn't work for anyone other than himself. Though he hadn't let that small detail keep him from agreeing to do it in order to gain a few extra dollars. See, Paul knew he could do anything he wanted and be a rich man using his "gift" but Paul wasn't a greedy man. Truth was that he truly enjoyed his job and the sense of accomplishment he received from helping his small community by getting people that he knew were truly guilty of their crime off the street.
Over the years Paul had become a legend among local law enforcement officers and it wasn't uncommon for most of the department and sometimes even the mayor to stop what they were doing and come to watch his interrogation from behind a one way mirror.
Although murders weren't unheard of by any means, this case was so horrendous that even the FBI had come to town to help handle the investigation. The crime had been on the news for several days prior to them finally tracking down their only suspect, and the whole town was still in shock from what few details had leaked out. Word around town was there were so many body parts that the officers hadn't been able to determine the number of victims, and it had been nearly a week! One thing the detectives and FBI officers working the case did know was that the victims hadn't come from this town. In fact they couldn't find where the victims had come from at all. Preliminary DNA results weren't providing any leads and the detectives had nothing to go on other than a vague description, given by a well known homeless drunkard, of a tall man in a dark coat. The drunkard had told officers that he saw the man leaving the park, where the bodies had been found, and walking towards a local motel. The officers had went directly to the motel where they found the strange man and brought him into the station without incident.
Even though the FBI was leading this investigation, they were aware of Paul's flawless conviction record and agreed that he should be the one to question this strange man; the only possible suspect they that had.
So Paul began his interview process the same as he always did, just like he had done for the training videos, by being very friendly to the man and offering him food, drinks, cigarettes etc. The man politely declined all of Paul's offerings and continued to sit there across the table with the same blank expression on his face he had when the officers initially arrested him.
None of this phased Paul as he knew he would have the answers to all of his questions in no time. Considering his audience, he decided to cut straight to it, Paul hit him with the key phrase that he had become famous for. "You know exactly why you are sitting right here, right now, right in front of me don't you?"
Paul had asked this question countless times of guilty men who usually responded with something like "no I have no idea" and their minds would then begin racing, actually answering the question thus telling Paul everything he needed to know.
However, Paul was not ready for what happened when he asked this strange man the "famous key phrase," and neither were all of the FBI agents, detectives, and even the Governor who had made a special trip into town to watch.
**Taking a break, will continue if Reddit tells me that I should.:)