"Peter we've been through this a million times, actually more. I don't know what you expect us to say."
A group of paper-pushers busied themselves, avoiding Peter's eyes while Peter smoked a cigarette, anxiously flicking it.
An individual by the name of MATT BERG recently arrived for process and neither subsequent departments (Heaven, Hell) were willing to take him. However, this posed a problem for both departments. Typically speaking, this type of situation was very rare - the last similar case had occurred pre-resurrection and, fittingly, their had been a slew of departmental policy changes following the shakeup. According to some of the older department heads it had been a logistical nightmare.
Peter finished his cigarette, exhaled, and spoke:
"The way I see it, we only have one option. Send Matt back and, with any luck, we won't have to deal with this mess the next time around...I mean, what are the odds he'll come back with an even count? Albeit possible it's hardly probable."
Mother Teresa chimed in:
"You can't do that without a sign-off from the boss. See Lazarus Edict 2012.7"
Peter looked at Teresa with malice...This politicking bitch had been nothing but a series of bureaucratic headaches since her hire.
"Okay then, what do you propose, Teresa? Because all I'm hearing are rebuttals sans solutions...something you've gained a knack for, I might add."
Teresa busied herself with paperwork, paying no mind to Peter's not-so-subtle underhand remark.
"Bring it to JC's attention and that will be that."
Was this bitch serious? As if JC didn't have enough shit on his plate. Peter was reaching his breaking point. Michael walked into the room.
"What's up my people? Heard through the cloud-line that we gotta Lazarus case on our hands? Am I sending someone back? Just give me the word and --"
Teresa chimed in:
"No because we don't have JC's sign-off. Peter knows this."
God-damn whore.
"Teresa, take 15."
"I took my 15 107 years ago I'm not due for another until --"
"TAKE 15 TERESA."
Teresa glared at Peter and slowly shuffled out. About fucking time.
Michael sat down in Teresa's chair and lit a cigarette.
"What seems to be the issue Pete? Something tells me you wanna expedite without the boss man signing off...Which I'm all for, but I'd at least like an explanation."
Peter paused. He might as well get it off his chest.
"Listen, JC is bogged down and I don't wanna be the guy who tells him we got another potential Lazarus case...And if I have to deal with that headache, rest assured you will too."
Michael smiled and ashed his cigarette on Teresa's desk.
"Alright Pete, I can swing it but we'll need to talk to Bon down in Hell if we want to swing it without Teresa sounding the alarm. I hate bureaucratic bullshit as much as the next angel but I also like my job and am not about to get shuffled off to Hell to work under Bon...the guy's been playing Highway to Hell on repeat since he moved into his new office. Fucking cock."
"Well, let's get it going then. I want this finished before Teresa comes back from her 15."
We took the inter-dimensional tram over to Hell and, after lengthy, unnecessary vetting by the security guard, were let in. As we arrived at Bon's office the song "Girls Got Rhythm" blared from the inside.
"At least he switched things up. This is a jam. Reminds me of a party I was at in Sodom & Gomorrah, Lot was hooking up with a straight 10. A shame, really."
All the suits outside of Bon's office were surprisingly professional. Truth be told, it looked like they had a more efficient system than Peter had over in Heaven. When Peter and Michael entered Bon's office he was in the middle of a phone call.
"I don't give a damn if she wants a transfer. This is fucking Hell and we're the department heads...Yes of course and no definitely not. You and I both know what Lucifer's response to that will be...Okay, let me know how it goes."
Bon hung up and smiled.
"Gentleman. What brings you to these parts? Let me guess...looking for wiggle room with a potential Lazarus edict discrepancy?"
Bon was a cocky little shit. Peter spoke:
"You obviously know why were here. So what'll it be?"
Bon drew the blinds. His office had a wicked view of the lake of fire. Various pictures of Bon and hell notables adorned his office. The most visible was a picture of Bon and Mussolini holding a gigantic cat-fish like creature that they'd pulled out of the lake of fire.
"The way I see it, it shouldn't be a problem. But Teresa seems to be the real problem. Granted, I couldn't give 7 shits whether she damages your rapport with JC. He's not my boss and, therefore--
"Not your problem." Interjected Michael.
"Precisely. But I know you're clever enough to find a way around this?"
Of course, just backlog him...Teresa won't come across it for at least 1,000 years and by that time the poor fuck will already be dead. Let's just hope it's not quite as balanced of a problem next time around."
Peter was no fan of Bon but he had to admire the can-do attitude. Plus, Bon got shit done. Bureaucracy be damned.
Michael clasped his hands.
"Well that settles it then. I'll send Matt back and you and Bon will backlog him. No JC sign-off no problem."
Peter breathed a sigh of relief. One less problem to bring to JC's attention.