**October 7, 2046**
They rode in silence.
The crew compartment was stuffy, cramped. Slim tendrils of blue smoke snaked from the captain's cigar, dancing in the red running light. John sat with his back to the hull, listening to the dull roar of the hoverjets, the mechanical chorus of readied weapons, the whispered prayers.
This was the third year of the operation, the largest ground war in living memory. Before they shipped out the CO had praised their bravery, their courage, their strength. They were rebuilding America, one city block at a time. They would be remembered as heroes.
* "Thirty seconds!" *
The call came through his headset. Within the claustrophobic confines of his helmet John watched his heads-up display flare to life; suit vitals, overhead map, bullet-pointed objectives.
He looked around at the up-armored soldiers around him, watched as they went through their pre-battle rituals. He tried to guess who they were beneath the dull, emotionless visors.
The captain rose, cradling her helmet under one arm, the other bracing against the hull. "Alright, listen up," she shouted over the bubbling commotion, "our target is an insurrectionist strong hold out past Old Seattle. Reports indicate a large stockpile of weapons and ammunition has been moved underground, into the subway tunnels. They've been peppering our boys for weeks, and we're gonna stop em. So check your weapons, keep your heads down, and don't get killed."
John could see the exhaustion in her eyes, the haunted thousand-yard stare so common among the veterans. The captain surveyed the soldiers, nodded, and slipped on her helmet. With a wave of her hand the thirty men and women rose.
The light shifted green, the transport landed with a spine-jarring impact, and the rear hatch hissed open. Into chaos.
***
His head pounded, he could taste blood. John came to with a start, fighting for breath. His vision was dark. For a heartbeat he feared he was blind, until a small, red warning icon flashed before his eyes.
John reached up, undid the clasps around his neck, and tossed his dented helmet aside. He was on his back, staring up at a smoke-clouded sky. He could hear the staccato retorts of small arms fire echoing across the city, the tortured screams. He tried to rise, but collapsed when his knee buckled. He looked down and nearly vomited at the site of his leg.
A nearby explosion shook him to his senses, and he took in the scene around him. The transport listed over him, nearly toppled. It had touched down along a residential street lined with burned-out houses and smoking craters, before meeting its end; the front half had been ripped open and was dripping molten slag on the cracked pavement. There were bodies.
He felt for his rifle, but it was gone. He reached for his sidearm, but it too was missing. He pulled the reserve radio from his belt and scanned through the channels, but all that returned was static. A thought surfaced through the daze; get off the street.
Bracing himself, John rose on his elbows and crawled away from the smoldering wreck, wincing as his mangled leg jostled along the uneven ground. He didn't know where to go, just that he should be away. His head was spinning, and he had to stop several times to catch his breath and fight back the encroaching darkness.
Feeling his strength returning, John reached out for a fallen tree branch and hoisted himself to his feet, using the limb as a crutch. Before him was a house, relatively untouched by the flames and the battle, and through his addled mind he figured it to be a safe place to hide, to wait for reinforcements. There would be reinforcements, right?
John looked around, but the street remained empty, save for the occasional crow swooping in for a feast. The shelter of the house called to him, reached out. He doubled his pace.
As he hobbled up the driveway, past the scorched hulk of a minivan, he did a double-take. There, in the window, was a face, for just a moment. Ignoring his mounting fears, he called out, a desperate wordless plea.
He stumbled, landing on the ruined remains of his leg. The world swam, he tasted copper, and the darkness swept over him like a warm wave.
***
John awoke to a sharp pain in his leg. He tried to call out, but his throat was parched, and all he could manage was a wheeze.
He looked around through crusted eyes; he was in a room, thin streams of light filtering through pin-prick bullet holes. As his eyes adjusted to the dark, he began make out figures, sheltered in the gloom.
As the past events surfaced in his memory, John instinctively pushed himself upright and nearly swooned as the pain returned in full. He managed to reach the far wall and sit up, his back supported by the rotting woodwork.
A break in the cloud cover cast a ray of light into the house; it was a living room, tattered and singed. Furniture had been shoved against the windows, boards had been hammered across the door, and there were people.
For the first time in the war, John got his first true look at the enemy. They were men and women, some old, some young, all hunched, grey-faced, exhausted, and all carried weapons. They stared at him with dull, lifeless eyes.
For what seemed to John like an eternity, nobody moved. The gunfire beyond the thin walls slowed, then stopped. The group before him shuffled, seeming unsure of what to do.
Finally, John stomached his fear. "Water…" he croaked, reaching out the group.
There was a hushed conversation among the gaunt crowd. Then a man walked forward, who must have been their leader. He was young, yet the pain in his eyes denied his age. He carried a pistol.
The man walked across the room to stand before John. For a heartbeat the two locked eyes, and John realized that they were likely the same age. They might have even gone to the same schools, before the insurrection.
The pistol wavered, then rose, the cold barrel pressed against John's forehead.
"This is for Lisa…"
Beyond fear, John nodded, closed his eyes, and waited. But the shot didn't come. The barrel fell, and John heard the young man step back amid a torrent of angry whispers.
When he opened his eyes there was a face there, a young girl of no more than six. She reached for his hand and wrapped his fingers around a cracked china cup. "Drink…"