I've been driving all night, and most of the day before it. It doesn't help that it gets dark at like, four in this god-forsaken state. To make matters worse, just like every other state with more cows than people, it's absolutely frigid. If I see one more empty cornfield, I might just scream.
I glance down at the radio. Two AM, exactly three minutes from the last time I checked it. On the bright side, that means only about six more hours of driving. On the other hand, I've been on the road for about ten hours more than that.
There are a small collection of lights up ahead; I utter a silent thanks to whatever may be listening, as I have three Red Bulls and a Gatorade's worth of a piss to take. The town is tiny, and the 'Welcome' sign says it on both sides. I always thought places that small were a joke.
Really, it's a wonder this collection of farmers that happen to live next to each other has the traffic for a 24 hour gas station, but here it is. I pull up in front of it, and briefly consider turning off my engine. 'Fuck that,' I think to myself. I'm not getting back into a freezing car, and the twelve people that live in this town are either asleep or working in a gas station. I step out, careful not to hit the 'lock' button as I exit. This is not a place one should be stuck out of their car.
The high-school aged kid working the till doesn't even look up from his phone as he mutters something unintelligible that I assume is a greeting. I grunt back in kind, and go into the bathroom to take the most glorious leak of my life. On my way out, I buy one of those 1.5 liter 'travel sized' waters, just because I hate stopping at a place just to use the facilities.
The exchange is over, and I brave 15 yards of frigid weather to get back into my warm car that I'll spend the next quarter-day in and pull out of the lot. 2:16 AM. Could time pass any slower?
I sort of zone out for a while. Straight roads, dead of winter, not a single other car since about 10 PM, what reason is there to pay attention? I snap back to reality when I hear it.
The song. Everyone says something douchy about it. "You'll know when you hear it." "I could never even begin to explain it". Without exception, I responded with a smart ass remark, never believing a word. But it's loud. So loud, I worriedly begin to look for a train, or a semi honking at me, about to end my life before I realize how beautiful it is. I'm nearly brought to tears listening to it, like some cheesy choir of angels was descending, telling me what was about to happen.
The voice is the sweetest thing I've ever heard. Like honey pouring into my ears. I'm so entranced by it, I wouldn't have even noticed the gun if not for the cold metal against the back of my head.
"Hey, sweetie," the apparent love of my life says softly. "I'm still gonna need you to pull the car over."