As the sky darkened and clouds moved in, a burst of lightning illuminated the charcoal sky and the surroundings low rises of Newarc, New Jersey. The artificial lights flickered to match the rhythm of the thunder. Above the operating table dressed in white robes, the Doctor was at work once again. After his last monster laid waste to his ancestral land in Europe, the Doctor was forced to exile himself. He chose the new world. With the town of Newarc in New Jersey as his home base, the Doctor was hard at work once again. This time with a plan to avenge those who wronged him. The thunder roared once again, masking the knocking at the door. He didn't hear the door slam open. It was Vincenza from the beauty salon on the ground floor, rollers still in her hair. With the spray tan on half of her body, she looked like she stepped into a mud pool on her way over. And with the expression on her face she looked more so the monster that jumped out of that pool.
Sneaking up on the Doctor she screamed, "Hey would ya keep it down we gotta clients down der!"
The Doctor sprang into the air, surgical wire in hand.
"Oh my gwad what are ya up to?" Vincenza, a New Jersey native and mob wife, confronted him in her thick Italian-America accent full of its nasality and coated with nosiness. She couldn't wait to see how this juicy piece of potential gossip would unfold. Her eyes widened.
"Erm ah um, vell I vaz jast doing some…threading" The Doctor answered nervously in his thick German accent. He has been caught, he thought. After what happened in his homeland, he did not want to move again. Argentina would be his next destination; he has friends from his homeland's academia in exile there. But as a vegetarian with Crohn's he wanted to avoid steak and wine. Plus his grade school bully was from Buenos Aires. He did not want to bring back those painful memories.
"Oh threading! We do it all o'da time down der in our shop. We got some hawt badies comin'in today for a canstest and dey gotta look a real good. Real gold."
"Bodies you say?" The Doctor's shoulders and arms lowered and relaxed. A puzzled look came on his face. His creations were puzzles, and he personally carved the pieces. He was looking for a few items to compose his jigsaw.
"Oh ye! The hawtest badies in the state. Hell, the hawtest badies in da East of da country are a comin'a here. Happenin'in our salon in a half'a hour. You should come and checka her out. But keep da noise down ‘ cause we gotta get a finished making dem golden – if ya know what I mean sweethart." Vincenza turned around and bounced towards the door like the jumpy mud monster that she looked like. Thinking she had the latest scoop on the new neighbour upstairs, who was now a mysterious eyebrow threader, she couldn't wait to share the news with her gals. She slammed the door behind her.
The Doctor was gleeful. That stupid monster has just handed him the parts for his next project. He removed his lab coat and ran to the back of the apartment. Climbing through the window, one leg at a time, he stumbled and fell onto the fire exit. The clumsy nerd that he was, he managed to tumble down the fire exit steps; the slippery rails and freshly wet steps helped him lose his balance. He forced his way through the back door of the beauty salon. There, his eyes widened and he froze. A tree of a man, with skin brown as oak bark and wide as the trunk, with a black hedgehog for hair stood in the narrow hallway behind the door and brought down his tiny dark eyes to stare at him.
"Hey boy you is a late. You must be dat natural fitness guy dey was a talkin'about. Scrawny as a mozzarella stick and soggy as a old pizza," The tree laughed, his roaring laughter shaking the walls
"Look at a yo scrawny self, and pale too. Good luck. But take a ya shirt and pants aff first, don't be a wuss."
The Doctor was too afraid to say no. His Argentinian childhood bully taught him not to fight back. He complied. As he removed his clothes, his pale skin brightened up the room. As soon as he was in his bleached tighty-whities, the tree pushed him through a set of heavy and dark doors a few steps down the narrow hallway. The lights blinded him, and he covered up his eyes. The roaring laughter of the crowd pained his gentle academic ears, used to library volume. He squinted and viewed what was in front of him through the gaps in between his fingers…and froze...