I'm sitting opposite a man. Someone who I had never met before in person but who's life I have memorized in its totality. My childhood has always been rather hazy, so I feel as though I've supplemented it with pictures of happiness found in the old, meticulous diary entries of the individual before me. It isn't the first time I've done this. The only way to get someone to talk is to truly become the them. Truth is as relative as the universe in which it has been conceived and I for one have created a very relative universe for myself.
"Blink once for a yes and twice for a no, do you understand?"
'Blink'
The white walls of the eight by ten room had recently really started to take a toll on me, but they served a purpose. There was a certain spaceless quality it imbued that allowed me to pull the mark out of the real world, and into one of my own creation.
"Now, I am going to show you a short clip. You will not like the contents of this video. You are to watch the whole thing and will not close your eyes or look away for it's duration. Is this also understood?"
A pair of piercing blue eyes stared back defiantly. The man to whom they belonged sat in an uncomfortable looking slouch. His balding head seemed to be attracted to his left shoulder, mirroring the way his penis rested on his left testicle. He looked retched. The bruising on his shoulders and chest told a story of the failed attempts of amateurs, trying to make him talk. I know this ploy, I don't like using words and speak only for my job. This is a luxury i enjoy utilizing. I am an artist and my work is performed always for an audience of one.
"Your compliance is unnecessary to me. I merely ask it of you in order to allow this process to go on in a reasonably amicable fashion. If you do not want to follow my instructions, this sharp blade can produce the same effect. I find the removal of eyelids to be a dreadfully tedious task. I'll take your response to be yes and continue."
At the end of the day this was all foreplay. Once the video came on he would not be able to avert his gaze. I pressed the play button and sat back in my chair.
metron
Onto the screen flashed a distorted image of a dining room. In the middle of it was a grand mahogany table, all around which were seated three people. The group consisted of a women and two small children; a boy and a girl. When he saw this the man's eyes widened in fear. How could I know who these people were? How could I know of their existence? Who they were is of no relevance to me. It was sufficient that they inspired the reaction that I received. I was told that the man was a loner with no affiliation. It seems the people who told me this were wrong.
In the centre of the table was a metronome slowly ticking back and forth. It was going at a rather steady pace. "Tack, tick, Tack, tick." Along with that there was a slow chant just barely audible.
"Tell, him, Tell, him..."
The man's eyes were saucers. I must admit the image was really quite striking. Each of my participants were alternatively striking the table with each word. You could visibly hear his pulse as the pace of the metronome started to quicken. I had really outdone myself on the aesthetic.
'Crack'.
The sound of a head kissing mahogany. The woman had stopped here movements. The young children were visibly distressed and started to make their way around the table to her. Shit, this was not supposed to happen. How the fuck was I to know that she had so few words left. God fucking dammit. I should have fucking known.
"PHTHWAK!"
The much louder sound of a man hitting the floor. I spun around to see two lifeless eyes staring back at me. Did he fucking say something? Shit I must have missed it during the commotion of the video. I've got to check the tape, what the fuck did he say.
I run out of the door and into my equipment room where the tape is still rolling. Rewind, rewind, rewind, fucking play.
The audio comes on and there is the unmistakable sound of the first crack of head meets table. I focus the sound and turn it up. I tiny rasp echo's in my ears as its amplified to gargantuan proportions...
"Soon".