As I lay there experiencing the gift, the wonderful release, I had before delivered to so many before me I strangely felt as if I were going somewhere else. Expecting this to be my final reward to meet those whom I had sent before me to prepare my final reward, I was shocked to feel...Fear. A foreign emotion I rarely experienced, but had felt it enough to know what I was being subjected to. I then opened my eyes to see me. I was standing there in the secret place I only knew, the place that would usher so many to the place of rest and reward but for some reason this view was different.
I looked down and saw I was kneeling, and for some reason wearing a torn skirt, with chains around my ankles. I looked back up and involuntarily let out a shriek as my beloved sledgehammer came down upon my own skull, and yet I feel nothing, a perfect hit instantly turning the brain into a puddle within the skull. Yet somehow I open my eyes and see myself in the same spot, only wearing different clothes this time, with a gag in my mouth as I, the true I, not the bastardized version of some mongrel only fit to serve myself in the afterlife that I currently find myself in; walk up and, using my left hand, lovingly caress the neck of the body I find myself in. I pull back, knowing what is about to happen but cannot stop the muffled scream from coming as the other hand comes forward lightning fast and plunges an ice pick into the eye of the body I currently reside in. It does not kill me as I knew it wouldn't, this time I wanted to see how a subject would react to a slower death, and I screamed in pain as the pick went into my ocular cavity, breaking into the bone found below the eye. Though it felt like an eternity he, for I was no longer him, removed the pick from my eye and mercifully penetrated my temple, ending my short and pathetic, yet somehow tragically beautiful life.
I was not surprised as I became the third victim, and the fourth. Each experiencing unique deaths. No I did not appreciate the way I slew myself as I had when I was only the one preparing the afterlife. This time I thought back to the strange memories I had been suppressing, the hopes and dreams that were not mine. I thought of my widowed mother whose husband had died trying to defuse an IED in Afghanistan, wondering how she could survive losing another she loved. Or to my basset hound at my apartment, hoping one of my friends would come by like they promised they would and notice me missing.
When I became the fifth I tried to fight the monster before me. Actually managing to sprain his ankle before he shattered my knee. I had just been accepted into the Police Academy the day I went out drinking and disappeared for 3 months, only to be found by a game warden during deer season. As the sixth I plead for my life despite realizing this was my punishment from God for raping those girls in college.
Finally, as the 7th I felt peace. I watched as the FBI SWAT team burst into the shed, serendipitously matching the first burst of blood escaping the arteries in my neck, as the beast before me jerked the hand holding the knife, taking with it my final chance at life, jerked outward from the first stab made into my neck. I laughed as the 5.56mm rounds fired by the Agents entered the depraved monsters' body. But my laughs only came out as choking gasps. I could feel myself bleed out both as this poor soul on the floor, who was watching the team medic desperately try to pinch off his arteries, and as the monster I finally realized I truly was. The only odd thing I felt as I slipped towards whatever hell I surely deserved, was a feeling of elation; knowing society was finally free of me.