The armored knight raised his broad sword above his head, his equally broad shoulders squared on his target. His right hand clenched like a vice grip on the hilt with his left holding with slightly less force. He understood that this judgment must be the first and last blow, lest he be butchered by his opponent's swift blades.
"This will be your only warning traitor! To your knees or I will strike you down so further below this mud that you may never rise again!" The sound of his heart beat drained out the rain, worried his words would tremble he had squeezed the hilt even tighter.
"Your hubris will be your end Edward. No matter your strength or your armor you will never strike me nor will the edge of my steel fail to taste your blood!" Leather was all that covered this soldier's body, weighing him down slightly as it held the rain. His long black hair matted against his face, concealing all the shared traits of the two swordsmen but their sapphire eyes.
Once brothers in arms, these two were far passed reconciliation. Charles was irredeemable in his twin's eyes, his twin short swords had consumed their father's blood. Edward having given up his royal title, swore an oath to guard the King with his life. He had believed he was the better swordsman, and for that he should protect his brothers. It would allow Charles to take the kingdom, and while they may have shared the same eyes, Charles did not share the same sentiments.
Edward's oath kept him beside their father at all times. Even during the war, when the kingdom's two greatest swordsmen were expected to lead the fight. The upcoming battle would have their brethren face an army of over ten thousand slaves. Themselves only half the size, Charles knew that alone he would perish much like his fellow soldiers. Without his brother at his side, Charles' skill in attack would remain uncomplemented and open to retaliation. Charles would become a prize target, with only a small shield in Ethan. Charles is death would leave Edward's oath null, returning his rights as heir.
Before any of this Charles had already shown his dissent. Their father was mad with rage at the foreign army's refusal. The foreign army had shown no desire to take their kingdom, but required passage through their lands to reach the far west. The King, having heard of their coming, sent a minor brigade to refuse them passage without toll and fealty to the King's right of dominion.
The foreign army slaughtered the brigade, having interpreted the group of knights as a threat. They would send their own messengers to the King, carrying the heads of his knights. The foreign army would not acknowledge the King, but granted him mercy. They would pass through without disruption, as long as the messengers returned to them by the following nightfall. If they did not return, the foreign army was prepared to annihilate the King and his people.
Edward kept his opinions to himself, while Charles expressed distaste in his father's choice to send the brigade in the first place. He warned his father that it would only end in trouble, and to allow the foreign army passage without interruption. Aware of the foreign army's capabilities, as heard through the various rumors, Charles knew lives would be saved if they avoided a confrontation. Nevertheless, the King's arrogance would not allow the foreign army to waltz through his domain without a showing of subservience.
Their father was mad, ignorant, and cared naught for the people in these final years. When their father called for the messengers heads Charles protested while Edward quietly observed. The messengers did not plead for their lives, but merely said, "The Prince is wise. His actions will save the lives of your people. Yours would erase your existence from history. No *true* King fails to grace the pages of history." Moments later the King would have Ethan take their heads and add them to the pile they brought.
Soon thereafter, Edward took his oath and relinquished his title without any consultation. Charles could not fathom his actions. The King had planned to send nearly their entire army to their deaths, including his sons, and his brother would abandon him like a coward. Charles' disgust with Edward would soon turn to hatred.
Whispers claimed that Edward had sent the lieutenant from his personal guard to the foreigners. He would carry an offer of fealty to the foreign Emperor, once they had massacred his brothers and remaining soldiers, in return for sparing the remaining Kingdom under his own name. The whispers came from the torture of Edward's lieutenant, after Ethan captured him while the kingdom's army made their way towards the foreign army.
Charles, having learned of this betrayal, would leave Ethan in charge and return to court. "Father's madness infects Edward's blood," Charles believed. "I cannot allow this to carry on any further," he resolved. Charles would seek to have his father relinquish the crown and thus allow him to attempt peace with the foreign Emperor.
Upon returning to the throne Charles was met by his father, seated and drowning himself with wine, with his brother at his side broad sword in hand planted downward into the marble dais. "You send your people to death! Your sons to their graves, while you feed your madness with wine!?" Charles refused to hold his tongue any longer, the court quieted and the air was suddenly thick with tension. The King looked crookedly at his enraged offspring. Charles continued, "And you! You conspire against me!? If you wished for the throne all you need was ask! We could have spared innocent lives if you simply spoke with me! We could have avoided needless bloodshed if you could overcome your cowardice!" His anger with his brother was beyond that with his father, but his bond with his twin was of a different magnitude. Edward remained quiet, tightening his grip on the hilt of his broad sword, his armor shifting slightly.
"You, you dare..." the King began but paused. "...You are a seed not worthy of my words, but I am a merciful King...However I will not poison the hearts of the people with our discourse. Empty the court! I will have words with my son that no one need witness." Momentarily Charles' tension left him, believing he had a chance to break through to his father while the court emptied. The King looked to Edward, "you as well my boy, I have no desire to embarrass your brother any further." Edward protested, but the King's sapphire eyes turned cold on him, and he made his way out.
Once the court was empty, Charles took a few steps towards the throne, "Father.. I'm sorry for my anger but --"
"Sorry!? How dare you speak before me! How dare you call me 'Father'! I am your King child! You will refer to me as such and nothing else!" The King stood, looking down towards his son, incensed with hatred.
Charles made another attempt, "...Your highness, I plead tha --"
"You PLEAD!? I did not empty this court for you to plead! Silence your tongue before I rip your throat from its godforsaken shell!"
Charles' anger began to boil once again, realizing his father was beyond reason. He remained silent.
"You are a son of mine no longer. Your rights are removed, and with Edward's oath Ethan will be well protected. You will return to the vanguard and give your life for your King! If your bones do not come back in pieces I will break them MYSELF before EVER laying my dirt atop you!" The King was far gone. There was no repair for this sort, Charles knew.