It wasn't supposed to end like this.
For years, werewolves and vampires attacked each other for dominance. We each wanted to make sure the other wouldn't hunt humans down to extinction, extinguishing our food source and damning both species.
Then, we realized it was foolish to waste our time and energy fighting over a resource that was expanding by leaps and bounds. Neither vampire nor werewolf grew to a large extent as a community. The process to bare new members was stressful and didn't always achieve success. Humans, on the other hand, needed no prodding or help to procreate, producing members constantly.
That was when it was decided that vampires and werewolves could coexist with little issue. We were immortals who could run our little worlds with resources that we had accrued over centuries. It made life good. It made us weak.
Zombies had been around as long as werewolves and vampires. The walking carrion were of no consequence to us, a runt species that was easily ignored. Early humans dealt with them easily enough that numbers were inconsequential. We'd even thought that they were extinct for the last two centuries.
Life became easier for humans. Their numbers swelled to seven billion. Seven billion plump cattle, comfortable to the point of ignorance. Our numbers were so manageable and their lives so disposable, it was a veritable paradise. We became idle.
The zombies, whom we thought were distant memories, took advantage of the same population boom and oblivious society that we were also guilty of. They started to spring up in population centers. We thought that the humans would take care of the issue themselves, they had made who knows how many movies about them, how could they not figure out how to put down the issue? They failed, just as we did. We were more than capable of snuffing it out early on. Our hubris was another contributing factor to our downfall.
Now, humanity is gone, the buffet is closed. I sit here in this bunker with a singular werewolf. She is weak. She has not fed in weeks. Many of her kin have destroyed themselves, much like mine did, rather than face starvation. I could have done the same. I wish I had done the same, much like my rigor companion probably wishes.
Now, religions touted eternal life as a glorious reward. Our two species have found a way to make it into a damnable punishment.
Edit: Spacing