We humans were always interested in finding alien life among the stars. Maybe it was out of curiosity, to see what else laid before us among the stars. Maybe it was out of a fear of being alone in the universe. What ever it was, what ever purpose we had for searching, had led us to this. This was the fate of humanity.
I think it is 9:00, 9:30? Who knows what time it currently is, let alone whether it was dusk or dawn. Every time I wake up, I hope that what happened was just a really, really messed up dream, and every time it is the same as the day before. Still shackled to this metal plate, while they pump the blood from my veins to fuel their addictions. Fortunately, I am O+. That means that they don't just squeeze me dry and discard my corpse like some sort of twisted version of a capri-sun. But instead, they just take a couple of liters at a time, allowing me to enjoy my misery until I "expire" like a carton of milk. Maybe it is because of the rarity of my blood. That's probably why. They don't just keep humans alive for this long for no reason. All I know is that my blood is the most potent, the most expensive, the most enjoyable and the most precious blood type in the known galaxy.
Sure, it is illegal for them to do this but this place just falls short of the federation's border. That means any human here is fair game. Or maybe this place is within the border, yet again, lets not get any hopes up. The chances of being rescued is minimal. I try to move into a more comfortable position, yet all this does is cause a sharp pain to ripple through my ribs, signifying that I have triggered the pumps to start doing their job. As my vision starts to clear, I am greeted with the familiar sight of various clear tubes, filled with blood, running out of my abdomen and off to a large pipeline where our blood is sent off to God knows where.
Every time I wake up, I don't say every day as there is no way of telling the time in this place, I turn my head to the left and right to see how my fellow "cattle" are doing. And every time I am greeted to the same sight. Columns of people hooked up to this infernal machine, sucking them dry with every passing second. Millions of them, if not thousands, in eternal pain.
But something was off. Not as many people where dying and being released into the depths of the facility to be disposed of. Instead, it seemed like the pump was slowing down, as the shooting pain had dulled. The usually high pitched whir of the pump had changed to slow hum. Then a loud crackling came over the loud speaker.
"Attention," stated a commanding voice. It seemed to be coming from every where as there was no source which I could tell the voice was coming from.
"This is Sergeant Umanda of The Federation."
"This facility is in violation of the "Extraction Amendment of the Homosapien Species" and has condemned this facility to destruction. Those who are operating this facility will be incinerated. Anyone who is still alive to hear this, don't worry. Your suffering will soon come to an end."
Typical Federation. Even they treat us like anima-