Adam and I had a difficult marriage. He desired a demure, obedient little wife. As if. I left his naked ass so fast. So, naturally God - who's also a man, mind you - declared the marriage null and void. He started again, creating the most beautiful creature I've ever beheld, notwithstanding the fact she came from that narcissistic ass's rib. Long red tresses like fire incarnate. Brilliant emerald eyes like deep green pools, pulling me into their abyss. Lovely as the eve she was named for.
Too bad she desired to be a dutiful wife. Giving Adam bratty sons, doing as he asked day in and day out. I watched from outside that overrated Garden. Until one day, as luck would have it, she ventured away. That natural curiosity had a way of getting the best of her. I pushed my raven hair behind my ear and stepped out from my place of observation to introduce myself. Naturally she was shocked, having been told it was just herself, Adam, and those ridiculous sons. Overcoming that shock, however, curiosity once more took hold of her.
We became fast friends. Every day she would come to see me. Shy at first, the words soon began to cascade from her tongue into my pool of understanding. We became nearly inseparable, and because of this Adam grew suspicious and one day followed her.
"You!" he gasped upon seeing me, eyes nearly popping from his head, a vein on his temple fit to burst.
"Me," I agreed with a smile pulling at my lips.
"This, this cannot stand! Come, Eve. At once." He demanded.
"And if I challenge you for her hand, Adam?" I asked, my voice still calm and assured.
Adam laughed. "What? Impossible. It's Adam and Eve, not Eve and Lilith. Don't be crass."
Casting a sidelong glance at Eve, I replied, "I mean it. If you can solve my riddle...I'll stay away. If not, well, Eve gets to choose."
Gulping past the thyroid cartilage in his neck that made it look like he'd swallowed a forbidden apple, he slowly assented with a nod. Ever the self-assured posturer, that one.
"What is harder to catch the faster you run?" I asked. Not even a hard one.
"Uh, a snake. Obviously." He said, holding out his hand to Eve. "Come along," he said smugly.
"Your breath, is the answer," I replied, looking to Eve. With no hesitation, she moved and took my hand. Adam paled and looked near to fainting, but he knew he had lost.
Eve and I have been together since, living in our own little garden of bliss. I've been labeled a demon, of course, but it's a small price to pay to have that fair creature in my arms. Doesn't hurt Adam has turned into an unshaven, self-loathing slob who blames snakes for his misfortunes.