Huo Pao was old and scrawny. He was hardly the right person to appeal to incoming freshmen at the university. The students were sent by their wealthy parents, and some even had advanced tutoring to summon up cantrips. Of course, every guy wanted to learn fire and lightning, but he was loathe to take them on; they would most likely become tyrants that would need heroes to stamp out. Likewise, they didn't want him. No, they wanted to be taught by loud and proud artillery battlemage, who could conjure great firestorms through excessive channeling of their powers.
A pox on them anyway, Huo Pao thought. He was about to exit the hall when he saw a boy. Average height, but unusually fit. Shabby clothes. Very nervous, judging by the jackrabbiting of his right foot. Yet, a nervous person would look around around, trying to both meet a gaze and avert theirs at the same time.
This boy was looking at everyone's magic.
"What do you see, boy?" The boy jumped in his seat, startled at the low voice.
"Wh-what?"
"I see you looking at their hands. Tell me what you see."
"Well...that guy over there, he weaves his magic like a pen. But I saw him doing the same thing earlier today. He only knows that one move, but he's good at it."
"And...what about that girl over there?"
"I think she already knows some charm magic. There are a ton of guys looking at her, but that didn't happen until she was halfway through the room. You ask me, she's kinda dumpy."
"So what are you so nervous about? Seems you can already read their magic."
"But...just because I can read it doesn't mean I can write it. I'm just a farmboy who almost burned down the barn over a little scuffle with my pa. Kinda went off like a dragon, but I don't know how to do it again."
Huo Pao stroked his chin. Farmboy was certainly different...and while many farmers had an affinity for earth or water, this boy had fire in his gut. Although many magi may eschew fitness, strong heart and lungs were key to efficient fire evocation, especially if you wanted to skip casting steps.
"You do realize they've been at this for months, right? Don't compare yourself to them yet." He realized he forgot something. "What's your name?"
"My name? Uh...Siyo, sir."
"Walk up to that instructor over there. Tell him Huo Pao is going to win the bet, then blow your dragon breath on his boots."
"But I don't --"
"I know, you couldn't do it again...until now." Huo Pao poked him in the solar plexus. "Heave, but not from your throat. Do it from down here, and project like you want the biggest echo in the valley. Got it?" With a nod, the boy got up. After halfway towards the instructor, he looked back...but his strange trainer was gone.
---- -
A couple days layer, Huo Pao broke the wax seal and opened the parchment. On there was a guild application for one Siyo Son, as well as a sticky note: "You owe me new boots."
Huo Pao smiled. The Firebending guild was back in action.