The most predictable part about them is that they don't expect to be seen. Sometimes I'll see one on the street, and I'll take the opportunity to study them. If the notice me staring, they freak out. They'll hide behind people, bushes, lamps, anything that'll hide them from one who sees. I guess they're told that they must always remain hidden, or they'll suffer some great consequence; I can't really think of any other explanation for that kind of reaction.
Having asked many people in my area, I've come to realise that people like me are rare, but exist. We can see the "soul escorts". Not to be confused with spirit guides, the benevolent creatures who apparently help you through your life, these creatures help you end it. In the past I've been able to prevent deaths because I've seen them, but I decided, with the help of a forum comprised of only Seers, that the risk of playing with mortality is too great. Some have provided evidence that ghosts or other supernatural apparitions are what you get when someone dies without their spirit guide, left to wander Earth for eternity, with no way out.
I suppose I'm glad that most people can't see them, because mass hysteria would break out in seconds. They aren't a pretty sight. Imagine, if you will, a wholly intact, yet mottled corpse constantly standing next to you. When they walk, they do so with a slow, limping gait, trailing their umbilical cord behind them. That's how I see them, anyway. Others see an oversized fly hovering by the shoulder, and still others just see a dark aura around the unlucky bastard.
I've led my life carefully up until this point; if someone has *unwelcome company* I'll quickly leave their presence, and it's worked up until this point, because I'm still alive. Unfortunately, it doesn't seem like I'll stay that way for long. In the past five minutes, more and more escorts have appeared in this bus. I've been trying to avoid looking at any of them. The last thing I want in my final moments is a bus full of both humans and escorts freaking out.
Mine still hasn't appeared yet, but I'm sure it will soon. I hope it does.
EDIT: All critisicm very welcome, I love doing this but I want to improve.