"Well, what about...eggs?" You suggested with a wince. You were still as averse to the idea of eating them as you had been just this morning, but your...circumstances...had changed quite a bit since then. And, well. After having every suggestion of vegetable protein denied--including soybeans, which you *hated*--you were getting desperate. Desperate, and very, very *thirsty. * "I mean, egg albumin is nearly chemically identical to --" An exasperated sigh bit through your monologue, bringing about its' premature end.
"Look. Okay. *Listen* to me," Erzabet pinched the bridge of her nose with spidery fingers, her faint Eastern European accent thickening in tandem with her frustration. "How many ways do you want to hear it from me?" She plead. "The actual, *content*, of what we must consume, is only part of the equation." She spread her hands wide, palms up. "Else why would we bother, with all these modern conveniences--when we could simply stock a fridge with donated blood--why still would we go to the hassle of direct feeding?" You shrugged weakly.
"Fresh...tastes...better?" Well, it was true for produce. Unfortunately, you imagined sourcing local O-Positive was a lot more difficult than organic kale. The ancient, supernatural, otherworldly woman--currently slouched beside you in a pair of your old sweats and an oversized Spinal Tap T-shirt--grinned ferally, her just-a-bit-too-sharp teeth barely pressing against her lips.
"Oh, don't get me wrong--fresh tastes much, *much* better," she rumbled, and, fuck, you could feel your body reacting to that in a way that had *gotten you into this mess in the first place, keep your pants on damn it*. Then she sighed, expression shifting from seductive to tired so quickly you wondered if you hadn't just imagined it. Shit, did vampires actually have some sort of hypnosis?
"But no. You see, while we *do* need the actual substance of the blood to replenish our bodies," she began, running her fingers over her cheek, newly flushed with stolen blood--*your* blood, "it is the actual *act* of taking liquid life from another being that refreshes the magic of our existence: the spell that maintains our immortal forms," she explained. You stared at her.
"Uh. Magic?" She merely raised a single eyebrow to your incredulous expression, and, okay, yeah, you deserved that. You had pretty clearly wandered past science fiction some time ago and had wound up in that embarrassing part of the bookstore that was halfway between bodice-ripper and YA Fantasy.
"Right. Magic." You paused. Something had just occurred to you. "So how does the sex factor in?" You blurted. She snickered.
"Was that not also 'magic'?" she asked. You rolled your eyes, but couldn't help the embarrassed flush you felt crawling up your neck.
You wondered how long you'd be able to blush, now, before you needed to...refill the tank, so to speak. As if sensing your shift in mood, Erzabet also sobered a little.
"It is...an exchange," she said softly. "Another type of life-ritual. We take the blood, the life-force, to sustain ourselves, and in return, we offer sex, pleasure. Sex is an act of creation, potential life, and rejuvenation of the soul: so when one is traded for the other, neither loses, yet both gain."
TBC...?