It had been called the silent planet once but now, most days, it screamed.
Not literally of course but stand above a chorus of a billion souls and the noise is more than enough to drown out most anything. It makes for a very noisy and sleepless occupation, one that I am *soooo* honored to have in case any of the higher ups are listening to this.
Earth 1, the prime creation. The first and by far the worst that my father ever created. I never quite understood how a race or people so similar in *every* way could find so many different reasons to hate each other so. I never understood how you could so easily diverge into a million different religions when the truth was spoonfed to you by the King of Kings himself. I never understood how you could pour so much of your resources into finding new ways to kill each other. But I did understand why you were truly his children.
You see his sight is endless but his attention is not. He's ever so obsessed with recreating the Magnum Opus that was Earth, so much so that he created nearly endless different instances of earth's just like your own. He never quite got the formula exactly right another time. So naturally when he left his pursuit of recreation on the back burner of his endless might be turned his attention to you once more.
My outpost is a coveted one, its the most important of all in fact. He trusted it to me, his second son, Michael. And though my post is considered to be an immense honor in the armies of Heaven, its reputation did no proceed it. I have watched over the endless carnage that is your society for millennia, and I expected my father to smite you the instant he turned his titanic attention towards you once more. However, almost as if to show me how little I truly understand him, he looked upon your earth and smiled.
I never asked why but I think I worked it out. It's your spirit that he loves. That he chases after. It is one of creation. It is one of endless love. It is one of endless malice. It is one of endless kindness. It is one of endless hate. It is one of power. It is one of weakness. It is one that is all things. It is his.
The perfect mirror of the perfect being. Forever beyond his reach, to touch it is to destroy it. To gaze upon it is to know the sorrow of the creator. It is why he seeks to recreate it. It is his perfection incarnate. After all you were made in his image.
So when he turned his attention to you once more after all these millennia, all he did was look upon you. His face that is not a face held immense sadness. All he did was look and for an instant I saw in you what he does. I saw him.
So I turned my eyes to the silent planet once more and the sounds that escaped it were no longer screams, but rather calls of joy. As if you knew your perfection, as if you knew just what it is that you were the perfect emulation of. I took to my post once more and I looked not upon the mewling faces of the savages but upon the visage of God himself.