I kicked off my gym shoes as I walked into my apartment. My entire body ached from the day. What time was it? Late enough to be pitch black outside. God, I could use a whole body massage right now.
I fell into the couch and stretched out, feeling each muscle tense up, from my torso to my calves, and then relax. I breathed out audibly. Today's training had been the toughest yet - a relentless cycle of pounding the punching bag, hours in the ring, and shooting drills. Mark, my trainer, had been more determined than ever to train, but I had also sensed his underlying, quiet distress throughout the day.
The doorbell rang suddenly, startling me. I got up quietly from the couch and peered through the peephole. There was a woman standing there, with long red hair and thick framed glasses, looking down the hallway. She looked vaguely familiar somehow, but I couldn't place her. I opened the door tentatively.
The woman stood in the doorframe staring at me for a long moment, a knot on her forehead, frowning slightly.
"Alexa? Is that really you? Alexa Goodman?" she had an untraceable accent.
"That's my name. Can I help you with something?"
The woman's face brightened, her expression now ecstatic. "Wow, I can't believe it! I mean, I cannot believe I'm really seeing you in the flesh! You look just how I imagined, though maybe a little shorter than I would have thought…" The woman took a step closer, head cocked, as if inspecting me.
"I'm sorry - am I missing something? Do I know you?"
The woman laughed. "I'm Rachel. Do you mind if I come inside? This is might take a while." Rachel's hands were clasped together against her chest, practically shaking.
Who the hell was this woman? A sociopath? Or worse, a salesperson? I would normally have shooed a stranger like her away, but curiosity got the better of me - how did she know me? Why was she so oddly familiar?
"Okay, come on in. Make yourself comfortable." I laid myself on the couch.
The woman trailed quietly behind me and sat uncomfortably close to me. Letting her in was probably a mistake.
"So… how exactly do you know me? Are you a long lost relative or something?"
"Well, not exactly," Rachel smiled uneasily. "How do I say this without freaking you out?"
"You've done a pretty good job freaking me out already, I'm sure I can handle whatever you have to say."
"Alexa, I just want you to know that you are my favorite book character, and I know how it ends and I want to help change it." Her words ran out quickly, like a river.
I paused for a moment, confused. "Come again?"
"You're one of the main characters in the Manhunt series. You have a mission tomorrow."
"I do?"
"Yes! But it's a suicide mission," Rachel's eyes opened wide. "You can't go! I mean, I can't believe that he would kill you off, you are by far the most well developed character… So." Rachel looked directly in my eyes. "You can't go."
Silence filled the room. I didn't want to believe her, but the idea that I was a character, a pawn in someone's fucked up story, was beginning to make a lot of sense to me. All of the coincidences that happened in my life that were too good to be true, the times when something external deep within me changed my motives last minute, all of the strangely predictable twists of fate - they all were contrived, created. And I was going to be killed off, just for the sake of a plotline. Rachel's voice interrupted my thoughts.
"Here's my proposition to you. I can rewrite your story, with you as the protagonist, the heroine. I've got all the details here in a contract… all you have to do is sign." Rachel pulled a large piece of parchment out of nowhere. "Do you have a pen?" she asked.
"Yes, in my bedroom. Let me go get it." I bought myself some time, a moment for myself.
I walked into my bedroom, shut the door, and paced. My mind was racing. All at once, the solution became clear. I grabbed the shotgun I kept in my bedside drawer and walked out to Rachel, barrel pointed at her face.
"I don't need anyone to write my story, bitch."