Everyone has experience a "last straw" moment.
This kid at work was the worst. I'm 23, he's 26, he acts like he's an immature 11-year-old.
We started out friendly. I would laugh at his jokes, I would humor him when he wanted to show me a youtube video. Then he started to try to show me porn at work, he started to boss me around even as it became evident I was already a better worker than he was. He bumped me when I was holding a knife a few times, I got small cuts.
I complained to management and they did nothing. I was starting to realize the type of place I worked for. He starts spraying me with the hose at night when we are cleaning up. After we close he follows me to my car and I have a hard time getting him to leave me alone so I can head home.
Days later he starts following me part of the way home. I was getting paranoid.
I asked for a few days off from work, I couldn't sleep at night, I was so angry at this guy, I wanted him to disappear off the face of the earth so badly.
I came back to work and there he was, joking around, blasting his anime music all shift long, doing it in front of the customers. Nobody would miss this guy if he was gone. Then I hatched my plan.
Next time he followed me home I would turn off my lights and sneak off and stop. Then I would wait for him to pass me, and slowly follow him from a distance for a while.
As he passed the hill right by the electrical plant I rammed him off the road right into the worst of it, sparks flew, I didn't see any movement and I drove off. I heard an explosion soon after and I felt no remorse.
When I got home I changed the tread on my tires and burned the old ones until there was nothing left.
In the news I read a story about a young man who tends to drink during his shifts at work and crashed into the electric plant by the hill. Evidence of alcohol containers were found in his car.
I started to like the feeling of having this guy out of my life for good. I liked knowing I ended him. Soon after our store closed (it was the crappiest store around), I decided to enlist.