"Now we head over to the war-torn sector Y-5 solar system, where two moons of the neutral Narjinn planet were obliterated by a series of Jukoo projectiles, said to have been blown off course by solar wind. Tragedy in-" *click-*
"-and you're going to take the tail and wrap it three fold around the rest of the body. Now here's the step everyone misses. Come in a little closer, because this is important. Look here. Everyone's afraid to use these quills in the recipe. Nonsense-" *click-*
"This is earth. One of the most well reserved planets in the galaxy. This is mostly due to a lack of societal advancement. The humans, earth's most advanced species, have at least acquired some forms of tier one technology. But it is a far cry from even the impoverished sector RR-4.
Ah, here is a very curious subgroup of the human species, the northern american. It walks along the designated 'concrete': a primitive form of infrastructure, composed mainly of water and sand. The human navigates as best he can, narrowly avoiding other humans and occasionally bumping in to one, not unlike the flightless one-eyed Yipps on planet Voranus.
It enters a structure through glass panels and engages with another human at an arrangement of wood and marble. A transaction is made. A few rectangular cloths are traded for a container of liquid. This is a hot substance and of very low sustenance. It is still widely debated why the humans consume such a liquid.
Some of the liquid spills out as the human nearly trips over an obstruction. Humans are known to have below average motor functions, however, this one seems particularly clumsy. It sets itself down at a wooden arrangement along with its steaming liquid and its tier one electronic device. It begins working the device with eight of its ten digits.
Ah, it begins typing, which is electronic writing. This is its redeeming quality. It is the closest humans have come to the standard cognition level of the rest of the galaxy. They, obviously, still are a long ways off. As you can see, it has paused. It's stuck, frozen in place, thinking...thinking-" *click- Yawn. *