People love the idea of an apocalypse, whether it's zombies, aliens, a virus, or something supernatural. The real thing is much more terrifying.
Nobody knows why the numbers started dropping. It wasn't noticeable at first, there were 9.6 billion people in the year 2051 after all. However, once people started dropping like flies, the world wide database started to pick up a trend.
One the numbers started dropping, everyone was given a wristband that connects to them intravenously. It monitors their heartbeat, can show GPS location, and can be scanned for identification purposes. Once it stops detecting a pulse, Once the population began to rapidly decrease, the live number became public domain and was released on the internet.
I checked it every day on my smartwatch.
We never did figure out the cause of death, just that they died. My name is Adam. My wife and I, Evelyn, are the only humans left on Earth.
We felt alone well before I watched the population count on my watch hit two. The other survivors were miles away, probably in different countries. However, seeing that number was like a pin being dropped. We were the only ones left.
Delirium set in next. Can you imagine the pain of losing everyone you've ever known? At least the dead don't have the means to realise everything is gone, they know peace. However, the will to survive, that primal instinct to exist, is strong. We never came to accept it, but we learned to live with it.
Eighteen months passed. I still checked the population on my watch several times a day out of some sense of hope. It always remained at two. We figured out a simple way of living, even if continuing to live felt pointless. I wished I knew why we were chosen, why we were left to wander the earth as living ghosts whilst everybody else moved on. Was it a rapture? No, surely we couldn't be the only people unworthy of Heaven - and it would be narcissistic to suggest we were the only people worthy of it.
One night, I heard Evelyn sobbing during the night. Alarmed, I awoke and rolled over to face her. Her words pierced the darkness and stopped the breath in my throat.
"I'm pregnant."
We stayed up all night, not sure how to feel. A couple of years ago I would have been overcome with joy to hear I was going to become a father. All I felt was dread and uncertainty. How could I bring a child up in a world like this? How could I protect my baby from becoming sick? All the doctors died, basic medical aid was as far as I could stretch. What if there were complications with the birth? Despite my own doubts, I had to be strong for Evelyn. I had to be our rock.
One day, almost nine months later, I was forced to confront my fears. I tried my best to console Evelyn, she was in agony for eight hours. By the time her labour was through, I had looked into my daughter's eyes for the first time. She was here. Unfortunately, bringing her into this world had cost Eveyln everything. She gave her own life so that our baby could live.
I could not bear to see the number 'one' staring at me from my watch screen. Struggling to see through tears, I removed Evelyn's wristband and attached it to my daughter.
I checked my watch. It had gone back to displaying the number two.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -
Before she died, Evelyn had named our daughter Morana. I tried my best not to blame her for her Mother's death, but sometimes it was hard. I'd look into her eyes and see Evelyn. I'd see a stolen life. I wanted to love her so badly, but I could not see past my resentment, even though I knew deep down it was not her fault.
The thing is with no one being around on Earth is that you can just walk into places and take what you want. I took to drinking bottles of whisky from the abandoned supermarkets. Some days I would drink so much I'd wake up with no recollection of the night before, not even remembering if I'd fed Morana, or put her to bed. One particular day I woke up with a nasty hangover. I wiped the sleep from my eyes and felt something wet smear across my cheek. I stared at my hands in shock...they were caked in red. I looked at the number on my watch and the grim reality slapped me in the face.
*One. *