Now deep down in hell, where the sinners stood
Somethin' bad was brewin', it was nothin' good
The demon lords were squabblin', down to a man
About who'd rule them all, and be the one in command!
Satan started roarin', with his eyes ablaze
"'Tis I who ruled the underworld, for all of my days!
You other sinners better bow, 'cause you can't compare:
I'm the biggest, baddest demon lord! And *I've* got the most flair!"
But Lucifer, he wouldn't take this insult sittin' down
He stood right up and paced about his face in a frown
"You might have ruled till now, with your iron fist
But it was ME who started up this whole affair, you get my gist?
I'm the first to sin, the giant on which you stand:
If anything it should be YOU beneath MY command!"
Then Beelzebub, now, he wouldn't settle for this
He flew into the air on the foulest of mists
"Now you two have the royal claim, that much I know true
But I have one question to pose! a quandary for you!'
Our final goal is Heaven, wouldn't we all agree?
But since *I* rule the skies, you can't do it without me!"
Then Abbadon stood, rising up in a flash
The beneath his feet began to shake, and teeth did gnash!
"Listen here, you mothers son's,'tis *I* who should rule!
If any think your better, then you're naught but a fool!
'Tis *I* who rules the Earth, and brings on the end of all days
So all you better kneel or else get out of my way!"
But Belial was never one to be left out
He called upon the fire in the earth to spout
"If ANYONE is fit to rule, it ought to be me!
If it weren't for my flames, where would all of YOU be?"
Leviathan leapt to her feet, freezing the stone
"You all better step back, I'll freeze you all to the bone
'Tis I who rules the seas, and bring the frost as well
None of you could rule like me, a snowball in hell!"
And so they fought, their petty squabble over a pit
But way up there in heaven, God is laughing a fit!
Together, they would all be one hell of a threat
But so long as they keep fighting, well, they're all wet!
Pride's a dreadful sin, and Heaven does agree
It is better off for everyone to leave them be!
***
*Tried for a bit of a jazzy theme this time. If you enjoyed, check out more of my work over at /r/TimeSyncs! *