"I was there when we left our home, all the way back in 20XX," I took a sip of my coffee since we've finally almost arrived at mankind's new home our supplies have started to dwindle, and there wasn't really enough coffee left to make a good cup.
"There were lots of us back then, but you know.. Two thousand years is a long time for a normal human being. The average lifespan back in 20XX was give or take 90, sometimes 100. Which probably sounds outrageous now as most of you will probably live till you're my age!" Everyone laughed, they knew that was impossible.
You see, I'm immortal.
I lived my whole life before keeping my immortality a secret, but that's not easy when you're on a ship with hundreds of thousands of people for the next two thousand years..
It took them about 40 years to start speculating, as by then I was about 70, but I didn't look a day over 30. Even now, 2000 years later I don't want to come off as I'm bragging, but I might even get checked for ID if I were to go to the Market Sector and tried to buy a 6 pack of beer.
"I was there when you were born, and you were born, and when your parents were born, and even their parents. I could go on for 2000 years." Everyone chuckled again.
"Did you ever get lonely?" one of the children in the front row asked,
"You know, some people would think living forever might be a gift. I have made many friends, but I've lost just as many." I pause for a moment. "I've been in love, I've experienced all there is to life, and even the some more. Loneliness is just another part of life, as is love, heartbreak and death." I take another sip of my coffee, "And even still, if I could make the choice to make myself not live forever, I probably wouldn't. The human race interests me, seeing where we all began, and where we're about to end up I couldn't be more excited to experience the next 2000 years."
"Ladies and gentlemen, if you are in the Lounge Sector of the ship look on your left to see the destination our ancestors have been routing us towards for the last 2000 years. Our new home, The Milky Way!" The ship's intercom went off, and as did everyone else to go see their new home.
I took a moment to think, "The Milky Way," why does that sound so familiar?
~~~~
*My first ever piece, I never write but I thought I had an idea for this so I wrote it up. Great Prompt OP. *