Twice every suncycle, I walk around my dusty, one-room shop, and chant the ancient prayers of Shib'aal. The words flow out of me like running water, but I had no idea what they meant - all my knowledge was like the person who'd learn to speak dolphinese by imitating the dolphins. Carefully, I pace - seven times clockwise, seven times anticlockwise - for seven is the multiplicity of the Ringworld. This *has* to be done. Otherwise, or so the legends said - otherwise the Ringworld would fragment, be torn apart under the stress of its rotation. This is my typical day - but I'm somewhat helped by the fact that this isn't your typical shop. You see, in here I sell prayers for the dead.
No-one knows how we came to be on this megastructure. Some ancient species had decided to build this monstrous ring, a hundred and fifty million klicks in diameter, and we were all that was left of their ambitious project. We have no history, save for the history that we made ourselves. We are the nameless, faceless inhabitants of infinity - we do not come from anywhere, nor do we go anywhere once we leave. For this reason folks here are rather pessimistic about death. In the best of times it was nothing to shout about, but here on the Ringworld death was positively mortifying, if you'll pardon the pun - because there was no certainty whether or not the universe would carry on without you. I mean, from what we'd seen, it'd always kept trucking along - but realising this would require people to admit that they were not the center of their own universe. Of course, this has since been empirically proven to be a stupidly difficult thing to shake off.
When my prayers are done I look outside the window. There's not much breathable air outside, but it's still enough to give the world a thin blue veneer. Far off in the distance, I can see the other half of the ringworld, stretching across the sky like some movie reel drawn in space. Soon the first few customers would walk in. A childless mother, perhaps. Or a broken partner. A dying man. Death was a booming business here, and if one were inclined only to money, you'd definitely say this was Pluto's lot - the gemstones and the underworld. Running this place, and seeing the people that passed through this place, meant that every passing day could never be fully typical. This place was routine only in its unroutine-ness.
I heard the bell tinkle and tried to look suitably sad. A mother approached the counter, her face wrinkled, her eyes red. Out of the corner of my eyes, I could see a small gold band on her fingers. Something inside my soul stirred - it is as if I had seen her before. Had I really?
"I'm sorry for your loss. How may I help you today?" I intoned.
"One extra-strength prayer tablet, please," she said.
I dived behind the counter, where I saw a tiny, pinkish pellet on one of the shelves. Carefully, I extracted it from where it rested and passed it across the counter. "I'm sorry, who is this for?" I asked.
She looked at me, and for the first time, I saw a look of surprise sweep her weathered face.
"Don't you remember me?" she asked.
I looked at her, and suddenly it was as if an electric bolt had run down my spine.
"Nancy?" I asked in disbelief.
The woman only nodded. "Once we went to the city. I remembered it well - there were seven bridges connecting the island and the bank. We tried to cross all of them and come back to the same spot. Always we tried - always we failed."
"Nancy," I simply repeated. The prayer tablet rested silently on the counter top. This wasn't unusual - a lot of people on the Ringworld, even the shadowy figures that dominated the other side - they all knew me. But Nancy was special.
"It was a prophecy," I said. "Only the lovers who cross'd the seven would be joined together in heaven. We never did cross them together, Nancy - so I suppose-"
Nancy swallowed. And then, in a flash, I understood. The ring on her finger-
"You married?" I asked. "Despite our promise not to?"
Nancy nodded. She couldn't bear to tell me the horrible truth - the idea that love could hurt was too much to contemplate.
"Who is your husband?" I asked.
"He's dead," she replied. "I'm buying this prayer for him. I have nothing left in the ringworld, except my wedding ring - will you be willing to accept that as payment?"
It was not a matter of payment at all, and she knew that perfectly well. Slowly, I reached out, and touched her paper-thin hands as the sky laughed and played on outside.
"What about us?" I asked. "Did we ever have anything at all?"
She blinked, then nodded.
I passed the pill to her with a sigh. "One extra-strength prayer tablet," I said. "To be used on the target of your choice."
She pocketed it, then stopped. At the door she turned back.
"Did you say - target of your choice?"
I nodded.
She broke the tablet in two, handing one half to me. I accepted my own tablet with bewilderment. "What is it for?"
"One half," she replied. "For love lost and found, and love lived and died."
"Do you really believe that's going to help?" I blurted out.
"What other hope do we have left?"
I started - but then I stopped. She was older now. I had grown up since then, too, selling prayers for the dead. Something had gone from us two and it could never be the same again. And as I bade her goodbye from my store, wondering about it all - well, I thought, love was a thing that could die after all. And the world would keep trucking on and no-one would give a squeak and no-one would care about the secret night out in Olympic park or the time we went to see spaceships launch for the Other Side.
So I simply shrugged it off. It was dead now. There was no escaping time, time, endless time, the spinning and suncycles of the Ringworld, the certainty of life winding down. I had drawn Pluto's lot - the gemstone and the underworld - and I could not go back. I had forgotten to pay Charon his due.