Song: [Atreyu-Doomsday] (https: //www.youtube.com/watch? v=RdmOa8MhVoo)
(had a leg up here, as I often write to music anyways, so this was mostly already written) Had to edit some things to prevent spoilers since it's from a forthcoming work.
------
Sergeant Gregori Renfro's eye twitched. He wanted sorely to itch it or scratch it, but he was already strapped in. *S'not like I'd want to anyways, damn suit gloves aren't fit for jabbin in your eyes. * George hated the wait before a drop. It was their first, all of their first time. They had done thousands of simulations, dozens of training drops, but this was the unit's first combat drop.
As valiant as the locals were, he doubted they stood a chance without serious intervention. They would stand up for themselves, but were sorrily outclassed by the aggressors who had now set upon them.
But now the first squad, Weapons Platoon, 1st Mobile Armor Company, Vanguard Marine Corps was strapped into their four man drop pods, chambered like massive bullets into tubes four thru six.
It felt like hours since others in the company had launched. They were still awaiting their intel package to download. The whole mission was a rush job. Stonewater had them spin up the minute they left Sanctuary, the minute they knew the Kell fleet was headed for the planet Seggren, but they had to wait until they arrived to narrow the scope.
A light blinked on the display inside his hood and data began to flow into his suit's onboard computer. A screen materialized on the inside of his copula to the left of his face. The text WALON overlaid a topo-map for a few seconds before reducing to a corner. Translator data ticked along the bottom, along with minor cultural nuances. Streams of imagery began to show on a separate display to the right.
Gregori turned his head and sipped from his hydration straw giving him some added fuel for his pre-drop ritual. Taking advantage of the suit's waste system, he removed the pressure from his bladder.
Mentally, he tapped into the suit's communication node, "Alright gentle-beings, we're –" the pod slipped into its final prelaunch position, breaking Sergeant Renfro's train of thought for a split second. As the release clamps locked into place again, he knew the drop was moments away. "As I was saying, we're about to drop and clear the way for Second Battalion to land. Target is an airstrip just outside Walon. Looks like the local Spaceport. We'll crashdown, in the city outside and sow some confusion amongst the enemy prior to. Full brief should have uploaded to your suits by now. Everyone read it? Any questions?"
Across his squad tactical panel, confirmation signals just below the status signals, lit up green signifying "all good, no questions". Then one shifted from green to orange, Lance Corporal Tiv denWildfur had changed his mind.
Gregori opened up the link, "Yeah, Tiv?"
The Coloplfian cackled slightly over the squad channel, "When can we get some burritos? I'm starving."
Sergeant Renfro sighed, "I don't think the locals have them, Tiv. You can sample the fare *after* we're done."
A large "10" appeared centimeters from his face. It faded into a "9". *You know, sometimes I wish they'd just drop us rather than have the buildup of a count d–*
The acceleration of the drop cut him off. In the pods they were in zero g, free from artificial gravity. Upon launch, the systems did their best to create a limiting field effect around them. It cut the g forces to ten percent, but it still kicked like a mule. After a few moments, acceleration gave way to stabilized flight.
Gregori could feel the adjustment thrusters nudging the pod. Gently at first, the tug of gravity returned. Then the shuddering began, followed the main thrusters kicking in forcing them into an accelerated burn.
*Two seconds and…*
With a pop, bang, and a hiss the drop-pod broke into four tear shaped meteors, shedding a good deal of debris into the air behind them.
*Another three seconds…Need some music. Computer, play: * Atreyu-Doomsday. *Medium Volume, Auto-fade for incoming communications. * Gregori had taken a few liberties with regulations and coded into his suit a basic music emulator, but ensured that it would not interfere with his situational awareness by coding it in a manner that allowed the audio systems of the suit to override it under specific circumstances.
The speakers near his head began to build up a crescendo of throbbing guitars, just as the air around him exploded. Scattering behind him, the protective shell that held him flew away. Thin wisps of clouds buffeted him as he plummeted. He checked his readouts. Everyone was still green, everyone was now in free-fall.
He glanced left to see Corporal Trask, wrapped in his golem-esque synthsteel suit, falling like a skydiver. Each of the Mark II suits protected, enhanced, and empowered even the smallest Sat'ra. Variations on this model existed for each species in the Vanguard, increasing the size of the wearer to just slightly larger than a Kell. Obviously some variants had more mechanics than others.
Rushing up at him from below, the ground looked far from welcoming. Smoke and ruble ruined the symmetrical layout of the ancient city. It was the capital of the region and an important transport hub.
Music faded as he willed the squad comm line open, "Breaking in five. Tiv you're falling to fast, break now. Everyone else…NOW!"
The music built into a symphony of anger as his boot and pack thrusters flared to life. Sergeant Renfro braced himself as he came crashing into the pavement on a foot and knee. The suit reacted in kind, allowing him to maintain his balance. His massive boot left a fifty centimeter long indentation in the asphalt.
Gregori recovered quickly and retrieved his Khamber-Five Enhanced Assault Rifle from its back-mounted attachment point. The K5 was designed for the larger fingers of the suit. Weapons Company normally carried bigger weapons than the K5 and would also be attached to line units in a much different manner. Today however, they were running like a standard Mobile Armor line Company.
Fading the end of the song, he called out. "Sound off, Hellhounds." One by one, the twelve other members of first squad responded. No issues yet. "Adjust to me, wide diamond. Fifty meter dispersion. Remember the ROE. No locals, no matter what they shoot at you. S'not like any of it will make a dent, short of a tank. Watch your shots too, urban considerations."
-----------
There's more, but that's the end of the song.
EDIT: A few stylistic changes.
I can post more, but only if /u/0ed wants it.