The winding road extends before me like the body of a snake. Rain pounds the windshield, and I drive at a crawling pace lest the serpent wake and fling me from its back.
On one side of the serpent, a steep hillside, covered in shadow, brush, and trees. On the other side, a sheer cliff extending down to the ocean. Who knows what foul creatures lurk in the dark waters at the base of the cliff. The road is perilously lodged between two extremes-the trees which reach up impossibly high to tickle the feet of God, and the ocean which flows down into the depths of the earth to cool the fires of Hell.
I look over at the passenger seat. My beautiful wife sits there, the side of her face pressed to the window. She was fast asleep, lulled by the sound of the rain and the hum of the tires on the wet pavement. I sigh. I am bitter.
We are returning home from her parents' place. A dry roast dinner had been a poor distraction from the equally dry conversation. But, there at the chipped yellow Formica table, under flickering florescent lights, my wife, my 'beautiful' wife, had confessed to everything. I wish she hadn't.
Affairs. Drug use. Theft, to support both her habits and her boyfriends'. She talked for what seemed like hours about her sins, though it was only minutes. I know, now, that while she might have her head turned to the hillside that reaches up, she is forever suspended over the cold, watery precipice. I realize that I've picked up speed.
I jerk the steering wheel. Not enough to cause an accident or to wake her. Just enough to prove to myself I could. I reach over and shake her awake. She looks at me, not speaking, only lifting that questioning brow of hers. I jerk the wheel again, and her eyes widen in panic.
I turn the wheel sharply, veering towards the cliffside. She doesn't scream, only grips the dashboard as the car tires leave the pavement. For a few wonderful moments, we are suspended in midair. Gravity has no power over us-we are flying. Angels, for the first and last time, before time resumes and we plummet towards the ocean.
The roaring of the waves growing louder, I spare a glance into the back seat. There, our child, a boy of seven, is fast asleep, his head having fallen onto his chest. I smiled.
I wanted my wife to know, but my son, if he is mine...he won't know what happens tonight.