I've been trying to sleep. I have to work early tomorrow. If I fell asleep right now, I'd get about, I look at the clock, 6 hours if sleep. I'd have been asleep an hour ago if my FUCKING CAT WOULD SHUT THE FUCK UP! His nonstop meowing was driving me crazy. I let him out, I fed him, I was out of options.
"Just shut up please! Shut up or tell me what you want in English and I'll do it yourself stupid cat!"
"Fine by me, you've got a deal."
And the meowing stopped.
Wait. I sat up, finally realizing what the hell just happened. I look at my cat and he's sitting there looking at me. Surely it was just my imagination. My cat can't talk. That's dumb.
"I would like you to quit your job and come with me on an adventure."
Nope. Not my imagination. Definitely heard that. Definitely saw his mouth move. Definitely losing my mind. I stared at him complete dumbfounded. He stared back like I was an idiot.
"Well? Will you do it? Are you gunna go I to work tomorrow and quit?"
"You can talk?"
After a moment of silence he replied "Uh, yeah, we established that, now back to the point at hand, are you going into work tomorrow morning and coming back jobless?"
"But why would I do that?" I somehow managed to reply as if it was a normal conversation.
"I know you hate your job, and what have you got to lose? I mean, your cat is talking, so I'm clearly not just trying to get you fired for nothing, obviously there's something more here." He had a point. But I needed money. I wasn't poor, but I wasn't swimming in it either.
"Fine. When I get back tomorrow, we better be going somewhere exciting." My cat seemed to smile at this and his tail quickly flicked back and forth.
I cannot believe I actually just quit my job...For my cat. I was driving home after a really awkward conversation with my boss about having to quit immediately because an emergency came up with my pet. I probably sounded like an idiot. Hell I still sound like an idiot to myself. But I swear if that cat was lying to me I'll see him to some Chinese restaurant. I pulled into my driveway and he sat on my windowsill watching me. I walked in my house and he greeted me like normal, brushing up against my legs. I got changed and he still acted normal. I was worried I just quit my job over a bad dream I had.
"Well, what this big adventure you talked about?" I asked him, a little upset.
"Don't worry, she'll be here soon. When the lady gets here, we'll be on our way to the greatest adventure you've ever had!" So at least I wasn't insane. I mean maybe I was, but I was either insane and didn't need to be working at a normal people job, or my talking cat wasn't just a figment of my imagination.
"What lady is this that we're waiting for exactly?" I didn't notice the small dark spot in the corner of the living room. The growing shadow despite the big open window. The figure climbing out of the shadow as if it was a hole. I was looking the other direction at my cat. He stared right past me and didn't even reply.
"Hello!?"
"Hello." That was not my cat's voice. That voice was raspy, feminine, and came from behind me. I spun around to see the woman appear as if a shadow had materialized and manifested into a physical being. Her skin was grey, her hair, eyes, dress and...Smoke/essence/aura that seemed to emit from her was all black.
"That lady." My cat said snidely.