To be fair, I'm always a little intimidated to talk to any kind of stranger, let alone a girl with long brown hair and deep green eyes and a propensity for wearing low-cut shirts. This feeling is familiar--my heart is in my throat, the adrenaline is surging, I can barely breathe let alone think let alone keep my throat clear so my voice comes out smooth and even, as if talking to her is just the easiest thing in the world. This is normal.
And yet. I'm sure this time is different. This time she is making me feel the way that I feel, I mean actively sensing that I am looking at her and as a result making my throat close up, my pulse quicken, my palms sweat and my entire theoretical life with her flash before my eyes, punctuated by sex with her, often, forever. She is a God.
How else to explain the fact that she has never raised her hand once, or even been called on to speak, despite sitting right there in the front, close to the door. How else to reconcile the fact that not even the football player, who comes into this class to take the exams and nothing else, tries to hit on her after class as I see all other football players in all my other classes do to all the other beautiful girls? How else can it be that this person is so incredibly gorgeous, and is not already married and living in a castle somewhere, whisked away by a handsome actor with a trust fund? She is unreal. She is too good to be true. She is unapproachable, especially by the likes of me, and she knows it, and she wants me to know that she knows it. She knows I have figured her out and she is trying to put me off, like she does with everyone else.
But: It's the last day of class. We will hand in a paper next week to complete our coursework. We will no longer sit here and discuss the differences between Sikhism and Buddhism, or parse through Masuzawa's texts. We will go home and pretend this never happened, most likely--happy to have passed and to move on. But for me, this class won't end until I talk to her, and find out if she's real. I will not be dissuaded.
The time has come. The clock has struck noon and the professor has dismissed us. We rise, more or less in unison, gathering our things and nodding silently at each other or ignoring the world. I see her already moving towards the door, and through it, and out into the hallway.
I race out to find her, and see her hair disappearing down the stairwell. My feet feel heavy as I clomp after her. My body has not yet caught up with my brain and refuses to believe we are trying to move this quickly in this direction. I want to call out, but not only does my mouth fail to work, I don't even know her name.
I round into the grey stairwell and see her a flight below, almost out of sight. It is truly now or never.
Hey, I say, down the stairs at her receding shadow. I say it quietly, but it echoes along the concrete and I see the shadow cease moving.
I walk down the stairs and approach her, as she turns to me.
Hey, I say again. I realize I haven't planned for this, that I was sure she would disappear in a puff of smoke if I actually reached her. I fumble for the next words.
What'd you think of the class? I manage to blurt out.
She simply smiles and raises an eyebrow. Then she speaks, and the force of her voice pushes me against the wall of my own mind. I am standing stock still and yet blown away to hear the words come out of her mouth.
"It was interesting. Never thought I'd take a class like that and actually like it. Wanna grab coffee and talk about the final?" she says, easy as a hand through fur, as a light beer into the glass.
Sure, I say, and put out my hand. I tell her my name, and we walk out of the stairwell and into the sun.
"Nice to meet you. I'm Tanri."