This is what i wrote so far. I didn't realize how long it was until I stopped and read some. If you want me to continue let me know.
I never much had a taste for flying. Almost like a long Cuban cigar which I find harsh and unpleasant yet, some love the taste and "texture" of the thick smoke rolling off the tongue. Much like flying in a way, some love flying, or just don't mind it, while others loath the very slightest of plane rides.
I myself always find a nervous pit in my stomach form when it comes to booking the tickets, checking the bags, and boarding the flight. That small sudden ping of anxiety the moment the flight attendant fakes the over exaggerated hello and the captain gives his pre-flight speech to prepare the individuals partaking on the flight and giving them all the particulates. Today was no different as I boarded the flight I got the same pang of anxious, stomach churn and took my seat.
3-B, window seat, I guess I couldn't be upset for I enjoy the flying sensation, staring downward at the miniscule landscape, with that brief understanding of the perspective of god In way, or for those who don't believe in the big omnipotent man upstairs, at least a bird.
3-B, window seat, for some reason my mind wanted to repeat it as if some form of a sequence, maybe I should have had some more damn coffee this morning waiting at the O'Hare lounge. Plus, the barista there was a looker, even though she always seems to get some grounds in your coffee, but nobody is perfect.
Tilting back my tray the flight attendant brought me over the pretzels and prune juice I asked for as I set my travel pillow behind my head. Shoving my Memorex ear phones, connected with my iPod, I nestled in to the ever so fraudulently comfortable airplane seats and drifter away, suddenly envious of the 1st class fliers with their bed-like seat structure.
Dreams, so vivid it felt like they weren't just actual life, but a part of my soul, crashing through my mind as if they were freight trains without the hindrance of brakes. The dreams came in the forms of odd, slow, and jumbled images. The images twisted around as if imitating an owl's head movement were blurring by my vision, Twisted images all indistinguishable yet, all causing a sense of panic, an almost pain like feeling.
Suddenly awake as if in the blink of an eye I reared my head to the left with a slight gasp, Cold sweat grasping my body in waves causing me to shiver uncontrollably, being asleep for only 40 minutes felt like days as I groggily sat forward, rubbed the sleep from my eyes, withdrawing the buds from my ears I withdrew my laptop from my checked bag as if it would send some comfort to myself having that homily item to rely on. Never leaving home without the square centrality of my life holding everything from work, play, and the pictures of my kids all in one place, astounding the advances of technology truly are as I click the power button and wait for the startup blinking followed by the encouraging tune of music that plays upon arriving at the password page.
CNN, my trusted news source for the last 5 years of my journalism career, anywhere from the cold facts to the stony, dumb bastards running this country, however what I saw upon arriving at the home page was numbing, a shock as if the family dog had just been hit by a vehicle. The flight, the damned flight MY ticket has listed on it 357. "Gone, Disappeared, or severely off course, American Airlines flight 357 goes dark!" I glance around the aircraft in which all members are still resting as if nothing at all could be the bother. I un-click my seat restraint and move towards the bathroom with a sickly feeling tormenting my stomach as if you just spilled the milk and your step father doesn't like wet shoes. I make my way towards the rest room moving slowly as if in molasses almost to a crawl.....