"That is not a small fire!" the all to familiar voice hissed. "I told you it was too much gasoline but you would not heed my words! Now look at us we are doomed!" Narrisa pulled her head off of the cold concrete to look up to at her work. The resulting blast had knocked her a considerable distance from where she remembered standing moments earlier. Pillars of flame danced from the rafters and smoke billowed out of the now blown out glass windows of the vacant warehouse. "Yes I would say we are" she mumbled in dull tone pulling her legs up underneath her and sitting up slowly.
"What were you thinking? Up until now you have followed my advice exactly and never have been caught. Now of all times you dare deviate from my teachings! You fool, we had it made! No one expected us. Thirty eight arsons in just under a year, fifteen people dead, and the police had no leads. Yet you choose now to throw it all away!" The voice was screaming at this point but Narrisa was to taken by the dancing of the growing flames in front of her.
"We were on the path to greatness you and I! The terror we caused, the fear we instilled in such a short period of time. You finally were something! You were a sniveling little child when I came to you. I gave you purpose. I gave you strength now you will die a nothing! A no-body! You will be mocked as a weak minded person killed by their own stupidity!" To that Narrisa couldn't help but turn her head and laugh. Slowly climbing to her feet she finally acknowledged the voice giving it a life of its own. It was nothing new to her she did every morning in front of her bathroom mirror. A woman with ebony hair and sad green eyes, she knew that face well.
She extended her arm and laid it upon its shoulder and put on a comforting tone. "For us now there is no going back I am afraid. There was only one small fire between us and that was the first one we ever set. From then on where ever we went the urge was always there and ever growing, a flame that consumed our very being and those around us." The visage stared back at her in anger, sadness burning in her eyes, saying nothing. "You know what happens with fires? They either find fuel and grow even larger or gutter out. I'm afraid I'm done giving you fuel my dear friend. You did give my strength as you promised but at a steep price. We used the lives of others and our very souls as the kindling and now it is spent I'm afraid and I'm not ready to go collect more." With that she turned back toward the flames now roaring and growing by the second. She could feel the heat on her flesh growing and the sweat beading upon her brow. "Yes I'm done. I regret it all. I'm sorry for it all. It seemed so small at first. A little fire started with the smallest of sparks. But what it grew into was no small fire indeed. I have built my own pyre and I go now to it freely" With that the visage winked out of existence and she strode forward into the all-encompassing flames with a smile on her face and her arms out stretched her body returning to the dust and ash whence it came, sirens blaring in the distance.