Stela Malsano confounded every epidemiologist, even someone as knowledgeable as Dr. Anna Walker.
Most diseases, you see, spread from an initial vector of infection. A man stumbles into a garbage heap with an open sore and picks up a dangerous bacterium which proceeds to multiply in his body, then spreads it around by coughing and vomiting. A woman orders an exotic undercooked fish at a Japanese sushi restaurant harboring pathogens from the ocean and kisses her children at home. Once the responsible anchors itself in the host, it starts to reproduce and eventually breaks free to infect others. The self-catalytic process repeats itself until it either runs out of hosts, is contained, or simply expires.
Not Stela Malsano. When it erupted, it did so instantly around the entire globe as though someone had suddenly pulled a lever, flipped a switch, pressed a button. Entire families on the far side of the earth awoke screaming with vivid hallucinations. Chaos ensued on the highways as drivers seized with convulsions and caught in the grip of lifelike trances lost control of their vehicles, often fatally. Dr. Anna, attending a colloquium on multiverse influence at the University of Illinois, bore witness to the entire room suddenly get up and run around screaming with lunatic abandon. Some thought the zombie apocalypse had begun; others were convinced that the Rapture was imminent. For a terrifying moment of penetrating clarity Anna wondered if the entire world had gone mad leaving her as the sole sane observer; almost as quickly, the rational part of her mind suggested the logical counterexample that she might be the only madwoman in a world of normalized lunacy.
She was tall for a woman, over six feet in height, with a stern sharp handsomeness to her features. Persistent asthma had plagued her since her late teenage years, but even now as a well-respected professor in her late forties she could force her way past the young graduate student raving about lunar light and barricade herself in her office in the Department of Epidemiology. Panicked screams seeped through the walls in muffled bursts like corrosive waves of toxic miasma and Dr. Anna fumbled for her phone. Her children. Please let them be alright. Risking a peek outside the office window unveiled the panorama of pandemonium; every human seemed to have gone mad simultaneously outside, running drunkenly into sides of buildings, stumbling, falling, rising up to do it again. The ubiquitous pigeons pecking for seeds on the grassy quads fluttered up to the trees, annoyed by the chaos of their usually orderly lunch. Indignant bird features ruffled at the irrational commotion; fine, let the earthbound simians stumble around like tangled marionettes!
The hysteria died down within a day, though its effects lingered on the human consciousness for quite some time afterwards. Laboratory epidemiologists almost immediately found the prions responsible for the outbreak, mysteriously dormant again. Radio pundits suggested terrorism. China and North Korea blamed each other. Churches saw record attendance on the next Sunday while public services faced the staggering prospect of repairing wrecked infrastructure left in the wake of the Stela Malsano. After-the-fact reports trickling in from around the globe confirmed that the epidemic had erupted all at once, near simultaneously.
It took a long time for life to resume some semblance of normalcy after the outbreak.
Alone in her office, Anna's phone finally connected. "M-mom?!" a frightened teenage voice asked in trepidation. In the background, Anna discerned more rabid screams and shrieks all around. "What's happening?! Are you alright? Where are you -"
"Leah? Leah! Oh thank goodness you're safe." She had to raise her voice to be heard; the professor nearly jumped out of her skin as a raving man collided with her office door and then sped down the hall. "Where's your brother? Is he okay?"
"I don't know! He's was in another class. I'm in the girls' bathroom, the stall is locked - mom, what's happening?" Poor Leah sounded on the verge of a breakdown and Anna forced herself to consciously suppress her own sense of rising panic. "I'm so scared!"
The flood of psychiatric assessments and interviews after the epidemic brought to light a number of common symptoms. Vivid hallucinations, often of the moon. Others spoke of a disturbing, sickly emerald light that filled their vision. Societal upheaval inevitably followed: drug addicts swore off their vices to become productive, hard-working citizens while productive, hard-working citizens swore off their virtues to become drug addicts. Dr. Anna, often forced to spend much of her time writing grant proposals to scrounge money from whichever source might be willing to spare her some change for research, suddenly found herself inundated with more funding than she could use. Her senior graduate student quit his studies to go on a journey of spiritual enlightenment. Anxiety-induced deaths spiked sharply worldwide that month. Nine months later, a record number of babies were born globally.
"Leah - Leah, honey, listen to me. I'll come and get you. Stay safe where you are," Anna told her, steadying her own quavering voice. Fear for her children overrode trepidation of the screaming masses outside. "Stay safe. I love you, Skye," she finished the call with an affectionate touch of her daughter's middle name. Dr. Anna picked up a plastic ruler more for a sense of security than practical self-defense before emerging from her office into the world consumed by madness.
-----------------------------------------------------------
The Governor, rather pleased with himself, looked up to the Enforcer. "There you see, Lord Vader? She can be reasonable. Proceed with the operation. You may fire when ready."