Look, if you're going to cut down an alley in this part of town dressed like that, I consider it a personal favor that someone as non-violent as myself is going to teach you this life lesson. I launch into Act 1 of our little two-man show, and I have to say that Mr. Fancy really shone in his role as set-upon victim; I didn't have to put up with any tough-guy bullshit, but he wasn't some blubbering, pants-wetting mess that I had to coach through the whole process either. You can tell this guy's been mugged before, and he has that polite, detached let's-conclude-this-transaction-quickly demeanor that I really appreciate in a mark. I think to myself that everything's going ol' Lucky's way if a man who's in this tight with my boy Benjamin Franklin decided he didn't have the patience to wait for that Uber like everyone else. I'm about to wrap things up, but his hand is lingering a little protectively around that right pocket and my intuition starts nagging me that maybe we're operating with different understandings of the word "empty". Now you don't need to explain to me about honor among thieves, but it does rustle my jimmies a mite when I'm doing my level best to keep this a polite and professional experience and the mark thinks he's going to get clever on me. I present a convincing argument as to the merits of my empty pockets policy to Mr. Fancy in the form of a few right crosses, and he hands me a thumb drive. If he's willing to buy tickets to my chin music festival for it, I'm thinking its probably got some financials on it, or maybe a performance art piece he did with the missus. Either way, you bet your ass I'm checking it out. I leave him zip-tied to the dumpster like usual and stroll back home to count my money per the sage advice of the warrior poet Kenny Rogers.
Back home I say hello to Roachy and the boys as they skitter under the fridge, and I review my haul on the kitchen counter with the assistance of a cold can of Nasty Light. It'll keep the lights on anyway, maybe with a little left over to sock away in my equine investment portfolio down at the track. I figure I'll check the thumb drive to see if I maybe hit the Powerball, so I pop it in the ol' porn box and load the drive. One measly.exe file, and I've opened too many of those from Russian models who want much sexytime to fall for that again. A little disappointed, I toss it and turn my thoughts to how I'm going to convince Snake tomorrow that this Rolex is a no-shitter.
I flip on the TV and some fine-ass blonde is perched above the scroller talking about terrorism, and I'm just about to flip it over to Cartoon Network when what do I see but some security camera footage of me and Mr. Fancy having our little tete-a-tete. Shit. He must have been some kind of something if taking his lunch money is worth throwing my mug up on cable news. I develop a sudden interest in national security, and turn up the volume. Apparently Mr. Fancy was some Chinese agent moonlighting as a Pentagon IT muckety-muck who was on his way to take down the nation's energy grid with his trusty thumb drive. The talking heads are on the screen now speculating wildly as to the identity of this masked hero and the current whereabouts of the thumb drive. I cast a nervous glance at the trash can, but as of now it appears that the only one with any pressing interest in it is Roachy.
----------
The CIA denies involvement, but of course that's what they'd say, so everybody--to include the CIA--seems to be content with the narrative that they cracked this one and everything's under control. Soon the nation moves on after an escaped gorilla is shot by a Syrian immigrant cop at a Black Lives Matter rally. Me, I'm still just a small-time hustler running game. You're welcome, America.