They come for me every so often, as they came for my grandmother, and great-great grandmother, before me. They keep tabs on my family, and bless one female in the off-cycle generations with extraordinary longevity, to keep especially gifted Dreamwalkers alive in a fearfully curious reverence.
Over time, millennia of time, our oral history has managed to maintain the truth of Earth life's origin. It would be considered too ridiculously far-fetched, not to mention morally repugnant, to speak it to anyone not esoteric enough to be part of our personal circle of friends. But the simple fact is that homo sapiens sapiens, and all other creatures, was an experiement performed by a race of beings who fully comprehended ideas that humans are only theorizing in their twenty first century. The idea was to be able to tap into the unending stream of energy that is matter and time, to cut through dimensional static, and then ascertain the most probable of events. After tests performed by their own race failed miserably through insanity, coma, or sudden death, it was decided they needed new cognizant, mentally resilient subjects able to reliably fade in and out of consciousness on schedule. Earth happened to have the correct light/dark cycle, and after the last mass extinction event, was sparsely populated with any life and none to bother the terraformers.
I knew I could Dreamwalk before I knew what Dreamwalking was, and I knew it was different from the other types of dreams. Most dreaming is imagining, and in that imagining we create complimentary dimensions that causes chaos for our Creators. And we forget all about the process; don't even remember doing it--or possibly we do. Or we remember incorrectly. It winds up as even more dimensional static. Think of it a bit like how we worry about being trapped on Earth due to "space junk", those Creators are now trapped in a more limited reality due to our dimensional junk. Dreamwalking, where the Walker packs out what they packed in, is tapping into the energy flow and moving harmlessly forward or backward along the thread that is our reality. The Creators cannot usually handle it themselves as they already can partly manage the process in their normal state, which is not "on" as a human does it, but a bit like that period where a human is "dozing off" and is still aware of surroundings but also trying to tune them out.
Sometimes those types of Dreamwalking Dreamss are like movies playing out the events as a documentary, and other times the settings of the Dreams matter less than the message the Dreams bring as the specific actions to bring about the end result are not yet set. Perhaps even mentioning the Dream will change things, and so the Dream will never be "documentary clear". It is not a paradox of predetermination any more than watching a raindrop roll down a pane of glass; you see it is a matter of the perspective of energy. (Pardon my one pun.)
By virtue of always being tuned in, our Creator race cannot truly step back and imagine without losing their nearly-overwhelmed minds or being too inhibited for any sort of success. Humans, by contrast, are able to compartmentalize. We are varied, whereas our Creators are now nearly-depleted clone stock. However, you still see some of them in us, and their goals in us, and our desire to find the truth out there in the stars in us.
I did not believe they actually came until I finally left my childhood home. One night they took both me and my roommate, returning us in the early, pre-dawn morning with red marks on our left biceps that looked a bit like the Triforce from 'The Legend of Zelda'. I know, but cannot fully recall, what I had been asked to do or where we had been taken and am hesitant to try to look. I do remember we both noticed the lost time, the marks, and how our captors did not return us correctly to bed. We were not tucked in, but on top of the covers with our clothes on.
Therein lies my problem. Yet I am sure if more Dream-sensitive humans could combine their focus we could do even more, but who would believe this? I sure didn't. Even my mother, whom I suspect is the new long-lived Matriarch, will not believe in the "alien abduction thing Mom, Your Grandma, always insisted happened to her". Not even studying theology and showing her the hidden science in the old stories could convince her the family title is more than a mere honorific. I try reaching out and touching others in their dreams sometimes, the results have been mixed.
Our Creators made us long ago to assist them in winning wars for galactic, universal, and dimensional conquest. They will lose, I have Dream-Seen it, even if I know my mortal brown eyes will not even see what our reality will call the official start of hostilities. Our species has managed to compartmentalize horrors, at the expense of joys, although it is using its gift for abstract thought for short term, tangible gains. Even still they cannot destroy us for the risk of seven billion new Heaven or Hell constructs, or ghosts inhabiting the dead Earth, would overwhelm their tenuous grips and "dimensionally junk" them in where ever they are. They encourage us to self-destruct, and it works to a certain extent, but they designed us too well. Not even the cessation of our human bodies actually 'ends' the human, and many humans are even able to immediately conceive of their own return to Earth.
Knowing all this, what can be and what long ago was, my current life span has been a careful plod forward. I try to encourage my fellow humans to their full potential as we will need all of us--the more "grounded" humans have an important role in reminding the "energy sensitive" to stay properly charged and focused. I will need our help to minimize the inevitable hostilities.