"Shit."
Dr. Sam Heinz ran into the emergency room, and smelled the patient before she saw them. She knew that smell, cloyingly sweet with metallic undertones. It affected the stomach in a curious way; you could feel the scent more than you could smell it. It was not a good feeling.
She rushed to the side of the gurney, pushing past the nurses who busied themselves trying to get the patient to breathe. Time seemed to slow down as Sam looked down at him, and he looked up into her eyes.
His skin was blanched and had an ever slight unnatural green tint, almost imperceptible in the glaring lights of the ER. Hie eyes were sunken into his face, rimmed in black and bloodshot, oh, so bloodshot. His lips were curled back in an unintended grin, his gums swollen over his teeth. Blood seeped through his teeth in a thick bubbling stream, oozing thick from his nostrils. He made no sound other than a soft gurgling as he tried to breathe. His jaw was clenched tight and his pupils were wide and delirious. They darted around the room, unseeing, before briefly meeting with Sam's. There was no recognition, no acknowledgement. Then his eyes rolled randomly in their sockets. They moved independent of each other.
Sam snapped back to her senses. "Everyone listen to me! All of you need to get out of her RIGHT NOW!"
It took a moment for the activity in the room to lull as the nurses looked towards her. The nurses were stopped mid-activity. No one made a move to leave.
"Goddamn you, LEAVE! You can't stay here -"
Sam was interrupted by a loud wheezing noise, and she whirled to face the patient in horror. He had elevated his back off the gurney by his neck and feet, and he inhaled air violently, with his hands at his throat. His chest expanded as his lungs filled with air - bigger, bigger, BIGGER. Sam tried to scream for everyone to run, but it was too late.
The man dropped back down, before shooting up to a sitting position. With no warning, he expelled the air from his lungs with a scream. At least, it would've been a scream, but it obfuscation was by the blood in his oesophagus. This blood and saliva sprayed out into the room in thick globs and a fine mist; the miniscule particles floating through the air to land on everyone in the room. The man stopped screaming and slumped forward on himself, before sliding limply off the gurney.
Sam, covered in gore, dropped to her knees in resignation. It was too late. It was all too late. They were all infected. She didn't know with what, but they'd all be dead within three days. They'd die the same way this man did. They'd die the same way her husband did, just a day after returning from his year-long service on the International Space Station. They'd die like her daughter did, two days ago.
She was going to die with them, but she knew this before she even walked into the hospital today. The only reason she came was to find a way to save herself. But it was all just...too...late.
She could already smell it in her skin. That sweet, gut curdling scent that smelled like nothing else on earth.