"C'mon gang, let's investigate! There have to be some clues around here somewhere!"
"But Freeeddiiiiee, this place is so creeeeepy! Not to mention it clashes with my outfit..."
"Don't worry Daphne, we're right on the Creeper's trail, I know it! Maybe we should split up and look for clues..."
"I'm not sure that's such a good idea, Fred."
"Like, yeah, what if the C-C-C-Creeper shows up?!"
*bark! bark! *
"See, Scooby agrees with me!"
I sat up, walking over to the door of the cell and looking through the bars as best I could. Maybe...maybe these children could help me? "Pardon!" I shouted, knocking on my door a few times for emphasis. "Excuse me, children? Please, come here, I'm in need of your help!"
The group that sauntered up to the door were...textbook, in a sense. Superiority Complex. Narcissism. Mild case of Autism, possible indicators of savant tendencies. Schizophrenia. Probably the only one in a relatively healthy mental state was the Great Dane, and even that assessment was mostly due to the fact that I'd never studied much animal psychology.
"Zoinks! Like, what're you doing in there, Doc?!" the lanky schizophrenic asked. I leaned in close to the bars, whispering. I didn't want to be heard after all.
"I hate to break it to you, but I think there may be...a *madman* running around here, in a *mask and costume*! Please, let me out, I need to get the situation under control, there are some very dangerous people in this facility..."
"A creeper in a costume? I knew it!" Fredrick exclaimed, and I gave him the least patronizing smile I could muster. Nodding, I pointed down the hall, explaining exactly where the keys were in the office. I went into a bit of detail about the man wandering around Arkham, dressed in a terrifying guise, using fear as a weapon. He fashioned himself a professional, but in all reality he was just a disturbed man preying on the weak.
"Gosh, who woulda thought!" the red-haired teen exclaimed, looking around nervously. "Do you know where the flashlights are? I wouldn't want to get caught alone by someone like that!"
"I certainly do," I replied as the door swung open, stepping out and shaking Velma's hand vigorously. As I suspected, she grew visibly uncomfortable at the sudden physical contact. "Let me get them for all of you. I'm very grateful for the help, but, erm...who exactly are you all...?"
That was enough to let their self-proclaimed leader dominate the conversation for a few minutes, while I traced a familiar route to the western wing. Whenever he'd start losing steam, I'd simply ask another question about his constant exploits, or Velma's eidetic memory, or Scooby's intelligence. More than once the dog would yap and everyone in the group would turn to look at it. Perhaps they had some mass hallucination, because they'd act as though the brown mutt had said something profound or funny.
"Say, Doc, where are we headed, anyway?" Fred asked, looking around at the change in scenery. No cells here, just offices and laboratories with projects sitting half-finished on tables.
"I need to fetch some things, Fredrick," I explained, finally finding the door I was looking for. Locked, of course. I started turning drawers upside down, looking for the keys. "Chemicals, mostly, for taking care of the psychopath."
Finally, after tearing apart half the offices, I found the ring that had the all-important keys on it. Stalking back to the heavy bolted door, I started trying them one by one.
"They won't...like...hurt him or anything, will they?"
"Yeah, we've got great ideas for some traps we can set up to catch --"
"No, and no." I replied, searching the shelves. Face cream. Joy buzzer. Green hat. Metal umbrella.
"Jinkies...what is all this stuff? They don't look like doctor's tools!"
"No, they're not." Toga. Bullwhip. Coin with a well-worn face.
"Doc...uh, why do you keep your chemicals in here?"
"I don't, Daphne, others do." Puppet with a tommy-gun. Giant rubber mallet. Top hat with a 10/6 size tag tucked into it. A-*ha*. I bent down, collecting my tools again at last.
*bark! bark! *
"Answer Scooby, man, what kinda doctor are you?"
"Hmm?" I pulled the piece of brown burlap over my face, fixing the filter over my nose and mouth. I fiddled a second with the gloves as I stood up, no taller but a much more imposing presence. "I" m a psychologist, sir, I study phobias. Johnathan Crane, at your service."
Giving it a test spray, I smiled behind the mask. Still in working order, with spare cartridges sitting right next to the gloves in the evidence room. The outfit would have to wait; I had research to conduct, after all. No shortage of subjects, either.
"So tell me...do you know true fear?" I stared at Freddie, the only one not backing away from me on instinct. Boy still had a little fight in him. I gave raised my hand, finger on the release mechanism for the gas.
"...Would you like to?"