It was supposed to be a routine mission. Nothing we hadn't seen before. Just another cleanup round trip through the washing machine and the dryer. We'd done this a hundred times. But I guess even if you've been on the force for years they still can surprise you.
The trip through the washer went without any trouble. Lev was showing off his newly patched heel during the ride. Red wool. Apparently that's the fashion nowadays. Said I should get my own looked at. Don't see a reason to. Yea, my heel is getting sheer, but it's still holding up. I don't trust those shrinks and tailors. Don't like needles. Lev just grins.
I always get the shivers when we enter the dryer. Call it childhood trauma, but we all got our baggage. I got used to it, but this time something is different. We are getting pushed too far off to the side.
"Lev, I don't like this place. Smells awful lot like a trap to me", I mumble and pull up my cuff.
"You worry too much, Rick. Come on, partner, what could possibly go wrong?" Lev leans back and pokes the polished metal wall of the dryer. "They build these things to be safe. The other day I read that you are more likely to get burnt by lightning than to disappear in a dryer."
He doesn't convince me. I pull a bundle of fluff from my pocket and start chewing on it. Old habits die hard.
Then we start spinning. I try not to think about it. I need to distract myself. "So how's your patched heel holding up?", I ask.
No answer.
"Lev?" I turn to look at him, but his space is empty. "LEV!"
Hectically, I scan the area. My world is spinning. Literally. Suddenly I spot something. A thin thread of red, caught in a gap of the drum. I give it a closer look. It's good quality wool, and the same color as Lev's new fucking patch.
"Shit." I look down into the gap. Darkness. "Lev? Are you down there?" The thread twitches. Without further thought, I jump into the darkness.
When I come back to my senses, every single one of my threads hurt. I think some of them might be ruptured. I check my heel. Still sheer, but no permanent damage. So far so good. I try to get my bearings. Where the hell am I? I can't see a damn thing. I hear the rumbling hum of the dryer above me. I must have slipped into the bowels of the beast. It is pitch black. I feel something lying on the ground. Lev's thread. I grab it and crawl forward. The place is cramped, the air is hot and wet. Slowly I adjust to the darkness. I can see pipes and eagerly turning gears. Steam hits my gusset, but I crawl onward.
Suddenly, the ground disappears beneath my foot and I fall again.
The landing is soft. Softer than I'd like. A bad feeling grips me. Bodies. Heaps of them. I hear a moan.
"Lev?"
Silence. I carefully pat the ground beneath me. "Rick?" I hear a weak voice whisper.
"Lev! Buddy, I am coming for you!" Frantically I start clawing my way towards the faint sound. Then I find him. He is leaning against the wall, limp and barely holding up.
"Rick. Rick, they got me."
"Don't talk now, I gotta patch you up. I'll get you outta here."
"No, it's too late for that. I'm sorry." He shifts and so I can see his heel. My voice fails. His side is torn open all the way from cuff to foot.
"They got me good." He tries to laugh, but he only coughs out loose threads. "Real shame about the wool."
"You can't do this to me! We are a team god dammit! Don't you dare chicken out now!"
"You were right all along, Rick. This place is a deathtrap. You have to-" He breaks off, coughing up more threads. "You have to put an end to this."
I grimace.
"Promise me." Then he goes limp. Even more so than before.
I get up. Time to end this. I look up at the twisting gears and spit a ball of fluff at it. The gnawing metal teeth eagerly dig into it. The machine halts for a moment, chokes but then the gears rip the fine threads apart and the dryer roars to life again.
I sigh. Looks like I'll need something tougher. I find myself a new ball of fluff to chew and start running towards the twisting gears. I'm no use without a partner anyway. I'm coming for you, Lev.