The Door of Dimensions loomed before the nervous party. Its intricate orange patterns swirled back and forth, not tethered to normal space, normal reality. Soon, the party would enter the ancient gateway, into an unknown world.
The Door had been discovered eons ago. For as long as anyone could remember, the bravest of adventurers had led expeditions through it. Every time a group entered the Door, they found themselves in a new, unexplored world. When you entered the door, you either came back rich and glorious, or you didn't come back. Their party, the Crimson Banners, was one of the few adventuring companies to have not yet led an expedition through the ancient portal. They had done everything there was to do in their homeland of Esper. Led by the mighty human Paladin, Garon Godstrong, the Crimson Banners had slain dragons, conquered ancient dungeons, and performed great feats for many years. However, the task that lay before them was a new one.
It had been an arduous and taxing journey to reach the Door of Dimensions. The week long trek up the steep mountain pass was said to weed out those not worthy of launching an expedition into another world. The Crimson Banners, however, had not become known as the champions of death by sheer luck. For the experienced crew, the journey proved easy. When at last the band of allies reached the peak, their aging elven Wizard, Mastrae, immediately began to perform the ancient rite required to open the glowing doors. As he chanted in a long forgotten language, the weight of what was awaited them settled upon the party. A nervous quip was heard from the timid gnome Rogue, Dumpkins, just before the great stone slabs slid open, revealing the swirling chaos behind. A brief word of encouragement from Garon, and the party stepped forward.
Immediately, they were surrounded by an indescribable chaos. Up was down, left was right. Colors and smells and sounds mixed in a confused vortex. After what seemed like an eternity, the terrified party felt their feet hit solid ground. Decades of training led them to immediately snap to their senses, analyzing their surroundings. However, doing so only left them more confused. They were standing on a hard grey stone with lines painted on it. There was grass surrounding them, but it was the deadened brown of winter plants, despite the moderate temperature. In the distance there were towers made of thin struts, with barely visible ropes running between them. To one side, they could see a bulbous structure, with a sloped base, and a large sphere at the top, made of some nondescript white material. Looking at eye level, they saw a row of buildings. The buildings were clearly made by more skilled hands than those who had created the hamlets and villages the group was used to. They were made of the same strange material, but in varying shades of garish blues, yellows, and pinks.They had the shingle roofs normally reserved for only the richest of nobles.
Yet, despite craftsmanship that even the grandiose High Elves would envy, the houses were clearly in disrepair. Some of them were collapsed, others had walls blown out, and the plants were in a state akin to a gardener's worst nightmare. The stone they stood on was cracked and ruined. There were hunks of curvy metal with circles at their bases stood at the edge of the road here and there.
Strangest of all was the structure planted right in the middle of the streets. Made of a haywire collection of materials, it stood at an almost physics defying angle. A poorly made gate stood at the front. The confused and scared party approached it, then ducked down for cover when they heard voices from inside. Two men seemed to be talking. Quieting themselves down for a moment, the party strained their ears, attempting to hear what they said, in an attempt to find out what was going on. One sentence came to them clearly.
& nbsp;
& nbsp;
"General, another settlement is in need of our help"