The alarm clock next to me blared it's loud, obnoxious sound, greeting me in it's own way to the new morning. I shut the clock off with a forceful slap of my hand, it was another day in hell.
"Good morning, dear!" My wife called from outside the bedroom. She was cheerful as ever, cheerful as always, I could barely remember the last time I saw her sad.
"Good morning, father!" The twins said in unison, as I entered the kitchen. My breakfast of freshly cooked bacon and eggs was still steaming.
"Morning, everyone." I said solemnly, I picked at the eggs until the yolk burst and the yellow goo started mixing with my plate. My wife caught me at the door before I left for the day.
"Anything wro- Have a fantastic day!" her concern was appreciated but unnecessary, I had hoped the change would "stick" like it had with all the others but she was always stronger than the rest. Maybe, that's why I still loved her, with what little love I still possessed.
My commute was the same as always, the train passengers performed a rendition of "Wake Me Up Before You Go-Go" I smiled and clapped along as I usually did. It was crap though, Joey, from Water & Power was a little flat, like he had been for the past 5 years. No matter how hard I tried I couldn't motivate him into some singing lessons. I guess that wasn't part of my powers.
The receptionist greeted me with that same fake smile that she gave me the first day I enter Dr. Kapowitz's office. It had struck me as so false, so plastic, that I decided she'd wear that same look every time I saw her. I guess it reminded me of my own smile.
"Hello! James! Another beautiful morning isn't it? So what're we talking about today?" The Doc said in that same overly cheerful tone, as she picked up her notepad and started taking notes before I had even spoke.
"I'm not sure how much longer I can keep this up. I saw so much sadness and pain in all of you and it made me feel terrible. When I learned I could do something about it, that I could change people's emotions, I felt like a god. I had control over everything. Emotions are powerful motivators. Of course I did it all for myself, I made everyone feel happy because of how sad I felt. I figured that over time I too, would become cheerful. That was 20 years ago. Seems to me like the only person whose emotions I cannot control, are my own."