I watched as Kevin made the small flame dance across the tabletop to the delight of everyone who watched.
"That's awesome Kev." I said as he snuffed out the small flame. The small crowd that had gathered around to see Kevin show off his newfound power groaned with disappointment and begun discussing their own experiences.
Ever since the human race had been changed in the event, everybody developed a power by the time they were twenty-one. Some were major, some were minor, and some were useless. But everyone was regulated. Those who refused went rogue, and had to deal with the big guys.
"What did the examiners say?" Said Stacey, sitting down at the table. As always, she had several flowers interwoven into her hair. Each one was pointed toward the window. Stacey could control plants, make them grow, make them move, some people said she was actually part plant.
"They think my powers will grow, they said to come back in a few years, as it is I can't make a flame much bigger than my hand for now!" Kevin said, igniting a small fire ball in his hand again.
Without warning a torrent of water bounced across the table, literally bounced, before splashing over Kevin's hand and extinguishing his flame, not to mention soaking the entire table.
"Hey!" Kevin said, looking towards the culprit.
Laughing, Brad strode towards the group and sat down with a flop, water twirling around his wrist in a constant stream. He always kept a little bit of water on his body, mostly for pranks.
"Pft. So you can light candles now, big deal. You'll probably never advance beyond that!"
"Jerk." Said Kevin. But he was smiling. I smiled too. It was unlikely that any of my friends would be placed into duty for the Establishment, but that was fine, that way they wouldn't be hurt. Their powers were minor, so they were allowed to roam free.
Stacey turned to me suddenly, ignoring the small wrestling match that had broken out between Kevin and Brad.
"You must be excited huh Drew?"
"What do you mean?" I said.
"Well you turn 21 next month right? You should be getting your power any day now."
"Hey that's right!" Said Kevin, who had Brad in a headlock. "Any idea what it might be?"
"Oh, I guess I hadn't really thought about it." I said, smiling.
"What!?" said Brad, pushing Kevin away. "How can you not think about it?"
"I dunno, I've been busy lately?"
All three of my friends looked at me like I was insane. I simply smiled. After all how could they know that I already had my powers. That my examination was falsified every year, because technically, I didn't exist. I went rogue. My power manifested itself at 16. And when the inspectors came around for my first test at 17, I killed them.
Because you see my power is different, my power comes from a darker god than theirs. With a simple touch, I can take. Take anything, take everything. Your mind, your looks, your memories, your voice, your sight, the air from your lungs, the cells in your brain, the blood from your veins, your power. I can remove them, I can keep them. So far I've remade my face three times, and I have taken the powers of those who have come to find out mine. And disposed of any who came close. I have been 20 for over 5 years, each year with a new face, new blood, new body, new cells, new powers. So far I'm bulletproof, I can teleport, and following a truly spectacular fight, I can control the weather. I don't age, but maybe this year I will. Maybe this year I stop hiding.
But first I think I'll see how strong Kevin's power gets. Fire sounds fun.