"No, no no no...” She backed up and turned the other way the second she saw me heading towards her.
"Hey!" Starting to walk quickly now I picked up my pace until I nearly ran into her. She tried to duck behind one of the men carrying samples around the food court but instead just managed an awkward half step around him before I grabbed her shoulder. She turned towards me so I could get a clear view of her face. Now I was sure it was her. "Joanne?" Her eyes lit up, if only for a second before she turned back around, grabbed her hands and lowered her head before once again repeating her rant of no's from earlier.
"You can't be here, not now. I finally get this far and now you're here." She was mumbling more to herself than to me at this point.
"You… you're real," I said, looking back to her eyes. "How… do you know who I am?"
"I'm real? Of course I'm real! But you can't be here!" Now she was talking directly to me. "Do you know what kinds of hell you put me through? The amount of bullying, stress, and endless therapy! Dave, I finally get rid of you and now you have to come back in my head and tear it back out from under me," she slapped her head a few times as she delivered the last line.
"What are you talking about? I-"
"We were best friends, true or false?" She asked.
"True, no false, I mean, we were friends but not…" I looked at her once more to make sure she was actually standing there. "You're a dream," She froze at this.
"No, no I'm- you're a hallucination. I saw you for years! Every waking moment from-"
"Seven until twelve" I looked at her shaking my head, incredulous to what was happening.
"When we fell out of that tree that one summer," she smiled for just a second before frowning again and looking down.
"But that was just a dream, I woke up right after that."
"No, that actually happened. I was awake, I remember it exactly because that's when I still lived in Australia with my parents." I looked at her, and began to realize something.
"You saw me when you were awake, I dreamt you while I was asleep. I lived in Boston, when you lived in Australia."
"Hold on," She sat down. "My head hurts," She paused. "We met, every day-"
"Night," I corrected. She looked at me and scowled.
"Every day. For five years, until we fell. What happened after that?"
"I told you, I woke up."
"No, what happened for me? I don't remember anything but falling head first and then…"
"Joanne," I looked her straight in the eyes this time. "I woke up."