Bzzzzzzt. Bzzzzzzzzt. Bzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzt.
My alarm sounded. I reached for my phone but I hit air where I expect my computer to be. I open my eyes slowly, in front of me should be either a pillow, my iPad or the side of my desk, I see none of these things. I see a bedside table with an alarm clock, an old table lamp, and a cat. I reach out and stroke Max, who responds by climbing all over my face. The alarm is turned off. My door is open already. I'm in my parent's house with my elderly cat who's in a particularly young mood.
"First day back" my mother says as she passed the door, going downstairs to get her coffee.
I sat up in bed. Thoughts ran through my head. I'm at home? SHIT I'VE GOT WORK IN A HOUR. How the hell am I going to get travel 70 miles quickly? Train or bus. Why the hell did I come home. Wait, why am I home? I slid out of bed and reached for my phone. Nothing. I looked around my bedside table confused. I found a brick on the floor, charging. A Motorola Razr. Max left the room chasing a sound in the kitchen.
"What the fuck." I said probably too loudly. I picked up the phone.
"LANGUAGE!" Came a shout from downstairs. I had been too loud.
I flipped the phone open, and I saw it light up. I don't know how long I sat there, but it was long enough for my mother to walk past, and say she was leaving for work. It was only then I realised I was shorter. My back didn't hurt. My mother left, and I sat there in silence. I looked at my desk, there was my old bulky CRT monitor. I looked at the TV, and it had a video player under it, and was also a CRT and took up most of the space in the cabinet at the end of my bed.
What? Was going? On? I stumbled out of bed and went for a shower. There was no mistaking it, I was young again. 14ish? I went started to get dressed, and quickly realised I didn't have a shirt because I wasn't a senior. I had a polo shirt. I wore it with some trousers that clearly needed replacing. I was still struggling to believe this was happening. I checked my phones date, it was August 1999.
I got myself some toast, struggling to reach the toaster. I put on some apricot jam I found in the cupboard as my step brother walked in "Toast and Jam? You only eat peanut butter."
"I feel like a different person today." I replied while eating toast.
I grabbed my backpack, checked I had my main subjects books and left for school. As I left the area I saw a girl from the year above me I'd never had the courage to talk to.
"You're Sophie, right?"
She turned around. "Yeah. Mike is it? You're Jane's friend. So looking forward to the new school year?" She asked in a far too happy sound.
"Does anyone ever look forward to school?" I replied with the cadence of a 29 year old insurance underwriter who'd seen many a terrible grey Monday morning. Today was nice though, sunny, and warm.
"Ha ha. I know. So you go anywhere over the summer?" She asked.
"Sophie, I feel like I've been gone a lifetime."