I looked him straight in the eyes, only a young man though he looked much older. I could see the fear in his eyes almost accepting his fate.
"I'm sorry...its just the way things are." I said grimly.
He must have noticed my cold tone. It wasn't that I didn't care, I couldn't care. This part of the job became second nature. Part of the routine. Doctors worldwide adopted the policy at the turn of the 22nd century.
"I understand but I'm sure there is something you can do...we can just keep it between us right?" He stuttered desperately.
I handed him a pamphlet titled "Accepting Death" a standard procedure for all my patients. The role of doctors changed over the years. When I was a child they were known as protectors, carers and people who would help you and make you feel better. It all changed after the Crop Wars. There is never going to be enough food to feed the masses. We can no longer take care of the sick.
"I can talk you through it after you have had a moment to clear your head." I said calmly stepping out to give the man some space. He glanced up from the pamphlet, tears in his eyes.
"Okay. Just give me 5 minutes" He said softly with a somewhat forced smile.
I closed the door behind me and went out the back for a cigarette. The damp humid air wouldn't keep me outside for long. Before I could inhale the last drag I heard a crash followed by the sounds of shattering glass. I immediately tossed the cigarette but into the alley and flung open the metal door to return to my office. Before I had a chance the young man pushed his way passed, his strength overpowering me, pushing me to ground.
"You aren't authorised to leave! You need to come back or I'll call the police!" Shouted the nursed clearly distressed.
I regained my breath and stood up preparing to give chase, knowing an escaped patient would likely be the end of my career. I ran through the damp dreary alley way towards the bus stop on the corner of the street. The man, despite suffering from an illness had far more stamina than myself as he slowly gained a greater lead.
My luck turned when a passing peace officer noticed the scuffle and pulled his vehicle in front of the young man. Just like that it was over. The man was no match for the strength of a government officer. He was wrestled the ground with a boot pressed into his face.
"He one of yours?" The the officer asked sternly.
I looked down at the man and I felt something I hadn't felt in years. Empathy. This man wasn't the tyrant government propaganda portrayed the sick as. He was somebodies brother, husband and son.
"He...is a friend of mine. We just had a little disagreement." I lied. I couldn't let this man be imprisoned and likely tortured to save my own ass.
"We'll get your friend back inside I can't have people running around thee streets like that." The office loosened his grip and nudged the mans limp body towards the kerb.
As the officer left the man looked up at me. "Why did you do that? You could have ended up in jail?"
"I can help you...I can't keep living this way" I stammered.
"Help me what? Escape?" He replied.
"No I can help save you, we have the medicine. I know it's breaking the law but someone needs to make changes. It wasn't always this way."
"You mean you can actually cure me? I don't have to die?" Hope filled his eyes, his face lit up with an almost cautious joy.
"Doctors used to be healers. Believe me...there was a reason I choose this profession and it wasn't to end lives...there was once a time where we saved them" I grabbed the mans hand and slowly walked him back to the office.
"You will have to come with me, there is no safety at the office. They will always be watching over me" I said
I took the man into my car I knew it wasn't going to be an easy mission. But if there is going to be any change in the world, if I am going to make a difference. I have to change the world one patient at a time. And it starts today.