It's the job of our agency to keep track of the worlds monsters and keep them locked down. Which is complicated because people aren't allowed to know they exist or that they create them.
Fear itself, when amplified by a large amount of people, fearing that same thing enough...produces a monster to represent it, it simply comes to life and exists. We stop said Monsters from destroying us. We always do.
This time just over a decade ago, our job got a lot harder, a new breed of monster had appeared, and it was more dangerous than we ever suspected possible.
The thing about the old monsters is they're like the fear they represent:
Werewolves were simply animals, animals that stick to the forest, they're easy to explain to locals and generally don't even cause much trouble so long as they're left well enough alone, we picked off the aggressive ones and left the rest alone.
Vampires were a problem for a long while, because like the aristocracy they represented, they liked to lord it over people. To show off their power. Made it very hard to keep them a secret, but also easy to find them and destroy them before the fear they created spread too far. The few around today only stay alive because they don't act like the monsters they are, so it has been nightmarishly difficult to finish them off, but they're generally no longer our biggest issue.
With Modern medicine as it is, zombies went extinct long ago with the fear of disease that created them.
They weren't like one would imagine them though, they were slow and stupid sure...but also silent, they'd spread by bite, but not moan or be loud doing it. During the black death they killed as many people as the disease itself as fear of disease produced more than we were able to handle.
However now...a new monster has come about. We didn't even realize it -was- a monster until we captured one. Because they destroy themselves mere seconds after they pop into existence.
What much of the world knows as 'Suicide bombers', we found out their true form. So far as we can tell, there have been few genuine suicidal terrorists acts - 9/11 being the one that caused enough fear of terrorism to bring these monsters into existence. However now they jump into existence wherever there's enough fear and tension and after they die, they've left only more fear in their wake, leading to -more- coming into existence later.
So if not humans, what are they? Well. They have human faces, and hands...but the rest of them is anything but. Their limbs are made of some kind of shadow and their chest of fire - which when they release to explode and cause mayhem.
We only captured one after a brave marine tackled one to the ground - it would have made no difference, but in doing so he also accidentally starved the flames of oxygen -just- long enough to stop them becoming intense enough to remain, at which point the being became only shadow.
The creature is pitiful if it doesn't get to die soon after forming - the mask it uses to represent a face swiftly begins to rot, lasting only a minute at most the hands soon mold until they too are shadow.
And then...it just dies, it dissipates into the essence that makes up all monsters.
In a weird fit of irony, their purpose is the same as their fears creators - get as much attention as possible and use it to spread fear. And oh boy have they been doing so...we just can't stop them.
Because one can get over the fear of something that fears the sun, that only comes out on a full moon or is simply countered by modern medication.
If things get any worse, if we don't stop the media spreading the fear -and hence the monsters- we're going to have to fear a whole new ending to the world.
"This is the way the World ends, not with a whimper. But with a BANG."