Some nights I lay awake staring at the ceiling. When I wake up I swear I can see your ghost in the corner of my vision. But whenever I turn my head the only thing there is the white wall staring back at me. I think back to the fun we had. Camping in the mountains staring at the stars. Sneaking into the local pool to skinny dip. I didn't know how to live until I found you. Now I can barely remember what it is to live. What it is to feel. I try to go through my day like before. It's harder waking up in an empty bed. Harder only having my music to break the silence as I get ready. But I have to have the music. Without the music I'm left alone with only my thoughts. And that is what I try to avoid at all costs. I still work the same desk job you got me. The looks I get going down the hall cut into my soul. Some show pity. Some empathy. After I leave work I go to the bar, the only place that doesn't ask questions. I'm not asked how I am. They just give me my vodka and leave me to wallow. I always hope I can drink myself into enough of a stupor that I can actually sleep. Maybe I'll even get lucky and crash on the way home. Then I won't have to answer the questions that are always asked. Or deal with the glances that people shoot but think I don't see. By the time I get home I'm usually too drunk to even make it to the bed. But somehow I did last night. And as I fell from consciousness, I thought of you. I thought of falling asleep with you in my arms. I wished for the warmth of your body against mine. I yearned for the comfort of your breath next to me. When I felt the wind against me I passed it off as the window left open. When I felt warmth against me I thought it was the liquor warming me. But now I start to wonder. As I sit here staring at you I question if I'm still drunk or the most sober I've been in weeks. I can't believe all the details that are still there. I can see your beautiful green eyes that I fell in love with. I can see the scar on your palm that you got when you tried to help that stray dog and it bit you. I can see the blood on your head and shirt from where you went through the windshield when we hit the tree. But worst of all I see your mouth stuck open screaming in horror the same way it was as you died next to me. I should have pulled over. I should have stopped to sleep. But I wanted to get home to lay bed with you. Now I know why I've seen you morning after morning. You miss me as much as I miss you. I think instead of work I'll go back to sleep. I'll slide aside so you can lie next to me. Take you in my arms again. Now I know it wasn't the wind against me. It was you watching me. Watching me sleep in my bed while you sleep in the ground. Well no longer. You're here for me now. I have you in my arms again. I embrace the cold that you bring as much as the warmth that once came with you. At last I will be able to sleep with my sweetheart again.
Some Nights - FUN