I can hardly read the letter, because the hand holding it is shaking so bad. My hand. There's nothing wrong with me, I'm just nervous. I'm actually a pretty normal guy, painfully normal. But that's all about to change.
*Dear Mr. Thompson, we are quite happy to inform you that we have successfully received and processed your requests, as well as your official test results. It is with great pleasure that I can relay to you, on behalf of The United States Department Of Supernatural Distribution, that you are officially licensed to generation and application of banishment, disappearance, and-*
The sturdy stationery and pompous print fade from view. Everything is temporarily blurry, and I feel my nose flare and quiver for a moment, before the rest of my body joins in. I'm not much of a crier, and make a pathetic scene for a moment as I let the emotion wash over me. Finally. Finally. Fucking finally. I blink the tears out of my eyes, and hear the soft thud as they land on the paper. I look down again, and next to a tear drop I read, *your superpower will be rendered available as soon as you read aloud the following code: USER556865REQ55432. In accordance with federal law, you must destroy this document upon activation. *
It is the most amazing, natural thing. I just wave my hand, focus on an object, and.. boom; it's gone. Or transported amazingly to a location of my choosing. It's like magic, except it's not. It's a superpower, and one I can now use to my heart's content. Of course there's laws and regulations, but with great power comes blah blah blah yada ya. I focus on the document for a second before transporting it from my hand to my desk before Vanishing it altogether. So. Damn. Cool. What now? I think the answer to that is pretty obvious.
The video clip is pretty short, and I filmed it myself. The shot zooms in on my sink overloaded with dishes, two weeks worth. The camera then turns to me, and my frown lets the viewer know that I'm not happy about it. As it turns back to the sink, my hand waves across the frame. Boom, they're gone. To erase any doubt, I open the dishwasher and ta-da, they're neatly stacked on the racks within. The final scene is my smiling face. Facebook. Instagram. Snapchat. Upload, upload, upload. #Lifestough
Two hours later, I check my posts. One response, and 13 combined likes. Mom says "congratulations", but she didn't even put an exclamation mark at the end. My heart sinks. I'm so damn sick of being the last one to every trend.
I wish my superpower would disappear.
Just kidding, it's still pretty cool.