"They don't believe we're interesting?" one of the younger mermaids, Ari, asked, looking around the elders of the council. Of all the reasons for the decline of the last several decades, *interest* had not been one she had thought about. Low birthrates, weak magic, and increased illness and death in their people had spurned the mer- and hydro- species to gather and think of something to stop what would soon be the end of them all. That it was the human's fault was implied, but how was the question.
"It is the fault of their aeroplanes," an old mermaid replied. Ari did not know her personally, they were from different seas, but the merwoman had been kind to her despite her age. Ari was the only representative healthy enough from their bay to journey here, even if she was young.
"Ships are not used as much for transport," the Pacific mermaid continued. "And when they are they are so big and well-made that our songs do not reach them. There is no reason to fear us. We may look pretty, become a tale to tell with friends if we are seen, but then we are forgotten."
"Which is a problem," a siren added. She lounged on a giant open clam, the self-appointed head for this group. Her songs at least, on occasion, brought about disappearances around Bermuda. "Belief does not have to be real to fuel magic, to fuel *us*. Interest in fictional variations of our kind would be enough. But all of that is now taken up by vampires, or zombies. And we? From what I hear I am relegated to literature no one reads for pleasure, and my dear mermaids you are children's toys."
"Children have interest," the old mermaid replied. "About a quarter century ago we had several good years. I began to find dolls and toys in the sewage near people that showed a red haired mermaid."
"But only for a while. You know soon after that it was lions or some other nonsense."
"Then.." the younger mermaid began her thought, but paused. The elderly mermaid smiled to her and nodded for her to continue. The siren looked interested. Ari turned to the oceanids and nereids- it had been something they had said earlier that day that now came back to her.
"Then perhaps we must do what our ancestors did," Ari said. "We come up to the surface, to the isles, up the deep rivers because we had to get to the people. Now they have other ways of transport, but water is important to us all. We must simply find other places to dwell."
"Yes!" a nereid added. "My cousin, she went to the beaches and then amid the people and their buildings when my young brother became sick. She found small ponds with no fish or plants, but where many people would go to play. It was close to home, so at night she could return, but during the day she enticed two young men into such a frenzy they fought for her in the deep end and drowned! My brother's fever broke and he is now well because of their deaths and fear."
"Exactly!" Ari gestured to the other young woman. "We have to go to them, make ourselves known."
"It could work," the elderly mermaid said. "We did always see who could go closest, and the one who brought someone in from the land would win. But lately such games have not been on our minds with the bad times."
"We just have to make sure they know it is us, and not something silly like sharks."
Now inspired, the group began making plans for their emigration onto land and the shallow waters. The young people, those who were healthy and could take the shape of humans, would slowly begin to the move to the fresh waters and those lakes and ponds that did not return to the ocean. The occasional drowning would be a good start, and as they settled into their new homes they could connect with that new part of the world. Surely a lake, even a pool or a fountain, needed a spirit as much as the ocean or a river did?