Not a single person in the crowd of Nora Janice's Funeral had spoken a word. Friends, Relatives, and a few other people all bonded together in the stillness of the moment. Even Nora's own parents were seen, with no idea how she could have been a part of such a horrible death. Soon, an image appeared in the front of the room. The image of Norah soon became a video, and papers were heard rustling around. Tears could be seen creeping down the young eyes of the girl, and those tears began to spread throughout the room as she spoke.
> Hello. If you are hearing this, t-then they must have gotten to me. I don't know why, but I know that soon I will be...dead. I pray you never have to hear this, but I guess if you are hearing this, it's too late.
The camera showed a barren room with notes on a desk in the front, a plain chair, and dim lighting highlighting the webcam glow on Nora's youthful face. It must have been recorded very recently before her death, but she still looked too young for someone like her to be gone so soon.
> Ok, I need to start at the beginning I guess. Most of you must have known me as a perfect little girl with a great heart and all that. That's not the full me. Ok, ok, calm down, I've never told anyone this, calm down.
By this time, everyone in the crowd had undergone a change from a teary-eyed and mournful mood to some feeling much more intrigued. Nora wasn't a crazy conspiracy theorist, or ever been mentally unstable. Well, maybe she did seem a bit strange at times, but the way she was speaking now made her seem absolutely insane.
> When I was kid, I had terrible nightmares. Every time I had one of these nightmares, it was the same kind of thing. I saw people dying. But - Here's the thing, it actually happened. Like, I was dream of some man I'd never seen before getting beaten to death with a club, and a few days later I would see him on the news as a murder victim. Now it happens - or, well - happened, about every month or two. A few stand out in my brain. A week before 9/11 was horrible. I tried to help out a stranger I saw on the streets, but to no avail. He wouldn't listen, I tried to warn him!
Now, the audience was fidgeting. Nora's parents were the most shocked, and all the others in the room were mimicking their expressions. Sure, maybe a few things about the way she acted made sense now, but she was just another girl. At least that's what everyone in the room had thought for the last 20 or so years she'd been alive.
> For the past week, I have been having a different kind of vision in my sleep. I see myself. I'm in some room of my house, and someone walks in. I'm laying on my desk, and I can't see his face. Papers are laying around everywhere, and he just walks over to me with, s-some kind of gun or something, and then...and then I wake up. I know it's going to happen soon, and, i just don't know when. Probably in a couple of days, but it could be soon. I just- I don't know what to do.
On screen, she began to lay her head down in pure fear. She threw some of her notes down on the floor, and they gently rested down on the floor. The video feed stood still for a moment, then a creaking was heard. A door opened, and a man walked in. The man looked down at Nora, and shot.