Sergeant Clark lifted his wrist to look at the band wrapped around it. It was no different than the fitness trackers people wore, except that it was reinforced by thick ropes of steel. It looked boring, actually. Black, some kind of supple rubber. A little digital heart pulsed consistently beside of a number that read 96. A cold blade of panic pierced his back, shooting a chill up his neck and across his scalp. He swallowed against an entirely too-dry throat, feeling the tissue scrape across itself like sandpaper. The sensation gagged him and he had to suppress his body's reflex to retch.
He managed to tear his eyes from his own wrist to a face concealed by a mask without contour or color. "You have 60 seconds. If your heart still beats after, the nuclear bombs will launch. It doesn't matter what countries will be hit. What matters is the one that fired them. The USA."
It was strange where his mind went as he targeted the stranger with the barrel of his gun. He thought of how he'd never have a dog. His parents would never let him have one of his own growing up and life had never given him the opportunity to bring one into his life as an adult, between never having an apartment that allowed him as he failed out of college, and all of the travel required by his secret career. He didn't think of Lucy or his mom. He thought of this dog, that probably would have been brown and white or something and ate its own vomit. He would've named it Daniels, because Jack would've raised some brows with the reputation Sergeant Clark had made for himself.
Hands numb, he lowered the barrel of his gun. The number on the wristband was nearing 200. He felt disconnected from his body other than his nose, which was ice cold. He closed his eyes and smiled. He didn't know what was funny, but he couldn't deny that something was. He relaxed his shoulders, let the rifle fall slack on its strap across his chest, and pulled his pistol from its holster on his hip. The metal should've been cold against his temple, but he wouldn't have noticed it had it not been for the determined pressure of it. Almost forgetting them, Sergeant Clark turned to face his squad. Why? He wasn't sure. Maybe to say he was sorry. Maybe to thank them for his time with them the last five years. Maybe it was so the last thing he saw before he died was a familiar face, if not a friend.
Instead, what he saw was the barrels of five guns with highly trained fingers on the triggers. He was glad he couldn't see their eyes.
Sergeant Clark holstered his pistol in a practiced, mechanical movement and gave a short nod that was both an order, a pardon, and an apology all at the same time.
__
Edit: Spelling