I never thought working with CPS would be easy.
I never thought it'd be this hard.
We get more cases than we have available inspectors. It was the screams of the girl, twelve reports, that got us interested in one Stanley Colville.
The reports would flood in on full moon nights. All the crazies come out with the full moon. This guy was no different. Probably beat the poor girl on those nights.
So I waited. Pulled up in my beater one such night. Knocked on the door.
A shotgun answered.
That's when my heart dropped.
"CPS?"
I nodded, couldn't speak through the solid lump of concrete building in my throat. I could feel the tiniest bit of pee leak out too.
"Come in."
He motioned me inside with the shotgun.
One thing I learned growing up in the Midwest: never argue with the man with a twelve gauge.
So I entered.
"Follow me."
He was toting the shotgun as we made our way down the clean hallway, nothing out of the ordinary in this house. Pictures of a smiling teen with her father lined the walls, normal decor, television with the news running in a clean living room.
No obvious signs of bad parenting. Except that damn shotgun.
He was wearing a pistol on his hip too and a knife in a sheath on his thigh.
Guy was absolutely nuts.
"Basement."
I took one quick look. Colville was a decent looking guy, clean shaven and well dressed. Fit. Normal looking guy.
That was about to cut me up into little pieces in his basement.
Great.
Into the dark I took the steps down, coming to a heavy steel door with padlocks and bolts. I could hear heavy breathing behind the door.
A chill ran down my spine. Maybe she wasn't abused. Maybe she was the abuser.
From a ring of keys he unlocked the padlocks, unbolted the chains, and opened the door on oiled hinges.
Inside was a concrete room with three heavy metal rings secured to the floor. Through these were looped heavy steel chains. These in turn were attached to manacles.
These in turn were attached to the furry arms of a vicious looking beast, drooling and slobbering and eyeing me with obvious hunger.
There was a pink bed against the wall, some posters on the walls, and a stack of books on a nightstand next to the bed. Teen fiction.
Shit.
"What the FUCK!" I shouted as it hit me.
He nodded.
"Werewolf."
From there I don't remember much. I remember the concrete rushing up towards me and then blackness.
I think I passed out.