It's quiet, living on the edge of town I manage to get away from the hustle and grind of the cyber city Teletariam. It was the first city that really embraced technology and set the standard for how cities needed to change and grow in the late 21st century. Cities across the globe had been integrating and modifying their cities but lacked the proper planning and initiative to effectively implement the modern marvels.
Teletariam changed that, being built East of Denver Colorado at the foot of the hills it served to be a beacon of new life. The series of revolutionary wars that occurred across the country from 2058-2093 left the country more united and stronger then ever, but beaten down and rebuilding. Teletariam was built as the new capital of the United West and served as the most technologically advanced city to ever be produced. We of the West take pride knowing that it stands tall, a symbol of our rebuilding, devotion and resilience.
My name is Gabriel and I work outside of this modern Haven as a farmer. They city produces most of its food internally but I grow larger row crops that not only support citizens but are used in various manufacturing processes. It's a Tuesday and like every Tuesday I get up feed the dogs while I power up and prep my cropbots for the day. I watched the news on a heads up display when I felt it. The ground shaking as if the world itself wanted to rip apart. I ran outside and the sun was eclipsing a large object in the sky? The shaking changes from a violent shift to a rumbling, I can feel it in my chest. A sense of panic runs through my veins, what is going on. An attack from the east, southern rebels, or something else?
With out a second to waste I ran through my shop, grabbing my binoculars, up the spiral stairs to my overlook I look toward the sky, it's a ship. Something I have never seen before, it is huge, coated in silver with orange accents. It eclipsed the sun, taken back from how big it is I look below large vessels had landed on the surface and something is heading this way.
Peering through my binoculars I cannot believe what I see....
Horses...
Unbelievable...
But who is riding them, or what?
These horses are bigger then anything I have ever seen before. Plated in armor covering all their vital and soft spots, I can see the breath burn from there nostrils as they gallop towards me. The riders appear to be wearing silver armor and a Lance blazing like the fire of a thousands sun's.
What am I looking at? As I took in the display off my overlook, over my head flies a legion carrier of the United West Marine corps. They land 500 meters from my shop right on my ready to harvest crops. A batallian of troops, tanks, troop transports, heavy gunners and equipment rolls off and into the ready. Without wasting time the heavy gunners and tanks begin to fire long range rounds. I watch as the rounds strike the horses and there riders, but to my and the soldiers on the ground surprise there is no effect. The barrage stops and the soldiers appear to be regrouping.
Suddenly jets fly over head along with a c730 air cannon ship. Hell begins to rain down as the jets bomb and lay down aggressive fire. The c370 lays down hundreds of thousands of rounds with in seconds. The approach of the unknown enemy is unaltered and an uneasiness rises across the battlefield. Seasoned soldiers from the war began to bark at the marines, rallying them to get ready to make a stand. You can hear the horses breathing hard. They're getting close. The soldiers deploy the trenchers, digging trenches instantly. They jump in preparing to hold there defensive line.
The enemy approaches at about 150 meters all at once the riders draw there swords and suddenly the horses accelerate running all out. They are met by a barrage of bullets. Within seconds they are on top of the marines break through their line. Chopping and stabbing as they go. Most of the horses cleared the trench and the riders jumped into the trenches as blood flies everywhere.
I stand in astonishment, in front of me I have just witnessed a bloody violent confrontation and as I realize what I had just seen, that's when I see it. A young Marine who has confronted a rider.
The riders horse appears to have misjudged the trench and took a spill breaking its neck the marine fires on the downed rider and the shots hit his armor without penetration. The marine changes to incinerator rounds and fires. To no effect, the rider gets its senses and begins to stand. It is just over 2 meters tall and stands on its 2 feet.
Its clearly not from this planet but it resembles us. The rider rushes the marine. Within a second it has pushed its blade through the marines chest. But in the marines right hand he held his dagger and with his last bit of strength he plunged it into the riders neck. An explosion of blood came from the rider and a cry that stopped his companions in their tracks. They turned and flocked to there wounded soldier and surrounded him. In this moment the surviving marines fell back.
They're heading straight for my barn...
Edit: spelling and grammer
Part 2 tomorrow...