Wow, just want to say this is the best prompt I've seen in the many months I've been reading WP responses. It doesn't seem like the kind that will take off, but good job on thinking of it.
---
Ray Thompson lay with his cheek pressing on the scorching desert sand, arm stretched desperately towards a water skin. His bare chest burned with each shift in the grains as he inched closer to the leather. Running a dry tongue over cracked lips, the large man used all his strength to push himself the final bit of distance. He grabbed the water skin and pulled his arm back like he'd been bitten by a cobra.
Ray managed to roll onto his back and put the smooth skin to his lips. Only a few drops fell into his mouth, but they were Godsend. He closed his eyes in bliss and felt his tongue re-moisten like the old sponge his mother used to wash the dishes. He felt something else fall into his open mouth.
Six individual pricks moved down the roof of his mouth and into his throat. Ray rolled back to his stomach and began choking, trying to loosen the intruding...whatever it was. He managed to get to his knees, feeling adrenaline kick in, and coughed violently. He felt his chest expand and retract with each cough like a drum when beat. The six points made their way down his throat, into his esophagus. He felt the points move individually, but as one. Perhaps a scorpion.
He got a deep itch from inside of his body. Ray brought up a hand and punched himself in the chest, right over the itch. He felt the hits connecting, but no pain from them. He was either too weak to punch properly or too close to death to feel the pain.
As he began to panic, a sharp pinch came from his chest. Ray's eyes widened as he tried to scream, but he didn't hear any noise come out. He hadn't heard any noise for...days? When did he come out here, anyway?
Ray shook his head as he found his thoughts wandering. The pain in his chest spread outward, as though a sun had been born within it.
He felt a sudden grasp inside of him let go. Perhaps the scorpion fell into his stomach, made itself food for him. Ray smiled, snickering in the heat.
All this time, he had been starving, but couldn't take care of it. He fell back to his hands and knees, laughing hysterically, though the sound of his laughter didn't reach his ears.
All this time he couldn't eat, so the food walked *into* his mouth!
Randy...Ra...Ray! Ray held his stomach and fell face first into the sand, feeling the burn on his eyelids as he continued laughing.
It walked into his mouth!
Ray fell back to the sand, laughing helplessly as the sun climbed the sky.
Perhaps this would finally be it.