Hans was never a "bright" child by any measure. He scored average in just about every capacity: IQ, grades, sports. Everything he tried, he was *average*. His parents didn't really know what to do with him. He was now 8 years old, had a few friends, never really exhibiting talents or a profinity for anything. On a whim his father purchased a stuffed dragon, roughly the size of an average baby. It was a vibrant green color, deep like an emerald yet just as brilliant. It had horns resembling a reindeer's, and a pearly white beard under its chin. Its body was long and slender like a snakes, yet girthy enough to hold and hug. The day his father gave him Sam, is a day he'll never forget.
Hans sat there, playing with the few toys he had as his father called his attention. He looked up to see Sam placed right before him. At first he was confused. It was a weekday and usually weekends were the time for gifts and treats. Maybe he did something special the day before, he wasn't usually aware of these things and often forgot his own actions. Now all his attention was transfixed on the wonderfully verdant creature before him. He reached out to hold his new companion, "Wait, what do you say, Hans?"
"Thanks, daddy."
"You're welcome. Have you decided his name yet?" his father asked as he handed Hans the plush animal.
"Sam."
His father sighed. He thought he might provoke some hidden creativity in the boy, alas it was the name of a family dog who died a year prior of old age. After a few weeks, his father would grow to like the name and almost regard fictional creature as a household pet. Hans brought Sam with him everywhere: school, bed, trips to the doctor, even church despite the protests of his mother. His father saw that it wasn't about what Sam did with the toy, it was the connection he made with his inanimate friend. Soon, they began to see Hans use Sam in imaginary play, something that eluded Hans previously. Sam had a whole family, Hans would tell his parents, that lived on Jupiter (they were learning about the solar system that week) and used special walkie talkies to communicate to Earth. Hans couldn't understand Sam's language, but he would read Sam's facial expressions and could tell if the conversation was good or bad. He picked this up when his parents were talking, thinking he couldn't hear or see them.
Then, he started drawing. And painting. By the time Hans was 12, he moved on to more difficult mediums like pastel and oil. His parents were not only impressed, but thrilled. Their son actually *was* talented. It was a shame when he got sick and couldn't paint anymore. Hans'health started to deteriorate around his 14th birthday. His parents first noticed his lack of energy, then it evolved into notes from his teachers that he was sleeping in class. Eventually, his symptoms grew to frequent migraines, crippling him from attending school or even leaving his bed. Sam was constantly by his side, Hans even refused to let his mother give him his monthly washing. It didn't take long for a diagnosis, a malignant brain tumor that was spreading quickly. Sometimes these things happen for no reason, the doctor told his parents, there's not much they can do besides surgery and immediate treatment. Treatment meant chemotherapy, which his mother already went through with her mother. She was reluctant at first, but because of the doctor's ushering - she relented.
It was a warm summer day in early June when Hans went in for his weekly chemotherapy treatment. During the summer, his treatments were in the morning so he could have the remainder of the day to paint. At least, he would try to paint. Nausea and fatigue would usually follow his treatments confining him to his bed most days. The gentle breeze kissed his naked forehead, partially covered by a baseball cap to mask his bald head. He liked to keep the windows down when they drove, the wind helped cool his face and keep him from vomiting. As they pulled into the hospital parking lot, Hans clutched Sam to his chest. Sometimes the nurses wouldn't let him bring Sam in, today they promised he could join him. As he approached the hospital doors, Hans got nauseous and had to stop for minute. He considered running away, far from the hospital so he didn't have to go back. He was old enough to know that it wasn't possible. He wasn't strong enough.
Once they got to the treatment room, Hans noticed there weren't any other patients. Usually there were a few, but he was the only teenager. There was another kid he would talk to sometimes, but he passed away a month prior from leukemia. His dad dropped him off today, he had a few errands to run so Hans was alone with Sam during his treatment. After the nurse left he turned to Sam, "Sam, how do you not get scared for your family?" Hans wasn't crazy. He fully knew Sam couldn't talk, but it was a nice nostalgia from when he first received his stuffed friend. Many of his conversations with Sam ended in great epiphanies. In his mind, he imagined the dragon replying.
"I do, I just pretend I don't."
"How do you *pretend* you're not afraid?"
"Fear is funny. It's always there, always staring at you. You can either try to stare back, which you'll lose, or ignore it."
"I don't think I can ignore this. The doctors and my parents are constantly reminding me."
"You're still trying to stare back, to understand why you're afraid. Conquering fear is about building a bridge over it, not bullying your way through. Even if you make it through with brute force, others can't follow you. You build a bridge though, they can. And...if my family knows I'm afraid, they won't follow me. I have to pretend because I have to help my family."
"I wish I could meet your family."
"Look in a mirror, Hans. You *are* my family."
Hans felt a wave of sadness move over him. Part of it was pity for himself, there are so many things he wanted to do, like write his own graphic novel starring Sam. Part of it was the beautiful acceptance that his life might end. The blank, white walls of the hospital provided a canvas for his imagination. He imagined his life on Jupiter with Sam's family and the others from his kind. He imagined what he would be doing had he not gotten cancer. He imagined his first beer, his first love, his first break up, and the first day of college. "Sam, I can't…" he paused as he tried to stifle his sobs. He couldn't actually cry, his eyes were far too dry for that from the chemo. But as a 14 year old boy, he tried to "man" up in his own way. “...I can't...maybe I won't be able to experience things."
"What do you mean?"
"I mean…" he choked a bit, "I might not be able to have the experiences all my friends are talking about."
"Hans, it's more about…"
"They keep talking about girls, what girl would want me? They all want the guys who play sports, skateboard, the guys who *do* things. What do I do? I sleep, lay in bed watching TV and I paint sometimes. I'm so fucking boring," he caught himself and checked to see if any adults were around. "It's killing me that I can't experience life, and this is killing me too," he pointed to the IV in his arm.
"It's not about that, Hans. It's about what YOU experience. You're going to make it through this, and when you do you'll have an experience none of them will ever have."
"What if I don't...what if I die next week? My friends say that heaven is a nice place, but I don't really believe them. *This* is already a nice place."
"The hospital?"
"No, this world. There's so much to it...and I may never see it."
Hans left his mind for the remainder of his time in the hospital. He'd rather stay there in quiet meditation, holding onto Sam as if he were drowning and the dragon was a life preserver. Hans would never recover from his illness. The tumor continued to grow and the increasing chemo rounds weakened his body beyond repair. Each time, Sam was by his side; and, each time, Hans grew weaker and weaker until he was unable to hold Sam anymore. His parents would place Sam at his side for him. As he became more fatigued, he stopped having his mental dialogues with Sam. He could see Sam was dispirited by his lack of communication, but knew he understood. Hans left his world three weeks from his last conversation with Sam - he never had a girlfriend, went to a high school party, or had his first beer.
One of the nurses asked about Sam, when his parents came to the hospital to collect his things. She didn't want to intrude on their grieving but said there was a little girl undergoing chemo who saw Sam earlier. She hoped she wasn't asking too much, but the little girl said he gave her strength. His parents thought about it for a minute, then thought about what Hans would have done. The next day, they both drove to the hospital and delivered Sam to the nurse. Later in the week, when the little girl, Natalie, came in for her treatment. Sam was sitting in her chair and she couldn't help but smile.