The sound of feet running down the hall echoes through the massive palace. A young Russian man yells out, pushing aside servants as he nears the Emperors private chambers. "A message for the Emperor and Empress! Move, I carry a message!" he yells at the slow moving servants. He pushes past the guards and throws open the massive wooden doors, "My Emperor! My Empress!"
His eyes land on the bed, where two lumps underneath move in a particular fashion. The young man's face turns red and he coughs to clear his throat. "My Emperor...?" he asks, stepping into the room.
The figures still and one pops up from under the covers. Empress Catherine of the Great Peoples Republic of Russia pulls the silken covers up closer, covering her bare chest. Her blue eyes land on the young man, narrowing in annoyance of his interruption. She opens her mouth to speak, but the other figure begins to speak, as it pops upwards. "I thought," it begins, sitting upright, "I made specific instructions not to be disturbed."
The young man gulps and nods his head, his eyes running along the features of the Emperor. He is a small, three foot high creature with green fur, yellow belly, paws, and nose, with a large nuclear symbol on the stomach in black fur. He calls himself The Care Bear and he has been leading the Russian peoples since time immemorial. "I apologize for the disturbance, My Emperor; I bring grave news from General Victor."
The Care Bear rolls out of bed, quickly grabbing a robe and wrapping it about himself. He rolls his yellow eyes at the mention of General Victor. "Ah, the ‘ Grave'General has news? Well, out with it!"
The young man nods his head, tearing his eyes from the beautiful Catherine to the note in his hand. "Um, General Victor says that there has been movement of Indian troops near Vladivostok. There has been a sighting of a Giant Death Robot, along with several platoons of infantry men and several tanks."
The Care Bear chuckles and shakes his head. "The dear General pulls me out of bed for nothing. Warlord Gandhi has no strength left in him. He has moved troops near our border before and nothing has come of it. Gandhi is nothing more than a coward who makes threats from afar and does not act on them. He is inconsequential. Is there anything else the General is afraid of? Perhaps there is a monster under his bed?" The Care Bear laughs and turns away, heading back to the bed.
"General Victor also mentions sightings of American XCOM squads near Volgograd, My Emperor."
At this, the Care Bear stops. He turns slowly towards the young man, "Did you say ‘ American'XCOM squads?" When the young man nods his head, the Care Bear's expression darkens. "Those Capitalist Pigs! They dare mobilize against me? I should have taken out the oaf Washington 10,000 years ago! That forward settling, greedy, Capitalist bastard!" The Care Bear snarls, pacing back and forth. Suddenly, he stops pacing and heads towards the young man. "What is your name?"
"Uh, Vladimir Ufa, Sir," the young man splutters.
"Well, Vladimir Ufa, you're promoted to whatever position you want." The Care Bear starts towards the door, motioning for the guards to follow. "Oh," he says, turning back to Vladimir, "Do keep an eye on the Empress and fetch what she wants. I'll be back to her shortly." With that, he turns and heads down the hall.
Vladimir blinks and turns back to the Empress. When his dull brown eyes lock with her piercing blue ones, he gulps and smiles nervously. The Empress smirks and makes a ‘ come hither'motion with her finger, letting the covers around her chest slip slightly. Vladimir is undressing and hopping towards the bed before the thought is passing through his mind. Vladimir has resolved to keep more than an eye on the beautiful Empress.