Dearest Vernonica,
How is my favorite man-thing? Are you really three heads and a hand tall now? I can hardly believe it! Pretty soon you'll be devouring planets while the priests of this world and that one beg for oblivion.
Things are alright here in the void between the stars. The Shambler Who Stalks can be annoying at times, especially while I'm trying to get my deathless beauty sleep, but all in all things are good.
Just the other day I was summoned by a Shade Priest who lives near you and thought I might perchance come visit. He was such an epic fail (am I using that right?). He was so obsessed with collecting the bones of all his ancestors that I barely had time to even try to contact you. In the end he tried to bind me to him so I twisted his face. Now wanders the night in a blindness interrupted only by the snapping mouths that now live behind his eye lids. If you see him, just say you're watched by me and he should flee in unfathomable fear. I did get a chance to stop by, but I think you were out of town.
Tell your neighbor I'm sorry about his birds, but it was largely his fault. I can hardly be blamed for the darkness that dwells within them, or that the amount of darkness is commensurate to the misery he lays on them, or that they are annoying.
Congratulations on winning that Astronomy Project prize. I do hope that the tour we took in my star chariot helped. Astarion the Astral Steed says, "hi."
Thank you for the drawing of us on that trip. I look incomprehensible in my grotesqueness. You do draw so well. If Astronomy is not your calling then surely Art is.
I'm sorry that Mikey is still bullying you. I know you wanted to handle it on your own, but your dear Cthon'cthan cannot sit idly. By the time you read this, my dark machinations will already have sprung. I am sending unto him a nightmare such that the merest thought of sleep should bring him unspeakable terror all the rest of his days.
I do so look forward to your letters. I can hardly wait to hear from you again.
Inscrutably yours,
CC xoxo