To put it politely, today has been a long day. There are some other words I would add to that, but the promise of $200 dollars is hard to resist. Staying up all night to cram for the two hardest finals of my academic career (so far) was bad enough. Running into my ex-girlfriend and her new boyfriend celebrating being done with finals when I tried to run into Quicki's for a snack between finals was bad enough. Getting urgent calls from my mom asking for $50 (that I don't have) in order to pay her phone bill in the middle of my second final was bad enough. Having all of that happen today, the last day of my stupid bet with Colin, was more than bad enough, but to make matters worse, ten feet from getting to my dorm and a well deserved nap, I stepped in doggie-doo.
All of that was bad enough, so when I opened the door to my dorm and heard a crowd of people shout, "Happy birthday, Timothy!" I was less than impressed. I stared the group down for a moment, my eyes glancing over their faces trying to see someone I recognized from a class or one of Colin's stupid clubs. No, these were fresh faces imported from Colin's jerkosphere of local friends.
"Sorry, wrong person guys. And maybe wrong room too. There's only me and Colin here," I said as politely as I could muster. Hopefully I had said that loud enough that they all got the message.
The man in front, a large, but lanky dude replied, "What are you talking about Timothy? You don't want to celebrate your birthday?"
He had a mischievous grin on his face that I wanted to smack off. He lifted a bottle of Grey Goose and begin pouring shots for the whole room. I sighed, throwing off my shoes, careful to let the dog poo land on Colin's side and dropped my bag on my desk. At a glance, the amount of alcohol they had must have cost enough to add up to more than the $200 I would get once the clock struck midnight. But I knew Colin, he wasn't the type to lose, even if it meant blowing much more than we originally bid. I mean, the amount only got that high after we went double or nothing several times. Either way I wasn't planning on cursing before I got my money.
"It's a surprise you all fit in here," I muttered. Our room was supposed to be a quad, but both of our other roommates had conveniently dropped out midway through the semester to go find themselves together. I suppose it was possible they were actually looking for one of my ex-roommates.
"Hey, I don't know if Colin put you all up to this or something, but check it: Colin's out trying to hit it one last time before break, Chris is driving down Route 66 or something, and Joe's close behind. I'm Troy, I'm tired, and I'd love if you all took this outside."
A pretty cut dude who felt comfortable wearing a tank-top and flip-flops, Boston's winter be damned, put an arm on my shoulder and said calmly, "Hey man, we're here for you. Chill out and grab a drink. We're celebrating that's it's finally, the day."
I really don't like being touched. Not at all. It's not like I was abused or anything, I just hate the feeling of another person touching me without notice. I shoved his arm off of me and said, "Hey dude, that's great and all, but how about you find another dorm room to mess -"
"Tim, stop fucking around," a gorgeous blonde chick interrupted. Her voice was somewhere between heavenly and melodic. She grabbed my arm, and dragged me towards a futon. "Finals are over. Drink up!"
My better judgement said this was a trap, but my sleep-deprived brain deferred to private first class on this one. I took the shot glass from her and mumbled something about them having the wrong guy, but decided I would have Colin's liquor and his money. There was a lot of cheering and hand-clapping when they realized I was going to be drinking as well. Good luck getting me to talk though.
"Let's get ratchet!" some chubby dude in the corner screamed jumping on a desk.
"Yeah, you do that!" I yelled back. All of my important stuff was already in storage. This was Colin's idea anyway and he was rich, right?
So for the next few hours we drank, ate pizza, and made way too much noise. It seemed like there was an intense debate on whether we should be playing poppy-stuff, heavy hip-hop, or some EDM music. Today was the last day of finals, so when they decided to just play all of it at once through Colin's ridiculous speakers, I had no complaints. Finals were over so no one else should be studying.
At about 9pm, enough people from the surrounding the rooms (the few who hadn't headed home already) had filtered into the room at least for a few minutes. Neither Colin nor I were huge party-throwers so it must have been a little surprising to our neighbors. I was too busy staring at blonde and gorgeous instead, so most of them had left as quickly as they had entered. They all had weird expressions on their faces, but I was too busy convincing Emily (that was her name) that taking jello shots off of her was a great idea to try and make them more comfortable. I didn't have any jello, but I'm not always the most logical when I'm 6 shots in.
"Bro, what the hell is going on?" someone said from behind me. There were at least 30 people in the room and I only cared about one of them at the moment.
"What do you think, dip- … genius?" Close one.
The angry voice became an angry pair of hands pulling me away from Emily and the tequila shots I was planning to take off of her belly. I had never done that before and I really wanted to punch whoever decided to stop me from expanding horizons -
"What do you want Colin?" I said realizing who my antagonist was.
"What do I want? Fifty-three drunk people out of my room would be nice to start."
I assumed that more people had wandered in over the course of the night. Colin was usually annoyingly precise with his estimates. I assumed it was something all rich people could do. "Excuse me rich boy. I'm sorry that YOU decided to get a bunch of people in here to get me to curse, but I'm enjoying it a lot at this point so how about you fu-find somewhere else to bi-blow your steam. I thought you'd be chasing Julie's tail by now and -"
"Rich boy?" Colin looked pretty confused by my behavior. It's not like either of us had seen me this drunk in the two years we'd been roommates. "Dude, you've had way too much. I don't even know where to…"
He sighed deeply before continuing, "Anyway, Julie is...look neither of us had a chance is all I can say. Now can you get your friends out of here? I really just want to pack and get some sleep. I need to."
"I don't know any of these people," I said, feeling the night catch up to me. "They're you're friends, right? Or Anthony or Timothy's or whatever. Just quit it. This bet has gone too far."
"Bet? Are you still talking about that? I Venmo'd you this morning. That's been over for hours right? Is that what this is about? You wanted to blow the $200 on a party?"
I looked at my phone and checked Venmo. Yeah, I had two hundos from Colin McAvery for "cleaning up your potty mouth." Ah. Then who were these people? I grabbed a girl with a pug nose walking by by the wrist. I'd be sure to scold myself for being so handsy tomorrow, but for now I asked. "Who's Timothy?"
She giggled the ways girls who've had too much are wont to do and said, "You silly. Don't worry. We'll be ready soon."
Colin glanced at me, but before he could ask the question I wanted to, the door to our room closed with a bang. All of the lights turned off, save Joe's old mood candle. And then everyone was holding candles. And then the all the music stopped save some heavy southern trap. And then I noticed there was a table in the center of the room. And then I noticed that everyone was chanting. And then the lanky guy from before threw my RA on the table, naked. And then someone pulled out a long knife with a serrated edge and handed to it gorgeous.
"Happy birthday, Timothy!" Emily said to raucous cheers before bringing the blade down on Kyle's chest.
"Well shit."