"Oh, come on. Everyone can do something. Chrissake, Jim hamboned for his talent, and that's just crap. You've * gotta * be able to do something cool".
Truth was, though, I never really tried anything before really. I never was interested in art or music, and never had any athleticism either. I wasn't any good at juggling, I was an OK cook at best, and really couldn't hum, let alone sing. About the only thing I really excelled at was work, and how demanding was it to run an industrial paper shredder?
"Really, I can't think of anything Steve," I protested. "I didn't even sign up for this stupid seminar."
"Well, none of us did. Stupid 'team building' programs suck. We all get along, don't we?" Steve protested. "Come on, just get up and like, I dunno, hop on one leg in a circle. Anything to get this over with."
"Is someone still shy?" asked the coordinator. "Come one, everyone has something unique to contribute! Let's see how this star **shines! **"
"God, all right," I grumbled. "Ummmm..."
"We believe in you!" our smarmy little manager said. "Don't let us all down in front of the veep!"
"Ugh, fine. I guess I got this little trick I do to take out the trash, but I don't think it really impressive. Um. Anyone got some trash they need to get rid of?"
"Yeah, my last performance review!" someone shouted from the back, followed by a smattering of laughter. Oh, what a riot we were.
"OK, there's a trash can; thanks Cindy. All right, everyone watch, here we go," I said as I pushed the trash away. "Yeah, not very impressive, I know," I mumbled to silence. And more silence. Finally, it got uncomfortable. "What? You wanted me to participate; I never said it was a *good* talent, OK?"
"How did you do that," whispered Jeff, our VP of operations. "What did you do?"
"What? I just, you know, pushed it away."
"Away? Away from what?!"
"You know; away from everything."
"What, like, everything? All at once?"
"Well...yeah. Saves me a ton of time on taking out the trash."
"Son," said Jeff, "screw this seminar. We need to talk about your new raise, and that little bit of magic you can do."