**Odyssey of the Edrathi: A 'Home' At Last? **
Our homeworld is long dead, and few of us remain. There were many "flotilla fleets" like ours, although what has become of them, who can say? Do the people of Ukrub still number in the millions at least, or are the 437,521 survivors in our fleet all that remain of our race? Even with the tetradrives to travel a lightyear in the span of a month, it would take centuries to properly contact the other fleets, and who's to say we would ever receive an answer?
Years of rotating individuals between waking work and cryosleep, the prohibition of bearing children except in extreme circumstances, the reclamation of any and all resources onboard our ships, all to keep us going until we found another planet to settle. We found such a world through the telescopes, the closest world brimming with life in our otherwise barren sector, and set up a string of jumps towards that planet. As we drew ever closer, however, we were able to see the clustered lights on the nightside, and learned that we were indeed not alone in this cold unforgiving universe. We had been given new hopes and fears in a single stroke, for while it was a world harbouring an alien intelligence, we knew so little about the pale, gaunt creatures that trotted about without claws or tails, only their deformed spines and lanky legs enabling them to walk upright.
As we crossed into the heliosphere into the system, a translation project was started up to dissect and analyse the wild and blurry transmissions echoing forth from that noisy little garden, and we found something most intriguing. Many of the transmissions were spoken in a similar language to that heard in the Book of Rush, many of the words spoken lining up to the words of the lead singer on the original holographic tapes. This planet, could it be "Erth"? Could these tall furless beings be the Elda race of Mann? In our efforts to survive the destruction of Ukrub, had we stumbled upon the birthplace of the gods?
Even with this grand revelation, we were yet again surprised when we intercepted quite an intriguing signal, what seemed to be a binary transmission of sorts, 3217 octobits in size. The signal continued for exactly 252 seconds before it stopped, and the second we had the complete message our engineers set about trying to decipher it. By freak chance, one of them arranged it into 111 rows, each row being 28 units long, and found what appeared to be a vertical series of blocky pictograms.
What we noticed first was that this world appeared to operate on Base-12, seemingly due to how their paws had 5 digits as opposed to our 4. I remember counting the digits on their paws, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12. Then I counted mine, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10. Creepy, but made a surprising amount of sense. Then came the second collection of numbers, 1, 6, 7, 10, 17. We lined them up to the atomic numbers of the 5 elements essential for genetic molecules, and lo and behold the third section of the message showed representations of molecular formulae for every nucleotide present in the genetic code, followed by a symbol of the double helix and what appeared to be 37,775,775,536 base pairs, roughly the size of our own genome though possibly exaggerated. Maybe it was an early approximate on their part?
The following sections depicted the Elda, in height and in population, then the worlds in their system, for some reason counting a very small dwarf world we found to be rather rich in nitrogen ice with pockets of frozen methane, and finally what appeared to be a radio telescope, presumably the source of the signal. With the project wrapped up, we continued our voyage past the gas giants and through that asteroid belt of theirs, until the remains of our fleet, all 437,521 refugees on board, came into orbit around an Erth mysteriously devoid of major space structures. There were an abundance of satellites, yes, and a small collection of pods and panels that constituted a rather primitive space station, but beyond that we were left quite confused.
Through surface scans we were able to see the sprawling metropolises of the Elda race, and there were undoubtedly people in great abundance, but they appeared transfixed by something. Some were glued to their media devices, while others stared up into the infinite skies, but all shared similar expressions. Unease, anxiety, fear, excitement, emotions we had gleaned from their visual transmissions en-route to Erth. Some great tragedy, we presumed, as we scanned for areas far from the cities, suitable zones to land and establish our colonies. After all, if they weren't using the wild spaces, surely they would not object to a race in need making efficient use of the land, right? How naive we were...
At first, our colonies remained safe and the colonists rejoiced in the free air, drinking deep of natural waters and finally breeding freely as our ancestors did. Then came the Elda, and when they came across us, we learned that they were not nearly as wizened and powerful as we thought, that they were not a unified species at all. While the majority of "contact" instances between us and the "humans" were cautious and slow, a few of our colonies on the Eurasian supercontinent met a horrifying fate. Men with guns and bombs, intent on clearing us from their lands like mere vermin! I still have nightmares about what I read in those reports...
Needless to say, we would not consider the "Russians" or "Middle Easterners" as trading partners, and despite the heavy trade sanctions already in place on the former, they consistently refused the calls to pay reparations for the Siberian Massacres. I shudder to think how life would have been if Russia still had that "Soviet Union" of theirs. But otherwise, the majority of U.N members came to accept the edrathi as a nation of our own, though there is still unease between our species on the whole. Unless humanity wipes itself out with atomics, perhaps our two kinds can learn from one-another, and find joy in the world we now share. While the lost children of Ukrub might not technically belong on Earth, it is the only place our once proud race can call home...