Time stands still, and he appears. Deaths robes licked the cold tile as he entered the room to claim his latest victim. Darkness flowed from them onto the floor like a mist, shrouding his movements as he shifted his frame towards the hospital bed.
He allowed his eyes to rest for a moment on the young woman that lie there. Golden blonde hair, rose colored cheeks, icy blue eyes. How unfortunate she must feel at this moment, how awful to be her. Her husband collapsed on the white tile floor next to her, the pain of loss must have been terrible for him. Death had, of course seen this before, many times. But in cases like this, he could not help himself from feeling an amount of regret and empathy for the departings kin. The world was not fair, not right, but it was not for him to decide, he had a job to do. Death claims all, no matter the circumstances.
His victim lie still, and death looked on. A stillborn baby, the very opposite of himself, yet still the very essence of himself. Here is what should have been life. What should have been happiness. But the world was not fair, not right, and he had a job to do, it was not for him to decide. He reached for the young soul and grasped it gently.
He paused for a brief moment and felt the warmth from the soul on his bone like fingers. "You are young and do not know sadness or joy, and so this may mean little to you but, I do not wish to claim you." The souls warmth remained. Death felt a small pulsation coming from it. It glowed a warm hue of the purest golden white, untainted by the years of hurt that life brings. He looked at the small body in which it came from, fragile and motionless.
"I will watch you closely, little soul. I expect great things in return for this," Deaths voice rumbled deeply as he reached out to the stillborn child's body a second time. "not everyone gets a second chance at life, but everyone deserves a first chance."
Death released the warm, vibrant soul back to where it came, and glided back to the door. "Until we meet again, little one." he said.
As he made his exit from the room, he could hear the child's first gasp of air, followed by a cry. The world may not be fair, not right, but today Death respected life. He would watch over this one, to see what good his empathy brought the world of fragile men.