They say you die of old age with black blood. Not that I've ever seen an autopsy done before. Born with white blood and gets darker with every sin, or thats what they say. Im kinda a sceptic, could be a strange corralation. My blood the few short times a year I see it is kinda looks like a flavored coffee creamer last I saw it. But sitting right in front of me is the love of my life the sweetest person I know with a nose bleed, that is way beyond the fifty shades of grey or brown that late life blood usually is. Shes not even embarrassed, even though I'm a sceptic this is mad unusual. She tells me that she doesn't believe in sin and that morals are created by man. That this blood turning is guilt that maybe she could do something better. Or maybe for not giving people a second chance. This all seems way to rehearsed to be the full story. When we get home for the night I ask if she murdered someone half jokingly, she gets mad that I'm just like the rest believing these myths not actually believing in the science, or even science may have a possibility to explain this.
Now let's go on to as why she's saying this is a myth and why I'm not running out on her. In the beginning there was Adam and Eve. The creator told Adam not to eat the fruit of the tree of knowledge for you shall surely die on this day. Adam tells Eve do not touch that tree of knowledge for you shall surely die. The first sin or so they say a little white lie told from husband to wife. So the snake was born Vushu. Vushu convinced Eve to touch the tree and got her to eat the forbidden fruit. She then fed it to Adam and the creator says you shall surely die on this day but a day is a thousand years so your new punishments will be: must work the fields, painful childbirth, and your blood will coagulate (not a real translation just a modern one) like a snake bite. For the snake is sin and you have created it with you tongue. Well this fable is passed down for around 36 generations at 2400 years. Where the creator chooses a people in front of what the book says 600,000 males. Which that story is only written a hundred or so years later following the Messiah and promised eternal glory. But the Messiah events were only recorded 700 years later and 200 years after his death.
Ok now here's the fun part this fable didn't even happen on this planet apparently it happened on earth which good destroyed due to man kinds black blood. We are on Mars just seven generations after earth's destruction. They say we will be saved when earth settles and we will be repopulated. But being the sceptic I am I agree with my girlfriend I think we were responsible for our actions, and earth's demise.
I kiss my girlfriend on the cheek maybe you can't take a joke that's why you've got black blood.