Life on the reservation was miserable. Poverty, crime and corruption ran rampant, and day-to-day life was much harder than it should be. Growing up, Steven learned about the White Man, who had come under the guise of peace and slaughtered his people, stole their land and herded them into these godforsaken hovels. Steven swore he would help his people. He spurned the guidance of his elders and their suggestion that he become an attorney or a civic leader, or an activist. Instead, Steven gravitated toward the myths and Gods of his ancestors, praying every day for a way to restore glory to the Cherokee nation.
As Steven got older, he had *visions. * In one, an eagle carried him across the ocean, dropping him in a faraway land where his people dwelled, hunting and living off the land. There were no cars, no smog, no white man. In another vision, a huge grey wolf carried him through the forest and into a reservation, but here there were only white men, and they lived as he did, stumbling through the life he had always known. The Gods had been good to him. They had given him a name, Spirit Traveler, and they gave him purpose; he knew what he must do, but how?
One day, as Steven was sitting in the smoke hut, meditating on his myths and gods, he had his most vivid vision. He stood facing the fire, the wolf and the eagle across from him on either side. The wolf growled and snarled, baring his fangs. The eagle spread his wings wide, raising his beak to the sky. A powerful voice resonated in his head.
"CHOOSE," it told him, "Spirit Traveler, you must make your choice between the fearsome wolf or the powerful eagle."
Spirit Traveler felt a deep hollowness in his chest, a great fear of the beasts before him. As he cowered back, the wolf spoke in a low rumble: "You do not have to fear me." The eagle replied in a piercing shriek "You do not have to fear anything!"
He clenched his fists. What path should he take? He stepped forward, swallowing the lump in his throat. He reached out and made his choice.
The feast was underway when he opened his eyes. He saw the long tables, his proud, lithe ancestors sitting across from the pudgy white men in their ridiculous black and white costumes. His ancestors were so strong; he had never seen a native so full of confidence and power. He was overwhelmed; he could not imagine how these people could have been so easily and so thoroughly overrun by the much weaker white men.
His spirit animal whispered. "Let's do what we came here to do."