I rebuttoned my jeans up as I made my way back through the great city of Rome. I wasn't worried about being seen by the locals, the cloaking would take care of that. For all they knew there was nobody walking down the street with a freshly sucked dick and a smile as big as the colosseum.
The rendezvous site was between two pillars, I would meet Jeremy there and we would go back to the future. We'd been paired up as time buddies, making sure that neither of us tried to stay. There was a big deal at Two Timers about paradoxes, but I wasn't paying much attention to that.
We'd built up quite the bond during our time together as Time buddies, we would discuss how things went if we were going to look for a new girl, our lives at home. I spent an hour every three days with the man, so he and I had become fast friends, and we had made a pact to make every Wednesday from this day on blowjob day.
We chatted for a moment before being wrapped up in the time stream, a nice blue middle area between times. It was where the HQ of Two Timers was. At the helm today was Trisha, who was looking over papers when we ported in.
"Hi, Trish!" Jeremy said, he always left a big tip with her, and she usually redid the top button of her blouse when he left.
"Hey Jeremy," she said, not looking up from her paperwork, "2056 right?"
"That's the year," I said with a smile, man it felt good to have someone who wanted you.
"Sounds good," she tapped a few buttons and pressed the large red one, a large ERROR popped up on her screen, "Ah shit," she said looking up to us, "What did you guys do?"
"We went and cheated on our wives," I said while rolling my eyes.
"No, like, what exactly did you do?"
"Well," Jeremy began, "It's blowjob Wednesday."
"Blowjob," Trisha lost volume, "Wednesday"
"Yeah," I said.
"So did you fuck your partner?" She was looking at me with a panicked face, "or did you just get a blowjob."
"She blew me."
"Motherfucker," she said, slamming her papers down, "We send you back to FUCK hot chicks guys."
"So?"
"That sperm she swallowed was Emperor Nero, who was supposed to be born from you," she pointed at me, "and now the timeline we are from doesn't exist."
"Fuck," I said grabbing my comb-over, "What can we do about that?"
"Well I can't send you back to the same day twice," she tapped her pen on her stack of papers, "but there is a way that we can make this work."
"How, we need to turn this around!"
"If we change enough of the timeline that things end up extremely similar, we might be able to go to that timeline," she said looking at her papers, "but you guys are going to need to fuck a lot of chicks."
"I don't know man," Jeremy turned to me, "Are you up for this?"
"Yeah, I think so," I said, looking down at my fly. It was time for the love hammer to bang this timeline back into place.