The air in the room hangs dense with a sense of dread. Another day gone, another night present, another opportunity to let the feelings creep into her core. She sits at the edge of the bed, face damp, staring at the wooden floor underneath her feet. A lamp at the corner provides dim lighting. A fan overhead slowly turns, pressing air gently against her skin
She is a girl, probably the almost-perfect girl, who takes advantage of every minute of her youth. She is a girl who beams her smiles, tells her jokes, and laughs her laughs. She is a girl with plenty of friends, most would say, who sometimes come visit her in that room.
"Why do you do this to yourself?" asks a voice, one quite close, laced with softness moreso than her own.
The girl continues to stare at the floor, her focus elsewhere.
"Why?" the voice continues, even softer. It is quiet. That is not a question the girl knows the answer to. "Want to know something?"
Reluctantly, the girl nods.
"I care about you"
The girl wipes part of her face with her forearm. She sniffles a bit, half believing the voice and half thinking it lies.
"Do you want a hug?" asks the voice. Again, the girl barely manages a nod. "Okay, good."
Warmth surrounds the girl and, after a few moments, it seeps into her core. It doesn't expel the familiar sense of dread, but it gives it company.
"Do you feel better?" she is asked. The girl shifts slightly in that bed and a breaks her gaze from the floor. Her mouth curls slightly. Not a smile, but almost.
"Yeah, I do" mutters the girl, almost to herself. "A bit, at least"
"Good" replied the voice, happier this time. "You're okay. Can you say that to yourself?" The words hang in the dense air in that room.
"I can". She pauses. "I'm okay"
"You're okay" quickly follows the voice. "And I'm here for you"
A slight smile paints itself onto the girl. She inhales deeply and slowly exhales, a sense of calm flowing through her. Another night about to end, another opportunity to see tomorrow.
She is a girl, far a from perfect, still with more time left in her youth. She is a girl who on the outside perhaps seems joyous, but no one has ever known her deeper than that. She is a girl, a lonely girl, which no one would say, and the only person in the room that night.