I remove my glasses to wipe off the sweat between my eyes. I've been watching this little tutorial for ten minutes now. How long does it take to make a fucking sandwich?
While her hands moved in slow-motion, she rambled endlessly about the history of the brand, from its New England roots to its present-day empire. Finally, she squatted down to examine the sandwich at eye level. "Okay!" she squealed. "Now that the tuna is spread evenly, we can prepare for the cheese. Now, we at Subway offer a variety of freshly-sliced cheeses. We carry American, Cheddar, Provolone, Feta, Mozzarella, Pepperjack, and Swiss," she said peppily, pointing to each respective wedge. "Now, we cut them in isosceles triangles. If you place two of them next to each other like this, they fit nicely into a parallelogram. See? I like to cover the entire base into cheese parallelograms. It just looks neater that way."
I take a moment to glance at my watch. Fifteen minutes. I better be getting a break soon. Meanwhile, her face is inches away from the sandwich. Without blinking, she places each slice of cheese onto the geometric pattern. She breathes a quiet sigh of relief after each successful placement.
"It's not going to collapse. It's a sandwich."
She blinked and looked up at me innocently.
"Sorry?"
"You can get on with the demo. I know how to put cheese on a sandwich."
Her eyes began to well up with tears.
"I'm sorry, it's just that I take so much pride in my work. This is my first job since Benny, my gerbil, died. Things are still rough."
I was lost for words. I mumbled an apology, yet she continued to stare at me hopefully. The persistent eye contact made me uncomfortable. I eventually gave into the silence.
"Is there anything I can do...to...you know...help?" I offered.
Her eyes lit up.
"Yes, I am knee-deep in debt thanks to the whole funeral arrangement. Seriously, I can't even afford college. It's like $20,000 a year. Times four years. Which is $80,000. Plus room and board."
I looked at her incredulously.
"So can we just do the whole dramatic reveal-thing now? I mean, I knew it was you from the minute you walked in. That ratty wig wouldn't fool anyone, Mr. DeLuca!"
Unbelievable. I guess this is what happens when you try to enter the job market at 40.