Sublieutenant G'rakh sighed as he watched the flickering screen.
*Eight years at the Academy just to be stuck at this lousy post*, he thought to himself.
G'rakh was one of three officers assigned to the scanning station aboard the starship *Lek'vah*. Hours were long and uneventful, especially in this dead region of space.
He looked up as someone walked in the room. It was Lieutenant Salak'kor, his immediate superior.
"Nothing to report here, sir" he said, as Salak'kor lowered himself into the seat beside him.
"Well, I didn't really expect there to be much" replied Salak'kor. "There hasn't been any life in this system for thousands of *vrakh*."
G'rakh called up a review of the system on his screen. He leaned forward and skimmed through the article.
"Simple planetary system orbiting an F-class star. Of the eight planets only one, the third planet in, was believed capable of sustaining life. However, we can only speculate as the planet was destroyed some 6,000 *vrakh* ago."
G'rakh looked back at the scanner screen. Where there should have been a planet instead was an immense debris field. Most of the fragments were small, about the size of an escape pod, but some were very large, several times larger than the *Lek'vah* herself. One or two of the chunks were large enough that he could even see the curvature of the planet. "That doesn't look like it happened naturally." he said.
"That's right" said Salak'kor. "I studied this system when I was at the Academy for my xenoarchaeology course. I had a theory that there was once an intelligent species on that planet, but it destroyed itself before discovering interplanetary flight."
G'rakh imagined his own world being splintered into a million pieces, its atmosphere venting off into space. He shuddered.
"Is that why we've come all this way?" he asked. "So you can search for signs of an ancient civilization and figure out what happened to them?"
There was a snort from the seat beside him. "No, even I don't have that much pull with the captain. We're here to conduct some light-drive tests. Hell, I wasn't even *that* interested in this system when I *was* at the Academy."
"Ah, I see," replied G'rakh. "well, since it is just about 32:00, I think I'll go off-duty a little early, if you don't mind, sir." G'rakh got out of his seat and stretched his four arms.
"Not at all, G'rakh," said Salak'kor. He leaned back in his seat and craned his neck back over his shoulder. "It's not like you'll be missing much."
"Thanks, sir. I think I'll go grab a bite to eat before turning in." He had almost made it out of the room when a soft beeping noise made him pause. He turned around.
"Is that what I think it is?"
Salak'kor pointed to a pulsing green indicator. "Yeah. It appears that the scanners have picked up something in the debris. Non-organic, though artifical in nature. Let's go see what it is, shall we?"
They walked through the twisting passageways of the ship. When they reached the aft airlock and donned their micro-light-drive acceleration suits. As they stepped out into open space and engaged their drives, G'rakh keyed his com system.
"Where we headed, sir?"
"Coordinates 302'045'-248" came the Lieutenant's reply.
Despite himself, G'rakh could feel his hearts beat slightly faster.
*Finally, I get to get out of that cramped scanner room! * he thought, *I've been waiting far too long for something like this. *
A short while later, they arrived at the coordinates of the object the scanners picked up. The Lieutenant's voice came over the com system.
"We're looking for something small, light-pink colored, and around 10 *uk'rea* in length."
"Roger that, sir" G'rakh replied.
A few hours later they found what they were looking for. They put the object into a containment unit and headed back for the *Lek'vah*. Once aboard, they sterilized the object and began analyzing it.
"Do you have any idea what it is?" asked Salak'kor.
"Not the faintest idea" replied G'rakh. He picked up the object. It was long and cylindrical, with a raised section at one end terminating in a point, and two spheres affixed to the opposite end.
"It appears to be solid in its construction, comprised of a malleable synthetic material." He sniffed it. "Nothing unusual about the smell."
He handed it over to Salak'kor, who took it by one end and shook it gently. The object wiggled back and forth.
"What could it be?"

---------------
Thanks, OP, for the interesting prompt!
This is my first time writing anything other than a research paper, comments and criticism welcome!
Edit: forgot a word