It took me a few weeks to piece together what had happened. I went to the police, filed the report, and collaborated with their investigation. Luckily, the nearby ATM caught the whole thing on camera, and I never was truly under any sort of suspicion.
As the man had no other ID, it was quite another effort to track down who he was. The bullet he fired, unfortunately disfigured most of his face, and this finger prints had been sanded off. I don't like thinking how much pain that must have caused, nor the insanity that would drive him, anyone really, to that level of desperation. I don't even know what he thought he was going to hide from by doing that.
I scanned the missing person's reports after the incident, expecting a friend or family member to be looking for someone with a similar physical description. He was a black male, mid twenties, about 5 foot 10, and medium build. He had a goatee, shaved head, and soulfully expressive eyes. There were tears in his eyes before he shot himself. The man had regrets. He had something or someone he had to leave behind. He had a place with someone somewhere. I tried to broaden the search and pull up all the missing people reports in other states and different years, but as I continue to go through them, I none have been a match so far.
I framed the card he handed to me. It is on my wall right now, above my desk in my home office. I don't know what this man did to get the card, but I am pretty sure he used it. Whatever it is, it isn't an ordinary card. I saw the name change. The letters moved and melded from his to mine. All I had time to see was a name, but it was gone before I could even read it. My guess is that this card is cursed, a magical relic from some time passed, with its own history of pain and torture being inflicted on its users. I tried cutting it up and throwing it out, but every day, it appears, intact, in my wallet, or pocket, jacket, or wherever. One time, it even showed up in my gym shoes. Most days it seems to stay in the case. It seems to be fine waiting there watching me watch it back. Other days it shows up in my pocket, wanting to tag along for the ride. So far though, it is staying with me.
I don't know how I know, but I know the card wants me to use it. I'm not a smart man, but I do know I am not going to do what it wants. I saw what happened to the previous guy. I know that this is a problem beyond me. That being said, this is the first time I can do something. My dad died because I wanted him to get me my special popsicle from the store--sideswiped by a drunk driver on the way back. Mom drank herself to death after that. My sister took care of me for a long while, not that I ever deserved it or made it easier for her. Wife left me when I slept with her sister. I never wanted to be with her sister, but she was there, I was drunk, and I let things happen. I have a kid out there now, without a dad.
In short, my life is a historical record of an unremarkable man who just hasn't risen to the occasion. Now I can. I don't know what this card is. I don't know what it does or why it does it. I do know that it will lead to my ruin, and any others after me. I am ending this though. So, for the rest of my life, the card will sit here with me for the rest of my life, utterly useless.
No one will ever find it. The curse will not be passed on to another. I am a friendless, isolated man, without a loved one in the world. It is a life I've entirely made for myself, and maintaining it is the best thing I can ever do for anyone else.
* [Edit: Cleaned up some grammar and one inconsistent point] *