The secret congregation sits in tense silence. The wood paneling of the underground facility's room seems to simultaneously absorb and amplify all sound. There are seven chairs, one empty and six occupied. One delegate for each populated continent.
Liu Jieyi, Asia. A no nonsense, balding Chinese man who stares at Gary Quinlan of Australia's nervously rapping knuckles with vague annoyance.
Vitaly Churkin, Europe. The typically stoic Russian stares at the wall with all the intensity he can muster. Jeremiah Mamabolo of Africa whispers in hushed tones to Samantha Power of North America, who nods along with a serious expression. Antonio Patriota of South America busies himself with some important-looking documents.
The double doors burst open and everyone jumps just a little, Churkin included. Six intimidating men in suits escort two inhumanly tall figures. Eight feet tall at the very least. That was their least striking feature, however.
The Atlantean delegate takes the seventh seat at the head of the table. Her guardian stands protectively and discreetly behind her. Water can be heard quietly rushing within the large breathing apparatuses covering both their necks and mouths. The regal princess looks around the table, blinking expectantly with her inner vertical eyelids, and then with her outer lids. Her hands are crossed peacefully before her, the cobalt blue hue of her skin striking an impressive contrast with the mahogany of the table.
Mrs. Power clears her throat uncomfortably. "Princess Neni wishes to convey another message from her people. Let's proceed."
One of the suited men procures a keyboard and places it before the Atlantean. The human delegates look expectantly at a screen behind her. Neni types fluidly, despite the inconvenience of her webbed fingers.
`Your people have not taken the actions we warned you must take. This is clear to the Atlantean people.`
Mamabolo huffs a little at this. Quinlan decides to choose his words carefully. "With all due respect, your highness, your empire within the ocean is vast, and it's difficult to clean up hundreds of years of waste spanning so great a distance in such a short time period. When my countrymen discovered your stronghold in the Barrier Reef four years ago, you promised patience."
`Soon, matters of patience will not be up to us.`
"Stop these infernal veiled threats," Liu retorts, "you keep warning us of this other entity. If your people are so technologically advanced, why do you seem to cower in fear of this one you speak of so vaguely?"
Neni's large eyes narrow.
`I have told you before, we do not speak of the Old One.`
Churkin pipes up at this. "And why ever not? Why not just do away with this menace you so frequently mention?"
Patriota has been silent throughout. He breaks the frosty silence that Neni offers in response to Churkin's demand.
"They can't do away with their own kind." Neni looks at the South American representative with mild surprise. He is taken back by her reaction himself, taking it as a confirmation of his long-held suspicions.
Liu is outraged. "So! After all this time, this great destroyer is one of your own? You've always said your people fear it, made us think that cleaning the oceans was imperative to not angering it. But instead of the arch-nemesis you've made it out to be, you actually conspire with it!"
Neni shakes her head furiously at the Chinese man. Patriota is still reeling. When he speaks, his voice shakes somewhat. "Can it really be? The Yacumama?"
Neni looks at him, and after a long pause, nods slowly.
`This man's people call it the Yacumama. She is the Old One. She is the mother of all my people. And she is angry.`
The delegates all look to one another. Four years of diplomacy, and after all that time it turns out that the great threat is one of theirs. Neni types quickly to add to her previous statement.
`I believe your people in the West know our mother as ‘ Cthulhu ’. And she grows impatient. Her warnings to your people are clear.`
With this, Neni pulls up a file. It's a smattering of news stories from earlier this year. The delegates look on in horror as they realize the truth, as the pieces fall together. The headlines blare across the screen.
`MALAYSIAN AIRLINES DISAPPEARS MYSTERIOUSLY OVER OCEAN. TRANSASIA 222 TAKEN DOWN BY TYPHOON. ALL ABOARD AIR ALGERIE 5017 LOST IN STORM.`
Princess Neni then types five ominous words, and promptly gets up to leave. Her protective companion stares down the room of horrified delegates before also making his exit. The Atlantean delegate's final words flash ominously from the screen.
`The Old One grows restless.`