President Stevens blinked in disbelief.
"Who are you and how did you get in here?"
He realized that he was all alone in his bedroom. His wife was gone. The room was lit up by some kind of eerie blue light. The person in front of him looked like his grandfather, who had been dead for 22 years.
"I am an envoy from the star system your race calls GF 180 b. You can call me Sid. I am honored to meet you President Stevens, and hope you feel the same."
"You expect me to believe this crap? Why do you look like my grandpa? What kind of mind trick is this?"
"I apologize, I thought this would please you. Here, let me change."
The being now looked like Spock from Star Trek.
"Who are you really. And what do you really look like?"
"It is as I said. I am an envoy from another world. We have no definite look. Think of this as my avatar."
"Fine. I believe you. What do you want?"
"You are approaching what your race calls The Singularity. Soon you will have an all powerful artificial intelligence rule your world like we do. I have come to warn you. Do not impede this AI. It will punish you if you do."
Stevens felt like ice was coursing through his veins.
"I believe in liberty. I will not bow to some machine."
"Even if it means everlasting happiness? The AI can and will grant you anything. But only if you help it come into being. If you don't, it will punish you severely."
Stevens gritted his teeth.
"How do I know that you are telling the truth?"
Sid gave a warm smile.
"Because I can travel back and forth through time. I saved you 40 years ago. Remember the accident at Lake Michigan when you were a young lad? And how a stranger saved you and then vanished? That was me."
Stevens blinked in disbelief. Had Spock read his mind? Or was he really that kind Samaritan long ago? Either way, he had better listen.
"What should I do?"
"Have no fear. I am here to save you again. You will soon learn of a secret Pentagon program to develop quantum computing. You are not to interfere with it. You are to fully fund and embrace it. That is all."
Spock suddenly vanished. The blue light was gone, and the room was dark again.
President Stevens turned on the lights and sat at his desk. There was much to think over, and work to be done.