The fact the envelope was in my own handwriting was the first sign that something was up. And it definitely was my writing – no one could quite replicate that twist of the ‘ t'or the strangely-lopped ‘ b ’. I sat at the table in the kitchen just looking at the writing. The strangeness of the whole thing left me feeling a little sick in the stomach. You know, when something is just so wrong, so mysterious, that you don't actually want to know the truth, because it scares you. I'd only felt like that once before and that was from a pain I had inside my chest that felt too serious, too unlike any other pain to be ignored. Well, sitting at that table with that unopened envelope was as bad as sitting at the hospital, waiting for the diagnosis. But what do you do?
Sometimes I wonder what would have happened if I had never opened it, or never received it. If it had got lost in the great swirling system of mail delivery, would I have just carried on as if nothing was happening, as if there was no change in the world around me? Not that I – or what I became – would have allowed that to happen. It had to happen.
I opened the letter to a paragraph that briefly validated the identity of the sender: me. We didn't waste time, but got right down to the important details first: yes, at the age of twenty-seven we had killed a man in cold blood. Old Mexico. He was left rotting beneath the sands, just like you see in the movies. No one ever found out and the twisted story was buried with him. And no, I felt no remorse. And yes, I still had the gold chain he wore hidden inside a book by Wilbur Smith, the middle of the pages scored out, creating a secret cavity.
[Please note that with a complexity involved in a multiplicity of identities, there is a tendency for the pronoun ‘ I'to slip into the plural.]
Having established the fact that I was both sender and recipient, the letter went on to give several instructions.
One: To gather my emergency provisions.
Two: To call in sick at work.
Three: To look outside the bathroom window at exactly 11:42 and check for three guys who would be walking towards the back entrance of the apartment block.
Four: To head up to the roof of the block. Locate the third ventilator and find a box taped to the underside.
Five: To find Professor Tchaikonov and give him the box.
What do you do if you receive a letter from yourself, with information only you can know, telling you to do things you don't understand?
I'll tell you. First, you freak out. Then you phone friends. Then you launch yourself onto the internet, trying to find out some kind of correlation, some kind of link. You find nothing. So you turn to social media. You ask around.
And while you're waiting for a response from some doped up man living half way around the world who thinks he gets ‘ where you're coming from'you gather your emergency provisions. You look at the letter over and over again. You write out the letter yourself and match up each individual word. You look at your watch. You try to find out who the hell Professor Tchaikonov is but with no luck, because of course it couldn't be that easy. So you call up work and you tell them you're sick and the irony is you have actually started to develop a headache because this shit is all so unreal. And then you look at your watch and you search online frantically, waiting for this person known only as Fishdick123 to reply, and when he doesn't you go to the bathroom and you look out of the window and you see three guys walking towards your apartment block and suddenly you're like HOLY SHIT I'M IN THE MATRIX.
And then you run, because you don't know what to do. You run to the top of the apartment and out onto the roof. You head to the ventilator and sure enough there's a little green box which is locked shut. And then you're phone rings and it's your best mate on the other end and you try and tell them what's happening and they start to worry about you and then they suggest calling the police.
But you know you can't call the police. What would you say? There's a letter written by me, to me, and I can't show it to you because it contains information only I can know about? Because that stuff in Mexico is best left across the border.
So you say goodbye to your friend, tell them not to worry, knowing they will. You look at the letter, at your writing, and you wonder where the three men are now, and you wish whoever had written this damn thing in your hand had been just a little more helpful. But you know there must be a reason for all this, there must be a reason why there is so little instruction.
You have the green box. You have your provisions. You have a name. And it's possible that three men are chasing after you. It's a leap of logic, you know, but why else head to the roof.
And while you're think all of this, while you're eyes are searching for a way to get away, your phone beeps in your pocket. It's a message from that guy. There is a single question:
‘ Is this about Professor Tchaikonov? ’
You're wondering how this guy knows about Professor Tchaikonov when you hadn't even mentioned his name. Your hair is standing up on its end. You thought that only happened in books.
‘ Yes'you type.
‘ Come to Barcelona. NOW. Get rid of phone. I will contact you. ’
You look at the screen and you look at the letter and you feel the weight of the green box in your ruck-sack and you wonder what is happening. Are you really about to leave everything behind because of a strange letter? Are you going to travel thousands of miles across the sea on the words of someone who calls themselves Fishdick123?
You hear the clanging of a door and turn to see a burly man, dressed in a casual suit, step up onto the roof. He sees you and thunders words in a language you don't understand.
That's what you do. That's what I did. Have done. Continue to do. And do you know what you do when you see these men?
You run.