When he returns from the mission, he tells the official version of his story so many times that he starts to believe it. He's on talk shows. He's on webcasts. He does guest appearances at sporting events and sees himself wave and smile on a screen two hundred feet tall, but he cannot recognize his own face. He thinks of this again when his visits his mother so she can play for him the recording of his first national appearance.
A clip of him shaking hands with the president plays silently on a loop from a frame by her front door. She says how proud she is of him and fills their time by playing the clips again and again and discussing her favorite parts. Here, she says, the way you nod, see? Everyone knows how brave you are. How strong. She sends copies of her highlight reel to her friends and siblings and he is inundated with emails and voicemail and missed video calls. We love you, they say. You make us proud.
At home, there is a regimen to take his mind off the lying and the mission and all the things from before the mission that still bubble up in public places and force him into bathroom stalls to throw up or weep against tile floors covered with piss. He does yoga in the morning. He meditates to the sound of monks chanting near the sea. He uses the VR sets that tech companies sent to him for free to wander a virtual copy of the moon in big leaping bounds. He finds a crater and stares back at the Earth and watches storms swirl across her surface as she spins through blackness. He tires the breathing exercises. He takes two pills in the morning with food, two at midday with plenty of water, and just one, dark blue pill before bed. He never remembers his dreams, but often wakes to find himself covered in sweat.
At his mother's house, he watches himself sit across from an aged Katie Couric, who at ninety looks sixty and still somewhat beautiful for an older woman. She's had treatments, sure, but doesn't looks as artificial and taught as the pop stars of his youth who are still singing about what boys and girls do when there's no one around to see. Her voice has never changed and she seems to be peering into his soul when they cut to her. "Tell us," she says from the television, "about the first minutes after the crash. What were you thinking? Feeling? What did you see?"
"Uh," he sees himself say. He half-smiles and runs a nervous hand through his hair. "We went through north of containment," he says. The picture cuts away to a detailed map of the Zone 6 and zooms in on the east side. Two computer generated Stallions fly over the terrain. "It was dark," he says. "It's always dark there. Dark like it is just after the sun sets completely and there is still some light on the horizon." He watches as the Stallions twist through a canyon and remember what it felt like to go through containment, like he ripped through an invisible bubble with his bare hands. They said, when got there, before the mission, that engineers carried the whole FOB piecemeal through gaps in containment. It took years, they said.
His mother fast-forwards the tape. This good part is coming up, she says as if he hasn't seen it several dozen times. The shots cut from Katie to him, him to Katie, back to the map and the animation. She resumes it as one of the Stallions clips a rock ledge and crashes into the snow at the base of a long canyon. "What was going through your mind then?"
He shook his head on the screen and in real life. "Not much," he said with a kind of reserved smile they had made him practice. "You don't think, your training takes over. As soon as Oscar 2-2 hit that cliff, we dropped about 50 meters straight down and I was on the ground before I really had time to think."
"And what did you see?" Katie says.
He swallows. He watches as his tongue comes out to moisturize his lips. "Well, a lot of my friend were already dead," he says. "A lot of them were dying, but some of them were trying to get up. That's when we heard the first shots."
"And where did those shots come from?"
"I didn't know," he says, but he did know. A guy named Martin or Martinez or something had opened fire from behind him. At first, he fired blindly into the air. He was trying to get his mask off with the other hand. He was screaming something, but the machine gun was tearing the air all around them. Another man, Jackson, took a grenade from his belt, pulled the pin, and rushed aimlessly away from the Stallion. He was chanting something in a language no one had heard and no one knew. He exploded several yards from the second Stallion, crippling one of the engines which began to burn. The pilots bailed, ran a few meters from the Stallion, then pulled their sidearms and shot each other without a word.
"What did you do?" Katie says.
Here, his mother says, this is the best part.
In the video, he looks at the camera. His eyes are wet. "I did what I had to do," he says. "I did my job."
His mother claps her hands together. That is my son, she says like she is seeing it for the first time.
"I ran to the downed Stallion and found Cooper and Estrada. She still had her mask on," he says.
"And by she, you mean Corporal Estrada?"
"Yes," he says. "She had a broken leg, but she was firing into the cliff side. That's the first time I saw them. I carried Cooper out first. He was unconscious and bleeding from his wounds and needed evac, which was already on its way." On the screen, he pauses and half smiles again. "All of this is happening, not like a movie, but at the same time, each piece of information has the same weight, you know?"
Katie nods. "It was confusing," she says. "Scary."
"Yes," he says and wipes at his eyes.
"We're going to cut away for a minute," Katie says, "but we'll be back with-"
His mother fast forwards again. I'll skip this, she says.
They have given him yellow pills and he fishes one out of the bottle in his pocket as several advertisements blur past. He pops one and swallows it dry. It tastes the way he thinks mustard gas tastes, dusty and sour and full of slow death. It bubbles in his stomach. I think I need to get going, he says.
Just stay, his mother says, for this last part.
I've seen it, he says.
Please, she says. Just stay.