My team and I had found where the humans were hiding. We all decided they posed a threat to the advancement of our race. It was either us or them. We could bring our race to the edge of the known universe, colonize, thrive, live in a way God couldn't have even imagined. But as long as the humans lived, they continued to hate us, they continued to attack us.
We were hovering over where a group could be hiding. I looked out the window of our craft, and I saw the target. We had been searching through China for months homing in on their location. And now we reached them here.
We landed. Our craft's ramp fell to the ground, and we walked down. The temple was dark. It was night, and there haven't been any artificial lights in China for centuries. We didn't need them. Our sight was enhanced for the darkness, unlike the imperfect humans'.
"Toad," I called his name. We called him so for his abilities. He could scale walls and jump ten times higher than a human. His best attribute, however, would be his incredible tongue. He could extend it upwards of fifteen feet and then latch onto anything it could get a hold of. "See what you can find," I told him as I pointed to the top of the temple. He sprinted towards the temple, jumped, and latched on to the side of the stone wall. As he clambered to the top, the rest of us decided to bust in through the front door.
The entrance seemed to be sealed off with a boulder, barely an inconvenience. One of our team just ran straight into it, knocking the rock away. I gave him a pat on the shoulder, and we walked in. We found a hallway, and at the end we saw a room glowing with light. I lead the way into the room. I turned the corner, and on the ground was a lamp surrounded by ten or so horribly thin humans. They looked as if they hadn't eaten for days, and they were covered in grime and dirt. They looked up at us but didn't try to run. They realized their defeat.
I could sense one of the humans had a knife on them. I felt the knife with my mind and yanked it from his backpack and into the air. I had the ability to control metal objects with my mind, and use them without even moving a muscle. The knife hovered above his head. One of the women screamed as I plunged it into his face. The rest died quickly by the hands of my team.
My team calls me Magneto. And the humans are near extinction.