David Poke woke up and looked out his blob. It used to be a window, but now it was some kind of shape that he didn't know the name of nor cared to learn. He rolled out of what wasn't his bed anymore, and walked through something that could've been a house once, if you used your imagination.
David tried to open a rhombus of serial, but his arms were on both sides of what kind of looks like a body, if you turn your head a little and squint your eyes. This made it exceedingly difficult to eat. Fortunately, David, as well as the rest of post-humanity, didn't feel all that hungry anymore.
The Catartstrophe happened about a week ago. No one really understood it at first, but then again, they didn't really understand anything anymore.
This is what happened. Some shmuck with a BA in Art History realized she didn't have any marketable skills, so she when she graduated with a B- average from her safety school, she had little hope of finding anything resembling a job. Upon returning home, she was met with a litany of "told-ya-sos" by everyone in her family, including the dog who learned to talk solely to mock her life choices.
Distraught, but still convinced her opinions worthy of respect, the fucking moron went on a dark pilgrimage through the world, telling everyone of her brilliant socialist ideas that "totally worked in Sweden, you guys. Seriously."
From country to country, city to city she roamed. Each port of call she fell upon presented her with the existential dread of this certainty: reality was real, and one cared if she was triggered or not. She was laughed out of the Louvre. Mocked in the MOMA. Giggled at in the Gugenheim. Every place she went, no one respected her knowledge! *Inapplicable! * was cried.
*Seriously, get a real job! I think Bed Bath and Beyond is hiring. You get benefits if you work more than 35 hours a week, too! *
*Would you shut up, for fuck's sake? Christ! It's Jackson Pollock. My kid does this on the back of a Denny's activity sheet. *
How she gnashed her perfect, porcelain teeth and how she ripped at her unwashed, dreadlocked hair! How she screamed and howled when, finally, the indifference and stubbornness of the world finally broke her! Like Krakatoa her soul erupted and split in two! The anguished roar echoed in the four corners of the world...
She walked through the desert, seeking the sweet embrace of death. Within a cave she came to rest and wait the arrival of that grim savior. Plop, she lay and splayed her limbs out in total submission to this dark beast called life...
It was then something peculiar happened. Upon whipping her digits from her core, she made contact with something hard in the darkness. A metal peel rang out. Though hopeless depression muted her emotions, a bit of curiosity slipped through. Weakly, she grasped a small bauble and brought it to herself.
Her hands now eyes in the dark, she slowly molested the thing trying to understand what it was.
Thunder clapped and lightning dazzled the halls of her tomb! A roar from beyond time and space cleaved reality, and from the swirling void in this gash formed a being of smokeless fire.
"BEHOLD! THOU HATH SUMMONED, AND I HATH ANSWERED! SPEAK NOW, YOUR WISH, CHILD OF ADIM, AND SO SHALL IT BE."
Also, this chick's name was Deborah. But I'll call her Deb or something.
For half an eternity, Debbie was blinded yet still stared-was speechless but still forced hair out of her huge, gaping mouth. For the first time in her life, she was speechless.
"It's just like Aladdin... "she whispered, as she regained her senses.
"NO. NO, IT ISN'T," said the djinn. "FRANKLY, I WASN'T VERY FOND OF THAT MOVIE. I'M MORE A *LITTLE MERMAID* ENTITY MYSELF, AND I'LL REVISIT *MULAN* FROM TIME TO TIME--BUT I DIGRESS! THE POINT REMAINS THAT THOU MUST MAKETH A WISH! NOW, SPEAK!"
Debbo thought for a moment. What would be the best use of this wish? Eliminating the gender pay gap? No, as much as she bitched about it, she was well aware that when adjusted for relevant differences, the gap all but disappears. Plus, she liked bitching too much about it.
That's it! She'll wish for everyone on Earth to have something to bitch about.
With a malignant grin spreading like a sin across her face, she stared off into forever and said those damning words: "I wish everything... was CUBIST."
And with that, the hot porn that David Poke had been stroking it to suddenly went "Nude Descending A Stair Case". Shocked, David rose only to find that his dick looked like a kaleidoscope puked on it. There were screams of terror outside his blob. Rushing over, he noticed that odd things were rushing about outside, shifting horribly through some god-awful medium, like koi through a raging pond.
Poke went to turn on the tele... something... and heard nothing but sobs from reporters not understanding what happened to their perfectly coiffed hair. There were people arguing over whether something was a leg or not. An oddly curved... triangle thing, I guess would be the best description, was beating the every loving... something....out of another thing. Really, it's all hard to explain, but it was an ugly situation.
Humanity had ended. Cubmanity had dawned. This was Debbie Shcloeman's curse. This was the Catartstrophe. And no one could ever really tell what was going on ever again.