Sometimes I hate my job.
Oh, the work itself isn't bad, it's the travel. By now, I've probably got enough frequent flyer miles to spend the rest of my life in the sky. Yeah, right. As if my job would give me the time off. As if I had the money to do anything else. Jetsetting around the world for the biggest concern around, it ought to be glamorous, right?
Nope.
God, I feel like an ass. I ought to be grateful. I've seen most all of the great wonders of the world. I've been to pretty much every tourist trap there is, and all on the company dime. I've seen and done things that most people wouldn't even believe. So why does my life feel so empty?
Because I made it empty.
And there it was. The truth I'd been trying this whole flight not to think. That I did this to myself. I'd left my friends behind, a long time ago. Now, my life was filled with co-workers, associates, clients. I had done it to myself.
I wasn't there when my son was born. I chose the job. I wasn't there for most of his childhood, other than cleaning up after his pets. I hadn't even seen him since his mother died. His mother. Not my wife, though she had been. I'd let that relationship die too. The boy was living with her parents now.
I was supposed to see him today. What would he say? Would he even recognize me? Would he be angry at me for not being there? What would I say?
Would he be angry at me? I still didn't even know if I was angry at me.
But we've arrived, and it's time for me to meet the son I barely knew.
I see him there, waiting for me. I see him looking for me. He's not scowling. That's something, at least.
"Son."
"Dad."
We look at each other for a small eternity, not quite sure how to proceed. If I stop now, I won't be able to go through with this, so I muster the courage to speak.
"You know I'm sorry about your mother."
Crap. That wasn't what I meant to say.
"Yeah, Dad. I know."
"You saw?"
"Yeah. I saw."
"It's time, son."
He draws back. "Me?"
"You've seen how it works. You're my son, you can do this. Take my hand."
He takes my hand, and I go limp. I fall against him, sliding to the floor, but he's still holding me. He guides me to the other side, just like he saw me do with his mother. Just like I've done so many times.
And I'm finally free.