The hardest part of pulling off a bank robbery is making sure Cory has his shit together. I watch as his bandanna bounces, sliding down the ridge of his nose as our van hits every pothole in Oklahoma.
"That's too loose, Cory. Here, turn your head."
I reach up and pull the knot on his vale a little tighter. As I let go, he turns to me and cocks his head slightly to the side.
"Yeah, it's good now."
He nods, then lays back on the blanket covering the cargo area. I slide my Nixon mask down over my head, and I can taste the rubber in my nostrils. From the front of the van, I hear three distinct knocks.
"Almost there, guys, get ready."
I'm calling this robbery as if I'm some sort of ringleader. But aside from liquor stores and gas stations, I've never done a big holdup before. Bruce, he's shot someone in the leg once, but never done any time for it. Cory, well, he's eager and dumb. Greg is our driver, he's covered in tats. We figure he's the last one we want in a clear camera view, so he's staying in the van. And then there's me.
The van rolls to a stop. I can feel it take the curb a bit, and lurch up in response. Cory hops up on the balls of his feet, pressing against the back door of the van. Bruce chambers a round in his pistol. And I swallow the acid in my stomach and act like I'm the coach of a football team.
"Alright. In and out. This is a nicer part of town, so no Plexiglas between us and the tellers. But also, it means the cops will give a shit. So let's make this fast. Roll out!"
Great, I just quoted the Transformer movie. I'm just brilliant.
Cory opens the door, and we pour out as the light floods in. Just six quick steps up the concrete stairs, and WHAT THE HELL?
The alarm is going off already. I hear a high-pitched shrill. Cory instinctively puts his hands up to his ears.
"The fuck you doing?" Bruce's reaction is priceless. "I thought you were a bad ass. What kind of bad ass covers his ears when a fire alarm goes off?"
The doors open wide, and reactions take over. It's a bloodbath, and no one is coming away clean. Maybe one day, I'll say that I thought they were security guards. I mean logically, they're armed, what else would you expect? But in that moment, my thoughts didn't use language. My thoughts used ammunition. And I was brainstorming away.
In the commotion, I knew only a few things.
Cory shot himself in the head. He went from covering his ears to adjusting his mask, and he had a hold of his gun the whole time. His shot was one of the first fired.
Bruce shot two people. Well, no, actually. He shot one person, in two legs. Then his face fell to the ground in a red blur.
I kept firing at anything in front of me, until my gun's 'bang' turned into 'click' and the hammer struck empty. The sounds of the alarm now mixed with moans. Everyone had been shot except for Greg and me. Greg and I. Whatever, you know what I mean. Fuck you, I just got shot at.
So anyway, there's two bags of money, and no one to claim them.
"You fuckers tried to rob MY bank? Fucking unbelievable."
Maybe this is the first bank robbery in the history of mankind where the money gets dropped off curbside? In any event, I'm ready to get away from the scene of our crimes.
I hop in the van, which by some miracle hasn't left yet. Greg guns it. Seven blocks to the other car we stashed. I'm also acutely aware that I have no bullets left. I ease myself further into the passenger seat, away from the driver.
We turn a few corners, racing to the stolen Honda parked just at the end of this street. Something got the better part of Greg, and he ran into our second getaway car. The bumper on the little Civic cracked and busted like peanut brittle. He sounded drunk, slurring his words as he turned to me.
"You sound like you're speaking in cursive, I can't understand you."
Blood gurgls out of his mouth, and also from the knife wound in his neck. I twist as I pulled the blade, for good measure.