The sign on the ground was unintelligible, most of the letters had been burned off a long time ago. At the edges he could see what remained of a blue background. Well that was something. This splintered and jagged road had been a motorway once. He had guessed as much, but you could never be really sure. A flyover was mostly still standing, and he decided it was worth risking walking up it to get a view of the landscape. He started towards it, keeping to the grass verge of the road. The tarmac and concrete had been torn up into sharp chunks by the persistency of the plant life, making the road treacherous. Here and there were cars, rusted and dented. After the bombs had gone off a lot of people tried to get away from the cities, fearing more were on their way. But no more came. He could only assume that the long touted promise of mutually assured destruction had come true.
At the time he had been living in a village called Blyth. It was a small place, and after a few weeks the people there started to leave and find their way to other places, places where help must have arrived. Only the elderly or sick had stayed. He himself had packed for a long journey and was ready to leave when those same people started coming back to the village. There had been no help, and things in the larger towns and cities were dire. Mass illness, mass crime, mass starvation. Gangs ruled and fought for land with a clean water source or food.
In response to this, they had barricaded parts of the village and set up lookouts. They had fashioned weapons from anything they could, and local farmers had brought their guns and ammunition and had trained people how to look after and fire them. No attack ever came.
A few people wandered by, alone or in small groups, and were allowed in to stay, if they so wished. One group had evidently brought the plague. People started getting a fever, this was followed by large purple welts on their body, and eventually they would fit and die or fall in to a coma, which was no better. One of the first people to succumb was the doctor, and of course that only made things worse. He and a few others sectioned themselves off. The whole village actually broke down into small groups of people. The idea being that if the sickness was in a group, it at least would be harder to spread to the others. And anyone with signs of illness went to the hall. He only knew of one person who had recovered, and she cared for the sick, the only one presumed to now be immune. Out of all of the groups, only two survived. One of which was obviously his.
They had all decided to leave. The village smelled of decaying bodies and was clearly uninhabitable.
He and another man were heading south. The man had gone his own way into Nottingham, and he had turned to go around it. It added time to his route, but he really didn't want to see the city.
Finding this was a motorway would mean that this was the M1. He could follow this straight down to London, if he so wished. But he didn't wish, he would turn off before then and head to the south coast. It was, he knew, quite built up there. But he hoped to avoid most of it. If he could get to the coast somewhere west of Portsmouth, he could take a boat to the Isle of Wight. It relied on him finding a boat, sure, but there were bound to be plenty of them out that way. He didn't know how long it would take, but he guessed at weeks. But, after the last few years stuck in a remote village, he was desperate to see if his wife and children were still alive.