The room sat several thousands of people, centered around an holographic display on a stage. No one needed to present, one person was in charge of moving the holographs around, revealing dozens of images of the worlds beyond this solar system.
No man has ever set foot beyond Jupiter, yet they managed to send five-hundred thousand robots to fly to other solar systems in the galaxy. Why waste a life or a few thousands just to fly in space of nothing for a few several hundred months when they could send robots who can do the job just as well, if not better and faster?
On these displays held the attention of all in the room. Only a team of four people had seen them before, and now many thousands will see them for the first time. All the robots had reached their destinations and discovered a few worlds in each system. The robots were sent to solar systems containing Earth-like planets and have them investigate the surface of these places.
People began to murmur when they saw a tower on planet Gaea. The murmuring increased as more buildings revealed themselves on other planets. Several dozen of planets appeared and disappeared in the air on the holographic display. Each planet stayed in the air for five minutes, zooming in closer to the surface and out to see the entire planet again.
The last planet faded from view two hours later, and the room fell silent again, most people shocked and stunned by what they saw.
"What is the meaning of this?" one person asked in the front row seat. A scientist who helped launch the robots.
Like a spell, the room burst into loud conversations—debates, expressions of shock, questions being asked, and no response could satisfy them all.
A loud gonging sound rang through the stadium seating style room, and the audience fell into a hushed whispers, unable to stop themselves from discussing the planets they viewed.
"This, ladies and gentlemen, is the proof that we are not alone," he said, showing one planet. As he continued to talk, the planet rotated. "The thing is, all of these planets show the buildings in ruin. No one is alive. They're all dead planets."
"But why are they all in ruins? How do we know for sure they are not hiding?"
"We have been examining the planets for a year," he answered. "There have been no movement. On all 428 planets. Of the 500 we sent, only 72 did not make it to their destinations. Of the 52 planets, there were no ruins found. The rest… 376 planets, they all had buildings—as you saw them. Houses, large buildings, towers, roads. Even pools. Yet, none of them had anyone walk around. Drive a vehicle. There are, however, life forms, animals if you will, moving around. Acting the very same way Earth's animals move to eat, to fight, and to sleep. They are not intelligent as they never used any of the buildings for themselves.
"Ladies and gentlemen, I present you another evidence. They all committed suicide. Mass suicides."
He pressed a button and it zoomed in to a building. The people could clearly see bodies on the ground outside the building, each of them holding a weapon very similar to a gun and aimed at themselves.
Another image showed similar scene, bodies with weapons aimed at themselves. The bodies on both planets were skeletons. The animals had not gotten to them on any of the planets.
The crowd was silent again.
"Does this mean… whatever happened to them, will happen to us?" the same questioner asked.
"That, sir, is the question we want to ask. The real questions are: why? What happened? How? What can we do to prevent this from happening? Anyone have a guess?"
The place was quiet, waiting for some brave soul to answer. Three minutes, still no one stepped forward to hazard a guess.
"Lucky for you, I do have the answers to them," he said, his expression growing grave as he continued to talk. "What is amazing is not the ruins themselves, or the bodies. Or the fact that we are not alone. What is amazing is what drove them to killing themselves. Every last," he switched to another planet, "one," another planet, "of," another planet, "these have been threatened with the space ships that came to them."
A final holographic displayed showed a fleet of space ships flying past Jupiter.
"They are slave traders. We have one week before they get here."
The room burst with anger words spewing out their feelings at this. Some of disbelief, of outrage, of despair.
"We know this," his voice grew louder to be heard over the din, "because we found 38 planets with ruins and they have shown no bodies like the others do."
The room fell silent again, his words silenced the skeptics.
"We have no option, we must kill ourselves before we become slaves to some… some aliens. I am quite certain we will not enjoy being slaves."
—
The fleet of ships landed on Earth. The doors opened on all spacecrafts. The people within stepped out, looking around and stared at the bodies with dismay.
"Not another one! Why do they keep killing themselves just before we could get here to make peace talks? Does no one in the galaxy want to do business in selling and exchanging fruits?"
"I don't know, it's a shame… I saw on the monitors that they seem to have some tasty fruits here…" a guy said, walking to stand next to the first person.
The first person sighed, shaking his head. "I guess we'll raid all the fruits and their seeds and move on. I hate this place, just like the rest."
The group was silent for a moment.
"Well, let's get gathering, men and women," the second man said.