From one year ago, [The shock of dying makes everyone forget that they're even dead. That's why you're here. To make them understand.] (https: //www.reddit.com/r/WritingPrompts/comments/2snxad/wp_the_shock_of_dying_makes_everyone_forget_that/cnrvudz? context=3)
"It's a shame about Tom, yeah?" One of the perpetual water cooler gossips asked to the person standing beside him.
"Huh? What happened to him?". He asked, bending down to pull out a cup for himself.
"Didn't you hear? It was all over the news." The gossip paused, taking a sip from his own paper cup. "Big rig slammed right into him on the interstate. Caused a five car pileup."
"Oh, very funny guys." Tom said, adjusting his tie. "I'm pretty sure I'd remember something like that."
The second man paused, his face scrunching up in thought. "Is that why he's not in work today? Geez, any word on how he's doing?"
Tom frowned, and crossed his arms, as the gossip shook his head sadly. "Dead on impact."
Tom cleared his throat meaningfully. "Okay, enough's enough. It wasn't that funny to begin with.
They continued to ignore him, though, as the second man looked towards the floor. "Oh, wow. That's...that's unfortunate." He paused for a moment, before looking back up at the gossip. "If I can be totally honest, though? I never really liked the guy. He seemed standoffish."
The gossip crossed his own arms. "Really, Paul? Not even a day and you're already bad mouthing him? Show some respect, man."
"Yeah, I'm right here. And I'm not dead." He growled, looking between the two.
Paul shrugged. "What? I mean I'm sorry for him and all, but that doesn't change the fact that he was a bit of a jerk."
"Well, can you blame him? After all, you know he hasn't been the same since his wife..." He trailed off, leaving the sentence hanging in the air.
"Woah, now you're going to far!" Tom shouted out at the gossip.
Paul nodded sadly. "Yeah, I guess. Well, at least they'll be together again."
Tom turned to Paul, his anger starting to flare. "That's it, I've had enough with you assholes." He reached to grab Paul's arm. "You don't even joke about...wha-?"
He stared as his fingers passed through Paul's arm. He pulled his arm back abruptly, waggling his digits in front of his face. He reached out with both arms, like a blind man grasping for something. His rage slowly turned to horror as his arms harmlessly went through Paul's chest.
Paul shuddered. "I just got the worst chill."
"Hey, that means someone is walking over your grave."
Paul scowled at his compatriot. "You need to work on your timing."
Tom was deaf to the squabbling that ensued. He placed his closed fists to his eyes as images began to flash through his head. The rear-view mirror, the rapidly approaching headlights. The world turning inside out.
Just then, he heard a voice call out behind him. "Tom?"
He froze up. It was a voice he had heard before. All too familiar, but one he had not been able to hear in years. "Amelia?"
He slowly turned, his hands falling from his face. There she stood, just as he remembered her. Her hair still long and full, her body unmarred from her illness. She just stood there, tears welling up in her eyes. A thin smile on her lips as his eyes fell on her.
"I'm here, Tom." She said, softly.
Tom rushed towards her, faster than he ever had run before. He wrapped his arms around her, his own tears flowing freely. "Amelia." He whispered into her hair.
He didn't know how long they stood there, wrapped up in their embrace. He could have stood there forever.
Finally, he spoke again. "I thought I lost you forever."
She pulled away just enough to look him in his face. "I'm here now, that's all that matters."
He closed his eyes, looking away briefly. "So I guess that means that I am..."
She nodded slowly. "The first few hours are always the toughest." She pulled away from him, grasping him by the hand.
"But I'll explain it all to you later. Come on, it's time to come home."