I wrung my tired hands as I watched the clock tick forward. I was due to give my speech at 3 PM, Eastern Standard Time. Right now, it was 2:47 PM. As I sat here at my desk, I thought back to the past few weeks, where one after the other, delegates and leaders and representatives of the United Nations shook my hand and wished me luck. Each word was worthless. I saw the helplessness in their eyes and they must have seen it in mine.
The Greater American president was the last people I waved out of the door. Before he left, he pulled me in for a tight hug. I could feel the weight of the world pass off of his shoulders and onto mine. While he never had control over more than half of a continent, I think I could relate to him more than anyone else. I was soon to inherit the entire world. I waited for a moment in his arms, and he in mine. I suppose we both expected some exchange of words. There were none.
The date is October the 11th, 2067. The time is now 2:56 PM. The United Nations officially declared that I was the world leader in the face of an impending apocalypse. All military power, all governing bodies, even the economy must answer to me now. On my agenda, for now, was one thing: address the remaining population of Earth. At 3 PM, I go live to the masses. Laid before me is a rough script full of talking points I can barely bring myself to face. My arms are shaking. I take some Xanax. My prescription has been getting heavier lately, and it shows in my face, my walk, and in my voice. I don't think I even care anymore.
The sparse camera crew set in the office jolts me from my trance. "Paul," says the man running the broadcast, "fifteen seconds and you're live." I sighed, and sat up straight. I wiped the sweat off my brow as he count down from five. "Five. Four. Three." He motioned now with his hands, two, one, point. The planet Earth, as well as the various refugee ships able to pick up the signal, is now at his attention.
"People of Earth, I greet you and thank you for tuning in. My name is Paul Abrams, and I have been delegated by the United Nations to lead you for the months to come. As many of you know, an asteroid impact due to arrive in seven month's time has the potential to cause an impact winter, blocking the sun from lighting and heating the earth for many years. We have sent off billions of humans to our galactic colonies, and unfortunately not all of us could make the trip." I allowed a break not for the audience, but for myself. My family did not make it onto any ship. My wife, my children, even my parents were probably huddled somewhere in a New York slum, listening to my broadcast. No one could find it possible to take them to a colony, not even the UN officials that worked so closely with me, not even after I was elected leader of over a hundred million damned souls could my loved ones make it off.
"As a result, there will be a great change in how the laws and doctrines of the world work. The United Nations have worked together in the time we had to devise a plan for those of us left to brave it out." I cleared my throat, and looked down at the list in front of me. "We have began building, in suitable areas, large underground shelters able to fit ten thousand people, along with enough rations to feed them for up to a year. In addition, each shelter will be fitted with its own garden that can provide for our nutritional requirements should the need arise." Thank god for the hydroponics boom. "A list of shelters can and will be made available to you by your regional governments in the passing weeks. All shelters will close two weeks before the scheduled arrival of the asteroid."
A lump rose in my throat as I went on. "Military personnel will be dispersed to major population areas ('Were there even any left?' I thought to myself) to insure the stability of the area and the long-term survival of your regional government. Keeping order will be very important, and disruption of the order will result in a very strict crackdown on any movements seeking to work against the greater good. Patrols will be sent out into more rural areas on a weekly basis to ensure that all are safe and in compliance with mandatory protocol." Another pause.
"In the coming weeks, local hospitals will offer euthanization services for those who seek them." I let out a shaky breath. "Regional governments, if they choose to, may also seek the euthanization of people deemed unable to fully contribute to society during the impact winter." I shuddered in disgust, but I knew the intentions were objectively good. The mentally ill and physically handicapped had no place in the shelters. Who would care for them? What could they be if not another mouth to feed? I hoped, at the very least, each one would get their own marked grave.
"We must unite as a world to get through this event. We cannot spread terror. We cannot war each other to death. Working together is the only way for the human race to survive on this planet. I sincerely hope that we persevere as a people, and can do the best we can. May God bless you, and thank you." The camera's red light faded out. I couldn't help but explode into tears. *This is it, * I thought. *You're the ringleader for the greatest circus in the universe. *
-------------------------------------------
Started writing, didn't really know how to end it. I'd love any and all criticism.