I size up the woman in front of me. Shiny gray spandex, long cape, one of those silly little masks on her face. The Silver Bullet, fastest woman in the world. Groan.
How will I wreck her? There are lots of options with super-speed, as several of my late enemies can attest. Bolt died of starvation after expending a small city's daily calorie intake in ten seconds. Zoomerang stripped the flesh from his own bones when he discovered air resistance. And Captain Velocity shattered his spine like a rabbit with a single overly-energetic kick.
I'm not your average supervillain--you know, I don't even like that term. What I do is necessary. All these superheroes, they're flashy and loveable, but they're dangerous. Ask anyone to recount how Captain Adonis stopped Doctor Catastrophe from nuking Topeka, and you'll be regaled with a forty-minute blow-by-blow epic. But they probably won't mention that the city was leveled anyway by the fighting.
All I do is bring these folks back to earth a little. I was born with the power, if you care to call it that, to reassert the laws of nature. I can break the convenient but unnatural circumvention of physics that other superheroes are born with--typically to fatal effect. Ask Firebrand.
I take a step toward Silver Bullet. I imagine the contrast my dark three-piece suit must make with her ostentatious costume--I like to think of myself as a little more practical than these superhero types.
"Silver Bullet," I begin. "You must know my reputation, and you must know there's no way out of this for you. Give yourself up, and I promise you'll be treated fairly. Confinement in the Tower of Penitence is better than death, you know."
The Tower of Penitence is where I keep all the superheroes who surrender to me. Well, where I would keep them if they did surrender. It's empty.
She looks at me with what seems to be pity. Overconfidence, the one constant of that varied crew. "I'd extend you the same offer. This doesn't have to end in violence."
"I'm sorry to hear that," I reply. "In that case, I suppose --"
A loud crack shatters the still air, and I freeze. Her speed--worked? How...
I feel a pain in my abdomen, where she must have punched me. I stagger back, jaw agape. This is impossible. I look up, falling to my knees in shock...and see Silver Bullet holstering her gun.