The wizard Nadir and his knight-errant, Parallax, stood, stunned, above the corpse of the greater stone golem. The golem's corpse lay across the flat earth of the desert. A wind whipped at the cloth of Nadir's robe, and curved across the armor of Parallax. Parallax's chest heaved up and down, exhausted from the battle with the golem. Nadir's hands were covered in soot and stains, a byproduct of the magic he'd used. The two stood side by side, and stared down at the treasure the golem had been protecting.
"What is it?" Parallax asked, sheathing her sword.
"I don't … I don't quite know." Nadir replied.
The two were staring at a small, brown bag the golem seemed to have coveted. They'd opened the bag, and inside had been a brown disk, flat and circular. The brown disk seemed to have the quality of a burnt baked good; flakes and ripples covered its surface. Currently, the disk sat next to the opened brown bag, both the wizard and the knight nervous about touching such a strange artifact.
"What do you mean you don't know?" Parallax asked, turning her head towards Nadir. "I thought you were a master of the occult."
"W-w-well of course I am!" Nadir stuttered out, his face turning read. "But this isn't occult. Nothing, none of my tomes or scrolls have ever mentioned something like this." Nadir said, gesturing madly at the flaking brown wafter sitting at their feet.
The two turned their attention back to their loot. They stood in silence for a few moments, trying to come to a conclusion. Nadir's mind ran and sprinted through his expansive knowledge of the occult magicks. Nothing was of use. As for Parallax, she looked back on her experiences. She had travelled the land, fought countless monsters and demons, goblins and ghouls, explored countless dungeons and caverns, abandoned forts and ruins. Yet nothing she had seen came close to this bizarre wafer. In a way, it reminded her of overcooked bread, but what would a stone golem be doing with a pastry.
"We don't have much time to waste. We need to meet up with Aphelion before the light wanes to the night." Nadir spoke up, breaking the silence. "It's obvious it's food. Go pick it up, and try some Parallax, then we can finally solve this mystery and be on our way."
Parallax bulked. "Why me? And how do you know it's food even. Why don't you pick it up and try some?" She replied, incredulous.
"Because I'm paying you, that's why." Nadir said.
"Not enough to risk my life on some poisoned trap." Parallax replied.
Nadir thought for a moment. He stroked his chin, and his mind tumbled through all sorts of devious plans and manipulations. Finally, He settled on a plan of attack to trick Parallax into eating the strange brown wafer.
"I'll give you fifty gold pieces to eat it." Nadir replied; a small, devious smile on the wizard's lips.
Parallax went to argue, but stopped herself. She thought about Nadir's offer for a moment, and weighed her chances. With a shrug, she bent down to pick up the wafter. It felt soft in her hands, and bits of the top flaked off in the wind of the desert.
She brought the wafer up to her face. She stared at it for a moment, steeling herself. With the thought of fifty gold pieces in her mind, and all that the money could buy, she took a bite, suddenly and quickly, diving in, trying not to think of the consequences. Her teeth tore easily into the soft wafer, and soon a piece was being chewed up in her mouth.
The horror and trepidation Parallax had felt were soon replaced by surprise and delight. The brown wafer inside of her mouth tasted delicious. It was soft, moist, sugary, chocolatey, savory. It seemed to be some sort of bread or pastry, unknown to the realm of the humans. Parallax savored the bite, and reluctantly swallowed. Her eyes were wide in pleasure.
"So, how is it?" Nadir asked, anxious to know.
Startled, Parallax shook her head. She put on a sour look, and faced Nadir. "It is … quite awful. Foul and disgusting; unholy even." She replied, putting the brown wafer into a small pocket. "It must be burned. I'll dispose of it as soon as we set up camp for the night."
Nadir nodded his head in thought. "Hmm. A shame. I wonder why a stone golem would be hiding something so awful."
Nadir handed Parallax a small pouch of gold pieces. Soon, the two were off, trekking through the desert again. Parallax tried to hide a sly smile. She couldn't help but think of the delicious beauty of the brown wafer, and made plans to have a little piece of it every night before she fell asleep.
-----------------------
Hope you enjoyed the story! I've got a bunch more over at my sub, r/ThadsMind, if you want to subscribe!