He was sitting across from the girl at a small pink table that was worse for wear. It was marked with crayon scribbles and covered in dings and dirt. The chair he was sitting in was far too small for him and the girl looked like she was about to outgrow her chair as well, though he imagined that the barbie dolls in the remaining two seats would never have such a problem.
Delaney poured the Devil another cup of imaginary tea.
"That's just the way things are." The Devil was explaining. "Collecting souls, keeping count, getting all ready for the final battle and all."
"But why?" The girl insisted. The Devil stared down into his empty plastic cup. The girl poured herself a cup next and the Devil noted how polite it was of her to serve her guest first, even if there wasn't really any tea involved.
"Just because is all."
"That's what adults say when they don't know." Delaney pointed out and the Devil frowned. Smart kid.
"Look it's been like this for ages, alright? You've got to have the bad to appreciate the good, right? To test the good and to punish the wicked."
"But why? Why fight and be angry and make people bad and all that? Do you like being mad at people and making them do bad things?"
"Well no I don't like it, but that doesn't matter does it? If I don't do my job the entire cosmic balance will just fall apart."
"Will it, though?" Delaney took a sip from her cup while the Devil pondered this and when he didn't respond the girl continued. "It's like broccoli."
"What?" Clearly the Devil wasn't following her logic.
"Momma told me that I wouldn't know if I liked broccoli until I tried it. I tried it and it's okay as long as it's covered in cheese and I only have to eat the tops. But the point is you'll never know until you try, right? And besides if it's not fun, why do it in the first place?"
"Well because...it's my Job."
"Who is your boss?"
"What?"
"Who's your boss?"
"Well I'm the boss."
"So there's no one telling you what to do?"
"Well...”
"More tea?" She smiled at him and he extended his cup. "I'm just saying that if you don't like what you do and it makes you mad then maybe you should stop. No one is telling you you have to stay so the only one keeping you there is you, right? Momma tells me when I'm angry that all being angry does is makes me angry. What would make you happy?"
The Devil sipped his imaginary tea. He hadn't given it much thought.
"You know...I've always wanted to go ice skating."
That was the day that Hell froze over.