I remember hearing about it on the news in the morning it happened. Everyone was calling it "The Clearing." I had known something was wrong when I could feel the warm sunlight on my face in the morning right before getting up. I'll never forget rushing down the stairs, scrambling to put on my air-filtration mask, and bursting out the front door onto our lawn. I could see the Sun shining brightly in the sky, birds flying overhead, and mountains in the distance breaking the horizon in jagged peaks.
I looked over the light blue fence into the Ericsons' yard and found them staring at the sky with similar looks of wonder and bewilderment. "How did this happen?" I questioned. Their youngest son Timmy was crawling around in the grass playing with their Scottish Terrier. "Why isn't Timmy wearing his face mask?" I exclaimed.
"They said it's safe to take off our face masks," Timmy's mother yelled back laughing. "The air smells so fresh. The sky looks so beautiful," she sighed, closing her eyes and leaning on her husband's shoulder.
That was a month ago, and things haven't been the same since. Ever since the government made face masks optional, more people have been walking outside without them. Once, I took off my mask for a few seconds and took a deep breath in, and I couldn't tell the difference between the artificial fresh air our masks released and the natural fresh air. My mother scolded me when I told her, she said it was sinful and blasphemous.
News channels and newspapers were all speculating absurd theories – a government experiment gone wrong, an extraterrestrial visit, the coming of the apocalypse. Even scientists were unsure how to explain the occurrence. Apparently, the global temperature was dropping rapidly and the Arctic Circle was rapidly freezing. My parents even said we could move back to the coast since the water levels from the coasts were receding at a faster pace than ever.
But life goes on as normal – I still have to wake up early on weekdays to make the school bus, I still have to sit through boring classes like math and history, where I'll learn about algebra and how God created man on the seventh day, the day after he created the fog.
Maybe he was the one who got rid of it.