"Shit," I muttered. I woke up late for work again today. My paranoia has been settling in recently. My eyes remain glued to the television for hours watching the news every day. I'm losing sleep over it. The Russians have flooded to us here in the U.S. and China has claimed Antarctica, shipping missiles over to it, to presumably launch from should anything trigger a nuclear response from them.
The Russians have been coming over in droves for about twenty years now. There has been a resource crisis going on for five. Do they know something?
I hopped in my car to go to work and turned on the radio. On the highway I hit traffic, of course. Dead stop. The radio gets an interruption with an emergency broadcast. The Russians have began isolated attacks in the U.S.
Now I don't know if I'm sitting in traffic or fear.
I put down my window and peek out to see if I can see anything causing this traffic when a huge blast about seven cars ahead shattered my windshield and knocked me out.
I awoke what was probably twenty minutes later.
Disoriented, I open my eyes. A huge pillar of smoke is reaching the top of the trees that border the highway. This is when I feel a severe pain in my arm. I look at it and notice a bend in my forearm, it's badly broken. My car has slid back a good fifteen feet and is now crooked. About a minute later my hearing is starting to return but is still muffled. The first sounds I heard was screaming. It looks like other cars around me got it much worse. There was a larger car in front of me that may have shielded some of the blast.
I step out of my car and look towards the billowing smoke. There are about five men equipped with what looks like automatic rifles standing near the origin of the flames. I can't see anything else besides this.
"Are they military?" I thought.
When I got back in my car I started it up again without any problems. I guess this will be the only good thing to happen today.
I begin to drive through the wreckage of other cars carefully. All their windows were blown out as well. Peering into some vehicles I didn't see a lot of motion. I was telling myself they were all just knocked out like I was, but I knew otherwise. When I got closer to where the blast originated I saw a charred car. The men holding the rifles saw me driving and ordered me to stop. There's a lot of firepower there so I wasn't taking any chances.
They asked me with what sounded like a Russian accent, "How much gas you have in tank?"
"I'm at a quarter of a tank full." I reply. I never really get too much in there because of prices now and the shortage. Did they want to leave the scene?
I glanced to my right and saw one of the other guys with them pull out a hose from a backpack and open another cars' gas door. He began syphoning their gas into a tank of their own. He was going car to car doing this.
I was snapped back to attention when I heard, "Give us what we want and no problems, okay?"
"Okay" naturally comes out when you have a gun in your face and asked a question like this.
One of the others walked up to him and whispered something to him. All I saw was a head nod in response. That's when I started hearing the unmistakable sound of gunshots. They were killing any witnesses.
In a panic I ducked down below the steering wheel and slammed the gas. I definitely hit the guy that was holding me hostage as well as pin-balling off of some cars along the way. I heard my car getting hit by their fire.
I got off the next exit and started heading back home. How I made it out of there I'll never know.
Now is not the time for thinking, now is the time for preparation. This has only just begun.