SLAM! The ringing steel doors echoed through the the hangar as Major Harvey Johnson marched smartly across the empty space. The cyber Intel team had been taken by surprise, as no inspection was scheduled for today. They all stood nervously as attention. A man with more stripes on his arms than the rest moved to intercept the major.
"Major Johnson, sir!" He saluted with as much enthusiasm as he could muster.
"Sergeant Taylor, is it? Well, sergeant..." The major paused as he surveyed the cyber warfare unit standing at attention around their stations. "Put your men at ease."
"Platoon, Parade REST!" Taylor turned back around to address Major Johnson. "Sir, I don't believe we were notified of an inspection today. What can I do for you?"
Johnson moved in close to Taylor's face; so close, in fact, that the sergeant could feel the brim of Johnson's cover touching his forehead.
"Sergeant, you have a mole. I am here to coordinate the shut down of your entire unit and erase the servers stored here. Your team has 2 hours to comply."
"With all due respect, sir, 2 hours doesn't even give me enough time to verify these orders from SECDEF. If you will allow me to do my due diligence, I can have this unit RFT by end of business today." The sergeant steeled his gaze on the major, willing him to back down. Suddenly, the major took a step back, and pulled out his cell phone. He dialed a number, and handed the phone to Taylor. "It's for you." Taylor raised the phone to his ear.
"Master Sergeant Taylor, this is Secretary Jass. I need your unit shut down by the end of the day. Everything erased. Nothing, and I mean nothing left. Because of the possibility of a mole, you must personally inspect each of your airmen for any information they may be attempting to steal. Can you get this done, or do I need to send Security forces in?"
"Uhh...Yes sir. Right away, sir." Sergeant Taylor handed the phone back to the major. "I'll get started immediately."
Returning to his desk, he noticed an email that had been distributed to the entire unit, Cyber7 eyes only. He opened the attachment and immediately regretted doing so. The file was a gay porn image, with a caption added to describe it.
> HUGH JASS SCREWED BY MAJOR JOHNSON!