"Your what? Your heart's gonna give out? Believe me Chancellor, I'll think you'll live for a bit more. A little exercise isn't going to do you any harm. In fact, you likely need a bit more than a little."
"I beg your pardon," the planetary governor stammered, his pasty white flesh reddening in outrage. He was silenced from speaking more at the sight of the other man's upraised hand, the fingers clenched into a fist.
"Chancellor, pretty soon my men and women will be dying to protect yours. The least you can do is show them your gratitude."
"Major Novak," the older man said wiping at a bit of sweat that beaded on his forehead. "It's not that I am ungrateful for your Grave Guards coming to our world's aid, it's merely that I am a very busy man and the demands of my position require that certain individuals be seen to as soon as possible."
Major Tycho Novak chuckled grimly at that before opening a door and ushering the planetary governor outside.
"Chancellor, if you're dead you don't have to worry about those kinds of people. So it might be better for your well being if you worry about the here and now, hmm?"
The door as it turned out opened to the balcony overlooking a broad parade ground, the grey cement covered with yellow and white lines to mark out distances and paths. Arrayed on it in neat lines were the soldiers and personnel of the Grave Guards, all dressed in their olive green coveralls and splinter camouflaged field jackets. Battle armor troopers wore their suits, forming a solid block of steel. Mechwarriors stood in front of their machines, the metal titans painted grey with black trim. Tankers stood next to their vehicles which proudly displayed their number of kills on the barrels of their guns. Overhead zoomed a squadron of six aerospace fighters, the roar of their engines deafening to the ears.
"The Grave Guards, Chancellor, have yet to lose a defensive campaign. Twenty battlemechs, four tanks, eighty battle armor troopers and a full squadron of fighters. They are at your side though not your disposal. A mercenary commander's capital is his men and I will not be frivolous in spending the lives of the men and women I consider family. They will do whatever I ask of them, the trust between me and them absolute. We will win, I just want to make sure it costs us as little as possible in pursuit of that victory."