The Prince and the princess
There once was a prince who loved a princess. But it was not to be, because this princess was already betrothed to another. But this prince could see that this princess was not truly happy. She was married to a dragon and her and that dragon were able to sire two children together. But as you know, the offspring of a dragon and a human is a demon. Now most people think demons are these horned creatures that go around creating misdeeds and causing havoc but that's not what demons do. Demons look just like any other person except they enjoy suffering. You see, unlike a regular person, demons love to see human beings suffer. I guess, that just makes sense given that so few demons are spawned by acts of love. Maybe demons aren't inherently bad. they're just nurtured that way.
Regardless, the prince saw this and he wanted to do something about it. What I haven't mentioned before is that this prince was actually also a knight. Hed also slain many demons but never a dragon. Demons are relatively easy to vanquish, but a dragon is a great accomplishment. The kind of accomplishment that so few knights are capable of doing but he was, because he was one of the greatest knights in the land.
The princess used to pretend she was happy. But the prince could see how unhappy she really was. When he would watch from the window, when she was all alone, away from the demons and the dragon, he could see her true sadness. The sadness that only the brave and handsome prince, the strong knight, would ever be able to chase away.
So one day, the prince entered where the dragon and demons lived. He was armed with a crossbow and an axe. Most knights would have used a sword but this particular night was fond of using axes because it's only with an axe that a true warrior attains a higher state of being. As he entered the door to the castle, he saw the dragon, the demons and the princess all eating dinner. The princess, of course, was pretending to be happy but the knight nnew better. Away the bolt flew from his crossbow and into the heart of the dragon,. The dragon stood up, trying to face down the knight but before he could the knight brought down the axe into his skull.
Seeing what a mighty warrior he was, the two demons began cowering and crying. They called out to their mother and the princess went to them, possibly still scared of what those demons would do to her. Knowing that the dragon's magic was strong, the knight pulled the princess away from the demons and slew them where they laid cowering on the floor.
The princess was traumatized. So many years and for so long, she had lived under the yoke of the dragon and the demons. She didn't know how to live a normal life. She didn't know true love. But now she would.
The prince pulled her into his arms and she began fighting him. The dragon's magic was too strong. The prince knew that the only way that the dragon's magic could be conquered was with love. So the prince threw his love over his shoulder and took her back to his castle.
Back at the castle, the situation seemed hopeless. Despite the prince's boundless love for the princess, the dragon's magic was just too strong. She continued to fight the prince. Numerous times, she attempted to escape. At one point, she even got to a local farmer and the dragon's magic started to infect the man so the knight struck him down before he could be corrupted completely.
It was then that knight realized that the princess, the love of his life, would need to be chained. Just like in Snow White, his love would awaken something inside of her but first she would need to stop fighting it. The prince chained the princess to her bed. The prince knew that what he was doing was unpleasant but no matter how confined her physical form may be, nothing could stop their love for one another.
Every morning and every night, the prince would enter the princess's room and expresses his love towards her. This continued for what seemed like ages until a miracle happened.
The princess was with a child. This was wonderful news. Just like the way a dragon creates a demon, a knight, being an instrument of God's will, produces only angels.
Now, I've told you this story every night for the past year-and-a-half, my love. and I know the dragon's magic still courses through your veins but I want to know what kind of ceremony you would like for our wedding. As you know, your marriage to the dragon was over as soon as I crushed his skull with my axe, so there's nothing keeping you from being my bride forever, now is there?