Teddy's eyes sparkle with excitement as he rummages enthusiastically and yet somehow reverently through the dusty and scuffed red leather suitcase, the case releases the warm scent of pipe tobacco, small hands lifting stacks of somehow unfaded paper. "Look at this one dad!" he says, waving the old magazine, a copy of Amazing stories. The garishly illustrated cover depicting a towering, glinting robot brandishing a finned ray gun and looming menacingly over an improbably breasted swooning girl drooping in the arms of a lantern jawed Flash Gordon knockoff. "SHOCKING vision of the future depicts humanity as SLAVES to artificial intelligence! Wow! Awesome!" I ruffle his hair and he smiles back up at me. "I remember reading all these as a kid myself. I didn't know dad had kept them all these years." My eyes naturally wander to the mantle, a photograph in a simple silver frame. Me, dad and a largemouth Bass held between us. Both of us wearing identical stupid grins, I with a beer in my free hand, dad with his pipe.
I can still smell his pipe as I hear his voice across the years. "Son, I am so damned proud of you. I know I haven't been there as much as maybe I could have been, but you've grown into a fine man." His eyes swim behind his glasses a little. "Come on dad, how many of those beers have you had?" I laugh. I was young, I didn't understand. His voice cracks a little. "I just wanted you to know son. You'll come to realise that someday it all ends and that if you haven't said what needs to be said, well, that's something that can never be undone." He blinks and pokes his pipe into the corner of his mouth with a hand that trembles slightly. The only sound is the quiet burble of the river as we sit in companionable silence for a while, broken by the plink of the fishing float being pulled under and the ratcheting click of the reel. "Get that net ready boy, we got a bite, and she's a big 'un! One for the album, you bet!"
That's the thing about clearing a loved ones house. So many memories, waiting to ambush you without warning. A tiny blue porcelain vase with a chip in the rim, a small brass cup engraved "Worlds best fisherman", a walnut handled pocket knife. Things that mean nothing to anyone else, but I know them all intimately. I watch my boy as he goes through the case, savouring the fantastical artwork of the covers and neatly piling the stacks of pulp magazines by title, so like his grandfather, so like me. I remember reading my stories, my sheets tented above my head and my Thunderbirds lantern casting its glow over the pages. Living for an hour or so as an intrepid space adventurer, or a swashbuckling pirate until finally falling asleep and dreaming a childs dreams of heroism and adventure. The scent of pipesmoke and cedar shavings entwined with warm memory.
"Say dad, do you think grandpa would have minded if I had these? They're so cool!"
"Son, "I say, "I think your grandpa would have wanted you to have those with his love, and mine."
I feel my eyes welling with pride and love. Teddy just rolls his at me. "Geez dad, don't get all mushy on me."
He's young. He doesn't understand yet.