The walls of Xebar-70 shook like an earthquake in the sky. We zoomed past clawed fingers of lightning which tried to lash our ship's boxed exterior. And even as ice chunks slammed into the pilot pod, I held the wheel with white-knuckled fists and pushed on. Doreen frowned at me from her co-pilot seat. "Pull back," she said.
Screams echoed up from the hull as we rose against deep turbulence. "You know I can't do that," I said through gritted teeth.
"You're going to kill these people."
I turned on her. "They're dead if we go back! If it isn't a blasted storm it's the bloody Nuria government officials. And personally, I'd rather face a storm."
Another set of screams echoed up from the hull. The refugees didn't have seat belts or motion stabilizers, so with every bump we made, they felt it ten fold below.
Doreen's face was as dark as the sky when she turned back to her control panel. I'd seen that look during negotiations with the Nurian republic. The same look she had when they declined to release our people. And it was still across her face when she said we would break them out.
The steering wheel vibrated in my hands as I pulled up toward the lightest patch of cloud I could find. "Spinners x-30, Mid-levellers north, boosters on thrust. We're going to make it out of this *bitch! *"
It was a play on luck and experience. I'd weathered a worse storm in Carvali, and even then I'd had two boosters less and a much smaller ship. We could do this, I was sure of it.
Doreen tapped at various spots on the control panel. "Mid-levellers aren't responding. Boosters online, Spinners x-30."
The ship's vibration stabilized slightly and we cruised on toward the cloud bed above. No Mid-levellers meant the ship would shake once we hit the cloud, and our passengers would get the worst of it.
Suddenly, purple blotches seeped through the sky.
"Bloody shit. It's a Storm beast," I hissed.
"Okay, now we really have to go back, Dean. This is no longer a discussion. Turn - the - ship -around. Now!"
A storm beast was a bird of sorts. When I say of sorts, I mean it looks a lot like a pterodactyl that's wide enough to span a storm. The thing carries so much static energy with it that it changes the colour of the sky purple. However, its focus would be on decimating the land below. I hoped.
I looked at Doreen and placed a hand on the thrust lever. She stared back with wide eyes. "You can't, Dean. You're going to kill us. Please, listen."
"I wouldn't do this if I didn't have to, come on, Doreen. You know this is it. Are you with me or not?"
She stared at my hand and then placed her shaky palm on top and squeezed. I lifted my chin toward the heavens, prepared to clash with the beast above.
"*Shit. Shit. Shit. * Please, God..." Doreen whispered.
"We're going to make it through. I swear," I said.
We burst into the clump of purple cloud. My teeth chattered from the force tearing at the ship. Doreen squeezed my hand and pulled down on the thruster, accelerating. The screams of the refugees were muddled in with the groaning of metal. And then as we burst over the edge of the cloud, we saw it.
A silver bird, its body covered in blotches of purple. For a moment I almost mistook it for the sky itself. Its dark black pupils widened in surprise as we shot past. A small spec in a chasm of awesome power.
Stopping only when we were safe in outerspace.