It'd been hours. Roderick was ready to burst, and from the way his co-workers and the handful of folks unfortunate enough to be in the bank at the time wriggled, writhed, and complained, they were feeling the same. Thursday, of course it was Thursday.
Roderick brought some of his wife, Rosie's, baked goods to the bank every Thursday. This Thursday was fritters. He'd just gotten the bright pink box open and was ready to share when, as one, every person in the bank turned for the bathroom.
Desperate, Roddy knew he wouldn't make it, couldn't make it. Gotta go so bad it hurt. Everyone in the room was doubled over. All but one.
Man in a wheelchair, had a grey suit and a white luchador mask, pink birds danced across the cheeks. Blush, he was known as. Popular online, humiliated a lot of famous folk, politicians, musicians, a couple actors, some journalists even.
That'd been before noon, and all afternoon they'd been trapped in the bank, waiting for that face-burning rush down the leg that just refused to arrive. Blush had demanded safe passage when the police arrived, talks and threats were exchanged. Stalemate.
Someone had to be coming. One of the good guys, the supers, the capes, as Roddy's nephew called them. He just hoped they wore adult diapers.
There was a rustle above, a quiet thunk, and a curse. Someone was in the vents, but they were too small, even for most kids. Who the heck could be up there?
Out erupted a grimy, fuzzy purple goat. The hostages coughed as years of pent-up yuck showered upon them. The goat stood on its hind legs, brushed itself off as best a stuffed animal could, and, as matter-of-fact as only a metre-tall purple goat can, asked, "Okay folks, who wants outta here? I brought diapers, sports drink, and sandwiches. Anyone vegan? Or got allergies?"
Once he was certain the other hostages were safely locked in the break room, Blush made his way to the vault, the manager, Alison in tow. The woman squirmed and shuffled as uncomfortable as a dam on the verge of overflow, "don't worry, you'll be just fine. So long as you co-operate, no one goes viral," he told her as they trekked downwards, "I'm sure you know the drill, give me marked bills, those dye-splatter bits, or any other funny stuff and things can be a lot worse than they are now."
She filled the large knapsack he proffered, "no, no dear, I want you to riffle through them, no funny business, remember?"
A slight look of concentration, and Alison grimaced, "Okay, okay, sorry. Wasn't-" she winced again, "thinking. Could you turn this down? It hurts."
"Sorry dear, harder to tell with women," the quiet chirp of a phone's alert, "ah, I ought check back in on your employees."
He fiddled with his phone a moment, swore, "It appears we have company. That'll be enough, Alison was it? I'm going to have to lock you in, sorry, but that's just how it is. Don't worry," he gestured on his phone, "the police already know you're down here. Brace yourself, I can't take any chances, you know," that slight frown again, and she crumpled as the door swung closed, "it'll pass, just breathe slowly."
Edit: Only posted about half the content I intended.