Anna had a habit of kissing me on the forehead.
When my mother died I'd feel a tingle down my spine when she did it. It had only been weeks since we started dating and her soft lips felt taboo against the particular patch of skin she rested them upon. The loud smack of her lips would pull me out of that hospital room where my mom coughed up her cancer for the last time and planted me firmly in the moment, where everything was quiet and Anna's hands would thumb away the tears that had no more reason to leak. I couldn't help but perk my lips upward, voluntarily forgetting the pain that felt so far away, shy and vulnerable in those moments. Everything was okay.
It was years later and it was dark. There was a blackout in my neighborhood so I decided to leave my apartment and head over to Anna's a couple blocks away to surprise her. The walk was longer and windier than usual. It broke me down, out of breath and weary. The wind whistled with increased violence as I stopped to catch my breath. I fought against it, indifferently and ignorantly and a million other adjectives apt to break me down foolish.
I climbed the stairs to where a pajamaed neighbor was standing outside her door. He looked mad with resent. Confusion left when I reached the door, and all sound was snuffed by a harrowing ring. I heard a glimpse of something, uncanny and out of place like a nightmare as my mind tried to rationalize it. I didn't hear what the man said, but it sounded like he was yelling for them to shut up. Them. I held composure, trying to force a relatable nod and smirk towards the man as he rolled his eyes at me and slammed back into his door. The screams were a grenade to my nerves. Cognitive dissonance was short lived. My stomach emptied its insides into my knees, buckling them together and collapsing them under the weight. Pulsing, timely, thumps like some sickly metronome conducted her "yes's" and "oh yeah's," and "fuck me's." Soon the whole apartment block seemed to leave their doors, some parents covering their sheepish children's ears, talking amongst themselves in disgust. And they all stared at me, collapsed on top the face of her door, trying to pull back tears with my hands like scooping up air. I ended up banging them against the ground, as my mind bled into involuntary, broken moments. The ringing came again like an aftershock, attempting to immune me from the pain. Another neighbor walked towards the door set on saying something to me. I ran.
I ran back home. I turned to my kitchen knives and took the tallest, sharpest one out. I looked down at past scars, knife aimed down at them ready to split them open once again. I started to think about my mother, and the days before her death when she would pull my arm out of my sleeve and begin to cry. I started to think about Anna crying into them, madly kissing my forehead as her tears buckled against her lips and trickled down my arms, stinging them.
I started to think about Anna.
Anna.
I wanted to split them open. I wanted to split myself open and rip out all the invisible memories that ravaged me alone and insecure, malevolently hopeless. I wanted to rip something away from me. I wanted to rip away the past and start over. I wanted to rip something.
I woke up with my scars intact and knife in hand. I didn't remember going to sleep.
There was a knock on my door. I opened it and it was Anna.
The unnoticed knife nodded in my trembled fingertips.
She looked bright and cheerful. Fresh with a bow, like a polished porcelain doll, pristine and lack of fingerprint.
She grabbed my cheek. Her fingers were rough against it as it was numb against her. Her half smile rang through my spine and paralyzed me with hesitation. I couldn't hold back my lips as they turned upwards, trained like a dog. I dropped the knife, and its thud went unnoticed.
I started to think about my mother as she kissed me on the forehead.