The great wars, of the Dwarves and Elves, were considered to be a myth. Even the eldest of Elves knew noting but peace. Stories of battles were present in both Dwarven folklore and ancient Elven scrolls, but those spoke of time so long ago no one could be certain of their accuracy.
The truth is, there were wars. Both races, were young, looking for their place in the world. When the fighting grew so violent that it threatened the stability of the whole world, they put their weapons aside.
Some twenty thousand years ago, the great peace treaty was singed. The Elves could build their cities in the flatland, and Dwarves got the mountains and the caves. The jungles were left to nature.
While at first they lived in isolation, they later learned to cooperate. The Elves mastered philosophy and theoretical sciences. Mysteries of existence were unlocked. They could improve their own bodies and visit far planes.
On the other hand, the crafty Dwarves, grew craftier and craftier. Their projects were more and more ambitious and required ever increasing power. To accommodate to the demands, Dwarves unlocked the secrets of the stars.
And while the mountains and the flat lands had so much going on, the jungle was not idle. New sentient beings emerged, the Humans. Both Elves and Dwarves had a soft spot for the new race. Their child-like curiosity drove them to the established races as they had so much to learn from them.
Some Humans joined the Elves whiles the others joined the Dwarves. The were accepted in both societies, livng amongst them in peace and prosperity. The two old races would meet, few times every century. And while that was enough for the long lived Dwarves and Elves, it meant many Humans never met the race that was not their host.
The Humans who lived in the mountains were not as strong or bold as the Dwarves. They always had the need to fit in with them. The Dwarves did like the Humans, but they also looked down on them as being young and primitive, not capable of the great works the Dwarves achieved.
One day those humans learned of Elves. But it wasn't for the meeting of races nor from Dwarves. They stumbled into the deepest, oldest caves. Drawings were painted with blood on the ancient walls of the underground hall. Paintings of tall pointy eared creatures reading and killing their Dwarven friends. It was the Elves and they were the enemy.
In secrecy, group of Humans, used the star power to create a weapon so powerful it can destroy whole cities. Now the Dwavers ought to accept them as equal they thought. The launched their weapons at Eleven cities and the time of peace was over.