I woke up and stretched in my bed. Anther glorious day. I got up, adjusted myself, and walked off towards the kitchen to get breakfast. But everything out here was wrong. Someone had moved part of my house around. Where was I? What happened? Suddenly I felt a warm arm around my shoulders and a nice-looking woman with a kind voice asked if I wanted some breakfast. Of course I did. What else would I want at this time of day.
I glanced at the clock but the hands seemed off. I couldn't quite make out whether the short hand was pointing at the 3 or I don't know. I ignored it and walked on. I walked in, ready to order. I wanted, that one food, uhm, what was its name again? They gave me a tray and it looked more like lunch food to me even though they were calling it dinner but whatever. When in Rome, right?
I sat down and started eating and Darryn happened to come sit down by me. I smiled at him and reached over to pat him on the shoulder and he smiled back. We talked for a little while about the meal, and he told me that he had been promoted at work and I told him how happy I was for him. Then he got up to leave and I said goodbye to him and he looked a little puzzled.
"I'm your son," he said, "Andres. My father Darryn died ten years ago." I immediately felt a great feeling of shame and sadness come over me. It was so terrible that Darryn had lost his job and I said as much to him, that I was so sorry he'd just lost his job but that we could get through it. Darryn looked sad too but I knew things would get better eventually. He'd find another job. He gave me a hug before he turned to go.
Then I went back to my room, although I got a little lost on the way. I did see a group of three women with kind voices though, so I went to ask them. "I'm a little lost," I said. "Can you help me find my room?"
A man walked up and the women waved him over, "She's lost," they said.
He smiled broadly and looked at me. "Hi, Lost, my name is Bart."
I smiled back at him. His voice was so nice. "I'm lost, do you know where my room is?"
His smile faltered and he looked at the women near him. "I," he started then he coughed and cleared his throat.
> There are three parts to every story. The beginning, the middle, and the twist.
> [More by me] (https: //www.reddit.com/r/kj6bwb/)
((Alzheimer's is the twist. There's nothing I can do to make it more startling or more surprising or any other kind of twist. If you have some extra money, please donate to [the Alzheimer's Association] (http: //www.alz.org/join_the_cause_donate.asp? utm_source=KJ6BWB-reddit). I don't get any money from it and won't benefit from it in any way, unless I or a loved one get Alzheimer's. "Then why's your name in the link?" Just to have fun with their metrics and identify myself.))