Where am I? How did I get here? What is going on? Why is there so much blood in the room?
I must keep quiet. I have clearly been attacked. I dont know where my attacker is, but I must get out of here before he returns.
I open the door to the room I am in and look around. I see a small room behind a one way mirror. There is a guy on the floor curled up in a ball. He has been beaten badly. Someone very sadistic did this to him.
I open his door, and he screams at me to leave. I tell him I will be back for him and he starts crying. Clearly he is mentally unstable. I walk over to him and put my arm on him and tell him he will be alright. I must have touched a broken bone or something, because he jumped at my touch and started screaming more.
Don't worry. I promise I will come back for you. I told him.
I shut the door behind him.
I go up some stairs and open a door. The door on the other side is impossible to see without knowing where the latch is to open it. I feel around and ifnd out how to open the door from the other side if I have to.
I quietly shut the door, and peek into the living room from the office I am now in. The TV is on and a Lady is sitting in front of it, and I hear noise upstairs.
Oh my God. The lady is a serial killer. I have to get out of here. I can see the door drom here, but it has 4 locks on it and I don't think I can quietly escape. I pick up a weighted bookend and slowly creep towards the door to see if I can maybe get outside ithout her realizing it.
As I am sliding the last lock, I hear a loud voice behind me say, just where do you think you are going? In a panic, I turn around and hit her over the head with the bookend. I didn't kow what to do so I kept pounding her head with it until she stopped convulsing.
While I am glad she got what she deserved, I am repulsed by what I have done. What kind of human could kill someone and enjoy it. I quickly dial 911 and run outside the house and down the road, waiting for the cops to arrive. I tell them about the man in the basement. I see him getting loaded into the ambulance, while the cops are tlaking to me. He starts screaming at me when he sees me.
He says "That is the guy that did this to me" All of a sudden the cops have me on the ground. I tell the cops that the guy is delirious. The first time I ever saw him was when I was escaping from my prison next to his. They keep me cuffed for a long time. Eventually a cop comes out and arrests me.
While I might never fully know what happened, here is what the police used to convict me of murder:
1. My fingerprints were all over the house.
2. I was married to the lady I killed.
3. The noise upstairs were my children playing.
4. I had a costant videotape of my office, and I was the only one to ever go in the room, and I went all the time.
5. I took people down to the hidden basement almost weekly.
6. They discovered 47 bodies in a different room in the basement.
Because of my mental state, they have me in a hospital for life they said.
I must have been set up. I know it could not have been me. They must have doctored the evidence to frame me.
After all if the governement could cover up 9-11 so easily, taking me down must have been easy by comparison.
So I sit and try and figure out why they erased my memory. I had a job as a stock broker. I read the newspaper every day, and I think I have finally figured it out.
I have looked over every stock, and I now know the pattern. I must have discovered it before, and the government didn't want me getting rich off of it.
I keep explaining this to my doctors, but each one assures me I am insane, but I notice my doctors keep getting richer very fast then disappear after a couple of weeks.
I have to warn someone, but the only guy here that believes me says his name is John Nash................