The telescope was patterned with verdigris and fingerprints, but the brass was still bright.
It had belonged to Robin's grandfather and her grandmother had set it up for her on the rural porch, preparing for the orbiting object. The young girl had done the mathematics herself, figuring out where in the sky the satellite would fly by and helping her grandmother's spidery, blue-veined hands to get the old instrument at the correct azimuth.
"I polished the lens," the old woman said as she gazed up into the clear night sky, "you can see Sirius clear as day."
Robin nodded and flipped though her notes, her auburn eyebrows drawn together in worry.
"I hope I got this right."
Her grandfather's pocket watch sat nearby, ticking resolutely. They had another ten minutes before it was due to breach the horizon.
The old woman draped a shawl around her granddaughter's shoulders; it was cold and the girl hadn't dressed warmly - she was flushed with excitement and the heady thrill of adventure.
*Is this a mistake? *
The thought came unbidden to the grandmother's mind. Was she a fool to encourage activities like this? Her own mother - were she still alive - would be sniping at her about encouraging girls to be dreamers, not homemakers.
But the old woman remembered her own dreams at Robin's age - selfish dreams of inventing electric devices, of making circuits of copper and batteries, exploring the seemingly unlimited potential of the new age of electricity.
"Grandma," the girl began, "do you think they'll ever put a man in space?"
The matriarch gave a frail smile,
"I don't doubt it child; it is only a matter of time and money I'd say."
Robin pursed her lips, wondering if she should ask the next question.
Detecting the reluctance of her granddaughter, she wrapped her thin arms around the child's shawl-draped shoulders in reassurance.
"Grandma," Robin licked her lips,
"Yes little one?"
"Do you...do you think they'll ever put a *woman* in space?"
Even though she'd known the question was coming, the old woman known as Jolene sucked in a sudden breath, a curious *pang* touching her heart.
"I don't know," she admitted with bald-faced honesty - the kind she didn't normally use around children.
They sat in silence for the remaining four minutes, watching the hands of the pocket watch tick around the mother-of-pearl face.
As the moment arrived, the girl pressed her eye to the telescope and watched intently.
For a few precious seconds, she saw a dim, moving light rise through the lens - then it was gone from her view.
With a whoop of joy she leaped up from the wicker chair and hugged her grandmother around the middle,
"I *saw it* Grandma! I saw *Sputnik! *"
Holding her granddaughter close, the old woman smiled. The girl had calculated everything correctly; her mathematical precision was uncanny for a nine-year-old.
"Come inside Robin," she said, "your hands are frozen."
Leaving her dead husband's telescope on the porch, she took the child's hand and led her back inside.