"Wire me to any patrol bots near the crime scene." I said, as i prepare to connect to investigate a case of murder. Not any ordinary murder, but one of the famous Oscar winning actor, Sebastion Jones.
"Detective Alex Burton, LAPD." I said to the officer at the scene. After being let into the crime scene, I immediately look for any evidence. I immediately spot a puddle of oil on the ground, confirming my deepest worries. A robot did this. I sighed, this is going to be one hell of a case.
After thanking the officers at the crime scene, I disconnected from the patrol bot. In order to gather more evidence, i will have to head down to the crime scene myself.
This murder was unlike any others. The scene was clean. I've been on the force for 31 years to see multiple thousands of murder cases, this is the cleanest murder yet. There were no traces, no fingerprints, no murder weapon and no motive of murder to be found anywhere at the crime scene. This was a professional job. Someone who had done this before.
"Sir, we found something", a young officer with holding a transparent plastic bag said as he approached me. The bag seems to have some opaque brown liquid in it. "Whats this?" I asked. "Type 18 Oil", he replied. "And how is this evidence?" I asked, puzzled. Ever since the introduction of Human-Controlled Robots (HCRs) six years ago, my life and job started to become literal hell as more and more people learnt to control robots. As a senior person, i'm not fond with technology. "You see sir, the robots working here are all Model H robots, which uses Type 16 Oil, and not Type 18 Oil, which was only used by the model X robots.". Amazed at the newfound evidence. I commended the young officer. Indeed, this was the big break that we needed. I surveyed the surveillance footage once more, and indeed, a model X robot had gone through this corridor.
I turnt to the police officers who were busily discussing their own theories. "Boys, we've found the bot, now lets find the man". Feeling confident and at the same time partially worried, i headed off back to the station. Only god will know where this case might take us. After all, this was a professional job.
(Thank you for reading! Please leave some feedback for me to reflect and improve on! This is my 2nd writing prompt ever!)