A friend of mine said it was something like a mushroom trip or a lucid dream, and you had to skip a night of sleep for it to work. I had skipped the night of sleep like they said I needed to, truth be told, I had skipped two nights. With the help of Starbucks I was still up. We drove up to his dad's cabin. They were cheering and pushing me up towards the door. My friend came in the cabin with me, where it was pitch black, save for two candles. The walls were draped with black felt, so it felt like we stood in the black of space. Up above the candles there was a large mirror, and beneath it, closer to us, was a recliner. Here it was quiet, here it was warm, here was another place.
I took my place in the recliner, my friend sat somewhere unseen behind me. He told me to stare into the mirror and instructed me to keep speaking, and not to stop. It started out pretty innocuous, the candles were very dim, even for candles, so i couldn't see anything in the mirror, except for the candle's reflection in my own eyes, tiny glittering lights dancing in the dark. I mentioned that, how profoundly comfortable the chair was, and how I could hear his pencil on the paper. Focusing on the tiny twin glints of light in the mirror, my voice became more distant, as if far away in a tunnel, the sound of my friend's writing was not noticeable, and even the chair felt like it had fallen away, and I was floating in the black nothingness of space. Even the aches of sleep deprivation had evaporated somewhere else. The universe consisted of me, the darkness, and the light, they were singular now.
---
The light, it was the light, the light people always talk about. The light was the light at the end of the tunnel, the proverbial light for the dead. It took what felt like hours, but it was much nearer now, nearly engulfing me. My grandmother was here, her warm smile, now years vacant from my life. Its warmth filled me with relief and contentment I had not known for too long. Her son, my uncle, was there too. Everyone gone was there, and they welcomed me warmly, and with love. as I approached, they walked backwards, beckoning me into the light. Clouds rolled at their feet, I walked on a path of golden light cut through it. I approached and they retreated towards the light, facing me.
When There was only enough darkness left to see them, I was finally able to draw near them. I was able to hug my grandma. She was exactly as I remembered her. I was relaxation, I was contentment. In this moment of bliss I felt her pull at me with all her strength, suddenly, and with vigor, she pushed herself away from me, I remained motionless, she could not move me. I was confused. The warmth in her eyes was gone, I was about to say something when my uncle grabbed my wrist and pulled as hard as he seemed able to. Again I didn't budge, my arm didn't even move. The departed relatives looked at each other with bafflement, I grabbed my uncle's wrist and pulled him to the golden path, the ray of light I walked on. From the bottom of his legs protruded not feet, but trunks, extending downwards, then back, back into the light. I felt my uncle's wrist crumple like an empty canvas bag or a glove, his image shot up off the image in front of me to reveal a mess of glowing golden roots entwined around splinters of what was once a skeleton, all of them pouring into the skull. through the eyes, through the mouth, through the nose. they shook themselves free of all the bones but the skull, and the Skull, now the terminus of a trunk reading out from the light wrapped around me and pulled with what I could only describe as the strength of a god. Still, I did not budge.
My friend was bent over me shining a light in my face. I was covered in water and the lights were on. "That was important work champ, we know where to find them now" He stuck a needle in my neck, Next time I woke I found myself at home in my bed. None of my other friends ever saw him again, and when we went out to see where the cabin was, it had burnt down. I was, however, able to find some shards of a broken mirror, and two candle holders amongst the ash.