"I am bound to this rock, unable to leave. But I still have more freedom than you."
Warden Sanjeev regarded the prisoner with bemusement. "That's it? That's all he says?"
The guard bobbed his helmeted head in a brief affirmative. Sanjeev couldn't see the man's face behind the opaque, black visor, but his tense posture told Sanjeev that he bought into the superstition surrounding the prisoner.
Sanjeev barked a short laugh. "Bit of a disappointment, isn't it?"
He crouched down to view the prisoner at eye-level. The man was unwashed, unshaven, and truth be told, probably undernourished, even by the prison island's standards. The guards likely withheld rations from the man. Whether that was due to fear of the prisoner's supposed influence on those around him, or anger stemming from the rumors regarding his role in the previous Wardens'demise, Sanjeev was unsure.
Looking at him now, however, Sanjeev was sure that the man posed no threat.
Warden Rogers, his predecessor, had been hiding a long battle with mental health. It was no surprise that 6 months of running Boyle Island had persuaded him to throw himself onto the jagged peaks surrounding much of the island's cliff face. His obsession with the prisoner had little to do with that.
The Warden before Rogers – Sanjeev couldn't recall his name – was nearly eighty years old by the time they shipped him back to the mainland one of the island's helicopters, the lone source of arrival and departure from the island. The man had been mumbling phrases like, "I can leave," and "Is this freedom?" It's likely the rumors started there, the guards being unable to accept that their old boss had finally turned senile.
Sanjeev pushed a greasy lock of hair off of the prisoner's face. The man's eyes held a startling – anger? No, misguided determination, perhaps, Sanjeev mused. He put that thought aside for later consideration.
"You're damn right, son," Sanjeev conceded. "You are bound to this rock. My rock. I'm the new Warden here, so I own this rock now, and that means I own you." Sanjeev grinned. "Now, if that's your idea of freedom, that's quite alright to me. Long as you sit there, nice and quiet-like, and don't cause no trouble, then we can get along just fine. I might even let you off those wall shackles. I bet your wrists are just aching" – Sanjeev drew out the word for emphasis – "for their own freedom."
Sanjeev paused. The prisoner said nothing, though his gaze was unwavering.
"Mr. Cortez, I am familiar with your transgressions. You tried to assassinate the Executive General of our nation-state. Such things are not easily forgiven." Sanjeev observed the prisoner for any reaction to this, but none was forthcoming.
"But," he continued, "those that are residing in my prison, and are not challenging the authority or integrity of those in my employ, are working towards catharsis. I respect that, and I am willing to treat you as a new soul, fresh to the world of civilized beings and capable of making rational decisions. In return, you must agree to follow the rules that I have, and will continue to, set forth for this prison."
The Warden allowed Cortez to consider this for a moment.
"Do we have an agreement?" he asked solemnly.
Sound of clanging filled the cell as the other prisoners were released for lunch. Footsteps of guards clacked down the concrete hallway as they left their cell posts to monitor the eating area. Soon, the only ones remaining in the block were Sanjeev, the two guards accompanying him, and Cortez.
The silence of the block became palpable, and Sanjeev became acutely aware of his guards'fidgeting behind him. Sanjeev frowned inwardly. He would need to address that lack of resolve soon. He added it to his mental to-do list.
"Very well," Sanjeev began, standing and turning to leave the cell. "I'll give you some time to think on— “
"I am bound to this rock, unable to leave. But I still have more freedom than you."
Sanjeev stopped in the opening of the cell door, framed by the bars and his two guards. He sighed. Without looking back, he ordered the guards, "Unshackle him."
They moved to do so. "Then beat him until your arms are tired. Move him to solitary afterward. And make sure you take the scenic route, let him see the lunch room one last time. It might be a while before he makes it back."
The guards hesitated. Sanjeev turned. "I gave you those batons for a reason, and you will use them," he warned. "Now get to work, I have more pressing tasks at hand."
*****
The beating changed nothing. Solitary confinement did little to change Cortez'temperament, either. Sanjeev decided to let the matter go. He knew how far a man like Cortez would take these little spats with authority. If Sanjeev continued to engage the man, the confrontations would escalate beyond a level with which Sanjeev was comfortable. Sanjeev had not been lying when he said that other tasks were more important.
However, Sanjeev could not rid himself of a question that nagged at the back of his mind. Why did Cortez choose that phrase, and repeat it verbatim, like some misguided mantra? As far as he knew, since Cortez'conviction and sentencing to Boyle Island, the man had never uttered anything else.
It's just nonsense, Sanjeev chided himself, the man had decided to throw his life away just to murder another, then screwed that up. He's broken.
Sanjeev stared at the clock on the wall of his office, watching the seconds tick by. The question lingered.
*****
The guards of Boyle Island were preparing themselves for another upheaval of leadership. It had only been three months since Warden Sanjeev had assumed control of the prison, and while the state of the prison had certainly improved, the Warden's increasing affiliation with the prisoner, Cortez, was causing consternation among the ranks.
Apparently, this worry was reflected higher up, as well. The Executive General himself was paying Cortez a visit today. The EG had never visited Boyle Island before, and so the guards assumed it was not a good omen. Nevertheless, excitement was in the air. They wanted to witness what the EG would do to address the Warden's negligence in this area, and whether he would take affected by the Cortez Curse. Maybe he would have Cortez executed. God knows that's what the guards would have wanted.
Sanjeev had taken to walking the perimeter of the island's wall once a week, accompanied by Cortez. The prisoner hobbled alongside the Warden as the Warden spoke to him. Cortez had walked with a limp since Sanjeev had the man beaten months ago.
The guards had never been able to overhear the conversations; the Warden spoke quietly, and Cortez had never been seen to utter a word. Rumors spread that Cortez only spoke with the Warden when they were in private. The Warden often brought Cortez to his office for what he called, "individualized reform interviews." While the Warden occasionally did this with other prisoners, stating that it had been proven to increase their chances of earning parole, Cortez'visits to the Warden's office were much more frequent.
Furthermore, the Warden had moved Cortez permanently to solitary. The guards suspected that this was so the Warden could limit the people that had access to Cortez, and raised suspicion, but was generally viewed as a positive undertaking, since fewer guards would be susceptible to the Curse.
So, as the prison's helicopter touched the landing pad, the squad of guards standing at attention were eager with anticipation. The Warden had instilled the discipline into them to make it nearly unnoticeable, but it was certainly there. They expected a confrontation.
And they were certainly disappointed when the large man stepped from the chopper, calmly walked up to the Warden, and shook his hand.
"Thank you for coming, Executive General. Welcome to Boyle Island," the Warden said. "Please, follow me to my office, where we can speak in private."
"I see what you meant when you said, ‘ dismal doesn't do it justice,'” the General quipped in his deep voice, and the two laughed.
*****
[1 of 2]