The world was divided into three sorts of people. The castle folks who lived a comfortable life in the sky. The Valiant, who either had flying contraptions or tamed dragons, and lived in the valley or the castle. And the people beyond the valley. The valley was protected by the Valiant. The dragons were usually enough to keep the outsiders out, but there were some outsiders who were braver, or curious about what was beyond the mountains, or why there were always clouds coming out of the valley. Policy about what to do with the intruders varied from generation to generation, ranging from "kill on sight," "test their worthiness," to "offer them trade deals," depending on the how life in the valley was.
Currently, the policy dictated that the intruders be administered a test or other challenge, of which there was an approved list of options for the intruders to choose from. If they passed, they would be presented the option of either permanently relocating into the world inside the valley (they would be permitted to bring their families), or entering a trade partnership with the people of the valley, but never being able to see the valley themselves. If they failed, they would be administered a memory-befuddling drug and sleeping drought, and then safely returned to the outside world. Repeat offenders would be blindfolded and brought to trial in the castle.
Despite being the safest city in the world, the princess was still heavily guarded within the castle, and was rarely allowed to wander the streets of the castle town. Occasionally she would be able to arrange a Valiant escort down to the valley floor to swim in the crystal clear river. Still, she longed for freedom. She had been known on multiple occasions to have attempted to trade places with her servants, sneaking out to the castle town, but was always found quickly. Her new plan was even bolder and more daring though.
One day, on one of her trips to the valley floor, she drugged all but one of her Valiant escorts into a deep sleep that would last for more than a few hours, ensuring she would have sufficient time to convince the last guard, a trainee only slightly older than her, to show her the rest of the world.
"I wish to see the world outside the valley," she said, point blank, to the last remaining guard.
He looked around at his sleeping comrades. "What have you done?"
"I thought you might be the easiest to talk into showing me," she said, in a bit of a singsong voice. "You have a dragon. You're only a little older than I am."
"Do you know why you always ride the contraptions?" he asked her.
"Seats are easier to add to the contraptions than to a dragon's saddle," she replied.
"True, but there is another reason. It's one your father tried to keep hidden from you, because your mother died when you were young, leaving you as sole heir to the throne."
"I know he wants to keep me safe and unscratched, so I can be queen when he croaks." She was getting impatient, and curious. "He has a long line of suitors from around the castle lined up to court me. Tell me something I don't know."
"Your mother was Valiant. A dragon-riding Valiant. You mustn't tell anyone I told you this. Your father would have me killed. But if you ride a dragon, you will establish a link with it. Such links are not easily broken. It's part of your blood, a legacy your mother left you, and which will be passed down for a few generations further. The trait is renewed, ensured to pass to the next generation, by bonding with a dragon."
The news was a shock. It took her a moment to process it. "I still want to see the land outside the valley."
"Having two Valiant bonded with a dragon isn't wise," the guard said. "Not only does it create a mental link between the dragon and riders, but between the two riders."
"Then find me a dragon," she demanded. "I've seen you flying in groups and formations."
"You don't just find a dragon." The guard was starting to both be angry with the princess and admire her determination and fire. "Until bonded, they are incredibly secretive, and will return to that secrecy to nest."
Nobody had spent more time watching the valley floor than the princess, who, while trapped in the castle, did have some license to explore the secured confines of the innermost circle of the city, the royal circle, and had spent a fair amount of time in the upper parapets, staring out the windows. During that time, she had seen her fair share of dragons, both with Valiant riders and without. And the ones without always vanished into the distant northern cliffs, where the valley was bounded by even taller mountains, that nobody could scale. "Unlike you, I have spent many a day watching the motions of the dragons, and may know where they nest. Now, will we be walking or riding?" She began to lace her boots back on.
Nobody in the castle denied that the princess was beautiful. Besides the fact that denying her beauty was nearly as terrible as treason, she was indeed fair in appearance, with long, wavy brunette hair, sparkling green eyes, and fair, clear skin. Only the richest, most prominent families in the town had any hopes of wedding their sons to the princess, but as she still a few months before coming of age, her father had not been able to present the suitors to her yet. Here in the valley marked the first time she had been alone with a man other than her father.
Something came over the guard, which most people would call attraction to the princess, and he weighed how much the rules really mattered up against the wishes of a princess. Combined with curiosity, what remained of his zeal for the rules crumbled. He smiled at her.
With wild giggles, the two young people climbed onto the back of the Valiant guard's fire-colored dragon.
"Not many women number among the Valiant," the princess commented as they tried to figure out the best way to fit both of them onto the saddle.
"Most leave the service once they are betrothed," the guard explained. "Or will assume less dangerous jobs until they have children to care for."
The princess felt strange tingles all around, from her head to her toes, as the dragon stirred to life, preparing to take flight.
As they took flight, she began to sense her guard urging the dragon north, and the dragon's resistance to going there.
"I am Princess Madelina of the Castle in the Sky, daughter of the King of the Hidden Valley and Queen Adelina, a Valiant dragon rider," she thought. "I wish to claim my birthright as a daughter of a Valiant dragon rider, to find for myself a dragon, and embrace the bravery of the Valiant Order and see what lies beyond the Hidden Valley."
The dragon continued to resist going north, but it was losing the mental battle with two rides urging it north.
"You need to be careful," the Valiant guard said. "If you try to direct a dragon too much, you can become lost in its mind."
"You cannot ride another dragon and properly bond with it," the dragon spoke to both of them, in their minds. "Not unless you both break this bond with me, or I find a mate and we have hatchlings. Then you could also ride my mate."
"Return us to the highest parapet of the castle, and do not return until such a time," Madelina thought.
"Are you mad?" the Valiant guard said aloud. He knew she was. He kinda liked that.
The dragon did as Madelina instructed. She led her Valiant guard down to her father's chambers.
"Where is the rest of your guard?" he asked.
"Safely asleep on the valley floor," she said. "I know you have prepared a list of suitors for me, for when I come of age in a season. I will deny all of them." For in the time that both she and her guard had been bonded with the dragon, the found a mutual sense of adventure, and a knowledge that the course both of them had been put on by their families would never allow that.
---
Some years later, well after Madelina and Arturo were married, to the shock and joy of the castle, but before they had children, the fire-colored dragon returned, with an emerald blue one by its side, and with an oddly shaped gem in one of the blue dragon's talons, their hatchling, too young to fly any great distances or any great height.
A great army was arriving from beyond the valley, moving under the dead of night and vanishing from sight during the day. One dragon riding Valiant escaped the initial battle. Madelina and Arturo had only just had time to mount the dragons when the news arrived.
"Fetch me a sword," Madelina ordered. Her father was old and ailing now, and most of the castle's management fell to her and Arturo.
Minutes later, outfitted for battle, she, Arturo, and the dragons took off for battle, followed by all the Valiant in the city, save the few messengers sent in other directions to summon the other Valiant from their stations. There was a fierce look on Madelina's face as the wind rippled through her hair, for though she had never fought, the thrill was in her blood, as was riding dragons.