TSA Guard Extended Guidelines
1) Maintain an orderly queue at all times.
2) Maintain your composure in front of passengers at all times, especially during a crisis.
3) Your standard taser and entrapment spells should only be used in a true emergency.
3.1) A person shouting swear words is not an emergency unless he is speaking in a Satanic dialect.
3.2) Spells from Harry Potter are fictional and are not a real Satanic dialect.
3.3) Foos-row-dah is not a real Satanic dialect either.
3.4) ~~Greek is not a Satanic dialect.~~As of 2053/3/4, permission is given to apprehend anyone speaking Greek.
4) All potential contraband must pass through the X-ray scanner, followed by the latent-mana scanner and be declared clear of contraband before given back to the passenger.
4.1) Should either scanner fail, close the gateway and direct passengers to other open gateways.
4.2) Tampering with either of the scanners is prohibited.
4.3) Do not under any circumstances tamper with the latent-mana scanner.
4.4) Any employee found tampering with the latent-mana scanner repeatedly will be fed to the latent-mana scanner after hours.
5) All contraband must be confiscated and stored in the provided hidden bin away from civilians. Refer to the contraband book~~let~~ for a complete list of contraband definitions.
5.1) Do not steal contraband for personal use.
~~5.2) All bins must be curse-proofed.~~
~~5.3) All bins must be soundproofed.~~
5.2) Spell pages must be shredded before being disposed in the bin.
5.3) Wear your curse-proofed gloves at all times while handling potential contraband.
5.4) Your curse-proofed gloves do not "double as boxing gloves".
5.5) Remove your curse-proofed gloves before dealing with burning people as they are highly flammable.
6) All liquids must be confiscated while they are contained within the container they fill.
6.1) Do not under any circumstances steal liquids that are contraband for personal use.
6.2) Drinking unknown liquids that are contraband to hide evidence is a very bad idea and is therefore prohibited.
7) It bears repeating: Maintain your composure in front of passengers at all times, especially during a crisis.
8) The interrogation room should only be used if suspicion of terrorism is justifiable
8.1) The interrogation room should not be used as a threat to unruly civilians.
8.2) Use the specialized fireproof interrogation room if necessary.
9) Racial slurs and harmful language are prohibited while working.
9.1) Yes, we understand one of your coworkers is now part-bee. Don't think we don't hear the name "Buzzy boy" in the cafeteria.
9.2) And "Goggles".
9.3) And "Boaty McBoat-Face".
10) Unnecessary searching of passengers is strictly prohibited.
10.1) This includes telekinetic searches.
10.2) Our full-body scanners should detect any foreign objects within any of the passenger's orifices.
10.3) For f*** sake stop feeling up the passengers!
11) Do not make eye contact with passengers without proper safety gear.
11.1) We are working on making the safety gear less bulky. Stop complaining about it.
11.2) Do not mock rock mages with the safety gear.
11.3) Do not mock basilisks with the safety gear.
11.4) Do not mock living statues with the safety gear.
11.4) Stop mocking people with the safety gear.
12) Wash you hands after using the bathroom.
All further inquiries must be directed to the High Management's ~~Office~~ Secretary's Office. Thank you for your time.
TSA