Ever get to some part of your life that's taken you goddamn years, *decades*, and then just- poof, gone, "Fuuuuuuck you! ", God throws a switch and kicks you off the stairs and into a ditch? It's been fourteen years since that happened, and I pray every day to gods I didn't believe in that it never happens again.
My brother was about to propose to his wife, one knee and diamond ring and all, when it happened. She'd fallen to her knees with him, and begged forgiveness for a secret so long withheld. Her twist was that she'd been a man; his was that he, an unusually homophobic and hateful man, still wanted to marry her. Kind of funny, that one, actually. Bit inspiring.
My parents was riding a Greyhound from Chi-Town to Florida, though; forty-one people on board, all quiet. Just about everybody sleeping in the early morning stretch through Tennessee. Somebody was a little fidgety, though, and, *surprise! * there goes the driver with a box cutter. The madman throws the wheel into oncoming traffic and rolls her. Dad and seven others didn't make it; mom's okay, though. She's remarried, living with the gentlest damn soul I've ever seen.
The one I can't get over, that apparently *no one* can get over, was my own. I share it with a few thousand, actually. I was on the phone with my wife, asking her how she was doing at work- *boring as hell, as usual* -when it came through. I didn't hear it on my end, like everyone else did, being in a thick-ass studio, but I heard it through the phone. "PLOT TWIST," like some demon was bellowing from the pit of hell. It couldn't have been God booming down from the sky- God doesn't fuck people up like that.
One of my clients snapped a string and cut up his tendons or nerves or something in his fingertips; couldn't play ever again, I heard. Poor bastard. I told my wife with a little bit of a shaky laugh that I'd definitely gotten my plot twist. She laughed, too, telling me they'd just had a bit of a shake.
Then she told me it was getting *really* jumpy over there. Then the line cut out.
One of the engineers pulled me pretty hard into the lobby of our studio, and everybody was staring at the tube like fucking cartoon characters, eyes wide and jaws hanging. They'd pulled me in just in time to see everything fall apart.
My boss told me, the *next damn day*, that he'd walked in on his wife with another man when she was drunk. Told me it was the *worst possible pain* he could *ever* feel. I laughed and laughed at his sorry ass until I was on the floor, sobbing. What a fucking twist.