"Hello," asked the woman, "how much does this cost? I couldn't find a marked price." "You won't," I replied, not looking up from my book, "not on that, or anything else in this shop, save the cheap trinkets on that rack near the door. Now, lets have a look at what you've found." I turned to face her. She was holding a small statue of a demon that was more horns and spikes than bare skin. I returned my attention to my book and said, "You couldn't afford that." "How can you tell? I'll have you know I am a very wealthy woman, and I came in here looking for a souvenir for nephew back home, who seems terribly interested with this sort of thing. Otherwise, I'd never have entered this tacky shop," came her indignant response. I kept my gaze locked on the book, and said, "If you want something for your nephew, go to the trinket rack. That is not the sort of thing he would want, or that he should be having. I don't care how much you have anymore; even if it was enough, I wouldn't sell that to you now knowing that you plan on giving it to a child." "How DARE you accuse me of being an irresponsible aunt!" she screamed. "Its not an accusation, its the truth. I can see it. That's not the issue here. The issue is that you have no idea what it is you are holding, or what it symbolizes," I said, still calm in the face of her fury. It was an odd contrast. "Go to hell," was all she had to say. Thankfully, I had a comeback for that: "I can't. Satan still has a restraining order against me." She made a disgruntled sound, threw the pointy statue at me, and left, making a futile attempt at slamming the two-way door on her way out. I caught the figurine without looking up. No damage was done to the figurine. The same could not be said for my hand, which now sported some nasty punctures and scrapes from the thorny demon. It could have been worse; goodness knows what would have happened had it broken and the demon been released.
I run an occult shop in New Orleans. The difference between me and most places is that my items are the real deal. People who are in the know have a way of finding my place, while the myriad other shops keep the uninitiated out. Hiding in plain sight is a time-honored tactic for a reason.
The young lady in the back breathed a sigh of relief at the other woman's departure. She had been carefully inspecting a mangled pickaxe that had been crushed in a coal mine cave-in resulting from poor management and safety standards, along with its owner. "That happen a lot?" She asked. "Not really. Most people who don't know the truth about this shop just buy a cheap keepsake from the wall or take their business elsewhere. You clearly have taste, though. Implement of death and vengeance, that. Interested?" She came back with a question of her own: "What you said, about Satan having a restraining order out on you, was that true?" I sighed, and nodded. I had hoped she wouldn't bring that up. "Then that would make you The Grifter!" she exclaimed. I nodded again.
"The Grifter." The name was a badge of honor and a mark of shame at the same time. I'm one of an obscure category of people known as the Traders. We bargain with higher powers, cosmic entities, and other such beings as a way of life. Most of us don't have souls. That is always the first thing to go. For us, a soul is a nest-egg, a place to start from. Turns out you don't really need one. Lucky thing too. Because true names are even more valuable than souls, we all go by pseudonyms of some kind, and sooner or later we acquire a title. The young lady had sorted out mine. I got it after gaining a reputation for making less than fair trades. Not many people can con demons, angels, and eldritch horrors, and nobody as well as I could. Eventually, Satan got so frustrated with me that he permanently barred me from Hell.
The young lady continued, "So, are the legends real then? Did you really sell the rights to your soul after you died to three different entities? Did you really bargain with Death himself for save haven from all three? Did you-" "Look," I cut her off, "If you want to ask me about this, we should do it in private. Go to the back room, I'll close up shop."
I made sure that all seven locks on the front door were engaged, as well as the chain and both bolts. I lit the warding incense and candles, then headed to the back. The girl (she had too much energy and too little restraint for me to consider her ladylike anymore) was looking around at my private collection, mouth agape. I coughed, once, causing her to jump and turn around. "Okay," I said, "Let's take this one question at a time. I can tell you won't leave until you are satisfied." She moved closer to me with slow and soft steps, then whispered, "Are you really immortal?" The question was bound to come up. "Yes," I said, "but only by accident. Satan barred me from Hell, and I've done too much wrong and made too many infernal pacts to go to Heaven. Purgatory would be an option, had God not shut the place down when the church started selling indulgences to line their own pockets. So, with no afterlife to go to, I can't pass on." The entire story was actually rather embarrassing. Most inexperienced, arrogant, or overambitious Traders try to bargain for eternal life at some point. Fools, the lot of them. I won't say what happens to them, but it is too unpleasant for words. The price on that is far too high. Smart Traders instead bargain for years, living on bought time and using it to accrue more bargaining chips to exchange for more time on this Earth. Some of them go mad, scraping just for a couple of weeks, afraid of the death they have avoided for so long. Me, I managed to become immortal by getting locked out of every afterlife possible. In doing so, I severely restricted my trading prospects, so I'm pretty ineffectual these days. That's why I view that as a mistake. Currently, I'd been around for roughly 150 years.
The girl had returned to awestruck silence once more, thankfully for me. She couldn't have been much over 20, and was rather pretty. She had no soul anymore, which marked her as a Trader. The fact that she knew of me just sealed the deal. Whether it was fame or infamy, I couldn't tell, but I was well known. Somewhere, in the back of my head, a devious idea sprung up.
"What is your name?" I asked. The question was, would she take the bait.
"You know full well my true name is too valuable, but they call me The Mermaid." she answered. It had been worth a try. With her true name, I could have controlled her to some degree, maybe used her as a proxy and gotten back into business as a Trader.
"Very good," I said, "clearly you aren't as green as I thought. Why 'Mermaid', though?" It was her turn to sigh. Clearly she was as embarrassed about the story behind her name as I was about mine, but she answered, "I made a bargain with a sea spirit seven years ago. It was my first, and I was just thirteen. The true meaning of what I was doing was beyond my understanding. I sold my soul and got unfathomable beauty and charm in return. A stupid thing to trade for a soul, I know, but I was able to use it. I got in the habit of seducing my classmates, getting favors from them. From favors, it turned into things I could trade with spirits, and that's how I got into this business." Okay, so she was a bigger fish than I had originally thought. I'd pegged her for a novice, but most people don't start that young. I gave a whistle, impressed, "You're smarter than you look. I'll be honest, I was hoping to get your true name, use you as a pawn to do more trades. You'd be surprised how restricting being locked out of Hell can be on someone in our profession." She cast her gaze downward. "You don't need my true name, or to use me as a pawn. I heard about you early in my career, and have looked up to you for some time. Please," she said, turning her head to look me dead in the eye, "make me your apprentice!" That caught me off guard. She was clearly competent, but not confident. I thought this over. She wasn't wrong to want to learn from me; I probably knew every trick in the book, and, even after Satan had essentially put out a burn notice on me, I still had no shortage of connections. But what was in it for me? I supposed it would be nice to have help around the shop. What's more, with an apprentice, I could maybe do some business. Besides, she was like a lost puppy that had followed me home. I thought back to my own young days as a naiive Trader. How nice would it have been to have somebody show me the ropes? I sighed yet again, and probably not for the last time if I was going to keep her around. "Fine." Her face broke into a grin that would give some of the wide-mouthed toothy demons I'd met a run for their money. I couldn't help but smile myself. This could be fun.