National Parks are a beautiful part of any nation. Yellowstone in the USA, Parque La Huasteca in Mexico, Krka in Croatia - all of them are filled with jaw dropping sights, unique in their spirit but unified in the effect they have on the observer. Spend a night observing the stars under the black skies of Snowdonia and the next night you spend in your apartment or McMansion will feel strangely crowded.
Each culture around the world shares stories about the woods, usually depicting animals that can speak, secret cultures of elves or dwarves that refuse to live with man, or trees that are wiser than even the most learned man. But each culture also shares the same story, the one that warns a wanderer not to stray from the cleared paths in the forest. The French have Little Red Riding Hood, the Germans have Hansel & Gretel, A Vava Inouva from Algeria, Lon Po Po from China; all of them share a similar theme of warning the listener to beware whatever waits just beyond the trees.
Have you ever read the original journals of Lewis and Clark? You probably haven't, there's a reason we remember them, but not a single quote from either has permeated the American national consciousness. Clark was a syphilitic, a disease which was believed to cause madness in its later stages, and Lewis fell in love with the dried Peyote roots that the Natives were so eager to trade for cloth and rifles. Their America is a different one from the one we know, a land filled with awful beasts that hunted man for sport. There is one who they describe in depth, a pale bony creature that walks upright like a man with long clawed hands that drag along the dirt, leaving a trail along the deep imprints left from hooked feet.
They called it a wendigo.
The creature appears throughout their writing, in every state they crossed through, they both wrote of scared natives who refused to lead them down easier paths, saying that these lands were where the wendigo lived. They ignored their guide once, preferring the easier crossing that a forested valley provided over hiking over another mountain, they turned back after the third skeleton they found with the jaw removed and the skull crushed in. I've read before that any animals that eats a man will eat the body in the following order: the thighs, the glutes, the fat deposits on the front of the belly, the tongue, and the brain. Lewis and Clark noticed that these people seemed to have died in reverse order, the teeth marks rarely were on the thigh bone or the tailbone, but they were always on the skull.
The strangest part about having your brain eaten is that you're alive for longer than you'd expect. Your brain is filled with redundancies for the major functions, it's the reason brain damage can cost you the ability to speak or to regulate your emotion, but your heart will keep beating. Cannibals used to believe that eating a man's brain gave you his power. There would be festivals where a man had his head placed through the center of a table, exposing only the top of the scalp. The flesh and bone would be removed with an obsidian blade, and as the sacrificed screamed underneath the table, high priests and kings would dig into their meal with polished stone spoons. I have heard before that people taste rather like pigs.
Lewis and Clark only saw the wendigo once, while they were traveling by torchlight through the green woods of western Oregon. They said they couldn't hear it, but that it appeared in the shadows of the trees, a tall and gaunt beast that would have blended in with the branches if it wasn't moving. It followed them for the full night, disappearing when they shouted and banged their pans and shot at it, but reappearing every time. The party didn't sleep until long after dawn broke, and even then, a member disappeared. They could have followed him, the screams let them know exactly where he was, but courage escaped them and eventually the noise stopped.
There have been periodic sightings of wendigos ever since. I am sure if you have any friends living west of the Mississippi, they all know someone who can speak of the shadow that moved beyond the trees, waiting. Officially, the United States government says that 11 people went missing without a trace in the woods last year. Many believe that number is much higher.