The biting wind whipping across the permafrost sought out the crack between my gloves and sleeves. "I hate it here," I muttered.
"Well, next time, Xander," Sasha said on the radio, "don't volunteer to assist the professor, *who is a climatologist* study the effects of environmental erosion."
*Damn, didn't realize my radio was keyed. * I tugged on my sleeve, trying to cover the gap in my clothing. A popping sound beneath me made me freeze in place. *Oh, shit. * The permafrost gave way, and I was falling into darkness.
---
"Xander! Xander! Can you hear me?" Sasha screamed over the radio.
I groaned and rolled onto my side. "Yeah," I croaked into the mic.
"Xander! Are you there? We can't pick up your transponder. If you can hear me, say something!"
"Damn," I muttered. I sat on my knees and looked around the defile. It was too dark to see anything, and I cracked a chemlight, holding it high as the plastic tube brightened my surroundings. "Fuck, where am I?" My words curled into a fog in the freezing air.
The sheer sides of the crevice looked like they would offer no purchase if I tried to climb up them. "How far did I fall?" The sky was a dim crack in the distance, but the defile seemed to continue for a distance. "May as well follow it...Maybe there's a better place to climb out down that way."
I walked a few feet and caught my foot on something hard, losing my balance and slamming my face into the freezing earth. I touched my left hand to my nose, and my white glove came away with dark red blood. *Pay more attention, damn it. * A humming sound to my left drew my gaze to a glowing pair of blue eyes encased in the dark ice.
I dropped the glow stick and edged away from the lights. The light landed next to a large metal finger. The ground shuddered beneath me, and ice broke away from the crevice's wall. A large metal arm shot out from the ice, blocking a large boulder from crushing me. Melted ice hissed away from the shiny metal monstrosity rising from the permafrost.
"Cvlz drksht valdir," the metal giant screeched.
"Don't kill me!" I yelled.
"Kuldir fyr volstur!" The machine made no more movements, but the blue eyes did not move.
I held still, waiting for the thing to crush me. *I think if it wanted to, it would have all ready. * "What do you want from me?"
"Scan of temporal lobe complete. Language assimilated. Indigenous life from, state your designation."
"I'm Xander Roberts. What's your… designation?"
The machine withdrew its arm from above me. "Multi-Vector Combat System, codename Maverics. My pilot's life signs have ceased. System is unable to function without organic pilot. AI will be deleted permanently to prevent damaged functions to developing if a new pilot is not located."
"Okay. What do you want me to do?"
The machine's head cracked open, and a desiccated mummy tumbled out. "Enter the cockpit."