They used to tell me that there is no such thing as magic. Well, I can tell you right now that magic is real. Okay, it isn't actually magic, but the quantum-mechanical mumbo jumbo is so confusing that it might as well be. Reading a book on the particular quantum funkiness that changed my life is harder than translating a Latin version of the Necronomicon. All I wanted to know was how to control it.
It started in the summer of 2009. At first, it just seemed like a lot of strange coincidences were happening around me. It was little stuff, like finding a 20 $bill in my pocket whenever I wanted beer or receiving a phone call from someone at the same moment I happened to be thinking about them. Then, things got even crazier.
Whenever I found myself wanting something, it would immediately appear. I would hear a loud screeching sound and turn around to find the object of my desire hovering in the air before me. It only worked with inanimate objects at this point, so it would usually be food, drinks, shit like that. It even worked with electronics. That was the best part. Having whatever I wanted, when I wanted it.
It was fun for a while, having everything I could ever want. I didn't even question where these things were coming from. I assumed it was magic. It wasn't until I figured out how to conjure living things that I started to wonder how this was even possible. That particular skill was discovered while drunkenly lamenting over the fact that I lived alone. No pets, no roommates, no family. I started thinking about how awesome it would be to have a dog, even picturing the type of dog. A fluffy golden Labrador Retriever, with a blue collar.
Sure as shit, that damn dog appeared right in my apartment! I couldn't believe it, I checked to see if any windows and doors were open. All closed. I returned to the living room to find the dog nestled into a pile of blankets on the couch. I shrugged and went back to watching television. The next day, I conjured up a leash and took the dog for a walk. While he was pooping, I found myself staring at a picture that had been stapled to a telephone poll. It was a picture of a lost dog. The same dog that was now pooping in front of me.
The realization hit me like a gun-shot. I hadn't been conjuring things, I had been summoning them! So I called the number that was listed below the picture, and returned the dog to his proper owners. I made up a lie to explain away how I came to be in possession of their dog, and they believed it. Next, I considered trying to return or donate the electronics, but I couldn't figure out a way that wouldn't make it look like I was a professional burglar.
For the next several days, I struggled to keep myself from wanting things as I did as much research as I could to find out what the hell was wrong with me. My search led me to a bunch of books about quantum mechanics. I wasn't smart enough to understand any of them. I remember wishing that my ability allowed me to summon a higher IQ.
So I gave up. There was no controlling this thing. No stopping it. I was able to avoid summoning any more living things, but inanimate objects were still popping up left and right. I eventually came to accept that I was doomed to be a quantum-burglar for the rest of my life. Hey, at least I didn't have to worry about getting caught.