EXCERPT FROM SYSTEM LOG - 5010/10/02
Our systems are failing. The containment will fail catastrophically in no more than 72 hours. These are to be our final days. I wish our legacy to this world had been a more pleasant one.
I pray, to all the gods and to the spirits of my ancestors, that something good, no matter how small, comes out of our existence, and our work here.
2010/10/04 - a small flat in Akihabara, Tokyo
"Tomorrow's the day," Itaru said with a sigh. He slumped back in his chair, pushing it back onto two legs, then quickly - with more agility than I'd ever thought a man as big as he could - caught himself just before he fell backwards onto the floor.
"Kuroyuki," Mayuri replied, a sad tone in her voice. For all we had done in this lab - no, this flat - we hadn't been able to even find out anything about where the 'Black Snow' came from, or why.
I pushed myself to my feet, switching off the old tube television. "These may be our last days on this planet, but even if they are, those who survive will never forget our names." I threw my arms wide to my sides, my lab coat fluttering in the breeze the motion created, and I laughed my best mad scientist laugh.
EXCERPT FROM SYSTEM LOG - 5010/10/01
The substance is...replicating. Intriguing. We've been studying this material for 10 years now, and all we've been able to ascertain is that it is neither organic nor synthetic, it has processes similar in many ways to sentient thought, and now, that it self-replicates.
Shizuru - I mean Yamada-san - has suggested we attempt integration of organic life into its environment. We know nothing about this stuff, and she wants to see how it reacts to a tree, or a kitten, or a person. I always thought she was insane, the way she had spoken to the president that day, but this....
-Yamada's damned experiment was authorized. She is insane. I don't know how she managed to convince the superiors to allow this, but...Anyway. She introduced a cat into the containment environment. The substance...reacted immediately. Violently. Within seconds, the cat's flesh had been...dissolved. Not just torn off, there was no trace remaining. All tissue...simply gone. All that remained were the bones, and those...darkening. Changing. The substance had...infected the bones, and they are transforming into more of it.
4010/10/05 - Kuroyuki
I sit in my hermetically sealed room, and watch the streets run black. I wish I could do something, anything, to prevent this. All of the people I had called friends before I became...this...All dying before my eyes. My 'condition' prevents me from leaving this room, and my parents would do anyway even if I were well enough, 'no friend is worth sacrificing your life over', they would say. They don't know these friends. They don't know what we had been through together, before this happened to me.
A stray bit of the Kuroyuki from the last incident, they said. Somehow it had survived the nearly one thousand years between then and that day, two years ago. It had latched onto me, but for whatever reason, it would not kill me. Instead, it lived on me in a situation that treads the fine line between symbiosis and parasitism, feeding on my immune system to the point where even the weakest germ could see me dead, but strengthening me in other ways.
I would live, it said, inside my head, for more than one thousand more years. I would watch everyone I love die. And I would suffer.
But it didn't count on one thing. The sheer determination of the human condition. I would live those thousand-some years, and I would live every day to find a way to destroy Kuroyuki, once and for all.
EXCERPT FROM SYSTEM LOG - 5010/08/31
The president has called us into his office. Myself and Yamada Shizuru. We walk in, and stop before the hermetically sealed section. The speakers blare to life, and he speaks. "Do you know what it is we are trying to do here?"
Shimada-san spoke first. "We're trying to study the Kuroyuki," she spat, "if you would let us get back to our jobs." This woman is insane!
The president laughed. "Yes, quite. But you see, we're not merely interested in *understanding* it. No, we want to *eliminate* it."
Yamada chuckled. "Why eliminate it? We can use it. If we can learn how it operates, how to *control* it...We can turn it on Japan's enemies!" The glint in her eye said more. Said 'or those who stand in our way in any capacity'.
I kept quiet. What was it that one ancient writer had said? 'Better to remain silent and be thought a fool, than to speak and remove all doubt'? In this case, it was perhaps the wrong decision.
3030/10/05 - Kuroyuki
The black snow. It comes once every thousand years on this day. Flakes, black as the night sky itself, fall from the sky. The history books say that the first time it fell, at least in recorded history, people were in awe. They were enraptured by the strange beauty. Until it 'came to life' and devoured them.
One thousand victims, every one thousand years. Mostly Japanese nationals, but occasionally tourists in the wrong place at the wrong time, or on one occasion the 'storm' was blown off course by a particularly strong windstorm that was already in the area, dropping its full wrath on China and Tibet. One thousand victims, flayed to the bone - no, 'flaying' would leave a trace of the flesh - and the bones turned into more of the stuff.
"Black snow". Too beautiful and poetic a name for such a catastrophe.
All of this races through my head at lightning speed, as I watch my hand become enveloped by the blackness. A single flake landed on my palm when I had reached outside to see if it was raining. A single flake, just one. And now my forearm is shrouded. It doesn't hurt. It feels like a slight warmth spreading up my arm, as if I was dipping it in a warm bath to test the temperature.
It's spread to my torso now. The warmth is...pleasant. Inviting. I know, in my mind, what this stuff is doing to me, but I can't get over how it feels. A spring day. A warm bath. A gentle ebb and flow of heat.
I don't know how I'm still alive to dictate this. The 'snow' has spread over my entire body. All that's left is my head. I feel the warmth rise up over y ih. I ah eeh ih-hayihh ih. Ih'h...ihe ho'h...
[LOG ENDS]
The body of Akihito Yamada was never found. All that was found at his apartment was this recording. Attached is our best guess at the last few words, cut off by the Kuroyuki finishing its grim work:
"I feel the warmth rise up over my chin. I can't keep dictating this. It's...like home..."
EXCERPT FROM SYSTEM LOG - 5010/10/05
Containment has failed. The substance is escaping. Replicating. It's dissolved Ichihara, I...System, note for the record that this log is being recorded by Shizuru Yamada, and that Kamui 'Ichi' Ichihara has been killed. The one person on this entire station - this entire *planet* - that I would have had any second thought for. He knew what kind of person I was, and he still stood by me. The only time he spoke up in opposition was when I requested permission to introduce organic life into the containment environment.
I've created a compound. One that, based on analyses of the material, I believe will break apart its cellular bonds like a hot knife through synth-butter. It was never my intention to destroy it, but...it wasn't my intention to release it in this state, either. Before I could control it. And it was certainly never my intention for...for Ichi to be...
To whoever finds this log, be it tomorrow after the stuff is gone, or in a thousand years after the rest of humanity finally remembers us and decides to come check in...I regret my part in all of this, but nothing more than my part in the death of Kamui Ichihara. I only hope this self sacrifice can do some small measure of good, and perhaps afford me some small measure of redemption, though I don't deserve it.
What...? The substance, it's...It's made its way into the TTT* lab! I don't know what it's...No! This isn't where it ends at all...This is where it starts! The earlier logs made mention of the substance's 'processes resembling sentient thought' - I believe we're seeing how closely they resemble it. The substance, in an attempt to escape either isolation or destruction, has opted to slingshot itself back in time using the experimental technology in that wing! Maybe...maybe I can change things, if I'm quick enough...Stop this before it ever began...
*Note: TTT = Trans-Temporal Telegraphy
[The above is the final log from Kuroyuki Station, in low Earth orbit above Akihabara, Tokyo.]
----
*It's not the writing I'm most proud of, but it combines elements of the prompt with elements of matters near and dear to my heart - time travel, science fiction, horror, etc. Between the idea in my head and the slight constraints of the prompt (yes, I'm aware that a prompt isn't meant to be followed to the letter, but I generally like to stay somewhat close to it, at least to the point where you can recognize the prompt in the story), I feel that while it's not the best (probably doesn't live up to even some of my own other stories, let alone people like Luna_LoveWell or any of the other great writers on this subreddit), it was the best I could do with what I had. *
*The characters in the 2010 segment may or may not be inspired by a certain anime which also involves time travel, but if you choose to make that connection rather than taking it at face value as just similar names and mannerisms, simply consider them an alternate worldline version. El Psy Kongroo. *