He sat on the sidewalk, watching people enter and exit the door before him every few minutes. No one really paid him any attention, maybe because he and his coat were covered in dirt. But, that's the way life was when you didn't have a home. Cleanliness didn't matter as much as satiating your hunger, and there was certainly food to be had beyond this door.
There didn't appear to be anything special about the door or even the building. It looked similar to the rest of the buildings on this street. But there was something different about it. Most notably, when the door opened, delicious scents filled his nostrils.
A couple and their child emerged from the door and walked down the street. The door stayed open for half a second before it started to close again. During that time, he was hit by a tidal wave of scents that sparked his hunger and summoned saliva. Spiced meat, potatoes, greens, oh he could almost taste it! The excitement the smells inspired brought him to his feet. Surely someone would come outside with extra food? Perhaps they would see him and share their bounty? The thought made his mouth water more.
He had to get in there.
The door had already closed again by now, but he knew it wouldn't be long before someone else exited or entered, leaving the door open briefly. So he waited, imagining the luxurious edibles that would soon be available to him. He looked down the street and saw a father and his daughter approaching him and the door. New patrons, perhaps? The little girl, bundled up in her coat, waved to him and smiled. He returned her enthusiasm as the father opened the sacred door, ushering his daughter inside. This was it. This was his chance.
He dashed inside before the door closed behind him.
The smell of the restaurant was so much more intoxicating when you were inside! Overcome by excitement and the prospect of food, he sprinted through the building, driven by hunger.
"What the..." someone began to yell. "Get that dog out of here!"
But it was too late. Dashing around corners and under tables, the golden retriever found the source of the scent, stood on his hind legs, and grabbed a delicious tenderloin steak from a surprised patron's plate.