By god, the girl was stunning. I couldn't believe that she was interested in a normal fellow like me. It was almost too perfect - she slipped and I caught her. Romance ensued. She was so easy to be with and we striked up a conversation. Akward as I am I started imagining how our life would be together. We would have adorable little children, a puppy, and...yea, I tend to get a bit over excited about things in general.
It was a good thing too that I got some good out of today. Earlier I was approached by a man. He looked quite ordinary except also a bit strange: he looked a bit harsh in his appearence. Judging from his cloth I assumed he was off after a long day at work. I thought nothing more to it until he came a bit too close. His breath was horrible and when I asked him to step out of my comfort zone he merely grunted in response. I am not a man of confrontation but I reached out my arm to regain personal space. The approaching man snatched it and before I could reclaim it he bit me. Hard, too! Reactionary I let out an "ouch" and pulled my hand back. I quickly ran away from him at this point. Again, I am not confrontational.
Ever since the man bit me I have been a bit off. But being with the pretty lady really distracted me from this. As we walked in the park and talked a bit I noticed that she was a bit wary. Weirdly she also kept looking at the sky. What really confused me was when the clouds made a small hole, just small enough for the moon to peak out. At this point she was visibly tense and exclaimed to herself: "THAT'S TODAY?"
Of course I asked her what she meant but she was too preoccupied with her sorrundings. I felt so irrelevant and contemplated going back to the weird man so he could finish the job or at least tell him to "bite me". This was of course a joke. Before I could manage to chuckle at my own joke I was interrupted by the lady. "HIIISSH!" she sounded just before a harry man jumped on me. I didn't get to see him. It was dark and it happened so fast. Non the less the lady somehow managed to fight him off, all the while I lay confused and still non confrontational about anything.
When the harry man fled I was shooked but got on my feet. "Did anything happen?" the lady asked me. I answered that I didn't think so and that is was a good thing since I had already been bit once today. She seemed surprisingly calm and laughed a bit about the situation.
A few minutes later we got back to my place. Romance intensified and I leaned in for a kiss. She dodged my attempt but took me closer. She then proceeded to whisper in my ear: "I'll show you a bite", as she sunk her fangs into my neck. I knew I was in a bad spot but something about the lady was so enchanting that I did not fight her. Actually, it felt great.
I just wanted her to continue but she stopped almost immediately. "WHO BIT YOU EARLIER?" she demanded. "Just some weird tired guy, probably a bit coo-coo after too much office time." I replied. she continued: "Motherfucker. Now I also crave flesh."
She then left me. I still don't get anything. One thing is for sure. I feel super weird now. It is like I am not me. I almost feel inclined to confront everyone I meet. Also I have started to get more harry. I have killer bangs now but I just wish that I wouldn't get *that* harry all over my body. I also started grunting more...It's weird. My dog just feels so enticing all of a sudden. But hey, maybe it is just a phase.
We will see. Tomorrow marks a month from my weird day. I am thinking about going to the park.