The Universe, as best as we have known it, is fundamentally defined by the principle of symmetry. For every action, Newton posited, there exists an equal and opposite reaction. For every calorie of heat added to a system, thermodynamics tells us that an identical calorie must have been subtracted from another. A gyroscope, by classical mechanics, will maintain its angular momentum unless acted upon by an opposing force.
The principle dives deeper. A proton may decay into a neutron, but only if charge is conserved by the emission of a positron, and only if an electron neutrino is released to balance the lepton number. A neutron may conversely decay into a proton, necessitating the opposite process. Yet further, for any "before" and "after" involving elementary particles, an infinite number of possible "during" s exist, moderating only by the demand for symmetry. From Feynman we see how these countless possibilities explode in complexity, boundless yet ever restrained by that singular principle. Without symmetry, our laws mean nothing.
In relative terms, the recent anomalies qualify as mere curiosities. But theory doesn't operate in any uncertain, relative terms, and the absolute implications of what has been observed are astounding.
In relative terms, a routine experiment at a non-descript particle accelerator culminated in an extensive investigation; how was the equipment damaged, scientists asked, such that a deuterium nucleus could spontaneously split into two hydrogen ions? It was inexplicable, and yet no mechanical flaw could be found. In still more relative terms, analogous peculiarities were consistently discovered at almost every accelerator across the globe - including the Large Hadron Collider. Confusion mounted as the doubt decreased. It was soon certain, to well over six-gamma error, that the observed anomalies were real.
With the observations established, a translation into absolute terms became possible: symmetry is falling apart. The very principle that has thus far held our universe together is unraveling. It was impossible to predict what this could mean at the time, but over many months, the observations have accumulated.
It was the engineers who noticed next. Strange fluctuations in pressure, volume, momentum; variations absurd by any existing model presented themselves in sensitive mechanisms and devices. Measurement errors skyrocketed and manufacturing suffered at the hands of arbitrary fortune. How could a screw be molded to one thousandth of a percent variation, when the dimensions of the mold itself seemed to incomprehensibly vary?
A standard wave of disasters followed. Numerous existing buildings, rendered unstable by the asymmetries that accumulated, began collapsing. Fortunately, the bureaucrats listened to the scientists before too many lives were lost, and an intensive research program into the new universe found funding across universities and research departments.
Their results came in slow, but every report offered some reassurance: yes, symmetry had collapsed, but there seemed to nonetheless exist a certain *balance*. The likelihood of an asymmetric decay process or a spontaneous application of a particular force was found to conform to a predictable normal distribution; we can't know *whether* these new, safety-rigged roofs will collapse on our heads, but we can calculate that given our modified designs, there exists only a minuscule chance of catastrophic failure in any given year.
So the universal upheaval has culminated ultimately in a paradigm shift. The uncertainties of quantum mechanics appear just to have penetrated a higher level of frequency, and we've been left to cope with the consequences. In the end, I'd say we did a fair enough job of revamping our engineering practices - although the inevitable loss of many millennia of architectural history was quite regrettable.
I can only hope the scales don't shift yet again. The universe is fickle, and we are at its mercy.