I'm not the type of man who makes grand gestures. When I proposed to my then girlfriend it was a simple proposal. "Jackie, will you marry me?" I didn't cover a park with rose pedals, hire a violinist off to the side, or make a big deal of it. I'm just not that type of person. Don't get me wrong, I love her. I've loved her since the day I met her. She is the most amazing human being on this planet in my eyes. Every day she finds new ways to inspire me, to push me to be better, and she has the ability to make me fall in love with her over and over and over.
I am a simple guy. I like my football. I like my meat. I like my coffee hot and my bread toasted with a little jam. I like my cereal crunchy with not a lot of milk. I like waking up next to Jackie and falling asleep next to her at night. I am a simple guy, from a simple town, in a simple world I have built for myself.
Sitting here in the waiting room I couldn't help but smile about everything there was to ever smile about when it came to Jackie. She was the most beautiful girl in the entire world when I met her. She still is to this day. Every time I see her she reminds me of that. Even if I just look up from the paper to catch her eye in the morning.
Today was no different. I had brought Jackie to the hospital for a procedure and was waiting in the waiting room to get notice that she was out of surgery. I sat there practicing the ways I would look at her. To let her know it would be okay. To let her know nothing had changed and that I still felt the same way I did all those years ago. Nothing had changed, and I wanted to make sure she understood that.
When the doctors told me she was awake I smiled. The surgery had been a success. I walked the halls of the hospital to her room practicing the entire way the things I wanted to say to her. I was just happy that she was happy and if she was happy, I was happy, but I would be lying to you if I told you I wasn't nervous.
I took the corner and stood by the door to her room and took a deep breath. This was going to be a new chapter in our perfect lives together. One that would start the minute I walked through this door. Deep breath, here we go.
I entered her room and walked over to her bedside. She smiled at me propped up on some pillows, drinking some water. The surgery had gone perfectly.
"Hi honey!"
"Hello love." I said.
The way he lay in that bed reminded me of all the times we went through and the process that had led us up until this day. He would continue to make me smile until the day I die. Till death do us part, he will always be the love of my life.
"I'm so happy for you Jack. I love you. It'll be just like it was before, I promise." I smiled and gave him a kiss.
-------- -
For more of my little stories, please visit /r/expiredcheese