He woke up with cracked lips and the taste of iron on his tongue. Rubbing a pain from his neck, he pushed himself up from the couch, a headache rushing to greet him like an unrelenting wave; he was parched.
After a few moments, he trudged to the faucet across the room and placed a cup under it, setting the plunger in its place over the drain as a precaution. He turned the knob and...nothing. Right. His tank had run out three days past, a detail shrouded by the steady throbbing in his head.
And there would be no relief. Rains hadn't come for over a decade and efforts to resupply any region within a thousand miles of the equator had been abandoned. The heat was intense, the solar flares constant and unabated. Radiation had driven the land to desolation. And the population had moved on, searching for respite closer to the poles as any sane person would. But he couldn't, not while she was still here.
He looked out the window above the sink, glancing at the carved flagstone set upright in the shadow of his old barn across the way. The rust-colored dirt spreading to the horizon was an easy testament to the harshness of it all. His fists clenched at the thought of his past, and pushed away from the counter toward the door.
He stepped outside, the early sun's gaze nearly searing his flesh. He looked toward the flagstone again and made his way over, sitting beside the mound in front of it and read the inscription:
*Dearest Alexandria Ensel*
*Beloved wife, you are my everything*
Thirteen years it had been, and each day he had spent time by her grave, with that time growing ever longer since the migrations. He hadn't much else to do, after all.
"I've finally ran out, Alex. No more food, no more water. Soon we shall meet again to the sight of green pastures and blue skies. I have longed for it, though I have been afraid. Please, take my hand now and guide me to our new world."
He knew she wouldn't be fond of his decisions. Her words a few weeks before she passed kept coming back to him. "*Live, * James. I will be there to pull you through the gates, when the time comes. But do not waste yourself in grief or guilt. Travel. Learn. Do not stay here." Well, he was selfish and he hadn't left. He couldn't leave.
Tears tried to come, but all was dry. In a moment, blackness took him...
He awoke once more to the sun directly overhead, frustration building within him. He rolled to his knees and looked at the grave once more. "I'm ready. Take me, give me salvation!" he yelled, slamming the side of his clenched fist on packed dirt, and it *sunk in, * coming out lathered in mud.
He reeled back, shocked. How long it had been since he felt wet. Furrowing his brows, he crawled back and plunged a finger into the small patch that was already shrinking in the heat. It was so cool. He spread the mud on his forearm and readied his fist for another pound, too exhausted to consider the true oddity of what he had done. This time, as it swung, he saw a trail of particles arcing behind his fist, as if materializing out of the air. He stopped the swing and the particles caught up, dousing his arm and creating a light sheen.
He glanced at the grave, hopelessness taking him. He heard her words repeating again, *Do not stay*.
"So this is to be my deliverance," he said. And he knew she was right. What use to give up on his world, their first home? It was not fair for her, and he had wasted far too long in the realization. "I'm sorry, Alex."
He licked the water evaporating from his arm, yielding instant relief and offering him a renewed vigor. He reached both hands toward the sky, feeling the water drifting, minute. He grasped, and *pulled, * collecting the water into a small ball before him. It floated there, shifting in the air until he directed it into his mouth, letting it slosh around before swallowing.
He patted the grave and stood slowly, making his way toward the barn. Years of dust shook off the tarp as he uncovered his old motorcycle. He had kept it in case he ever found the courage to leave, a long abandoned prospect. He filled the tank and set the spare gas into a storage container attached to the back, where he found two cans of beans and some wax-covered cheese that he had forgotten about. It would have to do. He just hoped he could find some additional materials along the way. Fortunately, the engine started and he had naught but gas, beans, cheese, and the clothes on his back to take. And, evidently, water anywhere he could draw it from. He took the bike out front and looked once more at the grave, kneeling to collect some dirt in his hands. "When we meet again, I shall have many stories for you.
"Goodbye Alexandria."