The phone in my pocket beeps in a tone that can only mean one thing, and I groan.
I quickly scan the message, taking only the vital information.
"Mark sighted. Train Station. Platform 9." and a picture.
I groan once more as I exit my home and get into my car.
It's raining and the skies are grey and dull. It reminds me of myself.
My life took a depressing turn since I, like many others, took the role of Death on full time.
When the marks started appearing, and their purpose made known, things had gotten a bit messy.
Most did not want to end another's life, and those who did usually got over-zealous leading to a lot of cleanup. Then there was those who did not wish to die and hid their marks.
So the Governments hired us. We were responsible for tracking "Fate-Deserters" who hid their marks, and for eliminating them and other marked individuals as cleanly as possible so as to prevent riots and other chaotic events.
My SatNav beeps and I jerk back into awareness. I had arrived, somehow driving without thinking. Unsurprising as I had to do it so much.
I examine the entrance to the station with a glum sigh. Just last week had a marked individual been thrown under a train by a large group of drunk teenagers before one of us got there.
I enter the building hastily, running my fingers along the hilt of my favorite knife, which is hidden in my waistband.
I quickly located my target. A small crowd had surrounded her, but luckily for me no one had gathered the nerve to attack.
I approach casually, my finger still on my weapon.
My heart beats loudly as it always does. I had never gotten used to killing, and I did not know if this was a particularly bad thing.
I worm my way through the crowd and approach my target. She's backed against a wall now, her fists are raised.
"Please, Do not fight" I say as I take out my weapon "I do not wish to cause you pain."
"AND I DO NOT WISH TO DIE!" She shrieks as she dashes forward and delivers a powerful kick to my hand.
My dagger slips from my now-fractured hand and lands somewhere amongst the crowd.
She goes for a second kick, one that narrowly misses me.
I fight back, a flurry of punches directed towards her, but non make contact. Whoever this was, she had been trained to fight.
I try her strategy and aim a kick for her face. She catches my foot mid air and pulls me. I almost lose balance. She pulls again, and this time my footwear slips off.
She gasps, as does the crowd.
I sigh and use her distraction to my advantage. Before she came back to her senses, I was choking her life away.
Once her life had ebbed away, I examine the crowd.
It hits me like a ton of concrete when I realize what they had seen. I look down to my ankle.
There, in plain view for the whole world, is something I had hidden for years.
My own mark.