I always feared death. That is, until I died myself.
All these years, I gave every ounce of strength just to fight the disease. Hell, even the doctors were amazed at how I could survive for two years after I was diagnosed by Stage IV lung cancer.
"Miracle," I often heard them whisper to each other.
But in reality, it just scared the living hell out of me to die. I mean, what would happen to my daughter? I can't just leave her alone. It would be so selfish. I think of my child, who just started schooling. She'll grow up without a dad.
Who would help her with her homework? Who would be there to read her bedtime stories every night just so she could fall asleep? Who would keep on telling her that her mom isn't really gone but she just traveled way up into the sky to watch over us? My heart crushes at the thought of her. She'll grow up an orphan.
My baby Bela, clutching her favorite stuffed toy in her tiny hands. *All alone. *
I remember the day that I gave it to her. Also my first paycheck from the firm. I was so happy to be living off my own hard work that I went straight to the toy store to give her something. She named it Hello. And no, it was not a Hello Kitty. It was one of those minions from Despicable Me that had the word "Hello" written over its shirt, hence the name.
She means everything to me. The way her face lightens up whenever I tell her something funny, or when we watch cartoons together, or when we devour our favorite ice cream. She was like a Fourth of July fireworks spectacle that only ended whenever she gets scared that Dora the Explorer was turning into a mermaid and she would start crying.
Every day with her is a constant reminder that is, and always will be the greatest thing that ever happened to me.
That's why I always pictured that I can't die. Not today. Not ever. I think it was my adrenaline that fights off the cancer. Ever heard of how we could basically do anything if we just focus hard enough on doing said thing? I concentrated damn hard on surviving. On living, not leaving.
Wednesday came, and I was still the helpless, semi-dead, motionless pile of crap engulfed in the hospital bed that I may have pissed on. I felt repugnant.
"Mr. Stone, might I have a word with you?"
It was Dr. Perry. He was one of those doctors with the reassuring smiles that seemed to tell you that everything was going to be fine.
That Wednesday, he was not wearing one of those smiles.
I stared at him for a long time, eager to squeeze something out of him that didn't need to be spoken. That's how I examined witnesses during trials. That's how people are, give them a cold hard stare and they give off clues about and I didn't need words coming out of their mouths to know. Based on their fidgeting and the sweat running down their necks, I instantly knew whether they were telling the truth or not. That's how I earned the name, "Male Medusa". Said that I could turn anyone into stone just by looking at them. Fitting, for my name.
"What is it, doc?" I gave up looking at him. This wasn't a trial. I can't win this.
"I regret to inform you, Mr. Stone, but the cancer has spread all throughout your body. How you withstood the cancer always astounded us, but we knew that this was inevitable. Your parents have decided to take you off life support. They can't pay the bills, and they said that neither could you," the doctor said grimly.
***No, *** I thought. I can't.
"Your daughter is here to see you."
With that, I push myself up. I tried to stand, but I stagger, and Dr. Perry sits me down.
"Mr. Stone, please, I'll bring her to you. No need for that," said Dr. Perry as he walks out of the room and comes back a few seconds later with a little girl no more than two feet with a yellow toy squeezed tightly in her arms.
"Bela.. Come her and give your old man a kiss," I say weakly, the words barely escaping my mouth.
She runs towards me and climbs up into the bed, and kissing me in the forehead.
She lays down beside me and holds my hand. Life will only be good with her on my side. I think she's asleep.
"Doc, do it. Now."
Doctor Perry responded with a look. I know he understands.
"But Mr. Stone, your parents --"
"Please, call me Xavier. And I don't want my parents here. I don't want them waking Bela up. This is my last request, Dr. Perry. Help a dying man out?"
He hesitated at first, then he taps me on my shoulder.
"I hope it has been a good life, Mr. Stone. I mean, Xavier," he said.
I look at my daughter for the last time.
"Its never been this good, Doc." I smile.
She was the last thing I saw. My eyes closed automatically, and I felt like I was flying. Damn, I thought. Death was a better drug than any combined. I feel the softness of her hand leave me, and that was it. For a fraction of a second, I was certain that I was dead.
...
A flash of white light overwhelmed me. I was in a daze. I felt unsteady, but soon, I realize that I could open my eyes.
My surroundings are starting to form into something. A room.
*Wait. *
I've been here before.
But I can't move. I see the room, its familiar atmosphere. The pink bed and the drawings taped on the wall. A picture of a man and a little girl in a fairy costume.
I look down, and I recognize what I'm wearing. "Hello", my shirt says.
The door opens. I see her.