"You know, I didn't think cynicism was an emotion." I mention casually, skirting around the emaciated, mottled grey-black humanoid creature sitting cross-legged on my kitchen table. The, erm, Cynic (I guess?) pulls its curtain of greasy black hair back with one hand and gestures to the hair-tie on my wrist with his other. I toss it to him and duck behind the table to grab a couple of sodas from the box on the floor.
"Well for most people it's probably not." Cynic answers in a voice that sounds eerily like Jack of Blades from the PC version of Fable. "But since you developed a ridiculous habit of channeling what little negative emotion you have into fuel for your shitty attitude and rapidly declining sense of humor I get to represent pretty much every negative emotion you have: so that's your pain from your few meaningful rejections, your anxiety about your crashing and burning immediately upon entering your adult life, all of that festering contempt and angst from when you were twelve, the last toxic bits of your episode of existential depression from age fourteen and your overall depressing view of existence. I get to represent all of that because cynical bullshit is all you'll listen too."
I continue to surprise myself by listening intently to the rant of the horrifying entity of every part of my brain I don't like to think about with absolutely no desire to run or kill it. I mean, the thing's terrifying! It's still hunched on my kitchen table, drinking a soda and smoking what I can only assume is my last cigar. I'm really regretting giving it that hair-tie now. Its entire face is extremely thin and angled, kind of like a much more exaggerated version of high-fantasy elves, with giant, pitch-black eyes, a long, hooked nose like what Sherlock Holmes had in the book, and a mouth stretched into a permanent sardonic grin so big and joker-ish it almost touches the nearly transparent skin stretched tentatively over its jutting cheekbones. When it stretch out to take the soda I also saw thin, jointed appendages folded against its back, they looked like bird wings sans-feathers. Oh god is this thing some kind of bullshit symbol of that "Every cynic is a failed idealist" quote?
"I don't think this is a conversation I should be having sober." I say shakily, pulling a joint from my cigar foil. Cynic nods, pulling his horrifying taloned bird feet from under him and stretching out straight, "Getting high should get the attention of the other third of this conversation." He kicks a kitchen chair towards me and I collapse gratefully, lighting the joint and taking a few puffs before passing it.
"Should you be partaking in one of the positive things I have in my life?" I ask Cynic as he hits it. "Or is the fact that you can partake of it a sign that it's a negative thing?" It holds up one bony finger and inhales sharply through its nose, passing me the joint before exhaling out of the window. "Slow down there Aristotle. I'm also an embodiment of the negative side of your shameless hedonism, you know the part of your brain that drives you to new states of inebriation so that you can escape the life-shortening misery your own worldview and self-pity sometimes causes you? Yeah I get that too. That aside, this'll help keep me from becoming overly whiny and conceited like all of this is when it's in your head."
I nod sagely, holding my hit, wondering if I'm just having some sort of weird hallucination caused by bi-neural beats and the rampant introspection my narcissism and free time leaves me vulnerable to. A sharp prick on my shoulder brings me around to see what I can only assume is the incarnation of whatever positive emotions I experience.
Sitting on my counter, hitting on my joint, is something entirely different from what is sitting on my table. This one's shorter, but well-proportioned, lean and covered in short black fur, instead of bald, emaciated and stick-like. Its face is also much broader and the jaw much stronger than Cynic's: with abroad, flatish nose, smaller but still overly large and heavy-lidded yellow eyes that I swear are sparkling on their own, and a wide, content smile on a fat-lipped face framed by thick blonde dreadlocks. He holds out a furry hand tipped with broad, curved claws.
"So What do you represent?" I ask, obliging that scary looking hand. He grins, exposing a mouth full of broad, pointed teeth before taking a hit. "I-" He chokes out, struggling to contain the smoke before releasing it in a gout of furious coughing and handing me the joint back, which I spear on the end of a handy-dandy safety pin that is my go-to roach-clip. "Represent the more positive and healthy parts of your mind." His voice makes me think of Steve Blume if he was high. "Your weird sense of confidence that's spawned from cynicism, your sense of contentment that's present when you're high or somewhere nice, that weird euphoria you get when you absolutely lose your shit at someone's joke or they lose their shit at yours, I'm that weird feeling of warmth that you get with that girl you've got absolutely no shot with, I'm your acceptance that the fact you've got no shot with the coolest person you've ever met and you're totally fine with it because you just like hanging out, I'm the positive side of your shameless hedonism that tells you to go out and alter your brain so that you can explore new faucets of you consciousness, I'm that deeply embedded happiness that comes from your knowledge that you live in a universe with more awesome shit than you can ever imagine."
Another sage nod as I take a hit, hold, pass and exhale. "So what's up with the claws, and monster teeth?" He doesn't reply immediately, as he's puffing the roach down, but he does uncurl a previously unseen tail and stretch it towards me, revealing a long spike of bone protruding from the tip. Now that sends a rare pang of fear through me, I still don't know what these fucks want after all. "I-I-I'll go get the bong." I stammer before rushing back to my room. "Remember to change your pants if your shit bricks coming to terms with this!" Cynic calls behind me.
A few swigs from my secret bottle of vodka and a steadying hit from my borrowed bong helps return to my kitchen to, well, face myself I guess. I shove the bong into Cynic's chest to silence the condescending comment I suspect is coming and retake my seat between the two entities. "So the claws, fangs and wierd-ass spike tail?.." I trail off, gesturing vaguely at the entirety of Stoner's form. "Oh that?" Stoner laughs a pretty mean laugh, the one I usually produce when I hear or say something really mean. "That's because all the shit you've ever said that's legitimately hurt somebody, intentional or otherwise? That's me too: I'm also your inner sadist, that pleasure you get from fucking with someone's emotions, or beating on someone during sex, I'm also that twisted amusement that you have when you see someone die, so I'm arguably the worst part of you, from an un-selfish point of view."
I take my hit and pass the bong, glad that water from last night didn't get too rank. "Alright then." I exhale. "So am I going batshit or is everyone having some kind of vaguely similar meeting?" Cynic taps a taloned foot on the floor. "Well it's pretty different for everyone, emotions are pretty universal, but everyone reacts differently." "So are everybody's emotional incarnations going to look like total freaks?" Stoner shrugs and hands the bong back. "They'll all be unique, but most probably won't be quite as freaky as us. You've got a pretty twisted imagination dude." "Okay are you guys going to be visible to everybody and can you communicate with other people?"
"Yes." Cynic strains. "And no." Stoner finishes. "Everybody can see us, but no one can communicate with us unless they or we have express permission from you. They can touch us but they're really not going to want to, for more reasons than one." "Okay so why are you here?" I ask, accepting the bong. "Can't say." They answer simply. "How long?" "Can't say." "Oh god school's going to be really interesting tomorrow." Stoner grins. "Oh dude hell yeah." Cynic coughs heavily. "Can you imagine how fucked up it's gonna be for people with friends?"
Holy shit at that wall of text. Never write high kids.