"Well?" Eli peered over my shoulder as I scanned through my GeoWatch.
"I don't know," I said, as I discretely pointed my wrist at the cute girl across the bar. "This seems kind of... stalkerish." The watch recognized its target and quickly began sorting through my location history.
Eli pushed at my shoulder. "Come on, man," he said, "it's pretty ingenious. I mean, it's the perfect conversation starter!" He hopped up from his bar stool and began a haphazard impression of my pickup skills: "'Hey there, have I seen you somewhere? Were you at that Barnes and Noble on Fifth Street?"' He reached for his beer glass and chugged it back. "'Why yes, I like to read as well..."' his voice trailed off as he started laughing uncontrollably. I rolled my eyes.
*Ding! Ding! * A metallic beeping noise indicated that my GeoWatch had finished its scan. I glanced down at the tiny screen. The algorithm had returned 7 matches. "Holy shit," I said out loud, to no one in particular. I scrolled down the list of previous encounters, with the first one beginning...
I nearly spat my drink out. I had to squint my eyes and lean in closer to make sure I read it correctly. *March 15, 2015. * I was only 5 years old, then. What were the odds? I hadn't even lived in the city then, that was back when I lived in Georgia. Even so, there was something else about this particular date that struck a chord; I racked my brain to figure out why, until the obviousness of it hit me like a train: that was the day my dad died.
*Okay, either some asshole just hacked me, or this chick has the worst timing. * Just out of curiosity, I checked the second match. *June 29, 2035. * The day my girlfriend of eight years had broken up with me. *What the fuck!? * I kept scrolling.
*August 13, 2036. * My mom died.
*December 4, 2038. * I got fired from my job.
*July 15, 2039. * I shuddered. That was a particularly bad day--it was the day I tried to kill myself.
*July 16, 2039. * My frustrated sister called me a coward. She never called me since.
Tears started rolling down my face. What asshole would hack my watch like this? Just so I could suffer? I glanced across the bar at that cute girl. Was it her? Was she a friend of my ex-girlfriend's or something, trying to make me feel like shit? I couldn't control myself. I stormed across the bar. "Hey --" I began to shout at her.
It seemed as if she had expected me to come. She stood up out of her seat, with an amicable expression on her face, and ambled towards me. "Thomas," she said, in soothing tone that somehow rose above the noises of the bar.
I couldn't see through my tears. "Did that bitch put you up to this?" I started to sob.
She shook her head, her face turning to one of sadness. "Thomas," she started. "I'm sorry. I didn't mean for you to get angry."
"Answer the question!" I shouted, my fists starting to clench.
"No," she said, sternly. "I didn't mess with your watch. It's accurate."
"Then who the fuck are you... "
She smiled. "Someone who cares about you. Who's always been there for you."
There was something about her voice, her tone, that made me believe her. My skepticism melted away.
She continued. "Every time you were hurt, I watched. And I cried." A single tear rolled down her cheek.
"Are you, like, my guardian angel, or something?"
She chuckled. "Or something."
I shook my head. "It isn't fair, you know. I've had a good life. You can't just judge me by my worst moments. You can't --"
She interrupted me. "I understand. I understand you've had a great life. I'm happy for you. But I'm sad I have to be here tonight."
I didn't say anything for some time. We shared a silent moment between us, allowing the background noise of the bar to take over. Something had *happened* inside of me. For some inexplicable reason, I believed everything this girl had told me. And the strangest thing was that I felt at peace. "So I'm going to die tonight," I finally said.
"Brain aneurysm."
I moved my hands up to my temples. I felt a warmth that I hadn't felt before. "Is it going to hurt?" I asked.
She shook her head. "Not as long as I'm here," she said.
"Why the whole trick with the watch?" I asked. I couldn't help but think that it was all just a setup to get me to talk to her.
"Us angels like to have a little fun every now and then. Although, like I said, the watch was accurate. I *have* been there for you in your worst moments."
I glanced around the bar, back at my friend, who had already passed out and was drooling on the floor. "He's going to miss me," I said. "He was there for me, especially when I tried to kill myself." I turned back to the girl. "Do I have time to say goodbye, before the aneurysm hits?"
She wore a sad expression. She shook her head solemnly. "No," she said, softly.
My peace was starting to run out. Hot tears rolled down my face. I felt the burden of death right around the corner. I wished now more than anything that I could just rewind the clock, that I never spotted this cute girl across the bar. *But it would have mad no difference. * "Why not?" I managed to mumble out between short sobs.
"Because you've already died."
Darkness came crashing in.