"Introducing- the one, the only, the Theeeerrrrafiiiiiiiiiist!"
The crowd roared. Lights flashed. The Therafist grinned.
"And in the other corner, ladies and gentlemen we have a real treat for you tonight- the depression of Ray Wilks, an office worker in rainy Seattle!"
The red humanoid figure sitting in the opposite corner looked up and sniffed, standing up to look around at the crowd. It lethargically removed its shirt, revealing rippling muscles and the word "DEPRESSION" in large black letters across its chest. It stood still, unblinking for a few seconds until the jeers died down.
The Therafist cracked his knuckles and raised his arms to the crowd, eliciting more cheers. He was going to beat the *shit* out of depression.
The announcer droned on and finally the bell rang.
With a sigh, the red figure stepped forward and put up its hands in some sort of half-assed block. The Therafist gave him a quick one-two and followed up with a wild right hook that knocked the creature back into the ropes.
They always made it too easy. He stepped forward to finish it off- and was slammed into the mat, his breath crushed out of him.
"Oooh, that's gotta hurt. Looks like we've got a surprise tag-team, ladies and gentlemen!"
The Therafist turned his head to look at what was on top of him. A large, fat figure, like a grey sumo wrestler, lay on top of him with a bored expression. 'APATHY' was scrawled across his blobby pectorals. Therafist squirmed, but it was no use. He couldn't move.
Depression walked up to him and unexcitedly began kicking him in the face. Four, five kicks, and his blood was splattering in front of him.
Suddenly, he was hauled to his feet. He was still held from behind by Apathy. A slim green figure outside of the ring, 'SELF DOUBT', tossed a chair to Depression, who slammed the Therafist in the head with it. He was down, Apathy on top of him again. WHAM. WHAM. WHAM. The chair hit him in the head until one of the bolts gave and it fell to pieces.
The Therafist was in a bad way. He wanted to give up, to tap out, to surrender and make it stop, but Apathy wouldn't let him. His arms were pinned. He blacked out for a moment.
Apathy, thinking him done, shifted his weight to stand- and that's when the Therafist made his move. He bucked, kicking Apathy straight in the temple, and the creature fell. He jumped with a crazy, desperate uppercut, catching Depression in the jaw. The creature fell to one knee. The Therafist again stepped forward- CRACK. Something gave out and he fell. He looked at his feet and saw, to his horror, his leg was sticking out at an unnatural angle. Self Doubt stood over him with a crowbar.
Apathy lumbered over, grabbing one of his arms and holding him up. Self Doubt grabbed the other. Depression was right in front of him, and there was nothing he could do as he was beaten near senseless. The last thing the Therafist saw was Depression standing on the corner pole of the ring, and then jumping up to slam on top of him.