"Finally" He mumbles angrily, feeling his breathing go heavy as he clicks onto Justin Biebers YouTube channel. He felt a surge of power flow through him as he let his cursor glide slowly ontop of the electrocute button. It felt so natural to do it, yet so out of place with the new icon.
He used to do this alot. Pressing the dislike button, navigating to the comment section, typing as fast as his greasy sausages would allow him.
He would usually end up exhausted and having to calm his breath after each comment.
As his mind drifted off, following the routine, he felt his hand hit the mouse button, his cursor drift to the big writing box he was so familiar with, and heard the loud clicks of his mechanical keyboard firing away at this /Justin Bieber/.
Suddenly, it came to him. He had killed a man. He felt his fat wobbling as he tightened his muscles, his scalp breaking sweat after sweat under his fedora. He began to feel uneasy, and he felt the drinks and crisps in his stomach lunging towards the upper exit. His keyboard was covered in a wierd greenish colour, the colour of Doritos mixed with stomach bile. The unusual smell of puke began filling the room, and his stomach lurched a second time at this. This time, however, he was ready, had felt it coming. He bent to the side and projectile vomited at his second monitor, dousing his favorite pony in puke.
Another thought came to him. He grabbed the last pieces of corroded Doritos out of his neckbeard, and clicked onto his own YouTube page. He went to his latest video and watched the amount of likes and dislikes closely. For what felt like hours he sat, in his pile of puke, sweat gathering at his moobs, waiting for the inevitable.
He jerked from his chair from surprise, as the dislike bar gained a pixel. He felt a slight tingling sensation at his feet, that rose up his legs. As the electricity claimed him, he thought about closing his YouTube page. He thought it might safe his upper-body from paralysis. He moved his hand with all his might, but it wouldn't budge. Finally, he relaxed his muscles, and as the tingle, still becoming stronger, neared his heart, he felt his sight grow narrow and his heartbeat peaking. His stomach lurched a third time, this time releasing nothing but bile in his throat. The burning sensation in his throat was the last thing he felt, as his nerves grew numb and the hum of his computer grew further away, only to disappear completely, being the last thing he sensed.