It didn't make sense. In the dead of night, when the waters calmed from the great storm, I heard the lapping sound of a swimmer in the water coming towards me. The moon was peaking over the horizon shedding the caps of the waves with a white glow. It was indeed what I thought I was hearing. The object splashed against the whitecaps and made its way towards me.
The last clouds from the storm flew across the sky, to reveal the stars and Milky Way. It was a beautiful sight as the object reached the edge of my boat.
Part of me was curious who it may be, while a greater part of me was completely mortified. Its hand reached over like a wet towel being slung across the top of a lounge chair and a few seconds later a head popped up.
"Ey, ya, would you help up?" said a young man's voice, the moonlight shining behind his head.
I scrambled to grab his hand and pulled him into the boat. He was in nothing but a swimsuit and didn't look to be above the age of 25.
"Thanks," he said, finding a comfortable corner in the boat to lay in. "Quite the storm, huh?"
"Yeah," I said. "I was almost out of food and water before the storm and then it hit. Now I'm completely out." He gave a little chuckle.
"I'm Rudy," the man said, giving a brisk wave of his hand. "I'm sorry I didn't carry some food and water with me. I thought for sure I wouldn't be seeing anyone out here tonight."
"Rudy?" I said. "Ha, that's my favourite movie. You heard of it?"
"Of course. Happens to be one of my favourites too," he said, sitting up.
"What were you doing out here, by the way?" I asked. "I didn't see any ships in the storm."
"Oh, I just happen to follow storms quite a bit. You could say I like to clean up the messes they leave behind."
I noticed then how cold the night truly was. Wrapped around me was my Thermo blanket and it was keeping me warm, but Rudy had nothing but a swimsuit.
"Aren't you cold," I asked. "I think I have another blanket in my emergency kit."
"Me? Heck, no. I don't get cold," he said. "Nope, nope, the cold doesn't bother me."
"So you're like that marathon runner that runs shirtless in the winter time," I said. "The Iceman, I think his name is?"
Rudy laughed again. "I guess you could say that. But the 'man' part might be a bit of a stretch."
His comment caught me off guard. I looked at his with a more careful eye as the moon grew higher in the sky. Somehow I never noticed the set of wings on his back.
"You're an angel?" I asked.
"Yes, Alex Nuible," he said. "The passage into death is a traumatic one, but every so often we get the chance to see death coming in people. You've been out to sea for awhile now and with that storm, it was all but definite that the storm would take you."
I realized then the reason I couldn't remember seeing any ships during the storm was because I couldn't remember the storm. I remember seeing the flashes of lightning on the horizon and the rising waves, but then there was nothing.
"Careful!" Rudy yelled. "Think too hard and you will remember the pain, the disparity. I've cradled you away from that. Let us start the journey to paradise."
"How do I know this isn't a dream?" I asked. "If I can't remember it happening, how do I know it's real?"
"You don't need to know," said Rudy. "The pain will be excruciating, but after you come with me you will see over time that what I've said is true. Right now reality feels like a dream. It will subside after you've had time to see that...you're not waking up." Rudy stood up with a solemn expression and walked towards me with his hand extended.
I could not accept, though. Even if this wasn't a dream, I had to see the truth. I had to know, without a doubt, my end had come. With a burst of speed, I stood up and jumped into the fridged water. The memories came flooding back.
I saw the great waves of the storm, rising among the lightning. They rocked my boat violently as it rode the crests and sinks. And then it happened. A huge wave formed above and extended its head until I could see the sky no more. The force of the crash plunged me into the deep ocean water where I was lost in the ocean currents. I struggled to find an escape, but my lungs screamed for air while I was still drowned in water. It was a horrific pain, like letting a thousand needles fall into my lungs and trachea.
In light of the memory, I was no longer in the water, I was in the sky. I saw the moon shining against the surface of the ocean as I soared further and further into the sky. Still hurt from the memory of pain and death, I hung absently in the grip of Rudy as he muttered to himself.
"Always so stubborn. I warn them every time."
--------------
Thank you for reading! More stories at /r/ItsPronouncedGif