I still remember how beautiful she looked on the day of our wedding. Her white dress with rhinestones shining in the morning sun as she walked. The contours of her body as an almost perfect hourglass filling out the dress almost as if it was a part of her skin. Her veil was lifted. Eyes the colour of chips of ice stared at me, piercing and taking control of my mind; stirring the exact same feelings as the day I first saw her. Her hair was a light brown with a natural wave that flowed to her breast so perfectly nobody would guess that it was natural. A smile appeared when she saw me that I shall remember for the rest of my time on this earth.
For our honeymoon we travelled across Asia and visited several monasteries. My favourite was on top of a mountain that took the better part of 4 hours to climb. The building itself was red brick, surrounded with gold statues of different deities ranging from 8 feet all the way up to 20 feet tall. The building itself seemed to touch the clouds, as if connected to something that we could never understand.
The monks that lived there often spoke of death, and how it is not wise to fear death; rather we should embrace it. I asked what happens when we die and I was given an incredibly simple answer; an answer that I fully understood, but could never fully comprehend.
"Do you remember what it was like before you were born?"
"No."
"That's what it's like when you're dead."
I always found comfort in that. Not a comfort as one would have when wanting reassurance that everything would be alight, but a comfort that in the end, the only thing that matters is what you have done with your time on this earth.
My wife never understood that. She was always overly terrified of death, in the same manner that a young child reacts when a bee flies near them. When cancer took her from me last week all I can remember was how scared she had been. She begged me never to leave her side and was constantly searching for alternative medications aside from the chemo. She was scared for the last few months of her life, and it took its toll on her. Some days I think being scared of dying was what really killed her, not the cancer.