They jokingly called us the Breakfast Club.
Us being the perennially underfunded Robert E. Lee High School debate team, or what was left of it after our coach—the former Ms. Cynthia Alverez—suddenly eloped with the billionaire she had met while reaching for grapes at the local Whole Foods. (I'm told the story of their meeting is very cute, but he was also fifty-two to her twenty-six, so I was not exactly sympathetic when she emailed us about "pursuing her great love" and left us in the lurch three months before State.) Anyway, after she left and the administration still hadn't hired a new coach six weeks later, most of the underclassmen bailed until next year, which just left us six seniors.
Therefore, when Bramford suggested we go on retreat to his uncle's cabin, I figured we would mostly just get drunk and maybe half heartedly organize bins and practice IEs. I had basically checked out by that time—my college acceptance letter to Barnard already framed on the wall, my last Cheer ribbon pinned on the corkboard next to it—so I was more or less just going along for the team. After all, I only joined debate my freshman year in order to pad my resume for college, but had discovered that I was a halfway competent CXer (something my dad found endlessly amusing: "Well at least all those years of gabbing at high speed to those friends of yours on the phone was useful for something.") and so four years later I found myself helping Gabriel, my partner in all things policy debate, load camping supplies into the back of my silver SUV.
Gabe and I are pretty different. I have no idea what I want in life since none of my family had made it past high school until now and I had already achieved everything my mother wanted of me—besides being engaged—by becoming Prom queen, but he was already looking past CMU to his projected future in Silicon Valley and attended hackathons in his free time. But, we knew each other well after being partners for years and spent the entire hour long car ride in a comfortable silence, the radio tuned to our NPR member station.
Despite being half-asian, Bram was your stereotype of the a good ole Southern boy—fishing and being The Generals' tight end were his real passions in life and he only joined the team because his mother had insisted—so I resigned myself to a weekend of not being able to use my blow dryer or receive cell phone signal when we pulled up to a cabin that was only notable for its Walden-like sparseness. Lexi and the others had already arrived earlier and Bram was already flipping patties on the small grill.
Lex was co-captain of the team, our resident overachiever in a group of overachievers, and had joined debate out of a genuine nerdy love for competitive arguing. She also did public with Bram and lusted after him with an all consuming passion that I thought mostly came from the fact that it would feed her vanity if he—who was a stratosphere away socially—suddenly declared his undying love for her. Although, in their partnership, she might be the main brains of the operation, but he was the charming public speaker, his voice deep and smooth to her agitated chatter.
When I went to drop my bags inside—which was actually well furnished to my relief—Raven was curled up on one of the couches with a book and she raised one hand in a wave when I came in before turning her attention back to Nabokov. Raven wasn't actually her real name. She had gone through a goth phase in junior high and, when her family had moved from down from the North her sophomore year of high school, she had thought to remake herself by telling everyone her name was Raven. Although she had moved on to wearing oversized denim jackets and listening to obscure bands, she still kept the name and the heavy winged liner. She actually didn't debate and was on the team just to do Poetry and Prose.
If you're keeping up with the Breakfast Club analogy—which Francine my co-captain on the squad came up with during lunch one day and repeated to basically everyone she knew because she thought it was *so* clever—that just leaves Jonathan. Or as Francine said multiple times that week, "Sam and Lexi are, like, both the Princess and Jonathan is the Criminal because he's black!" I don't think she meant to be intentionally racist, but Jon told me he's turning it into an anecdote for an essay he's writing for the Huffington Post on microaggressions he's experienced while living in a suburban, majority-white neighborhood. Jon does LD and is planning on becoming a lawyer and getting the hell out of the South. He, like the rest of us, joined the team because it was the only academic extracurricular that was offered.
Despite everything, we all liked each other fine and by nightfall were sprawled together on the couches before the fire, comfortably drunk on Bram's uncle's bourbon stash.
"You know," Jon said, standing up and swaying slightly. "I shouldn't be surprised by now, but can we talk about how there's a wolf head mounted over the fireplace?"
"It's kind of messed up, dude," Raven piped in.
"There's actually a family legend about that," Bram said. "Something about an ancient curse, the full moon, the Mayan calendar and...I'm too drunk to make more shit up."
Lex groaned dramatically and elbowed him, strategically moving herself closer to my amusement. I myself was curled up next to Raven underneath a wool blanket, my head pillowed on her shoulder, increasingly unable to keep my eyes open. In fact, I was almost asleep when Gabe stood up to refill his red cup, tripped over the rug and slammed into the mounted wolf head, the the sharp teeth breaking skin on his forehead and knocking his glasses askew.
"Oh shit!" Bram jumped up, disentangling himself from Lex—*they were cuddling? * I thought blearily—and used a corner of his flannel shirt to wipe the small amount of blood seeping from the wound. Everything that happened after was a bit of a blur to me, at least until the wolf mounted on the mantle, its right canine coated in blood, opened its eyes and howled. Then I was suddenly very awake.
After everyone had stopped cursing in alarm and terror, Jon said shakily, "Samantha, my girl, you know this means we're going to die first."
A howl echoed in the distance, punctuating his statement.
I was already trying to dial 911 and swore when there was no cell signal. Bram whipped out a shotgun from whatever pocket dimension he had it in and fired a shot into the snarling wolf head, silencing it, while Raven filmed it on her phone—" just in case this is a hallucination" —and Lex picked up a poker from the rack.
"Ignoring the complete impossibility of what just happened," Gabe was now holding a napkin to his forehead. "I think we have two options. We try to barricade ourselves in here or we can try to run."
"I'm *not staying here with that thing*," Lex said hysterically, fumbling for her keys.
"Hold on," Jon said. "Haven't you seen the movies? We have to stick together otherwise everyone's going to die except Gabe and Lex like some morality play about how we should do our homework and *it's bad to be a slut or black! *"
"Let's all grab weapons and take my car," I said. "I have the most space and we should leave now to get ahead of whatever is going on."
We all hurried to arm ourselves. Bram shoved a pistol into his backpack, tossing me its twin which I tucked in my purse, but didn't let anyone else touch the gun cache saying to the others, "Realistically, with no gun training, you guys would be more likely to shoot yourselves."
Bram also flicked on a flashlight as we hurried out together, the howling moving ever closer. The car beeped twice as I disengaged the locks and slid into the driver's seat. My palms were sweaty as I shoved the key in the ignition and flicked on the headlights, the others sliding pell mell into the back. Bram had circled around the car to ride shotgun, but suddenly his flashlight jerked away, its light arcing into the night air before toppling into the bushes. A shadow streaked past the front of the car. Someone in the back screamed and I was swearing now but barely registering it as I gunned the car in reverse and swerved it, my headlights turning to illuminate a massive wolf crouched over Bram's still body lying in the gravel, its muzzle wet with his blood.
For a moment I thought about just driving away, but I suppose in the end I was a bit of an idiot after all. But not that much of an idiot. I judged the angle and drove my SUV right at the wolf and prayed that Bram's arms were close enough to his sides. The wolf hit the bumper hard enough to dent before bolting into the bushes with a whine and, as I turned the car, Gabe had already jumped forward into the front seat. He opened the door and quickly dragged Bram inside, seconds ticking away as we listened to growls in the distance. My heart was moving in uncontrolled jerks by the time he slammed the door and I drove off as quickly as I dared in the dark.
Hitting the wolf had maybe damaged something, as I felt an unfamiliar rattle near the front of the car and it seemed like the very trees were leaning down into us to block our escape. I forced myself to ignore everything and focus on the road as, next to me, Gabe staunched the gash on Bram's shoulder and talked about hot button political issues in an attempt to keep him awake. I don't think any of us breathed until I eased onto the interstate. Then the doubts about what had happened started to slide in and we all snuck periodic glances at Bram in order to verify that it had been real.
We were silent as Lex pulled up directions to the nearest hospital on her phone.
It shouldn't be a surprise that we didn't go to State, as Bram spent the next month in the hospital and, without debate to hold us together, we all steadily drifted apart. The last time we were all together was a graduation when our mothers took a group photo of us—arms linked together and smiling.