I clutched the notebook in my hand, staring at my handwritten warning:
"March 10, 2016, 6:58 p.m.- The Flower Incident." I checked my surroundings, and casually slipped my way into the bushes in front of Olivia's building. I had already messed this particular date up long ago. It was time to right an old wrong.
Of all my attempts to court Olivia, the flower incident had definitely been the worst. How was I supposed to know that she was allergic? Is there *any* appropriate reaction to anaphylactic shock on a first date? I shook myself out of my reverie when I heard footsteps approaching.
Sorry, let me back up. Or is it forward? I've been pretty confused about how to use verb tense ever since this all started back in (will start in? Ugh.) June 2017. There I was, minding my own business, just another young professional in a suit and tie on my way home from work. I was passing by an alleyway right next to my favorite kabob stand, when suddenly an eerily familiar voice hissed my name out of the shadows.
I jumped in shock as my head whipped toward the source of the sound. There, halfway crouched behind an overflowing dumpster, was a figure in a dark trench coat, large sunglasses that covered most of his face, and a hat that would have actually been quite stylish if the man didn't already look like he had walked straight out of a bad spy flick.
I like to think I'm the adventurous sort, but in that moment my sense of practicality stepped in and I turned my head back forward and my feet started moving again in the direction I was going. The stranger yelled as I walked away.
"Wait!" he cried. I had definitely heard that voice somewhere, but I couldn't quite put my finger on it. My head turned once more towards him, and he took off the glasses and hat. My jaw dropped. The stranger was… me. The lines in his (my?) put him (me?) at several years older than me, but the shape of his face, his eyes, the color of his hair, and his expression was exactly what I've seen in the mirror my whole life.
I started, and blurted out "What kind of sick joke is- "the man suddenly jumped from the shadows, cut me off by putting his finger over my lips in a shushing motion, and grabbed me by the tie and pulled me into the alley.
"Look, there isn't much time," the man muttered in a rapid tone, "Yes, I'm you from the future. Just don't question it. The new Star Trek series sucked. Sorry. It was a big letdown. Pull your stocks out of Google right now."
I stared at the man (probably me) with a blank expression. He had my own knowing but slightly amused expression all across my face as I sputtered. He had perfectly nailed my "what would I do to verify myself to a past instance of myself if I was a time traveler" questions. (Don't you even try to tell me you've never thought of these sort of things before.) He looked directly into my eyes with a serious look, swallowed, and said,
"So I'm back here because it turns out you're, uh, we're, uh," a look of frustration crossed his/my brow as he tripped over the unusual terminology, "somehow critical to the future of the world. I don't get it, but the Council has determined that we absolutely need to date Olivia, or the future is going to fall apart. I don't get it either."
I let my face scrunch up into a confused stare.
"And who… exactly is Olivia?"
He/me responded by pulling out a futuristic looking phone and showed me a picture on the screen.
"Her? I went on one date with her sometime last year, and it was a complete disaster! Flowers? What the heck was I thinking?"
The man winced, apparently re-experiencing the embarrassment along with me.
"Yeah. But, apparently the whole thing was meant to be, or some mystic bull-crap like that. They're calling it a "Universal Quantum Touchpoint" or something fancy like that, but basically, you need to take this," he said, pushing a device that looked suspiciously like a black Tamagotchi toy (which I definitely never owned) into my hand, "And fix things with her."
He gave me a meaningful look, as if he had given an adequate explanation, and stepped backwards. As he retreated, a faint wireframe of the faintest blue appeared on the lines of his figure. He took another step and the lines multiplied, covering most of his body. One more step, and the man vanished into the lines, and they suddenly converged and shot into the distance.
After recovering from the shock of meeting myself, I quickly found out the purpose of the device. It was a bona fide time travel device. I quickly dubbed it the "Timeagotchi," for manly reasons completely unrelated to previous ownership of any similarly-named toy in my past. The first time I pressed the buttons on the front, any skepticism about the man who claimed to be me or his message pretty much vanished. I've seen some pretty high-effort pranks on the Internet, but, you just can't really deny the truth when you jump back fifteen minutes in time and watch yourself get abducted and then instructed by yet another instance of yourself.
So, I did as the man said. I started out by jumping a week before the flower incident. I reintroduced myself (is it appropriate to use the prefix re- if it was the first time for her? English just isn't built for these kind of situations) to Olivia. We had been riding the same train to work for years, but it had taken forever for me to gather up the courage to actually talk to her. We went on a nice date the next night. Coffee and ice skating. It went well, but when I called her for a second date later that week, she said that she thought we should just be friends.
So, I jumped a week back again. Movie and bowling. It was great, even better that the first. But when I called for the second date, I found myself still in the friend zone.
I jumped again. Carnival. Again. Homemade pizza. Again. A hike through the nearby hills. Each time, I was still in the friend zone, but I was getting to know her really well. I could see her face becoming brighter with each date, and the smile lines around her eyes deepening.
Finally, on the sixth jump, I finally had the perfect date with her. It ended with us walking down the moonlit beach, hand in hand. She looked into my eyes, and said,
"You know, we just met yesterday, but I feel like you understand me almost better than you understand myself. I love how you seem to be able to anticipate my every feeling."
When I called for a second date the next day, I got an enthusiastic yes.
So, as I had been working my way back through Olivia's history, I had gotten into the habit of meeting her on a Tuesday, and taking her out on a Wednesday. I'm a creature of habit, I guess. It just so happened that our second date was also scheduled for a Wednesday. We got on the train, ready to head to a stage play, when suddenly, disaster approached. One car away, I saw myself enter with a bag of sports drinks and snacks, wearing shorts and hiking boots.
I excused myself from Olivia, muttering a lame excuse about needing the bathroom or something, and I pushed my way through the crowded car. I tapped myself on the shoulder.
"You. Off the train, now."
My eyes, (the other me, not me, ah, you get it, right?) widened in surprise.
"But, hiking seems like such a great date for her!"
"Yeah, close, but no cigar. It took one more date to get to this," I said, pulling out my phone and showed him a moonlit selfie of me and Olivia, our faces pressed together with a wide grin that seemed to stretch across both our faces.
My (other me) eyes narrowed in acknowledgement, possibly jealously. Is it possible to be jealous of yourself? Without saying another word, he stepped off the train, pulled out the Timeagotchi, and disappeared in a flash of blue wireframe.
So that's how it went for the next few dates with Olivia. I was surprisingly cooperative with myself, for the most part. I took it pretty hard on the carnival date, but I had been in kind of a strange mood that night anyway. Olivia and I continued to grow closer and closer as we spent time together.
So that brings me to tonight, March 10, 2016. The original "Flower Incident." My head was spinning with the plans I'd made as I watched myself approach, holding a modest bouquet of flowers as I nervously approached Olivia's apartment for the first time. I stepped out from behind a hedge in front of the building, right in the path of my past self. He froze, the flowers quivering in his hand.
"Yeah, it's you from the future. The new Star Trek sucks, and pull your stocks out of Google." I said, looking seriously into my eyes. Past me's eyes widened and he gave a tense nod. I moved to stand side by side with myself, putting my arm around my shoulders.
"Look, you and Olivia are a great match, I said," as I pulled out my phone in front of us and swiped through several pictures of Olivia and I. I ended of the one of Olivia and I on the beach, our first successful date. I put the phone away and plucked several flowers out of the bouquet. "But, I said, she's deathly allergic to tulips. One whiff of these bad boys and she's gone."
I stepped back in front of myself, looked into my eyes and said "Just be confident, bud. You've already succeeded. Kind of. It's complicated. Just get up there, knock on her door, be yourself and have a great time." I thumped myself on the back, and he stumbled forward towards the apartment door. When I'm already nervous, I have an amazing ability to just accept whatever's in front of me. Past me turned to look back at me, eyebrows high on his forehead, hand on the door handle. I grinned and gave him a double thumbs up. He shook his head, unsure of what to think, and turned back around and entered the apartment.
I watched him enter the building, and then stood there for a moment, the tulips still in my hand. A lump rose in my throat as I wondered what would happen. I felt a hand rest on my shoulder.
"You made the right choice," I heard my own voice say.