"It's a combination of multiple things. You can't expect your font to look professional if you constantly use slang. It puts you in the wrong mindset. Push the vowels, don't mumble. We'll start with an easy power phrase. Repeat after me: 'I'm the boss here."'
The professor scanned the room and looked for fine details in the text that came up as they spoke together. The class had a size limit so he could see each of his student's text as they ticked on display word by word. The sentences hovered steady above their heads, each in varying thickness and size.
"Blue shirt, Alyssa right? Your font is a bit small. You want to hear it louder in your mind, show us you're not afraid. You wrote you were a Prosecutor in your introduction post if I remember correctly. You've got to show the jury you know what you're talking about. Show me some strength." He flexed his bicep to accentuate the point.
Each of his students was aiming to learn for their unique purposes. Richard left side was a weatherman who needed a cleaner font for the cameras. Heather dead center was a petite nurse whose patients took one look at her thin, bubbly font and proceeded to ignore all of her professional advice. Font shaping was a useful skill taken alongside rhetoric and speech to give people a new sense of power in their voice. Color theory stayed in the music department where conductors could chisel delicate blue or shocking pink fonts from the more talented.
"New phrase everyone. All together now, 'I'm in control. Listen to me."' He articulated carefully to hit all of the key points he skimmed over in his lesson.
Professor Barker didn't expect much of a change from each phrase. First day lessons were only to set up class dynamics and give a few examples to the students so they would how an everyday class might go, plus answering syllabus questions. Again he screened over each font and took in the styles, focusing on the general strengths and weaknesses like a chef would inspect his fresh ingredients before a recipe.
He noticed the young brunette in the far back right, lips sealed at each prompt. It wasn't uncommon for a student to be shy about their font, especially since attending his class implied there were some things to fix about it. He privately pinged her desk - "Don't be afraid to join in, you can even use a quiet font for right now. Nobody will see but me, and I promise I won't judge."
He instructed the class through another set of phrases and kept a curious eye on her. He didn't want to hone in too intently and intimidate her even more, so he lazily scanned the room and paused over her font for a brief moment. And wow.
He'd never seen anything like it.. The way the words flowed into one another elegantly, all connected like vines growing into one another. The lines themselves were thin like a woman's fine eyeliner. The g's and y's looped in a way that wasn't bubbly but had a confident layer of something mysterious, feminine, ancient.
She saw the way his eyes lit up at her repetition. She whispered and he knew by the volume that it was meant only for him. The letters twirled above her.
"It's called cursive."