Ellie didn't know what she was fighting for.
Actually, that was strictly untrue. She know precisely what she was fighting for, and it definitely wasn't any of the things that the politicians on either Mars or Earth were talking about. She was fighting to stay alive; nothing more, nothing less. Richie and Lamont had lost that fight just a few hours ago. Bell, fearless, draconian, red-faced pixie-cut Bell, had lost that fight less than an hour ago. Ellie briefly remembered her cries, her groans, and her final pleading with her communicator to please connect with her daughter one more time. She had been fairly sure that the captain didn't feel pain, but Bell had barely been in one piece after the proximity mine exploded. The dissolving of Bell's normally iron exterior surprised her; in another situation, Ellie might have been touched by the scene, but this was not such an other situation. Ellie ignored the captain's words, and in her mind they blended into the background noise. They were just another hum of the generators, just another hiss of the ventilation system, just another buzz of the lights. Thinking back, she thought she heard the captain beg her to please take a message to her daughter, but she didn't remember. Just another hum.
She followed her training. She scavenged supplies from the captain's corpse. It was breathing and moving and talking, but a corpse it was, at least as far as Ellie was concerned. She took ammo, mess kits, and first aid supplies. She took a canister of oxygen, a utility knife, and a flashlight. She took many things, but no memories. When Ellie inevitably followed in Bell's and Richie's and Lamont's and Brandon's and Paris'and Kenna's and the rest's footsteps, nobody would remember her either. It didn't matter that she didn't remember them.
Ellie didn't know what she was fighting for, and she didn't care. She didn't know anything about the two humans in red she had shot dead fifteen minutes ago, and she forgot everything she had learned about the history of the Mars colonies, she just knew how and where to shoot them. She didn't know how the screeching rifles the Whites and Reds pointed at each other worked, she just knew how to use it to make the Reds stop using theirs. She didn't know how and why the deadly proximity mines in Martian Immigrant Complex 7 were placed, she just knew how to spot them and dodge them. She had tried to warn Bell about the one that she triggered, but the captain was distracted by her thoughts and didn't react fast enough. Ellie didn't have any such thoughts or distractions, not anymore. Ellie just survived. She would survive as long as she was better than her enemies at surviving.
Ellie moved quickly through MIC7. The complex had been abandoned entirely by civilians, and the United Nations vanguard had driven the defenders back and held more than half of the structure, at "heavy casualties". Ellie didn't worry about the casualties. Either she was one of them and didn't have to worry about it or she was not and could not afford to.
She didn't continue towards her objective, planting explosives in a generator room not so far away. She checked to make sure that her communicator was, in fact, not working. She turned down a side hallway in the cramped complex, one of the hallways that led to many places, but were known to not have cameras. She looked for the familiar black glint of cameras and scanned the room with infrared, and found nothing. She stopped, and listened. They had eliminated the last guard patrol that was supposed to be in this area not so long ago, and she had picked off two stragglers on her own fifteen minutes ago. The chances of any more enemies along this particular shortcut route were almost none, but you could never be too sure. She listened, and listened again, and heard nothing.
She was alone. And probably safe.
She looked down the hallway for the least suspicious looking room. The hall had several unmarked doors that seemed to be utility closets of various kinds, and a few machine rooms.
*Where would an ambush be? Where would wounded hide? * She thought that the wounded would hide in one of the closets, in as low a place as possible, covered in something. An ambush would probably hide in the machine room near the intersection of two hallways, to be able to make sure their targets actually passed by them.
She slipped into the machine room near the center of the hallway. She briefly glanced at the label on the door, but didn't recognize the language. Some kind of oxygen system. It didn't matter.
All the lights were off in non-essential areas as the Reds were conserving their power for the war. Ellie shone her flashlight around, pistol in hand, ready to pull the trigger at a moment's notice. She almost did when she passed over a vaguely humanoid metal pipe, but managed to stop her finger, which wanted to shoot at anything and everything.
The room was clear. She passed over it one more time to be sure, then pointed her flashlight up. The apparatus was in several large pieces, and it would be difficult to see on top of any of them from the door. She picked the second furthest one, and started climbing. She realized her tired her limbs were as she pulled herself slowly up the gently vibrating metal exoskeleton, but simple tiredness seemed almost an irrelevant problem at this point. She forced herself upward, and soon crawled on top.
She spread out a self-expanding bedroll and a foil light-absorbing sheet. It wouldn't be much good if anyone turned on the lights, but there wouldn't be much she could do in that situation anyway. She rummaged around in the various kits she had picked up for sleeping pills, guaranteed to be fast and dreamless. Her own had run out a long time ago, but it seemed a few of her squadron hadn't been too keen on the pills. She found a bottle, popped it open, and took three, two-and-a-half more than was recommended.
She closed her eyes and found herself quickly drifting off to sleep. As is the way with humans, it was at these times that our thoughts, memories, and conscience always catch up with us, and despite her best efforts, Ellie was yet human. Luckily, she could feel the pills taking over, but in those brief, lucid moments, she allowed herself to think.
Her squadron's mission would be temporarily abandoned; she would have been expected to continue or report, of course, but after being ambushed, losing their entire squadron over two days, and being forced into the underground section of one of the MICs, where communication was difficult to establish, would probably be good enough to get her out of tribunal. At least in MIC7, the victory of the United Nations force was almost inevitable, and Ellie only had to wait half a day or so, maybe at most a day, until the area was secured. Maybe she could shoot herself in the leg or something and get sent home…not that there was any way to get home from this hellish planet at the moment.
An image sprang into her mind. Lamont's face, a round, brown face with a scruffy black beard on a thin muscular man, constantly wearing a smile. Lamont would have taken a power nap at most and continued on the mission, probably solo, especially now that the area was known to be clear. He only had to plant a few explosive charges, after all. Lamont was a hero in everything he did. On Earth, he probably would have been the waiter who went the extra mile and a half to make sure a customer's lost order was fixed up, or the accountant who stood up against a corrupt vice president and fought a five-year long losing battle in the name of justice. On Mars, he got shot in the left arm, torso, and lower abdomen, because he was not correctly behind cover.
Lamont was a hero. Ellie was not a hero; Ellie was alive and in one piece. As sleep took her, she dreamed of herself sitting back on a sofa in her tiny living room, wrapped in a blanket, cold soda in her hands, and listening to soft piano.
She smiled in her dreamy state, the first time she smiled in God knows how long.
*Let's just go home and listen to classical music. *