*So this is my first reddit post, I'm preparing for a timed writing test/interview. I used this prompt to write a quick scene from a plot I've been working on for some time. So it is slightly out of context. *
The garden behind the grand hall was unpaved, the plants grew naturally, not curated. The dry desert dirt formed a cloud behind him as Raenin's determined wolf hide slippers ran forward, his rough olive toned hands holding his robes so as not to trip.
The grand hall was empty. The oak carved benches and tables lined the matching oak walls without purpose. Raenin proceeded through the garden seating area and into the empty wooden room.
"Phirae!" he shouted "Jihah!" The cathedral ceilings seemed to mock his shouts creating smaller ones to follow. The tall, tan and well-built young man looked to his left. The oak paneled wall was unmoving, there was no door but he could tell no one was behind it. The archive was empty. He peered to his right at the long narrow hallway. He ran. weaving through the unpolished oak pillars he looked for one of the seven doors to be open.
"Phirae!" he shouted again.
A noise came from behind him. Feet beneath a padded dress, from the kitchen at the front end of the hall. Raenin turned to see Ms. Forsythe; Phirae's house handmaiden wore an unusually stern expression and lifted her finger to signal the boy to quiet.
"Where is she?!" Raenin's breath refused to calm, "Where?!"
"Calm down, boy." The large but strong woman reached for his arm, "They've left for the council meeting already."
"I must find them. It's been taken. The second book has been taken."
"Taken? You don't mean stolen, my boy?"
"Yes. Stolen."
"That's impossible, they've all been at the meeting. No one is home. Save me and Greig. And he's most assuredly been with the horses."
"I know it wasn't you or Greig." Raenin grabbed the woman's slightly thick forearm pulling her back through the hall outside and around to the far left end of the castle. The entered the archive through a small door in the center of the wall. It opened easily, broken.
Ms. Forsythe looked at Raenin worriedly and followed. The open door allowed the light to wander in revealing the dust hovering over each antique, each book and each shelf. The shelf they sought sat in the far back right corner of the room, it was labeled "Reference- Jihah's First and Second", one book sat on the shelf, bound in emerald leather, there was no engraving.
"Oh no." Ms. Forsythe pursed her lips, "No no no. Raenin how did this happen? Who was this?"
"I don't know." Raenin replied, "I truly do not know. All I heard was a sigh, a laugh and then I saw it, the shelf." When Raenin was given The Sight it wasn't in full. He had not been born with magic and to be gifted it was very different. His half-powers only allowed for minimal visions.
"Raenin," Ms. Forsythe had already developed a solution, "Go to Greig. Prep your horse and run. Find them. Find the council. They are at the desert center. You have three days."
Without pause the boy did as told. Ms. Forsythe stayed behind to barricade the door.
Greig was a quiet boy. He stood no taller than five foot and no one seemed to know how he controlled so many large beasts with so little muscle. Still, he was the best barn hand the castle had had, he required no room, no food and no clothing to be made, just the barn.
The pale gaunt fellow prepared the dopple gray gelding for departure and Raenin left without a word. He had gathered bread and water from the kitchen. Enough for two days.
...
The round room at the center of the desert was built entirely of marble and lined with the stones of the goddesses. There was no entrance or exit, such permissions needed to be granted by the building itself. Inside the marble seats formed an even heptagon. The women in each seat wore the color of her gem and her goddess necklace revealed hanging just below the chest. One seat had remained empty for over fifty years now, a singular ruby stone set in its back.
"We agree then, to aid the tribal wars to the east with only medical care, food and water. To all troops." The Emerald Jihah ran each conference as the eldest, finalizing all decisions. The other five would raise a hand in agreement, only able to speak when asked. "Moving on the the next prayer requested, the Southern tribes are experiencing floods. Their homes have-"
The marble shook like thunder opening just next to the red seat. The goddesses reaching for weapons and necklaces in response, immediate defense. Raenin entered,
"Lady Jihah's, please accept my pardon." He kneeled making sure to meet the eye of no one. Not even his beloved Phirae, "I come in urgency. The desert castle needs you."
"Go on, child." Emrald lowered her blade, signaling the rest to follow.
"The books, Emerald and Amethyst, Amethyst has been taken. I don't know who, but it was in bad faith. The archive was broken into."
The room remained silent as Emerald looked down, hands shaking in an attempt to hide rage. Her green eyes shifted to the empty ruby seat, "This conference is cancelled. Amethyst and I must leave." She gestured toward the youngest goddess and Phirae stood ready and afraid.
"Jihah," she spoke out of turn, "What is that they want to do with the book?"
"Change it, my girl. Change history. It will no longer possess the truth."