**The Zombie apocalypse arrived. The zombies live forever, don't care about social rules, sleep around a lot and generally have more fun. People are rushing to become zombies. **
I'll never forget what it felt like getting bit for the first time. It really fucking hurt.
My knee-jerk response was to punch him in the face as hard as I could. "The fuck you do that for, Jeff?" My shoulder throbbed. Drowning Pool's 'Bodies' resonated throughout the house. It wasn't funny at the time, but the memory of it will always strike me as particularly amusing. As if someone had decided to make my first experience picture perfect.
The weeks and months following were a blur of drug-induced debauchery. I lived to party. More than ever before, I sought the attention of my peers, disregarded authority, ignored the media, and lay waste to my surroundings. And it. Was. Awesome. Seriously, I had the time of my life. Or death, really. I suppose it depends on your perspective.
You see, what I didn't understand yet was that my *life* had ended. It ended hours after I got bit for the first time. For fuck's sake Jeff, you could have warned me. Anyone could have. But I suppose that's the bitter irony of my circumstances. I became so immediately wrapped up in the party of today that I failed to acknowledge the signs sprouting up around me. And now, two years later, civilization has all but collapsed around me. Where was I?
With everyone else. Ignoring the urge to eat, except for the few times I tried to gnaw on a friend. Going to town on whoever looked alright - did I tell you that's probably the weirdest part? Sexual orientation just sort of stopped mattering. I'm not even bothered by it.
I had no idea that I belonged to a new group of radicalized societal outcasts that partied the country into the ground while the rest of America watched in horror. And now I'm part of the obscene, one of the wanderers forced to the fringe while the normals hide out in their powered strongholds and warmed houses. Many of us have already committed suicide. Out of boredom, more than anything. Not *needing* anything was so much fun at first, but eventually just sapped us of humanity.
Every once in awhile I'll catch a glimpse of a television, somehow connected to cable still. The news outlets broadcasting from their various bastions always have some sort of breakthrough discovery about the disease. Last month, the big headline was that its effects were purely cerebral. As in, all it did was flip a switch to make us think differently. That somehow, through all the drugs and alcohol we'd still been consuming enough calories to subsist. Oh, and yeah. **Immortality is still a myth. **
Hell of a hangover.
At least I'll always have the comfort of not caring. Unfortunately, that wasn't true either. I just found out today. The bug kills itself off over the course of just a few years.
I wonder if they'll take me back?