Ten boxing days ago a crack hockey line was sent to the penalty box for a check that was totally legal. These men promptly escaped to the Halifax underground. Today, still wanted by the mounties, they survive as soldiers of fortune. If you have a problem, if no one else can help, and if you can find them, maybe you can call...
THE EH TEAM
---
Hudson pulled his hockey stick out of the man in front of him. It had been a brutal slash but it wasn't like there was a referee around to call it. "Sorry about that," he spat. Hudson turned to his teammates, they were waiting for him.
"Eh bud, you takin' long enough?" Abbot asked from on top of the snowbank. His hand was protecting his syrup flask from the crew Moose 'Trudeau'.
"Nah bud"' Hudson said, "I think I might just take a bit of extra time down by the bank, ya know."
"Hudson you hoser, we gotta move," Layton said from the driver's side of the Zamboni. He'd been acting like more of a leader recently. "If we don't get moving nobody knows what's going to happen to the prime minister."
"Oh man, nothin' is gonna happen to the Prime Minister as long as we're on the job," Hudson pointed out, "we're special teams man."
"Yeah, but we aren't on the penalty kill today," Vic scowled. He'd been in a bad mood since the maple syrup had been half full at breakfast. He'd always been a half-empty net kinda guy, but today was more.
"Vic man," Hudson started.
"Let's just go out for a rip bud," Layton cut in to fix the mood, "you can have a dart on the way, okay."
"Man you know I can't have a dart, we're passing within 70 feet of a restaurant when we go down Barrington.
"Ah shoot man, oh well."
The men arrived at the fortress of Manly Seattle, the head owner of Starbucks, the evil corporation dead-set on replacing Tim Horton's as Canada's favourite coffee.
"Manly Seattle, give back the Prime Minister eh," Abbot called out. Manly Seattle didn't answer.
"Eh Hoser!" Layton yelled.
Still there was nothing.
Like a speeding slapshot Hudson pulled the curtain and showed that there was no man behind it. Manly Seattle was missing. Prime Minister Trudeau had his mouth gagged.
"Oh man sorry about that," Layton said as he grabbed the bound and started to untie it. The french man with brilliant hair spat out the rag.
"Layton! Look out!" the smooth new cool guy screamed.
Layton ducked and a puck came flying over his head. He turned to see who it was. Vic was holding his hockey stick tight in his grasp. Betrayal!
"Vic no!" Layton said, "just put the stick down and we can talk about it, okay?"
"I'm not gonna talk about it," Vic said, "I'm done, pick up your stick."
"Vic," Layton started, but Abbot got in the way.
"You're not getting to Layton like that Vic, I'm sorry about this," Abbot pulled out his stick. It was time for a shoot out.
The two men laced up their skates.