A man smiled as he saw a package underneath his mailbox. He lifted the box with a groan, it was rather heavy, almost...human-like. Smiling with the thought, he went back in his dull gray house. The box struggled as the man slaughtered it with a knife, exposing its content inside. If there was blood inside this box, it would look like the Mexican Caravel sent him a message as there was limbs cluttered inside.
He picked up a leg, placed it on top a large blue sheet. Once all of the limbs were in place, he begin to attach ropes that were close to the edge of the porcelain skin before he attached the jointed steel where the bones would be. Once he finished attaching the head. It came to life. "Oh boy! Thank you for picking me! What did you want to call me, brother? Son?" It froze, awaiting my answer.
"Best friend." I spoke, trying to make it clear.
"Best friend? You sure?"
"Yes."
"Downloading best friend sequence..." It was still frozen. "10%" It spoke. "20%...30%..." I waited until it was done. "100%" It squeaked to life. "Hello! What's your name?"
"Harold."
"Hello 'Harold'! What shall we do today?" It didn't said my name through its pipsqueak sound, it recorded my voice and played it back to me.
"I want you to come with me. I want us to do something fun today."
"Ok!" We both stood up, walked outside in the dark cloudy day.
"Weather patterns detected. 'Harold' we can't stay outside for long. I don't do well in rain."
"Don't worry BuddyTron. Where we're going, there won't be any rain."
"Sounds awesome, 'Harold' Can't wait to get there!" We boarded onto my car and drove, watching the buildings whizzing by until skyscrapers slowly rolled by us. We stopped and entered one of the buildings.
The metal door squeaked open, revealing a small room. We entered it and pressed the confusing columns of buttons next to the metal door. The metal door squeaked closed and the room jolted upward, sending uneasy feelings down Harold's spine. The uneasiness stopped, and the metal door squeaked open once more. We walked out and into my office. "This is my office, BuddyTron, this is where we would have our fun."
"Ok! What shall we do today, 'Harold'!"
Harold picked up a chair and threw it through the large windows. "'Harold'! I detected danger, are you OK?"
"Don't worry about that, BuddyTron. I have a story to tell you."
"Oh boy! A story!" It chimed happily. Harold held the porcelain hand and stood at the edge of the window.
"All my life I've been an asshole. I was a narcissistic, I loved myself and no one else. I was a leech, I made fun of people until they cry, then I would smile because I made them cry. One would even call me a psychopath, because I manipulated people to get my way. My office here? I blackmailed the CEO, he was sleeping around with whores while being married. Recently I gotten rather sick, so I went to the hospital..." Harold trailed off. Tears rolling down his eyes. "I have cancer."
"'Harold'...I'm detecting suicidal thoughts from you. Do you want me to contact the local suicide hotline?"
"No, BuddyTron. I needed a friend, I needed to tell this to someone. I needed to die, so all of the victims I have would laugh. All the victims would smile and would feel free. You, BuddyTron, are the only friend I have, and...I don't want to die alone. BuddyTron, concern mode unactivated."
"Concern mode unactivated." It spoke in a monotonously. "What do you want to do today!" It spoke again, in a chippy mode.
"I want to die, but not alone."
"Ok." It understood. We both took step forward and closed our eyes.
-023