The house was a quaint house, by no means lavish or excessive. It had harboured a grand total of two families in its life, a fine accomplishment by any house's means.
The first family gave the house its name, House. They were also the ones who decided House was a cheery fellow, and gave him a new appearance of vibrant yellow to match this endowed persona. His new skin was a stark contrast to the deep, relaxed green of the forest that infringed upon the property. But all good things must come to an end; and too quickly at that, for houses age much slower than people.
The family grew from a man and woman to a group of six. House had no idea if this was a large or small family, after all, he was only a house. In time however, the children grew and eventually and inevitably left the nest, leaving once again only the man and woman, now old and wrinkled. House enjoyed watching over and protecting them in their last days. He enjoyed their quiet reminiscence of bygone times, and the soft way in which they spoke to each other. The way they held each other at night to the manner in which they shared meals together was testimony enough of their love for one another. Time marched on though, and eventually the man and woman passed on. Their children visited House once more, to clean and pack up their parent's possessions. They deliberated on burying the man and woman in the back field, something House thought would offer closure and peace to both him and the children. In the end, the children decided to bury them in a cemetery, far away from House. That was the last time he saw the first family.
The second family was, in many regards, a stark juxtaposition to the first family. Where love and acceptance once were, aggressive words and hurtful actions now pervaded House's halls and doorways. The family was like the first in regards to children and their incessant desire to leave and stake out a life of their own; one however, remained. She stayed behind long after her siblings had left, indeed even after their parents left this world and the first strands of grey were appearing in her once-brown hair. House didn't mind, as long as his roof was sheltering someone, a house could be happy.
The road to Hell is paved with good intentions, a lesson House learned too late. Months and months went by, the child selling more and more of her land to developers. The vibrant, lush forest that surrounded House was slowly replaced with dull, grey, concrete. Soon all that remained of the forest was a small patch of grass adjacent to the front window, probably hoping to be some other house's lawn.
The child eventually passed on, but this time no one came to clean and fix up House. Her possessions sat in House, gathering dust. The concrete expanded and giant black buildings were built around him. The developers who once had so eagerly swallowed up the land the child had sold them had seemingly forgotten all about House.
And so now he stands. Surrounded by concrete, no family to protect. Newer, younger houses are being built around him, affixed to the concrete. Somehow House knew these new houses would not share his same sentiments about life. House was resigned to this reality until the end of his days, by way of either dilapidation and rot, or the classic wrecking ball. After all, two families was a fine accomplishment by any house's means.
Today was different though. A sign had appeared in front of House. Someone had come by and given his old yellow paint a wash, bringing out the colour once again. And now, three people approached him. One of them was a stiff businessman, his starched suit matching his stolid demeanour. The other two people were a familiar sight:
A man and woman, young and in love.