It was a war for survival. There's no other way of putting it. It would either be us or them.
The lymph nodes had been filled to capacity between us and our foes. The heat of battle had rose to a fever-pitch and we both knew this would be a final stand. Many of us had been ambushed and overrun by some of their first sorties into our lines. We knew the stakes just as much as they did. Life; mere existence on the line.
Eventually, it came down to one-on-one contests. I found myself separated from the rest of my squad. I would have to sneak deep into the heart of the enemy's defenses to have a shot at taking over this territory. I sped quickly through main thoroughfares, slid between cracks in walls, tried to blend in with the locals as I worked my way closer to the goal. That's when I was spotted. A lone soldier of their patrol took a glance my way and began pursuit. There was no running now, I'd have to fight my way out.
He tried to stun me but his gun jammed. I struck while he checked his gear and sent him sprawling. He sprung back up and slammed a knee into my mid-section. I made a grab for him and took him to the ground with me. We rolled back and forth, striking whenever either could get a limb free. He pinned me to the ground and started raining a barrage of elbows into my head. No matter how much I tried to guard my own arms, damage was being done. As a last ditch effort, I dropped my defenses and gouged my thumbs into his eyes. He screeched in pain but rose from his knees to get away, giving me enough space to bring my legs up into his chest and kick him clear. He tumbled backwards into a wall and stayed leaning against it as I rose to my feet, still doubled over in pain.
"You're too strong for this system, punk. Why are you protecting them?" I yelled at my foe. "You know no matter what happens here, whether you beat me or not, eventually we'll take this sector, and everything else with it."
"I was born here, raised here, specialised here, just to take you out. You think a few words and a little pain can turn me?" he yelled back.
"Gave you a chance to make this easy..." I snickered. He let out a primal scream and rushed me once more. Letting him close the distance, I slipped the syringe from my pocket and jammed it straight into his core, letting the chemistry go to work. He stood there stunned as I watched the last of his will drain out of him. He fell to his knees clutching his chest, supporting himself on one arm. As quickly as he had begun his fit, he stopped, rose to his feet and faced me.
"What are your orders, sir?"
"Take the lymph nodes. When you've secured the area, re-group with the rest of us in the brain," I slipped him two syringes, "convert as many as you can."
"Yes, sir."
Survival. Many against one. It was either going to be us, or the human.