I fumbled with my keys in the door, fatigue making my eyes blurry. It had a been a long day at work and my body ached. As I dragged myself through the front door, a familiar meow alerted me to the presence of my cat Diana. She was looking at me intently with those furious brown eyes. Rolling my own eyes, I walked past her.
'Not now Diana, I just got in, come on' I said exasperated. A louder meow rang through the house as the sandy haired cat whined. I turned and saw her following, her silky hair sliding across her shoulder bones as she sauntered after me.
'I'll feed you in a minute, okay?' I sighed. Turning back round I walked to my bedroom, threw my bag on the bed, then slumped down onto the spongy heaven. My head hit the pillow and I rested my eyes. I didn't know if I could continue working like this. Maybe I needed a new job.
'Did I mention I'm an expert in explosives?'
A voice other than mine spoke. Um what? I sat up in a panic thinking someone had broken into the flat. Diana had also followed me into the bedroom but no one else was there. Maybe I was just hearing things? I tried to convince myself.
'Diana was that you, you silly cat' I joked, trying to calm my worrying with some humour. Her brown eyes were gazing at me, probably in confusion.
'Yes, it was. And I really am an expert in explosives, so I would suggest you put some food into the food bowl, before I blow you and everything you care about up.' My eyes widened in disbelief, did my cat just talk to me? I mean I saw her mouth move, but surely not. I suddenly realised what she had just 'said'. Blow me up? What the hell?
'I suggest you hurry up.' She sounded impatient. My heart was pounding, and my face must have been a concoction of confusion, wonder and horror. As I slowly sat up, I could actually feel the malicious intent coming from Diana. This was apparently real, so I did what any self-respecting adult would do: I obeyed the murderous orders of my cat.
As I poured the wet pouch of cat food into the cracked, plastic bowl, I thought about replacing the bowl with a new one, to keep Diana happy. Glancing at my cat revealed her angry eyes, glaring impatiently at me. A fear for survival gripped me and all of a sudden, I felt an an incredulous empathy with all the other powerless species of the world, as I realised that I was now in the control of an insane cat.