There are a lot of poems for this, so I decided more of a soliloquy.
I remember the rain, I don't know why but I always remember the rain.
I remember the morning after the bombs, the rain falling on the streets and the shattered buildings. Tip tapping on the helmets of the wardens and the firemen, the only noise in the silent, stunned streets, turned from our childhood playgrounds to ruined killing fields. It washed away the blood into the drains, and washed the dust of our faces as we emerged blinking from the shelter. So happy just to feel the cold sting on our numb skin. So happy to have survived another night.
I remember the rain the day I met you. I'd never smelt rain like it, to a city girl, rain was sour and dusty, sticky tears of a skyline ruined by the factories of war. This rain was fresh and pure, splashing into the muddied fields that stretched further than I could imagine. Your family sheltered me, from the rains, of water and bombs. How could we not be together, hiding under the bed, hearing the planes overhead, to rain on the cities and the factories.
Did we have children? I am sure we must have. You must have had a job, and I was the house wife, we lived.. somewhere. I just don't know anymore. I remember the rains.
I remember the rain the day we said goodbye. I'm not sure when it was, or who was there, but I remember the rain. Drumming on the roof as someone, someone important, spoke about you. I remembered you then. I remember loving you. The rain should have stopped as you slid through the curtain. Each drop should have shown its respect!
As the smoke rose from the chimney, the rain carried on, you drifted up to join it, you became part of it. I remember you.
I remember the rain.
I just wish I could remember you name. Your face. Your smell.
It's raining today, I can see it out the window. I try to tell the plump lady who's been hovering by the bed looking sad and sullen, I wish she; d leave me alone to be honest but, any company will do. "Look" I say, pointing out the window. "Look there he is, I remember him". She looks out the window.
"There's no one there" she says, and bursts into tears. I don't know why she cries so much, maybe shes got something wrong with her, she says some very peculiar things sometimes. "Are you from the mental ward" I ask, as nicely as I can. "even a mental one can see, he's out there, out the window"
She sobs again, this big bubbling woman, wasting my time and energy. I wished she'd leave me alone. Leave me in peace. She must be mental, I remember what she said, over the rain on the window. She said "There's no one there Mum".
What a lunatic.