I was just chilling in my room on reddit when the old guy came through the portal in my wardrobe, followed by a bunch of other old people. They were whispering amongst themselves, all looking quite nervous and stressed.
The old guy I mentioned before, I guess he was their ringleader, approached me.
"Charlie," he stuttered, "when was the last time you did your homework?"
It seemed an odd question, but I decided to humour the old man. "I've never done any homework" I replied.
"And when your parents ask you to do chores; do you do them?"
More odd questions, but whatever. "Never," I answered, "what's this about?" the question seeped out of my lips, a product of mere conversation rather than actual curiosity.
"A great sorceror has enslaved our people. We, the resistance, have been attempting to overthrow his power for many years, but his castle holds mysterious powers; only one person and the sorceror may be inside at any one time. Certainly we have strong fighters and powerful mages, but these are all useless against him, for you see; he has mind control powers! Everyone who casts their gaze upon him falls under his spell and becomes his slave, obeying his every will. But you, Charlie, have never done a thing you have been told to do in your life. We believe that only you have the willpower to resist his invasive magics! You must aid us, you must enter the castle and kill the sorcerer!"
It was a bit of a sob-story, really. The old man looked distressed, so maybe it was true. So I feigned interest, looked like I was contemplating it. But then I said, "Nah, can't be bothered really." This old man wasn't gonna boss me around. Nobody tells me what to do. He didn't even say please. I don't do nothin' for nobody, and I'm not gonna make a start with this guy.
Now he must have read my mind or something, because at this point the old man went under a transformation; his wrinkles faded, his beard dissolved, his hair grew shorter and thicker. I didn't really care, but it stirred up some discomfort with his party. "The sorcerer!" they gasped simultaneously.
He let out one of those stereotypical evil laughs, but I'm not going to dishonour myself by typing out "muahaha" (except for just then). "You truly do have a strong mind, Charlie! Even though I attempted to control your mind with my sorcery then, you resisted! You surely could have overthrown me and claimed the kingdom for yourself, so now I must kill you to ensure you never do!"
It wasn't long after this eye-roll-worthy bad-guy-monologue that he drew a long, thin knife out from under his robe. The rest of the party were just stood there, presumably under mind control. The sorcerer lunged towards me, yelling "Die!"
And that was his big mistake. I probably wouldn't have cared if he had just killed me, but telling me to die? Nobody tells me what to do. He didn't even say please. I don't do nothin' for nobody, and I'm not gonna make a start with this guy.
I sprang from my chair and dodged every thrust of his knife with lightning fast reflexes I didn't know I had. He cast evil magic towards me, fireballs and lightning strikes, but they all missed too. I was simply too fast. My eyes darted from one part of the room to another, looking for something I could use as a weapon, all whilst the sorceror continously screamed "Die!" at me. That's when I had my marvellous idea.
Dipping and ducking between his attacks, I reached the mirror on my wall, pulled it down and held it up between me and him. "Die!" he yelled, for the last time. My plan had worked; I was immune to his mind controlling powers, but he wasn't. He'd just stared himself in the eyes and controlled his own mind, with the order to die. He stood almost motionless as he pulled the knife up from his hand and across his neck, before collapsing into a pile of robes and magic on my favourite rug.
The "resistance" stirred, and upon seeing the sorceror lying dead, they gave out cheers and applause. "I'm a hero," I thought. It was lovely to be appreciated once in a while. They didn't stay long, because they had to go and sort out their kingdom or whatever, so they popped back through their portal and closed it behind them.
I didn't really know what to do with the dead guy, but my mother came in and told me to clean it up, so not that.