"I've gotten myself into quite a pickle," my client told me, "So I'm trying to get rid of some loose ends."
I simply assumed he did some crime, got away, and didn't want his partners to rat him out. I've gotten these kinds of jobs before. Standard. Simple. Kill some poor asshole that got himself into a sticky situation.
Holy shit, was I wrong.
I went to the address disclosed for me. I found myself standing in front of small house, the wooden shutters decaying from time. The stairs on the porch looked like they were about to crumble if I coughed on them. For all I cared, the house could have been a pile of rocks, as long as I still got paid.
The instructions I were given dictated me to knock on the door and follow the person that answered it. So I did. A pale man with a well-tailored suit silently greeted me into the abode. He simply began walking and I followed after closing the door behind me. I was alert, on edge, ready to take on my job.
My instructions went on to detail how the man would lead me into a basement, where I was to receive further orders. I went downstairs. I thought I was prepared for whatever sight would greet me. What I saw then, I still can't explain today. It was just a job.
I found my client. Twice, in fact. At once. I instantly recognized his face from the news; he was a suspect in a bank robbery, and right now, he seemed pretty fucking guilty. He stood in the dingy basement, a huge duffle bag of what I assumed was cash behind him, and next to a chair with a restrained man. The man was an exact copy of him. Spot on, the beard, the hair cut, the small mole on his left cheek.
"Hi," the 'him' standing up said, "I'm sure you have a lot of questions."
I did, but that was unprofessional. I shook my head in response. I just wanted to get this weird shit over with. "Good," he said, "I need you to kill me. THIS me!" He quickly corrected.
He continued, "Yeah, I'm sure you recognize me. I just pulled off a heist. I needed to be in two places at once, so I made a clone."
I only thought how.
"I'm pretty scientifically talented," he said in reply to my confused expression, "I want you to kill him. It. Me, whatever the fuck. I'm tying up loose ends."
"Why would you hire a hit man to do it?" I asked.
"Look man I'm a bank robber, but not a murderer. Plus he looks just like me! Think you'd be able to do the same? Just do the job and I'll pay you, dude."
I looked at the clone sitting in the chair, tied up. He looked at me with tired, red eyes. His sorrowful expression. "Don't do it man," he said, "He's lying. I remember everything in my life. I'm an actual person. *He's* the clone! Have some god damn morals!"
"I'm just doing a job," I replied.
"I'll pay you too!" He shouted back before being silenced by a punch to the face by the standing man.
The two started yelling back and forth. At me. At each other. I zoned out, closed my eyes. I blocked them out and drew my gun.
------
The news was interesting the next day. "BANK HEIST SUSPECTS FOUND! TWIN BROTHER ALSO INVOLVED! THREE BODIES AT SITE! MONEY NOWHERE TO BE FOUND!" The headlines read.
I parked my new car at my new house. I still had some junk money left over. It would take a while for the rest to be laundered, but it would last me the rest of my life if I was smart about it. All my loose ends were tied and I covered my tracks. Some other poor bastard would be getting arested for what I did. After all, the event was just a job, and I still got paid in the end.