[I'm a little rusty, my apologies.]
Of all the bouncing heads I observed through the doorway of Ms. Claudeo's classroom, Marcella's was the only face I saw.
As usual, I was waiting for the noise and horde to thin out before I went to my next class. I hate when people touch me, tease me, or rub their elbow against my own. It makes the back of my head hurt.
And as usual, Marcella took notice of me standing sheepishly near the doorway, and nodded to me with the faintest hint of a smile. She was the only one besides Lou, who moved to a school with a better autism support program, who ever smiled at me in school. I liked that about her.
Bub stood from his desk, walked to stand next to me. "What are you doing?"
I turned to look at him, meeting his eyes for a second, before deciding that it would be easier for me to just look at his nose while we talked. "I'm standing here." I said.
"I mean," he had the deepest voice I'd ever heard, "why?"
I looked at his shoes. They were green, black, and white, and had a picture of Michael Jordan's silhouette on the side. They were shiny. Mostly, they were weird. "Your shoes are weird." I said back.
He laughed. "Your shoes are Velcro."
I'm not sure why he said that. I think he meant "normal".
I glanced at the doorway again. Now there were only stragglers. "Well, I have to go." I said wryly as I walked out of the room.
I made a left. Thirty-five linoleum tiles later, I made another left. Twelve linoleum tiles later, I was at Mr. Nancy's class. I walked in, shuffled to my seat, and set my backpack down. I loved Mr. Nancy, even though his last name was a first name, which was a real problem for me at the beginning of the semester. *What is his wife's name? *
I'll remember, always, the day that Mr. Nancy was telling us about King Xerxes, and I raised my hand to ask what his wife's name is. He laughed for a second, as did the rest of the class. "It's Faye," he chuckled, "Do you have any questions about Persia?"
Faye Nancy. Finance—y. Nonsense words.
Anyway, on this particular day, Mr. Nancy was talking about the Meddicci family and why they were so important, and I was busy staring at the back of Marcella's head because half of it was freshly shaved, and I was feeling a mix of *please-let-me-touch-it* and *why-did-you-do-that*.
And when Mr. Nancy said this: "So let's all get into groups," I was very, very busy wondering what I had missed, and worrying about my group.
The room turned into a beehive for a moment, alive with the buzzing of excited students forming small alliances. I did not move. Mr. Nancy came to my desk, leaning down to ask me quietly, "Are you okay with that?"
I stared at his shaved head, much more naked and shiny than half of Marcella's head. "Groups?" I asked back.
"Yeah," he said, "Do you want to go to Mrs. Ray's room?"
Mrs. Ray is the special education teacher who gives me answers on every assignment when I feel stressed. I don't think she's supposed to do this. She may have thought I was stupid.
Mr. Nancy spoke again, "Or is there a particular partner you'd be comfortable with?"
I said quietly, "Marcella."
He nodded, smiled, clapped his hands as he walked to the front of the room, behind his desk. "Alright, guys," he bellowed, "Sorry for the confusion, but these are assigned groups."
Everybody groaned.
He broke up the class like teachers do: separating Steve and Andrew because they were so loud together, making sure that Jayme and Nika don't sit too close together because they tend to get distracted, and, finally, assigning me and Marcella into our own team.
Marcella looked at me and patted the seat next to hers. I came to her and sat. She looked at me in the eyes and I stared at her nose instead. "Sara, do you know what we're supposed to be doing?"
This brought out a panic in me. I felt my face get hot. "Being in a group?"
"I mean, like," she laughed. "What are we doing in the group?"
I was silent and decided to smile so that she didn't think I was weird.
She let out an even bigger laugh and said, "I don't know either."
She turned her head and began to text under her desk. I stared at the shaved side of her head.
"I like your bald head." I blurted out.
She looked at me. I don't know what face she was making, but it made the back if my head hurt for a second. Then she smiled and said, "Thank you," only she said it like it was a question.
I wanted to tell her that it made me happy when she smiled at me in the hallway. I wanted to ask her about her piercings. *Did they hurt? * I wanted to look at her shoes. Then, I realized, I just wanted to be able to make myself say *anything* to her.
After 15 minutes of her playing with her phone, she turned her chair to face me. "We have to look like we're doing something." Then, she swung her mouth to the side before asking me, "You have a good weekend?"
"Did I have a good weekend." I corrected.
"Did you?" She asked.
"Did I what?" I asked back. The back of my head hurt.
She stared at me quizzically. *Ow ow ow*.
I stood, gathered my backpack, and walked back to Mrs. Ray's room.