Day 1:
We have officially passed the Surface. It is… strange here. It is like what are scientists told us and more. We are currently camped at the edge of the surface and what they call "land". We hope to explore it tomorrow but have to charge our breathing tanks overnight. There may not be much water for us to use as we begin our journey. My heart is pounding. I am beyond excited to see what lies out there.
Day 2:
We have explored land. Everything is so dry up here. How could anything live up here without water? When I swing my arms back and forth, it feels like nothing is there. And the pressure is so low. If not for these suits, I fear what would happen to mine and my associates'bodies.
But what really has intrigued me are the animals here. They come in a variety of sizes, from small to big. In fact, I saw this really small one earlier today. It was covered in the most precarious little hairs and with huge black eyes. I wish I could have touched it. It looked so soft.
And then there were things that floated around. But they are not like fish swimming above. They seem to glide all around by beating their fins. Those are covered in some strange coating. They perch in the large plants. My colleague called them "trees". Absolutely fascinating.
Day 3:
While collect samples to bring back, I noticed something strange. I could have sworn I saw something watching us, hidden in the dense bundles of plants surrounding us. They did not look like any other animal we had seen so far – no hair or flier things. But I did not think much about it, considering there is so much to explore.
That was, until a person in our group went missing. She went off to collect some rocks, barely gone a minute before we heard her scream. By the time we had arrived to where she was, nothing remained except for her broken helmet. Without it, she is as good as dead.
And that was when I began to panic. No one else has said anything but I think they feel the same. We are scheduled to leave in the morning at daybreak. I cannot complain. Something is not right about this place.
Day 4:
I am the only one left. At least, I think so. It all happened a blur. I am still trying to figure out what happened.
One moment, I had taken a nap camp. The next, those savages come out of nowhere and attacked. They killed a few of us and chased the survivors in different directions. I was lucky enough to get them off my trail. But now, I do not know where I am.
Their screams still ring in my ears. It was… brutal, unrestrained. They seem to kill for no reason. Just who are they?
I have to sleep. It is a danger I must risk. If I can make it through the night, I will get back to the ship. Gods be with me.
Day 5:
There is no hope. After a day's long trek, I made it back to the ship. But they arrived first. Now, they hang around it, speaking in some foreign tongue. And over the bodies of my dead comrades at that! They put them over some strange yellow and orange energy that radiates light, witchcraft perhaps. Their skin browns, crinkling and reeking of death. I had to hold my breath to not vomit.
I have no choice. I have to try to get the ship back. My water levels are low and I lack a weapon but I must at least try. I need to warn my people of the impending doom if they dare to pass the Surface like we foolishly did. No one deserves this fate. So here is my final message.
If I do not make it, whoever finds this log please heed my words. These savages will stop at nothing to kill you. Leave while you still can.