Tough.
Male, obviously. Aggressive, above average testosterone levels. Quick metabolism...risky, because with poverty it would increase my chances to starve. Low potential for addiction, that would be somewhere in the frontal lobe I think. The guide for this thing was ridiculously long.
Resilient.
Being too smart didn't work out the last time. It's all good fun if you have the right circumstances, but it really sucks when you have people like *him* around. You internalize abuse too well that way. Never again. I'll have the potential there, but this time I'll need to work for it.
Hidden.
Slightly above average height. Brown eyes, black hair. Slim, but not lanky. Regular physical development. Unremarkable face. Slightly under average amount of body hair. Able to blend in anywhere. So they wouldn't drag me back to a place I didn't want.
Observant.
Slight depressive tendencies. Depression allows people to view things with less fallacies tainting the picture. Sharp hearing and eyesight. Good hand-eye coordination. When I'll be trapped, it won't stop me from getting around. Even if there would be no light, like the basement.
Manipulative.
Sociopathic tendencies. I need to be a liar. If I use people, they can't use me. Not again. Not ever.
Next I added some slightly crooked teeth. No use getting a swollen ego. A smaller than average nose, harder to break. Long fingers. Muscles built for sprinting more than a long run. If I need to run, it'll probably be fast.
I looked in the mirror, and saw the gaping hole in my neck. The temptation to make myself handsome, brilliant, well-rounded...it was a pipe dream. Only those born in the right place and the right time can afford to stand out like that. Never had that luck myself. But this time, I'll be able to fight it out...and become just slightly above average in the end. No gambling here.
I made sure my hair would be dry. With these features, I want to be able to make myself presentable with little effort. In the last moment, I decided that perhaps green eyes would be worth it. Just one small hint of a memory I'll soon forget. After all, with no kids of my own, I think that I earned this little mercy. The little dunderhead I'm gonna be should carry around a little memory, even if he will never know it.