It talks to me sometimes. I listen, my fear perhaps too tired to provoke me anymore. I listen to this thing speak and I hear its words, its thoughts, its desires. Some magic is at bay. I sound like my little brother, but that's what it is. No use in denying it.
This thing calls itself a monster. It is not natural, not even natural in a world full of magic. It speaks of a world lashed by flame, scorched by hate, full of violence and misfits. This monster itself is a misfit. It reminds of myself in some ways.
It had played a trick, it told me. It had stolen the eyes of the All Father, but of course, the All Father needs no eyes. It had thought it could run away, hide from its punishment. But you can't hide, I guess. My monster was punished, had its companion killed. A death there sends it to worse places than hell apparently. It showed remorse, cried into my thoughts, and then screamed revenge in a blind desperation.
I listened because I have no choice. But I don't mind, it reminds me of myself. I have always caused trouble. I've been beaten and punished. I've been called a brat, a waste, a demon even. Maybe that's what I've got talking to me. Maybe it's a demon.
I think it's been getting worse. It tells me scary things and I no longer feel to eat. It misses its companion and it has a plan. I'm afraid, but somehow I know there is nothing I can do. I feel strangely comforted by that. I've been up all night, just thinking, and I've written letters of goodbye to my family in case something happens. I know something will happen.
The thing has told me its plan finally. It truly is a monster. It claims it is remorseful and that it is doing this because there is no other choice. I don't know if I believe it, but what else can I do? It says it can control me, make me do anything. It wants me to kill myself. It wants to be with me, together in that hell that I believe is all too real. It says it has already made up its mind. I've cried and cried but it feels nothing. It feels nothing but loneliness. There is no other way. It truly is a demon.
I brace myself for hell. It tells me of the fires with relish. The pain and suffering. It's almost a hazing ritual. My suicide will be quick, it assures, and then laughs. I intend to fight, but it has already shown that it can take control. I've done things I never meant to do. I've hurt my brother, isolated my family. Oh what a life this is, being a monster's puppet. It says that it is sorry, but I don't think that is true. It only cares for itself. It only wants a companion. Nothing else matters.