I walk quickly toward the back of the music hall. Each footfall muffled by the thick carpet.
Senator Jackson makes his way slowly to the restroom, flanked by service detail. I move deftly through an open aisle and out the side-door.
I enter the bathroom ahead of him, and quickly check stalls. I'm alone. I move to the handicap stall and close the door, standing with one foot on the toilet and one foot on the bar.
I hear the door open and a serviceman walks through. As I expected, he's too lazy to check the stalls, he just leans under looking for feet. When he doesn't see any, I hear him exit.
Senator Jackson walks in and stands at the sink. I hear the water turn on.
I slowly lower myself to the ground. I slip under from stall to stall, until I'm directly behind him.
I take a syringe out of my pocket. Not breathing, I slide gracefully under the stall door.
*Go*. I stand quickly, thrusting my left arm around his neck. My fingers find his chin and pull outward, exposing his jugular. He shrieks, but my palm is shoved in his mouth. I plunge the needle deep into his neck and push the liquid into his throat.
Small air bubbles begin forming at the insertion point. I jerk his head farther with my hand, using my foot to make him fall. I catch him before he hits the ground, and step over him.
Dragging him by his shoulders, I kick the stall door open. I move him back and turn him, carefully undoing his belt. His pants drop to his ankles.
I set him on the toilet seat, and jump above him to the vent in the wall. I pull a small screwdriver from my jacket and undo the screws, removing the cover. I flip, using the safety bar in the stall, so my feet hit the edge of the vent. Upside down, I pull out a tiny coin from my pocket and leave it on Senator Jackson's shoulder. He's unconscious.
I push myself up, and use my feet to slide back into the vent. When my waist meets the opening, I reach down and grab the cover. I pull it in just as the door opens to the bathroom.
I stop breathing and wait.
The serviceman looks around, and bends to look under the stall. Seeing his feet and pants, he stands and walks back out of the bathroom.
As I slide backward through the vent, I reach into my jacket pocket and pull out a phone.
Opening the messenger, I go to the most recent text.
> Quora, 772. Target: Senator Reginald Jackson, Jr.
I hit the text box and a keyboard slides up. I type a message and hit send.
> Quora, 772. Confirm Target Dead.
I shut the phone, and snake my way out. The last thing I hear is the shouting from the direction of the bathroom floating down the duct.