It was cold, and damp, and miserable. A reasonably normal day in the south east of England around this time of year. Men and women in white overalls were scouring the scene for evidence whilst others were planting down number markers and taking photos.
"Inspector?" a voice cut through the still mist as Greaves stomped up the hill and showed his badge to the officer manning the police tape.
"What've we got?" Greaves grumbled. The morning coffee not having kicked in quite yet and he was still blinking the sleep out of his eyes.
"Double homicide" replied the officer "Male and female of around the ages twenty. We're still running identity checks so for now they're just going down as Jack and Jill respectively. Forensics hasn't gotten into the cause of death as there's no apparent blood or wounds on the individuals which leads us to believe it could have potentially been a poisoning". The younger officer took off her cap and smoothed her blonde hair. Greaves estimated her to be around the age of 30, stress lines around her eyes suggested that she wasn't getting much sleep.
As they approached the white tent covering the bodies they were intercepted by a well dressed gentleman. Swinging his cane as he walked, his suit appearing surprisingly dry considering the weather. He reached his hand out to shake the Inspectors and smiled a toothy, well practiced grin.
"Ah! Inspector, I was hoping to meet you before we got to the uh..." He paused for a moment, his eyes darting to the tent for a second "...Gristly details. I'll be working with you on this case. My name's Gregory, Gregory Coffyn. I'm one of the Abled."
The 'Abled' as they'd come to have been known were something that still remained to be a mystery to modern science. Throughout history despite the advances in technology, medicine and the physical sciences the Abled had been very much on the paranormal end of things. Unexplained occurrences such as floating lights, sounds that had no source and floating objects tended to be manifestations of such individuals. The majority of them were unable to correctly attune themselves before maturity and as a result were never quite able to get a grasp on their abilities. However those that did became extraordinarily talented in whatever specialties they focused themselves on. They also became a great asset, or a greater threat.
"Ah!" Smiled Greaves "and what's your parlor trick?". Gregory raised an eyebrow and pursed his lips as he assessed the detective. He stared at Greaves for a moment before finally, almost reluctantly admitting "I'm good with time". Greaves made a face "Time?" he asked apparently unimpressed at the explanation. "Can you maybe unpack that for me? Us normal folk don't quite understand whatever witchcraft, sorcery or magic you might do". Gregory shifted uncomfortably and looked down at his shoes whilst tapping his cane on the grass. He pulled out a pair of gloves from his pocket, runes sewn into the fabric. Gold thread weaved into the soft leather forming intricate symbols of power that helped the Abled focus their talents. "How about we get to it and I'll demonstrate as we go" Sighed Gregory as he lifted his cane to indicate the tent "after you".
Greaves grunted and stomped over to the tent. He lifted up the canvas flap and stepped inside.
(I'll probably finish this up when I get home from work)