My diet is strictly liquid. You guys have heard of that Soylent shit, right? Same thing, more or less. Everything I need. All the nutrients and electrolytes and whatever-the-hell that keep my system in running order. Each daily dose spread across three separate bottles. It's been that way ever since the shit-monsters materialized.
Taking liquid shits isn't so bad, I guess. I had to move from single-ply economy toilet paper to extra soft to extra soft plus moisturizing lotion to baby wipes. But there's a bear on the box and it looks kinda cute sitting on the cistern of my toilet. Plus I don't have to worry about which direction to place the roll, so I guess I've got that going for me.
But Jesus. I hate. Hate hate hate hate. Hate more than I have hated anything else. Hate more than I hate terrorism and ebola and Donald Trump's political campaign. Fucking hate the lack of variety in my meals. Sure, I've lost fifteen pounds. Sure, it's cheaper in the long run. And sure, I don't have to deal with the hassle of finding a new home for my crying, screaming shit-monsters. But I really miss solid food. Real food. Food I can chew up. Steak. Crusty warm bread with the soft chewy inside that I have gnash with my molars into a glutenous blob before I can swallow it down. It's awful.
So, I cheated.
Most people have a slip-up now and then. And yeah, if I'm honest with you right now, I don't regret it one bit. So sue me. I wanted food of substance. It's a natural desire. We're fighting millions of years of evolution here, folks. It's not like I committed some kind of cardinal sin. My teeth and the little biome in my stomach didn't evolve to process this synthetic liquid garbage.
Finding solid food is hard if you don't know where to look for it. There are still fringe groups of traditionalists who have all run outside to live off the grid and off the land, but they're a select few and kind of culty. That weird stuff always freaks me out. And you can always find someone in some alley somewhere who's got an old bag of Skittles, but that'll cost you an arm and a leg and you might end up getting shot for it. But I'm just a normal guy. I don't wanna do some backalley deal or sell my soul to some random Jim Jones wannabe asshole in Backwater, Utah (pop. 43).
And so I found myself on Darknet buying a six year-old can of SpaghettiOs for the equivalent of 150 bucks in cyptocurrency. Not a great deal, but not awful either. Plus they promise me prompt and discreet shipping. Worth every penny.
When the food arrived on my doorstep in a plain brown box with no identifying marks for my privacy, I was fuckin'floored. I scooped it up and took it into my kitchen. I drew closed the shades and made sure my blinds were shut. I opened up the can and dug in with my fingers, eating handful after handful of lukewarm SpaghettiOs.
It was glorious. The gritty blandness of chugging down bottle after bottle of Generic Human Dietary Fluid 2A-3E was a shadow of a nightmare in my mind. I crushed the noodles in my teeth and slurped up their tomato-y substrate. This is what we were meant to eat. This is real food.
But now I'm sitting in my car with my hands on the steering wheel—parked and waiting. There are picketers with angry signs moving up and down the block. Scary picketers. Violent, religious nutjobs. I want them to leave. The sign above the door of the building I'm parked outside of reads Planned Evacuation. My stomach churns and rumbles. It's not used to solid food.
I wait for the line of picketers to move as far away from the door as possible before I undo my seatbelt and make my way out of the car. I bet if I told you five years ago that prune juice was going to be considered an abortifacient, you would have laughed your fucking head off.