"Yes, I'd like to set up a savings account for my daughter here." George, formerly Dr. Sinister, said to the teller.
"Okay, sir, not a problem at all. I'll just need you to fill out these forms here, and-" the teller paused.
"What is it?" George asked
"Sir, do not make any sudden movements, turn around slowly," the teller said
George and his daughter Sally obeyed and were shocked to see two men and a woman at the entrance of the bank pointing guns at them.
"Calm down, people," the man on the left said, "You're all gonna be fine if you do what we say. Line up on the side of the room and take out your wallets. Duploid, hit the vault."
"On it." the other man replied as he walked towards the quivering teller. George stuck his foot out as Duploid walked by, tripping him. He and the hostages had a simultaneous gasp and laugh.
"What the hell? You got a death wish or something, old man?" Duploid said.
"No, but you may want to wish for a new villain name. You sound like some french brand of soap or Chinese food."
"What's it to you what his name is? You're getting robbed, I wouldn't be one to criticize," the woman said as she walked over, toting her MP5.
"I've had past experience in your line of work, and I was never so sloppy or outgoing. You'll all be rotting in a jail cell in two months if you aren't already dead." George coldly replied
The woman villain known as Miss Taek grew frustrated and pointed her gun directly at George.
"You can quit talking and hand over your wallet or I can spray your guts all over your daughter. Make up your mind." Miss Taek said.
"I am fifty-three years old, my daughter's inheritance is secured, my wife is a beautiful woman and an excellent caretaker. I live in a fantastic house that I bought with money I earned after turning away from crime. I couldn't give a shit if you hurt me right now."
"Swear jar, daddy," Sally peeped.
"Well, if you don't care about dying, what about your daughter?" Miss Taek said as she pointed the gun at Sally.
George remained calm. "Cover your eyes, sweetheart. You know the difference between me 30 years ago and you right now, Miss Taek? I actually had powers. Can you guess? No? I could control people's MINDS" and with the last word, he made Miss Taek suddenly jerk her arm over and blow Duploid's brains out onto the teller and the counter.
The other robber attempted to drop his gun and run out the entrance after seeing what happened, but George made him have a seizure and run into the wall, breaking his neck.
"You've made a grave mistake, Miss Taek. Tell me, how long can you hold your breath? Because you know, normally, after a certain amount of time, you breathe automatically on reflex. Where does that reflex to breathe come from? Your brain of course. You know what'd be fun? Let's see how long you can last when you forget how to breathe."