I first heard of the place at work. Johnny brought it up and described it as "magic", and how "it'll rob me broke". Then this other girl, Marissa, said that she finally got rid of a recurring nightmare by selling it. And Clary Snowe is always adventurous, so I had to check it out.
The said store had a strong whiff of...how do I say it...dream. It smelt like ginger, and cinnamon, and strawberries with undertones of sadness (if that's a scent). It was very confusing, being hit by the aroma.
"Yes, yes. You like it, no? It's very nice, yes? These are dreams. There are...um...bien dreams, and no- no dreams. You like try?" A scuffling short woman said, with a hint of a Spanish accent.
The woman seemed familiar. I've seen her before, I know it.
"Mhm...you have bad dreams, si? Can I buy?" The high voice said. "Many people come to me, and I know. You," she tapped my head, "are troubled. I'll buy for $30, ok? What is it? A ghost? Killer of persons? Fear of heights? What's your dream about?"
"It's always different."
The woman was mixing something. It was purple- a deep, purple, but it was also blue. It shifted colors in the light.
"No, no, hija. It's always different, ¡si! But, there's always something distinct."
Then she looked at me. I saw her piercing eyes. A dark brown set of eyes. I was gone; I was far-off in my head. I recalled nightmares of being trapped in claustrophobic triggering places, of facing big crowds and being forced to speak; I remembered those brown eyes always watching me. I couldn't always see them, but I always know. This, this set of eyes, started all my problems. It all started when I saw those eyes.
I was snapped back to normal when I felt a woman watching me again, waiting patiently. "Yes? You remember?" The woman said.
"As a matter of fact, I do. It was you."
The woman looked startled. Then she laughed.
She started to grow, grow to a regular height. Her hair spurt out, and her dress elongated along with her. She looked at me sternly and said in a low voice, "You mustn't tell anyone, or my friends will find you."
I ran for my life.
That woman's friends are devious creatures only the most demented person could create. They lurked in shadows, teasing you constantly. They attacked in the most brutal way. They skin people alive, they inflict our worst nightmares, and they stare. Their eyes are deadly. They're deadly. And most effective when you sleep. They're what the authorities are trying to catch. They're the dream catchers