When the bullet cases had come to a rest and the glass had finished breaking and the screaming had finally stopped I found I could then take a deep breath. The smell of the room was beginning to settle into something that seemed normal to me.
The dead body by the counter had reeked of bleach when it was alive. Bleach that was only just covering up something worse. He had laughed when he hit the old manager in the face. Her pine smell remained strong so I knew she was still alive. I resolved to speak to her again so I could place myself within her scent and let the forest she carried within her odour wash over me.
Despite the pain in my left shoulder I found I was still able to lift my gun as I stepped out of the booth. The whimpering around me grew quiet for a moment. I could hear someone on the phone to what I presumed was the police. He smelled of board pens and stationery. I knew he wasn't to be feared.
I moved around the shattered display case and saw his feet. He had propped himself up against a wall. The delivery man outfit he was dressed in showed the bullet holes and growing blood streaks. He was young, with sweaty blonde hair matted with blood. On a normal day he would have been ignored as a nameless worker passing by on the street. But that smell of his made me reel.
He smelt like something which lies behind the door at the bottom of your darkest nightmare. A smell of loneliness and terror. I lifted the gun briefly but then lowered it again when I saw the flow of blood from his wounds and spluttering, saliva flecked mouth was increasing. His stench stayed the same, relentless and indifferent. It would go when he died but for now it held itself around him.
He was mouthing something. I leaned in as close as I could but could only hear what sounded like the ravings of a man who was dying badly.
"Across the bridge, in the canyon, to the mountain and the field, to the house with the chair, to the house with the...man".
"Get your hands in the air!". I should have been able to smell them coming but so close to the dying man I had not heard them arrive. Their smells came in with them now, smells of stale bread, gaslights and cooked fish. One or two smelled bad and in their uniforms I knew I could not deal with them now.
I held my hands as high as I could before two officers cuffed me. One smelt like balloons and paper plates whereas the other smelled of engine grease. I closed my eyes in tiredness as the other diners slowly stumbled out onto the pavement.
The door chime sounded again as a new person came in. She stood in the middle of the cafe and I could feel the other police officers begin to defer. But as much as she carried her authority well she lacked something else entirely and the lack of it was almost enough to make me forget the nightmare smell which sat before me.
She didn't have any smell. Not just smelling clean or fresh or antiseptic there was just nothing. It was neither feral nor luminal. It was nothing at all. She turned to look at me and in that moment I could sense I might lose everything.
"Clear the room, I need to speak to this man alone."