"How many times are we going to have to tell Tommy not to put the cat in the oven?" James felt like this wasn't a question most father's had to ask, even rhetorically.
"He just loves the combination I guess. Maybe he thinks the cat lives there somehow," Mary replied. She was brushing Sherlock, the cat, on the counter while Tommy was off in the living room enjoying his favorite show.
"Maybe putting something else in there would help break that connection...what about putting his train or Mr.Lambo in the oven?"
"You can't put a stuffed koala in the oven, even if it is off. Can you imagine how gross it would get?" Mary asked. "We can try the train, it should be up in his room."
"Okay, I'll grab it, then we can pause the television and get Tommy to open the oven- and voila- he's cured," James said. He walked up the beige carpeted stairs, running his hand on the fake oak rail and watching the second floor get closer and closer as the beige walls came to an end. Tommy's room was on the right, complete with a wall decal of trains, and a treasure chest of toys stuffed to the brim. The train was right in the center of his bed, James grabbed it.
Stumbling down the stairs two at a time, James started to make train noises as he drove the toy towards Tommy. The boy turned to his father, grasping at the train. "Follow me if you want the train, Tommy," James said, making his way into the kitchen. He tossed the toy train to Mary who promptly put it on the first rack in the oven. Tommy arrived in the kitchen seconds later.
"Where is it, daddy?" He asked.
"In his real home, right over there," James said pointing at the oven. Mary stood to the side of the oven in her beautiful blue dress and beige shoes. Tommy walked over and looked around the cabinets. No train there. He checked the trash. The oven dinged, Mary and James looked at one another but decided on shrugging.
Tommy finally checked the oven and pulled out two trains. His smile was bigger than it had been minutes before. The boy was in train heaven, choo-chooing back to his television show. "Okay, what was that?" James asked.
"I don't know...I only put the one in. We haven't done this before have we? Certainly not more recently than when we last used the oven."
"No, this was a new idea. But the oven is new too, straight from the new appliance division of LG." As James finished speaking, a second cat, identical to the first, walked past them. The other cat was still sitting on the counter, swatting its tail back and forth.
[end]