I had a mission, and a rather simple one too. See, I work for West Point as an instructor, normally teaching young soldiers about Sun Tzu and George Patton as they work to become officers and field commanders. Truth be told, I've never seen combat or the front lines. I'm a support officer, and I'm okay with that. The battle field is for some folks, and those folks certainly are not me!
But, how could a history teacher pass up an opportunity such as this? To be able to go back in time and see a historical battle in person? Just think of the implications! It is truly a once in a lifetime chance.
So I signed up. It took almost two years to get all the paperwork filled out. Clearances, field training, survival training, range work. They knew I was a teacher, so they decided to give me all the training that an actual soldier would need in order to avoid getting his ass killed in an active war zone.
Then, they let me pick my time period. It had a margin of error of course, and if I ended up in the wrong year or wrong month, I was supposed to make a record of it and get back ASAP. I wasn't given American weapons, which was strange, but made sense. You didn't need to take care of an AK-47, and an American weapon would be harder to clean and maintain in 1863.
I was also given a nano-forge, a bit smaller and underpowered compared to what the average soldier got in his rucksack, but the model I had didn't need batteries or an external charge. Plus, I could still make bullets with it, along with anything else I would need. So long as it wasn't bigger than hand sized of course.
I've been to Gettysburg 3 times now. Once to record the battle, once to intervene, and once to try and change history. Time has a kind of elasticity to it though, so it doesn't much from the norm. I tried helping out with Pickett's Charge, as a modern weapon can do a hell of a lot of damage. But even if the south won, it never stuck when I got back to the future.
Well, at least I got to see Lincoln's address in person. Even recorded a video of it! Though I wasn't supposed to, what did you expect when you sent a history nerd back in time?