"Do you sometimes think of Dshangris Liksandr?" the question hit Samu out of the blue and ripped him out of various thoughts.
"Not really, Mika. He was that person whose watch failed, right?"
Mika looked old enough to be in retirement, but still came steadfastly to each of his shifts in the Immigration Office. Samu assumed that he lost quite a Euro in the last financial crisis and worked because he prefered working over starving. His voice however sounded used to authority, to ordering people around. "Yep, Immigrant out of...one of the stans...you know the area of what used to be Russia, I remember that you were on shift when he got his watch. You had to translate for him because his German was that bad. I still remember this."
Samu was middle-age, wore thick glasses and had recently taken up shaving his head to disguise his receding hairline. His voice sounded dispassionate - unless someone got ihm to talk about his family. "I translate for a lot of immigrants, I can't remember them all."
"But he was special. His watch showed Error."
"Error? Yeah, these things fail occasionally."
Mika made it clear that this sugestion was one of the dumbest things he heard in a while. "I replaced the watch thrice and it still did. Each of the watches did."
"So? You wonder what he is doing?" Samu asked, wondering again why he had to share an office with Mika.
"Yeah. I mean, it is quite mysterious, isn't it?"
"Maybe...I don't know...You know that my memory is like my car."
"You have a car?"
"No, that's the joke."
"Oh...well, to me, it is. I imagine him still being around,...and sometimes...sometimes, I imagine that the watch showed Error because fate did not want him to die." Mika's voice was quiet, it was clear that he was disclosing something he did not tell others. "I don't have a lot of time left, but, you know, this thing never left my mind."
"I see." Samu thought about this for a while. "You know, I will do a bit of research on this topic. Tell me what you remember, please."
The next day, Mika Grubenbauer was dead found in his office, clutching a folder of documents. Most of the documents detailed the life of an immigrant up to his death in a train crash. The last page showed a report about a product recall about a certain charge of watches - produced shortly before said immigrant came into the first world.