UNCLE SAM WANTS YOU
...to stop going back in time
and poking Julius Caesar with plastic knives
HE DOES NOT LIKE IT
Barry squinted at the poster pasted on the brick wall. Uncle Sam looked a bit feral in it. His eyes were wild and red rimmed, as though the very thought of someone poking Caesar with plastic knives was keeping him up at night.
"Kids ruin everything", he muttered.
Some genius had invented a portable time machine twenty years or so ago. He'd uploaded his schematics to the internet and now everyone had one or could have one if they wanted to.
No one changed the future or anything. Apparently that was impossible. Anything you fucked up in the past eventually fixed itself. Barry had listened to a guy on TV explain it once. He'd said time was like silly putty. You could mold it however you wanted but the slimy stuff desired to be whole. Time wanted to be a series of fixed points.
Nothing you brought back with you stayed. Barry knew a guy who'd stolen a chest full of gold from some old pirate ship. It disappeared as soon as the guy had come back. Now that same guy had lost an eye to the pirate king and that stayed gone. Though Barry didn't think he looked that bad in an eye patch.
The problems came, then, from the machines themselves. Some people came back wrong. They carved symbols into their skin, blathering about the coming storm. Some people just died. They crossed the wrong wires when building their machine or went to the wrong time or date or any number of similar things. The streets were littered with missing posters.
The government wasn't too concerned about time travel mishaps. What they were concerned about was taxes. President Kilborn had managed to pass a law which patented the time machine design several years ago. Anyone who used or downloaded the design must pay taxes. Such a thing was, of course, hard to keep track of. So the Agency was born, to collect on these debts.
Barry joined up half a dozen years ago. It wasn't what he'd thought it would be. Mostly a lot of skulking. Peeping. Listening. Occasionally moments of brief terror. Tonight he was supposed to go bust a kid for unauthorized time travel. The kid had gone back to regency England and started flipping women's skirts up. Barry had listened as he told his friend over the phone that the bustles made them like turtles. A room full of turtles, he'd laughed.
Barry stuffed his hands in his pockets, waiting. His partner stumbled out of the bar, clutching a woman in either arm.
"Phil? You forget we had a bust tonight?"
Phil looked out blearily from under a red fedora. He'd gotten into old black and white films recently and wore a suit everywhere. He wasn't alone. Most found a time period they liked and dressed that way. Powdered wigs and neon and gingham dresses. It was enough to give any man a raging headache.
"But my dolls needed refreshment! Would you deny my dolls, Barry? Would you?" Phil slurred. Barry realized the women were all that was holding him up.
"Just take him home. I'll go it alone. It's just one kid", Barry said. He walked away in disgust as Phil kept asking the girls what happened.
The kid lived a few blocks away in his parent's basement. Barry had spied through the window a couple of times. He hadn't seen much. Kid ate too much junk food and played VR constantly. Tonight, the windows were dark.
Barry peeked in, spotting a lone green light. The time travel device had a light like that. It flared up when in use and broke after one trip. They weren't very efficient to use or make.
Barry clutched his tazer and opened the window, wiggling in with room to spare. He usually hated his long bony frame but it did come in handy sometimes.
"Put your hands up!" he yelled into the darkness.
"Oh shit!"
"Lights! 100 percent!" Barry yelled.
The lights came on, near blinding him. In the middle of the room stood the kid. He was dressed. Well, Barry didn't know what he was dressed as. He wore a huge bell shaped skirt. And a corset? That bone looking thing around his waist really looked like a corset.
"I can explain, officer", the kid said.
Barry closed his eyes. "How about I come back tomorrow and arrest you? You can't go to jail wearing bloomers, for Christ's sake. Well, you could but you wouldn't like it."
The kid bit his lip. "I just wanted to see what it felt like. The way they moved...."
Barry held up his hand. He left, going up the stairs past the kid's parents who never looked up from their holotv. He headed back towards the bar where he'd left Phil, wondering if there was any whisky left in the place.