*Warning: this is 2000 words long. If reading that much on reddit annoys you, you can read it from my blog [here] (http: //george-y-keller.blogspot.com/2016/01/the-end-of-all-roads-part-i-knight.html) with slightly better formatting. I did not link or mention the prompt on the blog, so hopefully everything is fine regarding rule 8. With that out of the way, here you go: *
#**The End of All Roads**
Different people come into Vilam. All of them seek something: glory, riches, knowledge, refuge, redemption, death. Yet all they find here is suffering. This town stands on the edge of The Old Forest, a place which has threatened the realm for as long as we know it. Ungodly abominations lurk between those trees and at times come out to plague the land.
The kings of old tried to defeat the forest with sword and fire, but the harder they struck, the more devastating the response was. The accursed place seemed to have a mind of its own. It cared little for the things that lived within, but try to attack the forest head on and it would destroy you. Vilam was built as the first line of defence, our shield against the horrors which sometimes decided to leave their wretched home.
I bear the questionable honour of being this town's priest. The denizens of Vilam tell me much about themselves and about what brought them here. To preserve this town's history I've decided to write everything down. No matter if you consider these people heroes, fools, or just tortured souls, the inhabitants of Vilam are never quite what they seem. These are their tales.
##Part I: The Knight
Tristan, or Sir Tristan as he first introduced himself, was a rather handsome man. Skin white as snow, blue eyes, blonde hair, clad in armour with a sword at his side, he was everything a young girl could dream of, at least on the outside. As everyone who seeks out Vilam, the warrior was given two choices: stay forever to guard the kingdom from the evils of The Old Forest or spend one year venturing inside, searching for a way to destroy it. Either choice granted him absolution from any transgressions he had committed and a hefty reward for himself or a beneficiary of his choosing. This one decided to stay for a year.
His story was not easy to obtain. Tristan boasted about his great accomplishments, told tales of his unbelievable conquests, yet in those deep blue eyes I saw emptiness and pain. From the moment I first met this knight, I knew he was not here for glory, nor even for absolution, this self-proclaimed hero sought pain and punishment and after a few months I would start to understand why. One night, after returning from an expedition, the only one out of four who set out a week ago, he finally told me a part of the truth.
I still remember him, sitting there on the cold boards of the abbey's floor with his unfocused gaze directed somewhere far away. Blood of his comrades on his armour and sword still in hand, Tristan spoke quietly and calmly. With the fake glory and pride stripped, all there was left was a man filled with pain, fear, and guilt.
Tristan grew up, the same as many boys: listening to stories about knights and hoping to one day become a hero himself. Yet unlike most normal folk he never abandoned that dream. For one reason or another, the boy truly believed that his destiny was to be a champion against evil.
Despite his parents'wishes, as soon as he turned twelve Tristan joined the order. He went through the two years of initial training with patience and dedication, believing it to be the necessary step on his journey. After that the boy was given the title of a squire. However, it did not take long for the aspiring hero to get bored and frustrated with being a real knight's errand boy. In an arrogant act of defiance, Tristan challenged his mentor, Sir Ronald, to a duel.
Fortunately for the boy, the old knight was a kind soul and instead of banishing his squire, or worse yet taking the duel seriously, he simply laughed it off and knocked his trainee to the ground in just a couple of hits. Unable to fathom the idea that he, a fated heroic knight, could be defeated, Tristan stole Ronald's sword, armour, and horse at night and rode off telling stories of his imaginary victory and boasting the newly found fake title.
It was at this point in the tale that the warrior slipped away from his unstable state back into a more usual condition. He refused to acknowledge anything he just said and seemed insulted by my so called accusations. It was clear now, that most of the time Tristan truly believed his own lies. You might wonder why I didn't out the impostor on that very day, but the reason was simple: no matter how fake, he was still a sign of hope. People of Vilam, be it the ones who watched The Old Forest from afar or those who ventured inside it, needed to believe that among them was a knight in shining armour, a champion of justice, a true hero. Hoping to preserve what little light he brought to this place, I supported Tristan's lies.
Four months had passed, before I was finally able to hear another piece of the knight's tale. Just as last time, it was after an expedition, but on that night he did not return alone. With pale faces, five adventurers marched into Vilam from the side of the forest. One of them was carrying the injured and nearly catatonic Tristan. Upon further inspection, most of the knight's wounds seemed well-treated and thankfully non-dangerous, which meant his stupor was likely not caused by trauma. Worried and to be honest even slightly intrigued, I spoke with his comrades.
They told me of horrible monsters, devious traps, and things which were so foreign to this world that no words could describe them fully, yet none of those were the reason behind Tristan's condition. Apparently, after a long and excruciating battle with the forest's inhabitants they stumbled across some sort of a visage, a mirage conjured by an unknown force, possibly a part of the devilish place itself. Although the image of a small girl in a red scarf did not cause anything more than slight surprise for his companions, Tristan was brought to his knees screaming. His almost inhuman cries filled the air for an entire hour, until the warrior eventually stopped and became completely unresponsive.
I took watch at Tristan's bed for hours. It's shameful to admit this, but my main reason for such concern was curiosity. I expected this state to once again give me insight into the troubled man's past. It took some time, but as soon as the knight opened his eyes and saw me, he continued as if no time had passed since our last honest conversation. Once again, I listened to the quiet and trembling confession of this tormented soul.
Of course, after stealing Sir Ronald's possessions, Tristan did not return to the order, instead spreading his lies among the common folk of small cities and villages. However, the young man did not abandon his training. Even though he no longer had a mentor, Tristan did all he could to improve. At least on some level the fake knight still recognized his weakness, but it was not enough to dispel the illusion he so desperately clung onto.
Presenting himself as a travelling knight on a holy mission, Tristan went from town to town taking jobs, earning gold and fame. Although quite a few of these ended in failures, moving fast and changing names even faster allowed the young man to mostly keep out of trouble.
In time he became competent, although not great, with a sword and earned himself a mixed reputation. Depending on the name and city, he was a true hero, a charlatan, or in most cases just an eccentric traveller. All of this fuelled Tristan's mania immensely. Recognition, of any kind, was a key component in the plot he laid out for himself. Somewhere inside that armour was still a small boy, who wanted beyond all a story of heroic knights fighting against evil.
Tristan fell asleep before he could finish his tale, so I was one again left waiting for a new opportunity. To someone less observant the picture might have looked clear at that point: as a part of his quest, the self-proclaimed knight decided to go to Vilam and battle the vile forces of The Old Forest. However, that did not explain Tristan's downright demented reaction to the image of a little girl, and even that aside there was still something off about how firmly he tried to block out these memories.
I got the answers to all of my questions at the end of Tristan's year. Through luck, acquired skill, or maybe even some less noble means, he had survived the trials of the forest and was ready to departure. When Tristan walked into my abbey, he was not unstable like during our previous conversations. His voice was more humble and the knight's posture seemed less grandiose, but this was not the same despaired lunatic who mumbled of times long past, barely even recognizing that someone was listening. That time, being of sound mind, he told me the final piece of his story.