"It's time for our chat." Death dictated towards the horrified man kneeling before him, as his pager periodically buzzed.
Although this was not uncommon, with an average of one and a half millions deaths per day, the damn thing seemed to always be buzzing.
At an average seventeen deaths per second it would be impossible for any mortal to accomplish Death's job. However as a middleman for the gods death simply bent time, not unlike how mortals preceive time in their dreams, so in one second Death could have a five minute chat with every client.
With his gaze still fixated on this man kneeling before him
Death asked,
"What might your name be?"
Not that he didn't already know it. As it and every other detail about this man was displayed before Death on the clipboard he held in his hand opposite the hand with his scythe.
As his pager buzzed again Death ignored it and stated.
"It says here you were president, in your mortal life that is."
To which the petrified man still had no response.
Now this was not the average conversation Death had with his clients. It was usually a more intimidating and condescending approach. In a frightful manner to have the client confess all there wrong doings and determine their end destination from there.
But with his omniscient point of view on the mortal world Death had taken a particular interest in this human. Specifically because of a certain weapon placed under This man's control. A weapon Death often fantasized about they day they would be used, as he took much joy in preforming his job.
As his pager continued to buzz Death apologized saying,
"Sorry, this isn't usually for this thing to be going off so much, as it only buzzes when people die. ",
"I'll let you get your thoughts in order as I step out to be filled in on a situation. ",
"Please don't leave as I anxiously await our conversation, not that you can leave even if you tried."
Finally the man's attention was caught as he heard Death say, "...it only buzzes when people die." As the man looks up and watches death leave the room his face goes pail with an overwhelming expression of regret filling his face.
The next five minutes, and the last of the man's, life were spend muttering to himself,
"It was my only option." Over and over again.
As he awaited Death's return. Floating back into the dark room beaming with a sense of delight. Death took one final look at the man right before vanquishing him to his final destination with his scythe and said,
"That explains your suicide, I'm so glad you used them. No need for our chat now...I know exactly where to send you."