I didn't want to tell her. But the guilt and the memories had been eating at me for a while now, and while she may not understand completely, she also wouldn't share the same loss that I bore. I needed her absolution, even if it was given with only a partial understanding of what I had cost her.
Originally, I met my wife when she was 15 and I was 16. Kids in high school, we met at a bowling alley with a group of friends and aside from the basic, "She's pretty hot," I didn't think that much of her at the time. Different schools, different lives, and I had no shortage of girls giving me attention.
She married my (at the time) best friend, but not before sleeping with me. Their marriage didn't last, probably because both she and my "best friend" were sleeping with me on the side (amongst others, especially on his side). Don't judge her too harshly. It was an unhappy marriage with a narcissistic jerk, and she was straight out of a borderline-abusive family life to marriage with an abusive, cheating husband. She was only 18 when they got married. Eventually the marriage crumbled, no surprise there, but she finally admitted to me that her oldest son was actually most likely mine. I tried to help out with money but she always refused, insisting that her husband had established a father-son relationship with my son and it would be wrong to split them up. Initially, I agreed with her, but that was before I knew the extent of his abuse and before I realized how vastly different his parenting philosophy was from mine. Not that I had any experience with parenting, at the time. I toyed with the idea of going back right away. I could change things so that she left him as soon as she had my child, and work out some kind of custody arrangement with her. But I wasn't all that interested in being a Dad – my life as a single bachelor was pretty good. And while I cared about her, I didn't love her. Not enough to go back and change my entire existence for the last few years. And on top of that, I didn't want to take away her other child, the son who was her ex's.
Then I got her pregnant. Not quite divorced yet, but the papers were filed. Her ex lost his mind when he found out. Accused her of "dating a drug addict" (I smoked pot recreationally), insisted that she get an abortion, then tried to say he wanted to "come home" and put his name on the birth certificate. Again, I almost went back. Just prevent myself from sleeping with her that one time, and it would all be okay, right? But by then, I had changed. I could just envision a future with this woman, who I was coming to care for more and more. I feared that if I changed things, I would always regret "losing" my child. I feared that she would end up back with the douchebag and my son would never even know me. So I left time alone, yet again, and not long after found myself with a female housemate (with benefits), two toddlers, and a baby on the way.
Her ex never stopped making life difficult, but from the moment I saw my daughter, I knew I'd made the right choice. I could never give her up. I got to help raise my son, and his son, who were both beautiful, bright, fun boys (at least then). I fell in love with this woman, who'd given me a family and a purpose, and she fell in love with me. It was never perhaps the ideal or traditional path, but it was ours.
Then came the breaking point.
Our middle child, her ex's son, began to have behavioral problems. We dealt as best we could, but it was hard. He refused affection, threw temper tantrums, hit and scratched and was generally grouchy and mean. We did our best, but even though we often had a great time with him, at the end of the day, he was usually grumpy. We talked about giving up custody of him to his dad, thinking he was happier there. Our older son (still legally her ex's, even though he was mine biologically) told us that wasn't the case, though, so we never quite took that step. After a few years, this child came to his mother and told her he was actually a girl. She was transgender. We loved the hell out of that kid, so we figured out how to deal with it. She transitioned in our house and again became the happy, loving child that she'd been as a toddler. It was like night and day, and again our home was peaceful and loving. My wife's ex didn't take it as well as we did. He accused us of "turning his son into a girl" or "trying to turn his son gay." I was so proud of my wife – she read every book on transgender kids that she could find. She asserted her child's right to use female pronouns and a female name, and slowly but steadily replaced the pictures of her son with pictures of her daughter. Personalized items in the house were replaced with the new name. Our new daughter blossomed, finally able to be seen as herself.
The judge didn't agree. She viewed us as abusive, and blasphemous. She took both children away from us and threatened to take our youngest daughter as well. My wife lost legal custody and was given only very limited visitation with her two oldest kids. I wasn't even allowed to be there. I wasn't allowed to see my son. My daughter lost her siblings. Despite the therapists and doctors who testified on our behalf, a stupid cunt judge broke our family apart. And it broke my wife. She couldn't live without her children. She tried so hard to be strong. It broke my heart. She was good to our daughter, but she cried every day. She hung so many pictures of the three kids together, and the two who were gone, that there was no blank space left on our walls. My wife was devastated. Our daughter didn't understand why her siblings were never there anymore. I was devastated, and lost.
So I did it.
I went back, back to that bowling alley, and changed it all. And now, it was time to tell her.
"Honey, I need to tell you something...” I started, swallowing hard. "What is it, lover?" She always called me that. In both realities.
"I have the ability to travel backwards in time."
She stared at me for several long seconds, corner of her mouth twitching as she tried to decide whether to laugh or not. "You're joking, right?"
"No, I'm serious, dead serious."
"Are you feeling okay?" She asked me. "Because, honey, I don't want to have to take you in for a psychiatric evaluation."
"Look," I said, and then I tried something I'd never tried before. I grabbed her hand and willed us back, just an hour. We merged with ourselves from an hour ago. She came running out of the laundry room screaming, "Oh my god you were serious!"
"There's something else I have to tell you," I said sadly, after calming her down. I was afraid she'd wake the kids up early if she didn't quiet down. She'd babbled for a while about stopping Hitler and all sorts of crazy things, but I could only travel within my own lifetime. My body merged with its former self and life continued from there. So I'm old, now, you see, older than I look. And I learned as a child not to mess around too much. Can you imagine having to live through toddler years as a pre-teen?
"I've done this before," I told her. "Remember when we met at that bowling alley? I told you it was love at first sight. I knew all your favorite things. Knew how to hold you just right...knew how to make you squirm and moan without even trying?" She giggled and blushed. "We got engaged as teenagers and somehow we made it work. It's because we've done this before. We tried before, but we didn't get into a relationship until after you'd married and divorced Trevor, of all people."
Her nose wrinkled in disgust. "No, I wouldn't! Trevor??"
I sighed. "There's more. We had.. we had three kids. I got you pregnant while you were married to him, but he got to keep my son. Then you had a son with him too, and he left you for Renee right after that. You and I started hooking up again and you got pregnant with our daughter. We were okay for a while, sharing custody of the older two and all that, but eventually Trevor took them from us, because of some stupid ass judge. It broke us, honey, and we couldn't...I couldn't...I couldn't let us suffer any longer."
There was a faraway look in her eyes. "It's like deja vu," she said slowly. "I can just...almost picture what you're describing. It's so familiar...but not."
"It was our life," I told her. "And fuck, sometimes I miss it. I mean, I love YOU, and our kids, and I'm so glad we have a happy life together. But sometimes, sometimes I miss those other kids. I really tried, you know, with the timing. I was hoping...praying...somehow, we'd get the same kids. But I guess it doesn't work that way. It would have to be down to the second, you know?"
She sniffled, once, then again. There were tears in her eyes. "I feel so sad! Like I've lost something...but I don't know what that something is!" She wrapped her arms around my neck and kissed me. "Oh, lover, I'm so sorry. I'm so sorry you have had to go through this for us! I can't imagine...I don't know how you managed it." Then realization struck her and she swatted me on the shoulder. "That's why you wanted to have a threesome with Trevor! Oh, honey...”
"I love you," I told her. And I did. This woman had made me a better man, a good husband, and a good father.
"I love you too," she whispered. She kissed me hard, almost desperately, before we were interrupted by the sound of running feet on the hardwood floors. She smiled against my mouth. "The kids are up."
"All four of them," I agreed with a grin, listening closely to the steps and the excited whispers. A weight had been lifted. She knew. She still loved me. Life would move forward, as it was meant to.