Audrey and I looked at each other through the reflection of the lake, and she smiled at me. The sun was setting, and the orange light reflecting off of the water made Audrey look like an Egyptian goddess. She was beautiful, but I would be lying if I said that the lack of pigment on her skin didn't bother me. She looked up from the water and swung her bare feet off of the rock we were sitting on. I looked up too, meeting her hollow eyes.
"Tell me how it feels again, Michael" Audrey said.
"I've told you hundreds of times." I replied as I reached my toes into the water. A chill went up my spine.
"I know, I just like hearing you talk about it."
I couldn't help but smile. I told her everything I could about how the icy water felt. Or how the hard cold rock under my bottom was uncomfortable. And how my hair falling onto the back of my neck and bare shoulders tickled, and sometimes made me shiver.
Everytime I described these senses to her, I tried to delve into further detail, sometimes I would even make things up just to see her smile and ponder what I meant by "itchy" or "tingle".
Audrey wouldn't know for sure, of course, because Audrey is a ghost. Or at least, we think that she is. There's no way to know for sure, I guess. I guess is a phrase a use a lot given my circumstances.
Audrey and I live next to our lake, in our forest. I can still feel, but we think that we have been here for the same amount of time. I don't remember a life without Audrey, and she doesn't remember much of one without me either.
When I opened my eyes all of those years ago to silver hair flowing over my face, and the yellow mid day sun shining through the strands causing me to squint, I was afraid. The sun made her thin hair seem like strands of metal, and the first time I heard her voice I thought it was the metal strands rubbing together. Her voice is frightening, and if she could feel she would have felt my head bump into hers as I hurriedly sat up.
"Who are you?" Was all she said.
I opened my mouth to answer, and was confused when nothing came out. Who am I?
"I...don't really know." I managed to say, my words stumbling over each other as if I had just learned to speak. I was finding my bearings, and for some reason I didn't start to panic. I just sat there, staring at this strange girl. She couldn't have been older than 14. How old was I?
"Well how do you like the name Michael? It sticks out to me." She said as she sat back and crossed her legs, gently laying her hands onto her knees. It was at this moment I realized she was naked, and my stomach sunk.
Looking at her almost stung my eyes, her pale skin reflected the sun better than the lake that sat twenty feet from where I had just woken up. I got angry for a second. Angry because I was confused. And just as I was about to lash out at her, a thought came into my mind. I thought that wasn't created in the last five minutes, no, something deeper than that.
"Audrey." I whispered.
"I don't mind that! Well Michael, call me Audrey!" Her broken record player voice screeched.
It took me a few minutes to look at her again. And a few days to be able to speak to her. It took months to respond to Michael, and it may have taken years to get used to her voice.
Now, I do not know how much time has passed, but my hair touches my neck and my bare shoulders, and all that matters is the setting sun and Audrey's pale smile. A snap of a tree branch rang out from behind us, and both of our heads turned in time to see the branch hit the ground. A tall man stood there, accompanied by a few boys.
"We finally found you." The tall man said. I turned to look at Audrey, but she was gone.