"Forgive me Father, for I have sinned."
The priest sighed. "You do know I can recognize your voice." The screen divider slid aside, and the priest shot an annoyed look at the confessor.
She flashed a toothy grin, and reached out to close the divider. "Come now, do your job."
"Ten Hail Marys, ten Our Fathers."
"Hey, you didn't eve-"
"We're done here." The priest stood from his seat and hurriedly exited the confession room, slamming the door behind him.
"H-Hey, hold up there." The girl stumbled out of her side of the confession, almost faceplanting as she made her way to the priest's side. She reached out and gave a pointed tug upon the priest's shirt, untucking the entire back. "Can we just TALK for a minute?"
He whirled about, quickly wrenching his shirt from her grasp, teeth clenched. "I am WORKING right now, Tessa. Have you NO shame?"
Tessa recoiled somewhat, a look of uncertainty flashing across her face. "Johnny, I just..." She looked down at her feet, shuffling about in place, her cheeks flushed in embarassment. "I'm sorry, I just thought that I should...you know..."
"It's been almost five years Tess." Johnny sighed to himself, and began tucking his shirt back in. "Why now?"
"Well, Brian and I just got back from his stint overseas, and I-"
"How is Brian? Good?" Johnny snapped off curtly, idly fiddling with his collar.
Tessa paused at the sharp tone used, but eventually nodded, a small smile playing across her face. "Yeah, we're doing great. We think he's gonna get a station at home, so no more travelling, at least for a while." Her smile quickly faded. "Johnny, we didn't hear about it until he had already deployed."
"It's whatever. Long in the past." Johnny turned and continued walking through the near empty church. "I've heard it all, and I've made my peace with it."
Tessa fell in slightly behind him, nervously biting at her lip as the two proceeded along in silence. Finally, "I...got your letter."
He paused in front of a door, hand resting on the handle. He stood there a while, as though quietly digesting the revelation, before turning the knob and stepping through. "I need to change," he mumbled, groping around for a light switch.
Tessa stepped through as well, closing the door behind her. "Can we just talk for a minute?" Her eyes widened a bit when she noticed Johnny had taken off his shirt, and she looked away, suddenly intent upon studying a nearby cross. "Are priests allowed t-"
"There's nothing here you haven't seen before." Johnny stiffened up as he felt Tessa run her hand along his neck.
"I haven't seen this before," she whispered, her fingers tracing the pale scar that encircled his neck. She lingered a bit, before slowly wrapping her arms around his waist, pulling close. "Oh Johnny...why..."
He could feel her tears trailing down his back, and rested his hands upon hers. Gently, he freed himself from the hug, and turned to face her. "It was five years ago, Tess. I'm fine now."
"I...I read it, Johnny. Your...goodbye." She looked up at him, eyes red and shimmering in the dim lighting. "Oh Johnny, why didn't you just say something..."
"I was just being dumb. It doesn't matt-" Her slap rang out sharply in the cavernous room, and he reached out to touch his reddening cheek, a look of shock playing across his face.
"Don't you pull that shit with me, John. I've known you and your brother for too long for you to start with that dismissive talk."
John sighed, and turned towards a nearby closet. "If you would just go now, I need to get rea-" He could hear her rush forward, and whirled about, catching her hand mid-swing. He lifted her, somewhat roughly, and shoved her against a nearby wall, all the while keeping his eyes locked with hers. "Stop. That."
She lashed out with a foot, trying to kick him in the shin, but felt him use his leg to pin hers against the wall. "Fuck you John, you TALK-" She swung with her other hand and landed another slap. "-to me!" She made to swing again with her free hand, but Johnny hurriedly grabbed it and pinned it above her head with her other hand.
"Behave yourself," he growled, leaning in until their noses were almost touching. "Calm down, and don't try that again."
They stood there for a while, saying nothing. She could feel his raising pulse, the slight tremor in his grip, his breath against her face. Slowly, she leaned up, and gingerly pressed her lips against his for a moment. "Johnny...could you let go of me..." Her eyes widened as she felt his body press firmly against hers. "Johnny?"
He said nothing, leaning down for another kiss...
---- ----- ----
...They laid there for a while, quietly soaking in the silence. She rested her head against his chest, slowly tracing her finger along his scar, listening to his breathing, to his heartbeat. "I'm sorry Johnny."
He shook his head slowly, eyes fixated upon the ceiling tiles. "I was just being dumb."
"You could have told Brian. Told him how you...felt."
He laughed softly at that. "You know my brother. What he wants..." He rolled onto his side, gently shifting Tessa off his chest, and lightly kissed her forehead. "Besides, you two were always thick as thieves."
"...Still, Johnny...I just wish that you had just told me..."
He smiled, somewhat wistfully. "Would that have really changed anything?"
"..."
His smile slowly faded, as the silence grew...
---- ----- ----
AN: Sorry if there are any typos. Had to jot this down in notepad, since I don't have a word processor installed on the laptop.
Originally wanted to do a more dramatic reveal with the clerical collar, but kinda ran outta time.
Thanks for reading.