I'm flooring it across the hills of Los Angeles in my jeep, nervously glancing into my rear view mirror to see if any of the blacked out SUV's are still in pursuit. Fortunately I see only the small dust cloud my off road tires are stirring up behind me. It's been 5 days since "The Lag" occurred and the highways are still clogged with people trying to reconnect with their loved ones, leaving the hills as my only viable escape route. Praise be to Zeus for granting me the foresight to purchase an off-road vehicle years ago.
Once most folks began realize that we were experiencing the second greatest phenomena in the history of civilization (the first of course being the 2016 presidential candidates), they thought of the joys of reuniting with friends and family that perished over the three years. However, those hopes were dashed very swiftly. You see, just like the rest of us, the dead "woke up" in their exact same place and time they were at three years ago. But with a bit of a twist. All those that had died during the past three years were locked in their exact positions, eyes wide and filled with horror and their mouths agape, every single one emitting the same hellacious, gravelly screeching unwaveringly. "The Lost" as the news referred to them would continue doing this until their bodies died once more.
Within the first few minutes I looked out the window to see a 747 smash into the center of Los Angeles. The pilot was one of the lost. Catastrophic events like this occurred all across the world; plane, ship, and car loads of people racing to their deaths with screaming friends or loved ones plunging them into deaths cold embrace. On top of this havoc, the judicial system was practically ruined. All the criminals locked away over the past three years are now running loose. People debating over whether or not they can be tried for something that technically hasn't happened yet and various other topics.
For me, the lag could not have occurred at a worse time. You see, three years ago I was a contract killer for the local crime lords in the Western U.S. One of the best in fact. I was so good that I was able to have a fairly large house in the suburbs and my lovey wife was able to stay home, keep the house in order, and make sure my son kept his grades up. It was a happy time, my family was well supported, we were happy, and I was doing what I loved. I always thought of myself as a sort of artist of my craft, with my rifle serving as my brush. However as with any great artist, there are always critics. One particular crime lord took offense to me giving his brothers living room wall a Kurt Cobain inspired paint job and put a hit on me.
However since the buffoon made it open instead of approaching a professional, I had to deal with a bunch of gun toting savages that thought they were going to make their fortune. Of course these imbeciles managed to spray my home down with some cheap pieces of shit Tec-9's. I wasn't even home. But my wife and son were. Knowing there was no way I could single handedly take on the criminal scum of Los Angeles, I turned myself into the U. S Marshalls. I offered them loads of juicy details on criminal syndicates all over the west and in return was granted amnesty and placed in witness protection.
I had thought the hardest thing I would do in my life was watch my wife and son be buried. That was until the lag happened. I was having breakfast with the two when suddenly they started screeching vehemently at their waffles. At first I was confused, but as it went on the confusion was replaced with fear, and then despair, and finally a sorrowful acceptance as I went upstairs to collect my pistol and put them out of their torment. Burying them the second time was much worse than the first.
Now you may have figured out why I'm fleeing Los Angeles across the hills. Well all those mob bosses I helped take down were very eager for a chance to finally get their vengeance. Unfortunately for me, I see two blacked out SUV's at the bottom of this hill and another coming up behind me now. I pray that The gods at least grant me a warrior's death instead of some twisted bullshit in a butcher shop or whatever other insane shit is hip with psychopathic crime lords these days.