He stood there, looking as his own grave.
Fog hung low in the air, the visceral substance forming an eerie wall around the lonely cemetery.
The dirt caked on his boots seemed to weigh him down, anchoring the dejected man to his spot. Even if he wanted to run, he would be tethered here by obligation.
"Do it, Francis." A voice sounded somewhere behind the troubled man, but he didn't turn around to acknowledge it. Yet for some reason, it continued to speak. "You know why you're here. We all know why."
The man could hear footsteps behind him, yet he still didn't turn.
"You *killed* her, Francis. It's all your fault."
"No." The man uttered the word feebly at first, unsure of its validity. He said it again, this time more firmly. "NO."
Turning around, Francis confronted his accusers. The gaunt face of a woman stared hard at him; behind her stood myriad cloaked individuals, their faces hidden from view.
"Jessica is dead and it's all your fault, Francis."
"It wasn't my fault. You're wrong."
"It was. You simply can't admit it. You can never take responsibility."
"Shut UP! You have no idea what you're talking about-"
"I know *exactly* what I'm talking about!" The woman began to move in closer to Francis, her tone becoming more and more menacing. "The whole town knows what you've done! *She* knows what you've done!"
The woman pointed past Francis at the grave he had been pensively considering prior. The man turned, wide-eyed in horror.
A small child, a girl, was climbing out of the grave, eyes sunken, skin pale. Her matted hair obscured her features, but Francis knew exactly who she was. He wanted with all his being to scream, to run, to move from the spot where he currently stood. But he couldn't. He was anchored in place.
"NO." The only word that the man could say began to sound like a confirmation. "No, no, no, no NO!"
The child grabbed Francis by his shirt, ripping the man forward, shattering his unseen tether. She pulled him to the edge of the grave, just enough for him to lose his balance. The man toppled over the edge, crashing down to the earthen floor below.
"I'm sorry," Francis sobbed. He laid in the dirt, curled up in a fetal position. "I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm *so*, *so sorry*."
The man stayed there for a while. He had no grasp on the passing of time. When he finally raised his head, there was no girl, there was no crowd gathered at the edge of the grave, there was no woman with her sharp words.
Just him, his guilt, and his grave.