There are days when the sun shines. It cascades through the leaves overhead, dappling the ground with the semi-starry yellow glow of morning as the wind shushes your mind and keeps you quiet, listening to the lovely sound of silence and birds. And there are days of rain, wet and cool, and cascading susurrance to lull you into a fall nap.
And there are days of darkness. Not the nighttime kind of darkness that wraps a person up for bed after sunset; more of a forced dark. A cruel dark. Unnatural. Divorce was like that. Unnaturally dark. And darker still when the custody fight over your sixteen year old son got wicked and petty. The fact that you won that fight didn't restore much of the light, either. It just made the cruel dark a little more tolerable.
It was on just such an unnaturally dark day that James McAdams, or Jimmy Mac as the guys at the poker called him, took his final call. He was navigating his car along Cal State Route 1, humming along to Cat Stevens' Angelsea as it played on the radio. A voice of crystal echo. He glanced above at the malevolent looking clouds that slowly gathered. Fuckin rain. Figures. So much for Davey's pool party. He'd been actually looking forward to his teenaged son's sixteenth birthday bash, and had just filled the pool for the occasion. But now it looked like it was going to be living rooms, rented DVD's and pizza instead of sunshine and barbecue. Meh, probably just as well. That kid would eat pizza every day if he could.
He slid through traffic, listening as Angelsea came to an end, and Strange Magic started up. Next to him on the passenger seat, his cellphone blipped. He reached around the shotgun rack beside his MDC terminal and picked it up, glancing at the display. It wasn't a number he recognized, so he flipped it open and affected the 'official tone.'
"Corporal McAdams," he said, announcing his police rank and last name as greeting. On the other end of the phone was only silence. He waited a beat, said, "Hello?" and then abruptly hung up. Not going to sit there crowing at nothing like a magpie. No time or patience for prank callers. Fuck 'em. He set the phone back down and slowed for a red light ahead. His cruiser drifted to a stop behind a beat up old red pickup. The phone blipped again.
McAdams picked it up again, and saw it was the same number. He scowled, flipped it open and said, "McAdams!" perhaps more loudly than he needed to.
"...Dad?" a plaintive voice said. McAdams started and dropped the phone.
"What the-!" that voice sounded just like Davey. He bent over awkwardly, his duty belt digging into a belly that his ex-wife had wished was a little less jelly-donut, sweeping his hand across the floor of the cruiser, blindly searching for the dropped phone. Just as his fingers found it, he heard it utter the 'beedle-beep' of a disconnected call. He pulled it up towards his face, and was about to say something into it when he discovered a man standing just outside his patrol car's driver's side window. His heart leapt up into his throat, and he dropped the everfucking phone again.
The man outside the window stared at him, smiling. It took McAdams a moment to gather himself, he'd been startled so badly. He rolled the window down and said, "What are you doing, standing in the road like that, sir?" and trying really hard to sound official. It didn't work too well.
The man said nothing. Just stood there, staring. McAdams glanced over his thin and too-tall frame, noting the dirty dreadlocked hair, pasty white bony complexion, and odd-looking tophat he wore. The red band across the base of the tophat was worn and ripped in places, as was his knotty tweed looking long jacket. The man's eyes were too-dark brown, and swam in rheumy whites. Teeth were straight, a bit yellowed, and far too big to seem normal. And eminating from him was a faint odor of fish.
McAdams blinked, realized he was staring like an idiot, and shook his head. "Sir, get back in your car right now!" he barked.
For a wonder, the apparition did as bid, turning slowly and padding forward to the driver's door of the ratty pickup. The tall man folded himself inside, the reverse lights blinked as he shifted into drive, and the truck trundled forward, spitting a cloud of smoke behind it. McAdams sat for a brief moment, watching the eerie truck motor away, and refusing to acknowledge how disquieted he suddenly felt, until the motorist behind him tapped his horn to encourage him to move forward.
From beneath the seat, McAdams' phone blipped again.
"Son of a..." McAdams cursed under his breath and reached down again to retrieve the device. He opened it, and saw that this time it was a text message. From Davey.