Of the many tales one will hear of the great battles of the Western Front, doted upon by the Parisians of old, those men who would get drunk on the grape of the vine, none stands as foreboding as the tale of Strong Booted Archie of Lincolnshire.
It was Premiere Alistair who had begged Archie to come to the side of the French and fight saying to him, "Was it not I who insisted upon offering you gifts of the best land Champagne has to offer, or bringing you the women of Spain for whom the invading Germans are most willing to take hold of?" He said all of this through his messanger and wisest of council, Otto, son of Leo. Archie, whom all the Allies adored and looked to, spoke saying this, "Otto, you are a good man and admired greatly among the French and I would be honored to carry your rifle. But Alistair has dishonored me by taking back my lovely Brittany. She was finest of my spoiles. My captured Leichter Kampfwagen! My beautiful chariot with an attached fifty-seven millimeter Maxim-Nordenfelt that I was to ride into battle with. He has dishonored me and taken this from me! I will not battle this day, and it will be given over to the Germans for his arrogance!"
It was at these words Otto, who was good with the artillery, returned to Premiere Alistair saying these things. And Alistair, bon cri de guerre, faced no alternative but to march his forces against the great Von Hectenstein.
Archie knew of the great danger faced by the French and did nothing. His friend and companion Peter, son of Martin, knew this also and turned to Archie saying, "My friend we have fought together against these damned Germans for too many years. If you will not take to the trenches and fight, then let me get in your armored Rolls-Royce and lead a battalion to fight. Otherwise Von Hectenstein will win this battle and quite possibly the war. Then where do you think the Axis will push to next? They will land their Eulers and their Godeckers and will force themselves upon our own land of the crown! And what will happen to our own dear Lincolnshire? It will be burned to the ground and our women and children left to speak German! I can't have that. Let me drive your Rolls-Royce into battle and let the Axis believe Archie of Lincolnshire has overcome his pride and stepped into battle once more!"
Archie, son of Paul and Tessa, dame from across the pond, heard these words from Peter and said, "Peter you gorgeous man if only it were just you and I to take on the Axis alone we would bomb all of Russia and have it to ourselves! You take my armored Rolls and drive it straight into the heart of Von Hectenstein! And you come back alive you hear me?!
And Peter, who was an excellent driver and good with a rifle, readied a vehicle and Strong Booted Archie readied a battalion to protect him. Peter rode into battle to test the fates against the terrible Von Hectenstein.
...