(lone human...themselves? I'll keep it singular for simplicity.)
The study is posted all over the internet, and the world simply does not care. The functionality of a persons genome is beyond their daily concerns of collecting gadgets and raising their karma (not the good kind). However, a person of interest brings further intrigue to the whole shebackle.
This individual appears to have a completely functioning genome. Tests confirm this to be the truth, though not many people doubted it. All one needs for convincing is to lay eyes upon the grotesque figure that will burn its imagine into their minds for eternity.
The cost of a fully functional genome caused the *human* to grow a plethora of appendages, organs and develop entirely outdated traits from many previous stages of evolution. The functioning heap of genetic junk was charming to speak an outrageous lie. It was a beautiful depiction of every chaos that exists within biological creation.
Tears were shed for this poor creature and people around the world begged for its swift death, hoping to end its mostly assured pain and anguish.
But the beast doth protest! It claimed to live a full and happy life.
The masses called bullshit and wielded torch and pitchfork against the abomination. Marches organized around the home of the unfortunate one.
A sweet voice cried out to the people from below their waists. A young girl of four with eyes of green wept for the creature.
"Don't hurt him! He is one of us!"
"Nonsense!" they spat.
"I have what remains of a tail. My mommy says that I am special!"
The red-eyed crowd chuckled at her innocence then rekindled their torches. Only then did the door to the monster's domain fling open. Emerging from within, the shuffling fiend objected to the little girl.
"But I am a woman, my dear child!"
Vomit spewed from the mouths of many and of the few remaining non-vomiters clutched themselves in terror.
"My beauty may not be what a normal man may seek, but my spirit is refined and glorious."
Brows were furrowed and heads scratched. A single man placed his hand upon his hip and bellowed out.
"Ooooh. So you think you're better than us!"
An eruption of taunting of the foulest kind assaulted the ears of the dignity-clad creep.
"Not at all! I simply find no worth in focusing on my physical attractiveness. My joy is in life itself."
Stillness gave way to the awkwardness, people began to cringe. By this time the crowd had thinned from loss of interest and a dramatic reduction in testosterone levels. A considerable mob remained clutching to their mob-things. A dramatically ugly fellow had a question brewing.
"What happiness is there for you if you are not loved?"
"On the contrary, I am loved deeply. My husband is inside. You should meet him."
She slithered back into her home for a moment, emerging afterwards with an accompanying member. A gentleman walked out of the home, hand in hand with the wretched pustule. Breaths escaped and eyes beheld a man of considerable beauty.
"What the hell? How could you be with such a ghastly woman?" a leading voice rang out with jealousy.
The man did not respond, could not respond. The hideous wretch explained.
"He has no sight, no hearing, or voice to speak of. But with me he can smile."
The last of the weapons and fires dropped and dowsed. The mob had thrown in the towel and wiped their mouths clean and dried their eyes. They had all witnessed true beauty. The instance had overwhelmed the hearts of many that day. Some determined themselves to change for the better and pursue life with a new perspective. Others had made amends with those they had wronged beforehand.
However, this sentimentality did not last and the very next day every single person returned to lives of greed and debauchery with incredible enthusiasm. After all, these were the true workings of evolution.