"How does defeat taste, power rangers? I hope it suits your palate--once the green candle burns out, you will never get him back!" Rita Repulsa's laughter crackles as the projection shuts down. Tommy feels the shackles holding him back but his mind is focused on the small green flame that dances before him.
Rita takes off her headdress and leans back in her chair. "Finally. I wasn't sure if my throat could hold out much longer." One of her minions runs up with a cup of steaming liquid, taking the headwear from her. "Thank you."
"You won't get away with this, you witch!" Tommy shouts in confused desperation.
Rita slowly swivels to face him. "Brian, don't- wait was it Josh? Joshua? No matter. Please quiet down." She begins to swivel back.
"You may have fooled me once before, but now I know the truth! The power rangers will stop-"
"The truth?" Rita smiles, her gentle laugh quickly transitioning to a hearty cough. "Ouch. I guess the truth hurts." A few more painful chuckles followed by a deep sip.
"What's wrong with you? Why are you so… so relaxed?" A brief silence permeates. "What do you have up your baggy sleeve, Repulsa?"
"Please, Rita. Or Taijanna, if you prefer." Another sip. "Full of questions today, aren't we? Too bad they're all the wrong ones."
"What do you want?"
She swivels toward him again. "There we go. It's pretty simple. We need help."
It's Tommy's turn to let out a pathetic laugh. "Help? As in, helping you hurt my friends and commit genocide on my people?"
"You wouldn't be the first human to do so. But no matter, you're not a player anymore."
"My friends will save me!"
"From what? This?" Rita walks over to the candle and snuffs it out. "My dear, your powers have already been revoked. Galaxies, I didn't even need to bring you here for that."
"You're lying!"
Rita taps a button on her chair, and Tommy's restrains loosen. "Go ahead."
Tommy pushes his communicator in a familiar way but nothing happens. "How could- how did you do this?"
"It's not hard to turn off our own technology remotely."
"No, Zordon-"
"Is the wizard of Ooze. Uzi. Urzi?" Rita sighs, "A fraud."
"I don't believe you! Zordon would never lie to us!"
"Ten minutes ago you wholeheartedly believed that gigantic fighting machines were eons old and native to Earth because we shaped them like dinosaurs. No, I'm not overly worried about your beliefs." Rita swivels back as a minion appears with a lapdesk and several handhelds.
"You're not making sense!"
"What are you babbling about? Why else would I be here?"
"You're trying to take over the planet… to rule the galaxy."
"My my. That's right. Among all the stars in the galaxy, I happened to chose a planet that can apparently best me in combat time and time again. At this rate my empire might expand to half a dozen worthless planets in my lifetime! What unbridled glory!" Rita passes a tablet to a nearby minion. "Chickling, I, or any spacefarer for that matter, could destroy your sun with less effort than a sneeze. Or if I wanted your dustball, a host of species-targeted biological weapons. No, we are here for you. Well not you. You've played your part."
"If you want our help, why are you attacking us?"
Rita puts down her implements and looks at Tommy directly. "We are not attacking you. I send down one lumbering lifeform to a sparsely populated area, and provide you with excessive force to defeat it. I could easily flood your world with countless such creatures, even if your paranoia would likely result in a cluster of mushroom clouds." Rita focuses on her devices again. "Although even a single one results in hundreds of forms requiring approval. Still, so long as we fight, our so-called allies won't be allowed to interfere. Squatters rights and all that." Rita pauses, "Or maybe a filibuster would be a closer analogy. I really wasn't given adequate time to study this world."
"It doesn't add up! Why the charade?" Tommy's exasperation seeps in, "If you're so powerful, why do you need our help?"
"Didn't you ever wonder why we force you to dress in silly costumes and keep your identities secret? It's all about continuity with you humans." Rita starts to tear up, "By the time we are done, there will have been innumerable red and blue rangers, and no one will remember the names."
"I don't get it," Tommy retorts as he resumes a defensive stance.
"After a thousand generations of unmitigated human victories, your species might have the confidence to learn the reason without committing collective suicide. If we even last that long." Rita puts her lapdesk on the floor and notices the determination glittering in Tommy's eyes. "Still… these early years are crucial. A single outlier could cut that time in half, and that could make all the difference. Are you that one, Joshua?"