######[] (#dropcap)
Keller checked her suit seals a third time. Even with the improvements to the zero-G flight armor, they still were a bit dodgy around the seals. She tapped her helmet out of ritual and continued her pre-flight ceremony. The Sino-Ruski carrier was still a hundred thousand kilometers out and closing. It was rare they bothered with deep system flights like this, but the Brass had been very queer since the last Io expedition. Now the Old Cold War games were heating up again, but on the other side of the belt.
Major Marie "Valkyrie" Keller knew the Admiral wouldn't order fighter launch until the *Xian III* was within at least quarter fuel distance, so about 25,000 kilometers out. *Combat maneuvers do burn up so much reactant, * she contemplated checking to make sure the deckhand had topped her off with both core reactant and emergency maneuvering propellant. "Nothing quite like jetting out on a contained nuclear bomb," she muttered to herself.
Her computer registered that the *Xian III* was now 50,000 kilometers out and closing. "Bastards are at full thrust," she called out over her squadron comms, "Their active ping is hot, they are lazing the *Eisenhower. * Is everyone ready to launch in the next five?" One by one the members of her squadron called out their ready status, which she echoed to launch control. "We've got the green to cut loose in five minutes, thirty. Admiral doesn't want to provoke a war here boys and girls. Keep it tight on launch, double-diamond on my flanks with 500 meter dispersion once you clear a klick off the bow. Skull, you have tail-end Charlie." Her second-in-command rogered up without complaint.
Keller toggled the last of the pre-flight hard switches and rolled her release clamps to their just final setting. *What the hell did they find on Io to get the Sino-Ruski Cooperative so hot? Dick-measuring contests never reach beyond the Belt. * The amber ready-light spectrum shifted to green, pulling her from her thoughts. Heavy hydraulics, insulated from the freezing temperatures of space opened the maw of her fighter bay. The oxygen had already been sucked clean ten minutes past.
Valkyrie warmed her main engines as the docking clamps pushed her out into the hard vacuum. She watched the proximity sensor cycle up to at least 150 meters before she warmed up the SF-18 Space Hornet II's engines up to ten percent. She felt microgravity as the thrust pushed her back into her acceleration couch. Her padded gloves worked the thrust lever up slowly as her HUD started collecting flight data. Once she was at a safe distance from the *CSF-17 USS Eisenhower*, she kicked the engines into full gear and pulled a tight arc toward the bow of the kilometer long space carrier.
To her right and left the remaining ten Hornets formed two elongated diamonds with her at the lead and Major Roy "Skull" Folker forming the tail of an even larger diamond comprised of their smaller formations. Keller felt a small twang in her gut, this was only her second flight as the lead dog. *If Lieutenant Colonel Wesser hadn't broken his arm in that zero-g racket ball game...Yet, here I am, leading the eleven remaining Marines of Black Knight squadron of the 15th Marine Expeditionary Space Force, hopefully not to make a MES'F things. * She held back a soft chuckle over her bad acronym joke as she double checked everyone's position in the formation.
"Spook, pull in tighter, you're drifting."
Lieutenant Yasif "Spook" Farook responded with a hasty, "Roger that, Ma'am." before pulling his fighter back into perfect formation.
They cruised ahead of the carrier, putting 10,000 kilometers between home and the enemy. "All, victors, pump your breaks and hold here." Her long-range radar showed that the *Xian III* had already launched her compliment of twenty MIG-560. They were slower and less nimble, but built like tanks and could take a beating out here in the deep. Keller punched up the Eisenhower's Ops Center, "Recommend you get the Red Devils out, Control. Yellow Ivan brought all his boys out to play." She switched back to her command channel and told everyone to get ready for a stare-down.
Valkyrie whispered a silent prayer that this would not go pear shaped, *Please not today. *