This is most unwelcome, and most discouraging, for as a man who holds the highest esteem for the rightful King and his cherished Queen I must now speak plainly.
To the court, I must address certain suspicions and heresy levelled against my person, specifically those pertaining to our Queen and Regent. My role has long been one of trusted friend and adviser, a simple scribe when measured against the keep of knowledge that was once our lord and King, but an adviser nonetheless. The trust implicitly granted by our King was an honour that my death will not terminate, nor my supposed guilt erase. I served with dignity and care, and will do so in this life or what awaits.
To those here today I declare this, knowing the consequences of doing so: your Queen is a liar.
You have said I am a scoundrel, and a murderer, and I am not. You, a woman of birth and breeding lower your station with these levied charges, and lower us both by convening this hearing. I see in your gaze that you know what I allude to, and I see in your gaze you wish me to quiet my tongue.
Your child is my own, your womb carries no righteous spawn of god-willed nobility, but a child of passion and joy, a child conceived from secrecy and duplicity. The posture you exhibit leads me to believe you deny these charges, to which I must rebut: I am more familiar with your cleaning staff than you. I know that which you suffer on the moon's infernal schedule has ceased, I tell all here today that you are with child and that child is mine.
There is more to this story than the bringing of life, for you see, my Queen, I am also familiar with your doctors. I know well your condition, the condition that will cause your life to bleed from your body the moment the child is born. I know the child you carry is to be the mechanism of your untimely death, and more-so, I know my own character.
My flawed character that led me to insinuate my use of a lamb-skin sheath when none was possessed by me is not equivalent to the malice it takes to kill a king.
You have slain your innocent husband as retribution for your death to come. You have placed the blame on my doorstep.
I beseech you, take the remainder of your life into your own hands and spare me mine. I am no murderer, and you have murdered the wrong man. You have no heir, the king has no heir, the line is dead. Do what you must.