The radio crackles to life, and Chopin is on.
"Don't turn it off," Jane says. Henna flinches, and her hands retreat back to her lap, where a plastic bag full of oranges sits. "It's fine."
"Oh. Well. Um. Would you like an orange?"
"Alright."
Henna reaches into her back and pulls on out, meticulously picking off the sticker. Chopin quiets, but then surges forward again. Henna hums along until she hears Jane take in a deep breath.
"When I dream, I have two hands."
Henna's hands halt, fingernails digging into the skin of an orange. She looks, for a moment, desperately to the radio, but the piano offers no answer.
"You still do," she says, finally.
"Working hands," Jane replies. "They move, and I can play again."
Henna's fingers drift away from the half-crushed orange, juice trickling down her hands in shiny, sticky rivers. Between them, the citrus aroma rises, almost overwhelming in its sharpness.
"Oh," Henna manages. Her voice and smile waver with uncertainty. "Well, the doctor said that you might improve, right?"
Jane doesn't say anything, but she looks forward, and then down to her hands. The callouses on them are fading, tough skin fading back into softness. Her eyes shut, lashes curling against the curve of her cheeks.
"Yes," Jane says, finally. Her voice is low beneath the piano's thunder and the incessant static that crackles over it. "He did."
Henna's smile tightens so it stops trembling, and she pulls another orange out of the plastic bag and tentatively peels it. Carefully, she holds a piece to Jane's lips, and watches Jane's lips close around it. Then, Henna pops another one into her mouth. For a few seconds, the two of them chew.
"It's a little sour, still," Henna remarks. Jane briefly looks to Henna's face, and then back to the wall, and swallows, the action casting deep shadows onto her clavicle.
"You know, you don't have to smile for me."
Henna ducks her head down and looks at the oranges, half-crushed and healthy, sitting on the plastic.
"It's not for you," Henna says, finally. Jane watches her push the two oranges back into the bag and stand up. Like always, Henna doesn't slam the door, because she's polite, but she leaves no room for it to open again.