8:15 in the morning. The slip slid under my door. I saw it out of the corner of my eye and watched it move slowly across the carpet. It was like the person delivering it didn't want to make the smallest of noises. Not even a whisper. They knew what they were doing. I watched it settle, then turned back to my breakfast. Eggs. Lots of them. I've been eating eggs every morning for 26 years. I've eaten eggs in Kentucky, in Alabama, in Ohio. I've done them every way I can think of. They've long since stopped being anything more than part of the routine. Breakfast, workout, shower, costume, show, cry, sleep.
People get old. I saw it growing up. I'd look at people I knew. 10 years later they were past it. But I never realised it would happen to me. And the cruellest thing is it really creeps up on you. One day you're young. The next, how did that happen?
My life is simple and I've found joy in the little victories where I can. My costume is the same size it was when I joined the show. I pat myself on the back each time I fit into it. I can still stir the crowd, on a good night. The kids especially with their unrestrained joy and bright futures. And I lift the same weights. Kind of. Mr Barnes doesn't know I know he's messing with the plates. Most of them are clay rather than steel, but it's always been more about showmanship anyway, right? And the little car I lift each night, well that's basically a hollowed out shell.
I guess they must pity me. The old guy too proud to throw in the towel himself. The looks you see are hard to ignore. The 90% smiles. The half-hearted cheers. It hurts and it's the same each night no matter which state we're sitting in.
The eggs just don't taste right this morning and my eyes wander back to the slip under the door. I can imagine what it says. My time is up. 26 years of eating eggs and lifting cars and it comes down to a crumpled piece of paper delivered by a faceless messenger. Am I not worth more than that?
You see it's hard to tackle the things you've got no control over. I can push hard in the gym and get the sleep and food I need to power my body but the body is still 56 years old. How many more times round the clock will it go? And what will I do when it finally fails? Maybe I am too proud to let them see me like that. Finally broken by a plastic car and fake barbells. The shame.
The small caravan feels quite cramped now. There's not enough air. The smell of the half eaten eggs, the gas cooker and week old laundry are getting caught in my throat. But really it's the note under the door that's making me feel nauseous. A career of making people laugh and cheer and they do me like this. I can't face it.
The overheard cupboard opens and I take out the Colt. It's cold and heavy and dull. Immediately I feel the same stupid feeling I've always felt when I look at the piece. The weakness. It's one of the few things I never been able to lift. But maybe that slip of paper will make things different this morning.