"So that's why, Mr. President," I said, "They call it 'super-sized'. It's all because Ray Kroc had a philosophical fling with Nietzche when he was younger! I mean, can you believe it?"
The president looked at me with wide eyes, his jaw hanging open.
"My goodness," he said, "I did not know that, and I wouldn't have believed it if I hadn't heard it from you." He picked up his scotch and kicked back what was remaining and slammed the heavy glass down. He poured himself another and held up the bottle and shook it at me.
I nodded and he poured me one as well, a heavy pour.
"And you know," he said, "That's probably how they came up with Superman too." He dropped two chunks of ice in his drink, one chunk in mine. "Nietzche. Chiristopher Reeve as Nietzche and all that, I betcha."
"Actually," I said, "the creator of Superman named hero that after the drycleaner he used to take his shirts to get pressed. The place was called Super Men's Super Shirts and Laundry. Made 'em famous."
Well shit, he said, "Isn't the world just great?"
He poked his left hand at the pocket of his trousers a few times before it found its way in and withdrew a pack of smokes. He asked me if I wanted one and I said sure and we picked up our drinks and walked over to the open French doors. He flipped me a cigarette and I lit them both.
"Shit," he said, "Isn't it a pretty night?" He looked out at the rose garden and exhaled a plume of smoke. I nodded. He looked down at his hand.
"I wish these damned things weren't so addictive," he said, "Or that even if they were, they weren't bad for you." I nodded again and took a long swig of the scotch.
"You know," I said, I just read a study out of MIT that found that they aren't bad for you at all...that they're kind of healthy for you."
"No shit?" he said.
"No shit," I replied. "They found that they actually improve your lung capacity, and they put hair on your chest."
The president took a deep drag on his cigarette and closed his eyes. I absent-mindedly scratched my chest and took another drink. He open his eyes and blew out the smoke.
"Well if this isn't nice, what is?" he said.