When the citizens of Indiana went to sleep last night, they were Americans. This morning when they woke up, they belonged to a new country. This bizarre event was made possible by, of all things, an innocent clerical error. A resolution concerning farm subsidies passed by the Indiana legislature had erroneously included a clause separating the state from the union. According to sources in the state government, an intern had inserted that clause as a joke. However, that addition was not spotted during deliberations. Nor was it caught in when it passed through the State House of Representatives. Or the State Senate. Or the Governor's desk.
Normally this measure would require a popular vote. The unanimous passage, however, overrules that requirement, meaning that the secession is valid. State officials scrambled to correct their mistake, but by then it was too late. In order to regain statehood, the state legislature would need to draft a special ballot measure approved by 2/3 majority that would then need to be approved by a majority of voters. The earliest that the voting could take place is next November. Even that would only shift the action to the United States Congress which would then need to approve statehood for Indiana.
Already though, there are obstacles for the Hoosier state. Currently, their departure opens up additional seats in the House of Representatives, seats that the Democrats are eager to reassign or even see removed entirely. The state historically has been a shoo in for GOP candidates, the notable exception being 2012 when comments by GOP Senatorial candidate Robert Mourdock about rape derailed his campaign and gave the election to Democrat Joe Donnelly.
Also in the way are the voters themselves. Take Anderson, IN resident Connie Young for example. "What has the US ever done for us," she asks. "Higher taxes, massive debt. We're better off on our own." One of Indiana's largest employers, pharmaceutical giant Eli Lilly, has lobbied the state to suspend actions to regain statehood. Secession lifts the burden imposed by the Healthcare Reform Act, saving the company billions.
Around the rest of the country, opinions are mixed. Many are claiming that the country is better off without them or at least treat the issue with indifference. In fact, the only people actively lobbying for the state to regain statehood are racing fans. The Powell family from Covington, KY, just across the Ohio River from Indiana bemoan the fact that they now need passports in order to attend the Indy 500, one of the largest racing events in the country. They have attended every Indy 500 for the past 22 years. But this year, they will need to negotiate with the US State Department in order to keep their tradition alive.
It is uncertain whether or not Indiana will rejoin the United States and if they will be welcomed back. Whatever happens, though, for the next several months at least, Indiana is it's own nation.