The message flashed on my new smartphone's screen as I drove spiritedly through the mountains above Los Angeles, enjoying the endless twisting roads and crisp spring air. Being a somewhat responsible driver, I pulled my little roadster onto the nearest shoulder and opened the text.
"New Mission Available. Accept? [Yes] / [No]."
My brow furrowed in confusion. What kind of mission exactly? I could handle picking up some groceries, but anything else was a bit above my level of expertise. *Well, I not doing much right now anyway*, I thought to myself.
With the tap of the green [Yes] icon, a new screen popped up showing a map and single directive: "Go to location A and retrieve package." Location A appeared to be only a few miles away, tucked even farther into the valley that I had been driving along.
I placed the phone back down and threw my car into gear, flogging it down into the gaping valley with reckless abandon. As the engine screamed through every straight and the tires squealed around every corner, my mind drifted to the package.
What could it be? A bundle of weapons was likely, a cache of drugs was more so. Only now did the potential danger of the situation begin to dawn on me, and the idea of turning around and fleeing seemed more and more intelligent.
Suddenly I was there, my GPS marking me just beyond the destination. All around were massive trees which blocked out the sun and cast the forest in near darkness, obscuring my view of the single ramshackle cabin sitting just beyond the treeline.
I exited my car and slowly, tentatively walked to the edge of the treeline, peering into a cobweb covered window of the cabin. From within emanated the creaks and groans of movement on a wooden floor; someone was in there.
"Hey!" I called out. "I'm here for the package!"
For a moment the creaking stopped, then resumed at a fevered pace until the front door of the old cabin cracked open. From it emerged not a gun-toting arms dealer or a bloodshot-eyed tweaker, but instead one of the most jaw-droppingly gorgeous young women I had seen in my short life.
Her pale skin and blonde hair glowed warm against the shadows, somehow pushing them back. Her fragile and slender figure moved with graceful ease down the rickety log steps of the cabin, and her brilliant green eyes filled with light as they fell upon mine.
She ran to me, dancing over fallen branches and shrubbery like some sort of heavenly acrobat. I reached out my palm to receive whatever package this enchantress needed delivered, but instead she put her hand in mine.
"We need to go, now," she cooed, her soft voice tinged by an underlying urgency.
"What for?" I asked, my brow furrowing again.
"Because those Russian mobsters are going to be back any minute!"