A few years ago, sis, my only living relative, fled to a foreign country. I was alone, and craving a bond to fill the void, I decided to get a clone, a child I could raise as my own. To my surprise, the scientists accepted my application and were even willing to subsidize the costs, in spite of my sister's criminal record. At the time, I didn't think anything of it.
A short time after, I was met with a surprise. According to the scientists, due to a random error in the process, the clone would develop as a female, instead of a male. I heard stories of such cases, but I had never expected such a thing to actually happen. Nonetheless, I continued ignoring the signs, too shocked to think anything of it.
But, as the girl grew up, I noticed her eerily similar appearance to my sister's baby pictures of the same age. At first I wrote it off as coincidence, the product of simple genetics. But, when her blonde hair faded to brunette exactly like sis' did, I started suspecting something. That's when I decided to take a test, comparing the three of our genetic samples.
"TEST IS COMPLETE. HERE ARE YOUR RESULTS. THANK YOU AND HAVE A NICE DAY."
It's a mechanical voice from the other room, accompanied by the sounds of motors whirring. The girl sitting next to me jumps to her feet and runs to retrieve the printed items. When she returns, she holds them up to me with a big smile on her face.
"Daddy, here you go."
I take the documents from the child and I give her a short pat on the head. Happy, she sits herself back next to me, digging her face into my arm.
"Daddy, what's that?"
"It...It's daddy's test results."
"Is daddy sick?"
"No sweetie, daddy's not sick. Daddy's just seeing what the doctors found out."
I grab the corner of the folder's front page, but my hand freezes. I'm scared, afraid of what I'll see. But, as if reading my emotions, the girl takes my arm and presses it against herself. She's warm.
"Daddy, are you okay?"
She asks with concern, her worried stare reaching heart.
...
I can't do this. I don't know what'll happen once I read this file. Maybe I'll find discover something scandalous, perhaps I won't find anything at all. But, this girl is my daughter, and I treasure her more than anything else in this world.
If knowing it means risking our precious bond, then the truth can go fuck itself.