Ahmed had been under interrogation for a week now without showing any signs of cracking. His beard had been cut off and dark circles had formed around his eyes as a result of sleep deprivation. His fingers had finally scabbed up. They had thought ripping his fingernails out one by one would have been enough to break him, but they didn't know how strong he was. He would die before breaking, he knew this in the depths of his heart.
Agent Williams was watching Ahmed from behind the one way glass. She saw the look of steely determination in his eyes and knew that this was not going to be an easy task. Sighing, she pulled out her phone and dialled a number. "Get me Agent Kowalski. We are going to have to use the Madison Protocol." A momentary silence followed, before she heard a reply. "Roger that."
Ahmed was blindfolded and led into a room. His arms and legs were chained to a chair. Two agents held him down, while a third agent pried his eyes open. A fourth agent delicately taped Ahmed's eyelids to his face. Ahmed struggled fiercely, but a week of minimal eating had left him weak and unable to resist. Fear gripped the pit of his stomach as something was injected into his arm. He thought, "What is it that they will subject me to? God have mercy."
A projector whirred into action behind him and the white wall directly ahead of him suddenly came to life with the Touchstone Pictures logo. As a theme song blared from all directions, Ahmed felt at ease. He laughed to himself, "Movies? This is your big plan?"
The Waterboy had been playing for an hour now and raucous laughter could be heard coming from Ahmed's room. Agent Kowalski watched from the adjoining soundproof room and smiled. He knew that the MDMA that they had injected into Ahmed would have definitely kicked in. "Boy I bet that son of a bitch is feeling pretty great right now." He smiled knowingly as he watched Ahmed, who was laughing away at Adam Sandler's antics. "Thank god this room is soundproof."
Happy Gilmore started playing as soon as the credits for the Waterboy had finished. Ahmed felt at ease, his brain melting in a cocktail of happy chemicals. He watched and rooted for Happy Gilmore as he climbed the top of the Golf ladder.
It was around halfway through Anger Management that Ahmed started to get sick of hearing Adam Sandler's voice. And how many times were they going to show someone being hit in the balls? These things had begun to get on Ahmed's nerves. Kowlaski smiled once more from behind the one way glass. He knew the MDMA had begun to wear off. It was only the beginning.
I Now Pronounce You Chuck and Larry was the next movie. Ahmed spat at the thought of homosexuals and indeed, homosexuality was punishable by death in his home country. Even still the barrage of terrible gay jokes made him feel bad for having seen them. And Adam Sandler's voice now took on the characteristics of fingernails squealing on a chalkboard. The drugs had worn off now, leaving his brain bereft of the chemicals necessary for happiness. Ahmed struggled against his restraints and tried to close his eyes. But it was no use.
Angry screams could be heard as You Don't Mess with the Zohan played. Ahmed wished nothing but death to the Jew dogs of this world, but this was something else. Worse still was Rob Schnieder's portrayal of a goatherd. Rage welled up inside of him every time that ridiculous caricature came on screen. Behind the one-way glass, Kowalski chuckled once more.
It had been almost ten hours. What hard started off as a respite from torture had turned out to be something far worse. Now, Little Nicky was playing. "WHY IS HE SPEAKING IN THAT STUPID VOICE??? IS HE GOING TO KEEP DOING THAT FOR THE WHOLE MOVIE???" Ahmed began to scream and scream. Kowalski smiled and reached for a dial. The volume in the room grew louder and louder until Ahmed's screams were drowned out by Adam Sandler's voice. It was like someone was rubbing a cheesegrater against Ahmed's head and he could do nothing to stop it. "We are getting close now" chuckled Kowalski, once again thankful to be in a soundproof room.
Twelve hours. No food or water. Ahmed had screamed himself hoarse by this point. Before Grown Ups had started playing agents entered the room to inject him once more. Blinding pain coursed through his eyes, but he could not close them. All he could do was watch Adam Sandler and his friends piss in a public pool.
Agent Williams walked into the soundproof room. "What's the status?" Kowalski turned around. "We should go and interrogate him after this. Offer to end this if he chooses to co-operate." Williams looked through the one way glass and watched Ahmed, whose eyes were now glazed over. Eyes that had once held such determination were now completely empty. She turned around. "And if he chooses not to co-operate?" Kowalski smiled deviously as he opened a drawer and pulled out a DVD. "We always have this." Williams looked at the cover with shock.
It was Jack and Jill.