I woke up with a blinding headache
"He's waking up, quick get him back under"
Words cut through the vicious ringing in my ears and fade back into soft
silence and comforting darkness
...
Darkness fades back into cognition, my cheek itches and as I reach to scratch it my hand is bitten by something. Wait, not bitten, bound. Eyes flying open, pupils constricting expecting light; I cry out when the pain of its absence fills flares in my skull. Why does the darkness hurt? I try to roll over but the bindings bite in deeper, why cant I move? Trying to rise I find my feet bound as well.
"He's back at it, thrashing around"
A rustling by my side and the ground falls away as a deeper blackness envelops me
...
Coming to a white light cuts through my optical nerves straight to the back of my skull. A scream rips itself from dry, cracked lips.
"welcome back to the world of the living"
A familiar voice drawls. Eric, 23, single, neighbor, best friend since middle school.
"Damn, he looks rough"
Sam, 21, probably fucking Eric, classmate, study partners since last semester.
"Hey man, you thirsty? Eric, get him some water"
Ty, 23, player, pen pal, haven't seen him since he moved four years ago.
Footsteps recede, Eric, getting me water from god knows where. As the sound fades a memory takes form
"Can't believe that" ringing fills my ears "tried to kill him" more ringing, fading in and out "but these two have been here every day trying to wake him up" ringing and then a different voice
"Let them all stay, it will settle itself"
When was that? A week ago? A year? Who tried to kill me?
I try to open my eyes again, but the blinding lights force them closed again.
"Ty" I manage to shove the mangled word through bloody lips before a cough racks my body, sending pain through every nerve.
"Calm down there cowboy"
I can hear Sam's smile through her words, the same she uses every time I start to get ahead of myself.
"Hey man, chill"
Eric is back
"Open your mouth"
I oblige and cool water flows over my lips and chin, into my nose but most importantly my mouth.
The flow trickles to an end
"More" I plead
"Nope, they said only one of those every hour, but I think 45 minutes will be just fine" Eric says conspiratorially
"Don't want to hurt yourself there champ"
Sam again. Why are they all here?
"*The rule of three here still abides, two friends by your side a third hand does poison hide two with life to bequeath, third with steel to unsheathe*"
Who is that voice? Should I tell her what I've wanted to for these last long weeks. Can I get it out? I can try...
"Sam" A cough rips through my lungs
"Who?" Ty asks
"Sam, come here" I repeat, swallowing the next spasm before it can start
"Hey man, are you ok? Its just us"
"Yeah, you me and Ty" Eric interjects
"They must have you on some strong shit"
Ty chuckles nervously in agreement.
"But Sam, I can here her" I struggle through the sentence, words coming easier now.
"Do you know where you are?" asks Eric
Racking my brain to no avail I finally give in and admit "no"
"The hospital man, you've been here for weeks."
Cold dread fills my body, and I force myself to open my eyes, the cold white fades to a warmer yellow and my two friends faces swim into view with a hard white background.
"Why"
A quiet rustling as my two friends try to put the last few weeks into words.
Ty responds quietly "Your tried to kill yourself man"
EDIT: Names are hard