Man, what I wouldn't give for a "Fuck!" right. Just one short, sweet, full-bodied "Fuck!". Wouldn't say no to a few "Goddamn! "'s thrown in either. It's 2042 and I can't remember the last time I could just let my mouth go. It started small - bans in schools, elderly care facilities, evening primetime TV - things like. And it was just the big stuff - "fuck" and "shit". Well, you couldn't say "cock" or "cunt" but no one really used those that much anyway. Nah, it was the big two that hurt the most.
But hey, it was cool, right? Protect the kids and all. Build a better world. Except then it started getting worse - the lighter stuff, like "ass" and "hell". If it weren't for the Christian Right, the last one would be gone entirely. You can say it in church, maybe, if you're a pastor or whatever. But a blistering "Go to hell"? Forget it. 15 years. *Minimum*.
Slowly but surely, the situation got worse. I'll never forget the first execution. None of us will. They picked this old, fat, racist redneck. Klansman, I think. The worst guy they could find. He was talking to his friends about "sending those fuckin' niggers back to fuckin' Africa", and that was it. Full SWAT team, helicopter, the whole nine yards. They broadcast his execution live, too. I never thought I'd feel bad for a Klukker, but his face was so swollen you couldn't even recognize him. And they shot him. Right in the back of the head, just like that. People thought twice about swearing after that. Too risky.
Man, you ever tried getting busy with a girl without being able to swear? "Gee, I love your breasts!" "Go on, touch my erect penis!" It's fuckin' impossible. You sound like a 12-year-old. Speaking of which, the market for the cut stuff has exploded. I know guys that got rich off of "a $$" and "f @ gget". You couldn't sell them fast enough! Dropping a "g" of the end of "fucking" cuts the price in half. Take out a c? It's basically affordable! Not that it's worth it - if you're gonna swear, do it right. The hard stuff isn't gone either - it's just expensive. A buddy of mine sold a "pussy" to this elderly couple. 50th wedding anniversary and they just wanted one "pussy". Cost the guy about 3 months of his pension, he said. That almost broke my heart when I heard it. My buddy's, too, but business is business, and business is good.
If I ever read this aloud, it would cost me more than I've made in my life. Not that it would get that far - I'd be dead after the first sentence. Which is why I'll never read this aloud. I've thought long and hard about where would be best to leave this, and I've decided on Moby Dick, stuck in the back, in a high school library. Nobody reads Moby Dick. And even if they do, fuckin' NOBODY reads all of it. The irony of the title isn't lost on me either.
So to the person that finds this, if it's found, I hope yours is a world with profanity. I hope you can walk up to your best friend and call him a "fucking cunt" just because it's Tuesday. I hope you can criticize the government by saying the President sucks donkey dick. But remember my words, kid. Because a world with expletives isn't a given - and I've seen better men than you give every last fuck they had to fight for it.