I want to share with you something that I discovered about myself that rekindled my passion for writing. You need to fall in love with yourself and the words coming out of you. It's very easy to get bored with writing, your plot, whatever. Writing, like cooking, needs herbs, spices and variety. If you cook a frozen burger adding nothing extra, that burger is going to be plain.
I use the burger analogy when explaining writing to friends. I ask them: Which sounds better...A) Jack put a frozen burger on the grill. After a while, it was done and he ate it. Or B) Jack had before him a bowl. Ground sirloin beef was mixed with a beaten egg, Italian bread crumbs, worcestershire sauce, minced garlic and a few pinches of cayenne pepper. The charcoal grill had already been burning red hot when he added the soaked hickory woodchips on the fire. The patties were seared as the flames licked the side of the meat. He took a swig of the whiskey, it warmed his belly and reminded him of his father. He had always said a man should never grill sober.
The freshly done burgers had perfect grill lines across both sides. He had only flipped them a single time, it's the rule. They had been topped with a thick slice of cheddar cheese, three slice of bacon and a single leaf of lettuce. You had to get veggies in your system, somehow. He had baked the sourdough buns himself, they had been timed to come out of the oven just moments before the food was off the grill. It would be a satisfying meal, the juices of the hot meal running down the sides of his hands. The satisfying crunch of the bacon mingling with the slightly burnt texture of the scores from the steel grating of the grill.
-------
I know, it's a long example. When I explain it to friends...when I explained it to myself, even...I learned that I love making that fully realized burger. I like putting that piece of freshly done food in their mouth. You've got to rekindle that interest in cooking up a story. You need to figure out what flavors you actually like. If you start but never finish anything, you need to diagnose what that is. Are you not interested in the final product? Then you're cooking the wrong story. Are you vested in the final product, but the work to get to that end isn't satisfying? You need to start mixing in different ingredients, adding flourishes, seeing things that other people don't see or don't give much attention to.
Bottom line: You need to make things interesting for you. Challenge yourself to make even the most mundane thing, like cooking a burger, sound interesting. Otherwise it will taste as bland as it feels. I hope this helps.