I blink.
Another day passes by in my life as I lay in my bed. This life passing through time bores me now, I think I'll try something new today. Getting out of bed I look to my left to see him.
It?
Whatever. He's a him to me, I've honestly given up on remembering when or why I think he's a him. It's really been so long since I've been ten. They always did laugh at me for the animal I've been given. The weirdo, the freak and the oddball. The day I got him was both the worst and best day of my life. It's the day I learned that I will never really be like the others, but at the same time I learned that that was okay. Honestly, who cares about the opinions of those who are lost.
I get up and dress myself in whatever I can find. Most of my clothes are wearing rather thin. I should think about making more. It's always hard to come up with more reasons to get up in the morning so an actual task would be welcome. I'll need to find some cloth to work with. Maybe I can find some in town, there's bound to be some at the market still.
I put on my boots and make my way over to town. I guess it's a long walk? It's been a while since I went into town but I really don't mind the time lost. The market isn't too deep in the town. Just a few miles from the sign welcoming you in.
It's quiet like always. I try to remember the town like it was when I was younger. I think I used to come by here with some people, maybe family? I forget why I came, just some landmarks seem familiar. I finish up my business in town and start making my way back home. It's long. But I guess that makes sense.
I walk back through the door to my apartment and take off my boots. It's been a long day and it's almost night so I set what I got aside for a later day. It's just some clothes, they can wait. Going to a window I look out and take in the sights set before me.
A city. A great city. Well was a great city. Not barren and empty. It's a wonder that the buildings can survive for so long but I guess that is the wonder of modern engineering. Truly amazing that this city can survive thousands of years of nature rising up against it. I lose count of how long it's been but I guess after a while it doesn't really matter.
I walk back into my room. It is dark except for the glow he gives off. A faint glow but familiar. He floats in his little tank like he's done for as long as I can remember. My memories might be blurring now but that day is still fresh in my memory. I remember looking up what in the world he was. Turritopsis dohrnii.
"Hey Steve. I'm back"
The immortal Jellyfish.