"It's fucked. They have us at every turn and corner. Every fucking time we think we're close to pinning the source we turn up with fuck all." This was the third time this week the chief was bitching without any glimmer of a purpose, and you could tell by his lack of creativity in profanities. Michaels and Johnson were already dozing off in the corner. They knew the case was useless at this point, despite the fact we were all as professional as the NYPD gets.
We had been working on the case for 4 months now without a single arrest, and everyone knew why- they we're smarter than us. Not your college degree type smart, or using fancy words smart, it was the 'leave you scratching your head while they steal your shoes' type smart. My work week has been typically chocked full of dead ends, empty warehouses, and not a single suspect - but last week something changed. we finally found a shipment of Hypolinium-synthobendol-diazaomortryptophen. We call it Linium for short - but the street name these days is Albert. It hit the market 6 months ago after 2 pharmaceutical scientists we're murdered and all their findings and research were stolen. Since then its been nothing short of a shit show. Murder rates are through the roof and crime is sky rocketing. I've seen homeless people in Ferrari's, millionaires reduced to pennies, strippers turn celebrities, and celebrities turn strippers- but now that I think of it I'm sure that part isn't anything new. Credit card companies and banks are failing because they can't encrypt anyones information fast enough, so 'smart' people are just stick to cash these days.
"Who the fuck has any fucking ideas? God damn it Michaels, wake the fuck up! somebody give him some fucking coffee."
I chuck my half-empty thermos at his head. I watch it bounce off his forearm, skim his head and land on the floor.
"Thank you, Albert." Chief mutters.
I don't bother speaking because I already know how this meeting is going to end. I'm drinking coffee now out of sheer habit, not because I need to. I had the Idea we all needed earlier this week, and since then I've had literally millions more. This is all just a nice display of formality, and I'll let them talk and feel better for it - as though they could get any closer to catching anyone. But they wont, not like this. See because before you try it, you can't help but wonder why such smart people wouldn't be honest and make money the 'right' way, use their intelligence to contribute to society, help create the sustainable world we all need...etcetera, etcetera, so on and so forth. But then you know. It all becomes clearer than all those empty warehouses. Being human becomes overrated. Morality is the steel chain that tethers the poor to the rich, the pathetic to the resilient, the dead to the living. It is weakness, a symptom of meaningless emotion, an outdated survival instinct that is now obsolete. I've lived my life with it as a driving force, guiding my every decision and action since my mother taught me to say 'you're welcome.' But now, now I can finally get to work.