We were meant to do this together. That was the only way it would work. Even though this was a challenge whole generations have never seen, we were meant to bring peace. But how could the elements of the world be divided? When the cosmic energy is split, the result can't possibly end well.
Yet we avoided the haunting idea all our lives. The nations were at war with each other. Kings, chiefs, warlords, and monks alike fell and rose in the span of bloodied decades. And while the soldiers sharpened their blades, the small folk looked towards us for salvation. But the hope in their eyes was tainted with despair. They knew, like we knew, that the avatar had returned as an abomination. A deformity. A freak. In pieces. The elements were shattered, in both the world and in the avatar.
But we tried. In our training, I grew powerful and graceful, while she grew swift and savage. I prayed and she danced. I attained wisdom and enlightenment as she attained glory and honor. With meditation, I waited. With a warrior's spirit, she grew restless. Soon, we fell apart. She told me to be merciless and abrupt when moving the earth, and to be rapid and stinging with water. I told her to focus the flame and to flow with the air. We didn't heed each other's words, and now we must pay the price.
She saw the battle torn lands as an opportunity to unite all the nations under one leader. To form a rigid society that pays homage and loyalty to the avatar itself, and no one else. Those that stood in her way were scorched or suffocated. She wielded fire and air like torture devices. My friends, my family, and my people all tasted her wrath.
I saw through the fog that clouded her judgment. As long as I matched her in power, I wouldn't let the realm fall to her. It was a one way trip. We came into this world together, and we were going out together. I shall dowse the flame and stand strong against the wind. Our deaths will welcome the new savior. Hopefully this time, it is whole.
The next avatar can save the world. I need it to be over.