(This is my first story on here, please bear with my on any mistakes or if its just bad...here we go!)
I've been a gamer for almost my entire life. Fantasy in games became reality for me to escape my awful life growing up. I'm the basic, 'single mom, no dad, no money' kinda kid. Yet somehow I always scraped up enough money to buy the latest hit games, granted it was one game every other month or two.
I had been stressing about my mutation for years, wondering what it could be and what I could possibly do with it. I thought of it like a toy, I could be a real life superhero...just like everyone else. Thing is, power can change a person, fast.
I woke up right after midnight on my 21st birthday, feeling the intense burning all throughout my body, as everyone does receiving their power. After a few minutes of pain, it was over, and I was left wondering what I had been given. I tried lifting things in my one room apartment, no effect. I've always been a scrawny kid, no strength gains. I tried telekenisis, I wanted to be like Obi Wan. Still nothing. I tried to read my neighbors mind when asking for some coffee creamer the next morning. Still nothing. Then it happened.
I was walking alone, as someone with quite literally no friends does, when some guys tried to jump me. Their powers were obvious. Strength, claws, and the biggest was made of rock. Since the powers first started, it's separated people into many groups, mainly the good and the bad. These were clearly the bad, the ones who abuse kids who haven't reached 21 yet.
They picked me for being the scrawny kid I was, and assumed I didn't have my power yet. Even though I did, I didn't know what it was. They came at me, and I closed my eyes and held my hands up to shield the blows...and none came. I opened my eyes and a red, semitransparent shield was blocking their attempts to hurt me.
"I'm a conjurer...oh my God..." I mumbled to myself as I made a sword appear and cut large gashes into all of them. They fell to the ground, and I made a headsman's ax appear and behead them, rather than let them bleed out.
After that incident, I realized how much power can get to your head. "There are way too many bad people in the world...maybe I can do something about it..." I said to myself as I walked through the worst neighborhood in Dallas. The criminals ran through the streets causing mayhem. I called their attention and they charged me. A lance here, a conjured bus over there, and even a few summoned, golem-like warriors dispatched most of the bunch fairly quickly. They stopped, realized that I had a very uncommon mutation. The 'leader' approached me, and offered me to take his place.
Now I rule most of the city, controlling the city with fear of my ever growing power and army of hood rat mutants.
The heroes usually win in comic books, but this isn't any dashing white knight's tale of heroism, this is my attempt at power. After all, power can really get to a person's head.