*Sunday, May 11, *
Three days ago I found out about my condition, and three days ago was the last time I had tasted sleep. I was incredulous at first, when I was brought in by the worldwide funded NCP, or the Natural Cause Phenomenon, Research Group. However…the file in front of me quickly turned that incredulity into denial, fear, and hysteria.
12,525 days I had been alive and more or less than 12,525 lives had been lost. The countless faces in the overfilled file were all killed--*murdered*--by me, because I fell asleep. The elderly, sick, disabled, men, women, children, everyone…were in this file because *I fucking fell asleep*.
I could maybe live with one or two maybe with extensive therapy, but in the thousands? But 12,525? **Twelve-thousand five-hundred twenty-five people** dead. All because life has a twisted sense of humor and watched on as I unwittingly killed 12,525 human beings to entertain it with my sick existence.
The NCP Group have tried to reassure me that they will find a cure so I can live a normal life and even to ensure my condition to be kept a secret for my safety. They ran many tests on my while I was there with the request I return upon request for further analyzation. The Group sent me home many hours later with suggestions of dramatically adjusting my sleep schedule to cut the amount of times I sleep as little as possible by prolonging the amount of hours I stay awake and in consequence, prolonging the hours I sleep without interruption.
Day one was easy enough as my mind was too preoccupied, a mixture of coffee and energy drinks carried me over day two, but day three has been consumed by my delirium that no amount of blaring music can cure and the only thing keeping me awake is what's left of my stubbornness and lingering horror. I can't keep this up; surely I will collapse tomorrow - if not today, and kill another.
I'm not strong enough for this, and am ashamed to admit that I'm more consumed by the fear of what everyone else will do to me when this inevitably leaks out that I'm the one who took away so many loved ones from the world than of myself. That's why I'm writing this, because I'm too much of a coward to face the masses and receive what I deserve and I want the world to know that I am not doing this out of some self-sacrificing heroism.
I'm doing this because I am weak, and am much too afraid to end it with a quick bang.
I'm afraid of pain and would rather take one more with me than to die in any other way than my sleep. I truly am a monster.