In hindsight, he didn't really dress for the occasion. When you think of a thousand-year-old God making his first appearance ever. Camo shorts and a Hawaiian shirt don't usually come to mind. And it definitely didn't come to mind to a small tribe in the middle of the rainforest. They welcomed him by calling him the devil and building a massive fire and sticking him in the middle. All he wanted to do was show these guys how grateful he was that they were still worshipping him after all this time. Even after he had abandoned them.
It was Loki's fault. He damned near forced him to come down here and show his appreciation. Although he has been a bit of a prick ever since those movies came out, fucking Tom Hiddelston.
He was against it at first. He had heard the stories. Reveal yourself as a God and you don't get to be a living God for much longer. But he decided to take the risk. It was better than being forgotten about and turned mortal. Fuck that shit. And Loki told him that Death hadn't went after a God in years. He didn't even think he was up for it.
He wasn't too worried at first as the fire started below his feet. He thought, if anything this is just gonna be embarrassing for them when they burn through the wood and realise that he can't die.
He tried to explain to the chief who he was but got squared in the mouth with a rock for his troubles. It was like lighting had struck his bottom lip. A new sensation he knew only as pain ran through his body. Followed by the taste of blood. Then heat. Then fear.
**They had forgotten about him. **
It didn't make any sense. He had came here for them. After all this time they spent praising him. Begging for him to appear and show them the way. And when he finally did they had moved on.
The flames spread faster and he could hear the chief ask God for a good hunt, a warm season and an abundance of strong warriors from the tribeswoman's bellies. It took a moment for him to realise that they were no longer asking for him.
As the flames engulfed him, his howls were met with the tribe's chants and praises to their new god. One who watched the fire from a distance. In silence.
"Loki, Loki, Loki…"
Loki used to be cool. He hadn't played a trick on someone in thousands of years. Fucking Tom Hiddelston.