You truly attempt to try out this great machine. The first date you set is forward about 2 days. You are warped forward to the day. You see that everything is completely normal. The only strange thing is that you know exactly what happened yesterday. You can vividly remember what you ate for breakfast, french toast with peanut butter and jelly. You can remember that you took your dog and 3 year old daughter to the park and played all day. Yet, you know you did not live that day. You think that maybe this will continue to happen so you travel 2 years into the future. Today is the day you send your daughter to kindergarten, you hold back tears as she whispers "I love you Daddy" into your ear then runs off to join her friends in class. You stand, wondering where the time went, how it seemed to speed by. Days you remember but you did not live. You enjoy the moment then you use the machine to skip ahead 18 years. The day is her wedding day and you walk her down the isle to her waiting groom-to-be. You are holding back tears as you let her go and she whispers "I love you Daddy." You have never been so happy for her yet you still wonder how you remember your little girl graduating high school, getting into her dream college, then graduating from there. You wonder how you remember these things knowing you have skipped those dates using the machine. You reach for the machine to turn it 30 years into the future. You're on your bed in the hospital surrounded by your daughter, son-in-law, and all four of their children. You are weak and old and clinging on to life hoping to last a few more minutes, a few more hours. You remember having such a great life, welcoming in your grandkids, vacations, retirement. Yet the thought still nags at you, how you remember but you never truly lived those days. When the time comes everyone knows. You hear your daughter whisper "I love you Daddy" and you start to cry. You reach for the machine hoping to turn it back to the first day, that day 40 years ago. But as you look for it, it's gone. Its only then you realize there was never a machine. Its only then that you realize you spent your whole time looking ahead that you forgot to look at the now.