Major Tycho Novak laughed at the words, his artificial eyes glowing brightly in the dim light of the officers' lounge.
"Kid, there's exactly two kinds of peace; the temporary and the permanent. The Temporary is the more common one. The two sides get tired of killing and sign a peace treaty promising not to attack and to stay on their side of the fence. Those never last. Humans are bastards and as soon as their side is rested and resupplied, after they have had a generation or two to recoup their losses they strike. They fight, they kill, they die all over again until once more they either succeed in their objectives or more likely get tired of throwing their sons and daughters into the grinder. So they declare peace *again, * using that quiet period of time to rest and rearm. And then, the other side attacks to recapture lost territory from the last war. Sensing a pattern?
"Now the permanent peace, that is the one where you wipe your foe clean off the map. Carthage, Nazi Germany, the Amaris Empire. They won't be troubling us anymore. We did more than defeat them, we crushed them utterly, their remains found only in the history books. You must be willingly to break a culture completely if you want them never to threaten you again. You demolish their temples, burn their libraries with their caretakers inside. Slaughter their religious leaders wherever they're found. Teach them your language, your faith and raise their children from birth to be like you and not like their grandparents."
"But that's...that's cultural genocide."
Novak nodded, idly brushing a thumb over his black collar tab with its three silver pips.
"It is. It's terrible and wrong. And that is why we will always have war. There is no one willing to take that ultimate step, to become irredeemable in the eyes of mankind and god. Perhaps that was why Lucifer fell from Heaven, to save man from the curse God Himself placed on them. He was willing to be cast away from the light of God to suffer for the Sins of Man."
"You mean like Christ?"
Major Novak smiled ruefully, taking a sip of his beer.
"Now there's an interesting thought..."