It was becoming strange counting the days. It was becoming strange not speaking. I used to enjoy being alone, but this was far too much to handle without slowly losing my loose grip on sanity. I was starting to hear things in my head, things that weren't real. At least I'm almost sure that they weren't real. It had been approximately two years since the last day. That was the day the sky turned dark and they came. They came from nowhere and went right back, beasts careening through the clouds straight down to the earth. Sleek, powerful spacecraft that just seemed physically impossible. Just as quickly as they came, they destroyed us along with them. That's what baffles me the most. I cannot fathom what happened. But I digress. What happened happened and that cannot be changed. But two years afterwards, on that day of pure glorious joy, the upvote was there. I had made it a habit of posting every few times I used the computer. I used the computer quite a bit, which only pulled me farther from reality. But I was punched right in the nose by reality that day. My mouth hung open for what felt like days. It took me an actual six minutes to snap back and assess the situation. A fucking upvote. I've been leaving the same message over and over. Why no reply? I comment on the post saying 'I'm Eric, a survivor'. Days go by. Then weeks. Then months. Jesus Christ, it was worse than nothing. It was tearing me apart. I posted that same sentence every day. But nothing has ever come of it again. If you are reading this, I hope that you are human and that you are not alone. Not like I was. I'm an old man now; I fear that I am close to death. I have not seen a human nor had any sign that humans are out there since that day. But I still have hope. I cannot be the last one. We are stronger than that. I have clung to that thought my entire life. It has kept me alive. It kept me searching the world, looking for somebody, just fucking somebody. But I never did. I leave here a library of my studies over the years and other things I would like to have another person make use of. It has been so lonely over these years. It has taken my humanity for I am lost. But I still have hope for others. I know you must be out there. I am sure of it. I am Eric, a survivor.
She breathed deeply, sitting on the floor. She ran to the address that was written on the last page of the tiny book that she found within the massive shrine. The shrine he left out in the middle of the White House lawn. She ran, she knew that street. She walked into what looked like the living room and saw him, a man that looked to be in his eighties, just like her. He couldn't say a word and nor could she. They had waited so long. They had been so lonely. But no matter how little time they had left, they had that time to spend together. That was all that mattered. She spoke for the first time in so many years, first softly and cracking but soon strong and proud she said 'I am Joy, a survivor'. They both smiled through their streams of tears and embraced each other for the rest of their lives. That was all that mattered.