The Joker was going to die now- that he knew. But not before he broke the Bat, the Bing a Ding, the Bruce, Darrrrrrling. After today, Gotham would see their beloved dark knight fall.
These were the thoughts that went through Joker's mind as the fists rained down. And he couldn't help but laugh, because, oh, it was just too funnnnny. "AhahahaAHAHAHA- hahAHAHHA-hAHAHA!"
"IS THIS WHAT YOU WANTED, JOKER," grunts the Bat, rage clouding his eyes. He slams his fists down onto Joker's chest, and there is an audible crack as ribs break.
Joker had gone too far this time, they both knew it. He'd attached a bomb to an unsuspecting girl scout, and made her sell cookies to Bruce. And then, after he'd sampled the cookies so obliviously, the dumb girl had tried to tell dear Master Wayne her secret, and Joker had no choice to blow her up, really. What a shame- Joker was sure there was a joke in there somewhere. Maybe about thin mints.
Then the Bat had come after Joker, and this time Joker wanted to be found. Cameras surrounded their fight- but of course the Bat had no idea.
The fists kept coming. "NO MORE," the Bat moaned as dropped another punch. "No more deaths." He felt something quivering inside of him.
Joker spat out a tooth. "What's wrong, Batsy? Are you feeling a little...squeamish?" Joker grinned, and cackled.
Batman stepped off of Joker's beaten and bloodied body. He drew a gun. The gun he'd taken from the man who'd killed his parents, a gun it had taken him years to find. The gun that he'd kept for all this time, saving it for this moment- to finally end his greatest foe.
Joker grinned. Here it'd come. The cameras were rolling. "DO IT, BATS, BABY. DO IT!"
Batman took the shot. It hit Joker square in the chest, and went perfectly through his heart.
A second later, a huge flood of diarrhea exploded into Batman's pants. The cameras- linked to social medias and news outlets- captured the dark brown stain, obviously spreading through Batman's grey suit.
The Joker laughed. "Laxy laxatives, Batsy! So LONG!" and breathed his last. This was the ultimate Joke- he had ruined the most valuable of moments, and the Bat was never again to be Gotham's reckoning. At least, not without some chuckles first.