The clock ticked a-rhythmically and uncomfortably while the HR rep contracted out for recruitment leafed through the application and resume with a degree of humming and teeth whistling.
The room was slightly too cold, the rep has adjusted it down and was dressed accordingly with the applicant feeling the chill dressed as he was for the subtropics. Subtly looking about the room he noticed how nothing was quite comfortable, from the flickering light, the clock tick and the chair which pinched in places except for the rep's chair which looked discretely luxurious.
"Well, that's all in order. Your tax forms are altogether, ID checks out and the referees I've called have mostly confirmed everything"
"mostly‽" exclaimed the applicant quizzically.
"oh don't fret, just two didn't return my phone calls. But i followed up, The uh Regurgitator apparently passed on Blood Island after a run in with a U.N. taskforce sent to recover the warhead you very successfully purloined from the Reunited Republic of Korea. As for The Stink in Franchescaville they vanished though I am informed this was at the same time one of the caped kinds had an epiphany about the nature of murder and morality. So one makes assumptions but other sources tell me your work was commendable." the representative quickly drummed his fingers on the desk and appearing to consider something.
Time ticked slowly away.
"anyway, back to the task at hand. Now it's important for me stress that this will be a different arrangement to your usual fare. Full time retainment with loyalty clauses opposed to the more freelance style of contract you are more familiar with. Annual pay will seem smaller than a 'good year' "the air quotes went un-gestured but very much inflected. "but I think you'll find the reliable income and other benefits more than make up for it".
Tension in the room jumped suddenly as a chrome revolver was produce from a drawer in the desk and dropped on the table. The applicant became aware of a coppery tang to the air and tried not to look at the wall behind him. "now you may know me as The Recruiter and of the many things i do this is my trademark, you don't have a say in this anymore and it's up to me accept you for the contract or...terminate it before it even begins."