"No" I say calmly
"What do you mean no?" questions my employer.
"No, as in i will not do it."
"You can't refuse."
"Or what you will have your bodyguards kill me?" At that moment one of his two body guards falls to the ground griping his chest and after a few cries of pain he is motionless.
"What..." my employers says while his second body guard pulls his gun at me.
"Too late." I say as he drops his gun and and grabs at his throat gasping for air and he to falls and stays motionless.
"How...What did you do?" My ex-employer asks me
"I am the best at what I do and there is no one I cannot kill, but sometimes I like to get a head start so a few days ago I broke in here and read my mission, I didn't really care for it, especially when I saw the contractor."
His eyes go wide and his face goes white, "I..."
"Yes thats right you, I was wondering and wondering why you would do this, and the only conclusion was that you thought if I cut the last tie I had the kept me apart from this I would want to stay."
"You...I..." He grabs in intercom and shouts "EVERYONE TO MY OFFICE, HE HAVE A BREACH OF SECURITY" I wait quietly but no one shows up so he calls over the intercom again, and again to no avail. "Where is everyone?" He asked me, his tone becoming desperate.
"Gone, much like your bodyguards, I took care of them, and before you ask, yes all of them. While I did enjoy this job, you made it personal by targeting my family."
He is frantic now "I...I'm sorry, please don't kill me i'll do anything."
I smirk as I about face and head towards the door. "I'm not going to kill you, I won't have your filthy blood on my hands." He looks at me with a slight look of relief and confusion. "But I can't let you go either, so I had to compromise my principals. I mean I a not a fan of using contraptions so assassination but I can make an exception."
"What did you do?" he asked again scared for his life.
"Thats a secret," I say as I step out the door, "But I will say I hope your seat is comfortable, you will be there for a while."