I had waited for this day for what seemed like an eternity. My torment was finally at an end.
I had come from a place beyond time and space itself - before the singularity, before the expansion, before it all. A remnant of some past existence, some old universe where atom charges might have been inverted, or none-existent. It did not matter, for I was beyond that place, as well. I arrived here approximately 13 Billion years ago, when the rules were not rigid and the barriers easily broken. I drifted, for a while. Through the hot, dense clouds of gas that made up the universe I explored, observing the rules that make up the sum of all existence settle into place. I broke every single one of those laws, because I was outside of those laws. I was some unknowable entity, something that existed, but that was all that one would be able to use to describe me.
Time passed. A new phenomenon in itself, and one I took pleasure in experimenting with. Time was wonderful, the idea was novel. The clouds expanded outwards at a steady pace, always forward, and never stopping. After a few billion years, I found a small, barely-solid rock drifting aimlessly around the sun, and I waited. I watched and felt the rock solidify over time, the gasses in it's atmosphere condensing into clouds, flooding the planet with water. I was there from the beginning, when the landmasses split and shifted, great plates beneath the earth moving at an incredibly slow pace - but moving nonetheless.
When I first encountered life, I was overjoyed. Seemingly spontaneous, where had it come from? How did it work? I studied it eagerly, all it's own little rules. The single-celled bodies became multi-celled, then fish, then amphibians. I could not have been happier. Or so I thought.
Then they came. The first humans - simple creatures, like those that came before. I was happy to observe them and figure them out, how they worked, fed, interacted with each other. They barely noticed me at first, some small fragment of me travelling amongst the skies of their little rock. The other animals did not react to me - but these ones did, eventually. They learned to look up. Their initial reaction was one of fear - understandable. I was more than alien to them. It shocked me to see them run away, screaming in some primitive tongue. What shocked me more was when I came back days later to see a carefully arranged pile of stones in the shape of that shard of me where I had been seen. Fruit and meats were carefully arranged underneath it, and a human was on his knees, hands upturned towards the sky - towards me. He saw me again, and was excited. He picked up a bowl of fruit and offered it towards me, eagerly.I took it, and disappeared. I did not know what to make of this - I needed to think. If I could describe what I felt with a human analogue, it would be...powerful.
I watched these creatures grow and change - their primitive tongues turned elaborate and sophisticated. They learned to bend their world to their will - their spark, their drive to succeed and conquer their surroundings impressed me. The lizards and the fish were content to survive, but these humans - they must thrive. I tried to continue to merely observe, but it was fruitless - that draw of power was too much. They had many names for me during my interactions with them - Odin, Anansi, Hephaestus. They contributed their success to my interactions, to my aid. It felt good to accept their praise, but it felt hollow - I tried to express to them in various forms how they were responsible for their growth, but they would not accept it. My interactions with them grew hollow, tiring. They began to grow weary as a species, blaming me for things from plate tectonics to pestilences and diseases. Just as easily as they had praised me for something I had not done, they had condemned me. Wars were fought over which of my fragments had interacted with who, and in what way. Relics claimed to have been passed down by me were found, lost, then found again. I grew tired of it, and I felt pity for them. Their spark was too bright - they ached for something more, and saw it in me. I was just an observer from outside of what they could understand - though to them, there was no difference. I was more than them, and I was beyond them. So I waited.
The day came when their eyes were closed - I chose to wait for a reason. My presence for these creatures was too much - too much misery, suffering, all in my name. To see me in full would doom them. I left silently, and without much event, turning back as I drifted amongst the cosmos to observe their pale blue dot one last time. I wished I could do more for them, but now they were truly on their own.