She wasn't much of a looker. One eye was kind of bigger than the other, so it bulged a little bit and looked like she was staring at you funny. Her nose was crooked too, but she used to tell me she'd done it herself by running into a chest of drawers. She didn't like the way it was before. Rose took up smoking when I was eleven and she was sixteen, because a boy in a leather jacket had pulled a lighter out of his pocket and slicked his hair back in a way which I would never learn how to do.
"I don't like it when you do that." I'd grumbled, feet hanging off the ground.
"I don't give a shit, sonny. I'm special." She drawled, and she was right. There it was, the little 'X' on the back of her neck, standing out like someone had sharpied it onto her skin. She was meant for something great.
That evening, Rose and I sat in front of the TV. She stank like mint, overpoweringly strong. There was no mistaking her new habit, but I remember Dad letting it slide. She was meant for something special, something great. She couldn't die yet. On the flickering screen, a man with black hair raised his hand over the small bible before a crowd hung in suspense.
*" I do solemnly affirm that I will faithfully execute the Office of the President of the United..." *
When he turned his back to the camera the cross stood out against his white neck.
It was four am and the sound of buzzing woke me. I crept to the bathroom, floorboards creaking.
"Go back to bed."
Rose was standing in front of the mirror, Dad's electric razor in her hand and long curls of blonde hair tailing over the corner of the sink.
"What are you doing?"
"I want people to see," she hissed. "I'm not like you!"
"You look stupid."
The floor had been cold under my feet, but it was nothing compared to the look in her eyes when she turned around to glare at me.
"What would you know?" She sneered. "You're a nobody. You're not special. You will never amount to anything."
------
The roads had been wet for about a week. I'd been watching raindrops chase each other down the smeared window of the beat-up old car. Rose got to sit in the front seat and Dad was struggling with a stick-shift, gears grinding and wheels sliding.
"You excited about seeing Grandma?" He asked, turning round and beaming at me. Rose's ears stuck out from her shaved head, patches of blonde fluff just starting to crop up again around her ears. Dad was going to make her wear a hat when we got there.
But we didn't. The wheels of the car skidded and Dad swore. The tiny car lurched and skidded, Rose wailing and gripping the dashboard with white knuckles as we hit the barrier of the road.
I don't remember much. The water was cold and heavy and we started to sink immediately. Later they told me Dad's leg had got trapped under the gearstick. Rose had broken the passenger window with her elbow. She'd flayed the skin to her shoulder, they said. They didn't let me see her again for a while and when I did her hair was just beginning to get long, peeping over the corner of the white-collared shirt the hospital had given her.
She sat on the end of my bed and picked nervously at the scabs on her red, raw arm until they broke and soft red blood began flowing.
"You saved me," I said nervously. The end of my sentence hung in the air between us.
"I quit smoking."
"You did?"
She swept her hair aside and showed me the back of her neck, smooth and clear as if the cross had never been there.
"Turns out you only get one great act." She said sadly.
"One was enough."
She looked up. Cuts and bruises littered her face. She wasn't much of a looker. But Rose was great.