A quick scan around the room begins to inform the stranger about his whereabouts. He doesn't fully understand the items he's looking at, or his surroundings but there is an air of familiarity to it all. He can't remember why or how, but he's been here before, plenty often. The smell of oil, sweat and steel is a significant clue. Smells are a potent trigger for memory and this all smells so familiar, yet just out of reach. Except for the bloated, stained corpses, those smell awful and by the looks of it, they've been there for quite some time.
He looks up at the rafters, seeing where his rope snapped and says a silent prayer of gratitude to whatever circumstances caused it to fail so fortuitously for himself. Not recognizing the others, he hopes they went peacefully, though the tear stains streaming down their faces tells otherwise. 'She looks like she may have once been so very beautiful.' he thinks to himself as he stares at the female corpse staring down tragically at him lying there on the ground.
SNAP! His knee buckles underneath him as he tries to stand. 'That doesn't sound or feel at all good', he thinks to himself as he falls back down to the cold, oil stained ground. He decides to sit and gather his thoughts a bit more before he tries to stand up again. Not that he has much choice in the matter at this point.
'What the hell is going on?' he mutters anxiously. 'Why can't I remember anything?' That's when he feels a warm, wet spot on the back of his head. He reaches back there, grazing it gently with his fingers to feel a sharp pain and a squishy, shattered sensation. His fingers come back to his eyes to reveal streaks of thick blood coursing from his fingers down his palm. Blood, he remembers seeing blood before. Recently and a lot more of it than what's dripping from his fingers currently. 'Blood everywhere.'
The memory is a strange, miraculous thing sometimes. A zoetrope-like sensation of memories as images begin to carousel through his mind with little concern for logic or relevance. He sees images of death, hundreds of bodies lying prostrate in the suburban streets of Anywheresville, USA. Flashes of broadcasts showing military forces raining bullets on what appear to be civilians, though the stumbling gait and mindless wanderings indicate something else...something horrifically worse. Another flash of a group of people screaming, begging for safe entry into a home; HIS home! A concerned family; two young boys and a scared, compassionate women looking to him for guidance, to know what to do, to have all the answers and to keep them safe.
"What do we do, Dad?! I'm scared and they won't stop screaming!" He remembers that last sentence so vividly now, the fear warbling in his son's voice. He remembers reaching for the doorknob and looking back at his wife for reassurance, before opening the door to let the unknown in, if only to quiet the small mob that's gathered to avoid bringing any further attention to the family house. The memory of his wife's fearful look is what does it; opens up the floodgates to a full, horrific recall of the apocalyptic events and tragic circumstances he's awakened into.
It all got so much worse, so rapidly after that. 'I should have never opened that damn door' he mutters to himself mournfully as he drags the length of rope and himself to the locked door of the garage.
'I'll be home for dinner, honey.' he says to himself through choked back tears, as he slips the rope once again round his neck, feeling the familiar scratch and ties the end just taught enough around the doorknob.
'I'll be home just in time, dear...' as he slumps himself down, pulling the rope down tight with him.