Old man Bayou woke up before his alarm. It was Monday! Grinning, he threw off the covers and leapt out of bed. There was a poster on his wall, from his daughter, which detailed a complex series of calisthenics that promised to keep him ‘ Spry and Steady ’.
But he didn't need those exercises to feel spry today! It was Monday. Mail day!
Old man Bayou hadn't received any letters since Saturday. He was starving for the attention that his mailbox gave him. He zipped down the rickety stairs in his bathrobe, flung open his front door, and padded out to the mailbox in his bunny slippers.
The mailman was reaching out the window of his little mailman vehicle, placing letters into Old man Bayou's mailbox. Bayou stood next to his mailbox, bouncing with excitement.
"Happy Monday Fred," Old man Bayou said, beaming.
The mailman turned to grin at Old man Bayou. But it wasn't Fred. It wasn't Fred at all. Fred was plump and jolly. This mailman was...Gaunt. And his smile was kind of creepy.
He couldn't help it though. He didn't have lips. Or skin.
The skull stared at Bayou with empty eyes. "Special delivery," the skeleton rasped, holding out an oversized black envelope.
Old man Bayou eyed the skeleton warily. I can't see very well anymore, he told himself. And I don't really understand kids'fashion these days.
He took the letter and retrieved his letter opener from his bathrobe pocket. He gingerly cut open the seal, biting his lip with excitement.
He pulled out the letter. It was typed in Papyrus font. It read:
"Dear Bob Billy Bayou,
You have had a long career as a player in the game of life. It is our pleasure to announce that we have promoted you to the position of moderator. We hope you enjoy your existence in this capacity.
Cordially yours,
Misters Good, Evil, and Death
P.S. Your salary will not increase, please do not request for a pay rise."
The world turned white and seemed to dissolve, like an Alka-Seltzer. Old man Bayou saw his body fade away.
And then he was inside the head of his nineteen-year-old grandson. Seeing through his eyes. Hearing his thoughts. Feeling his feelings.
‘ It's Friday,'His grandson thought, ‘ I think I'll go drink myself silly and then sleep with a loose woman.;
"No!" Old man Bayou shouted. But the way his voice sounded...It was just a little voice inside his grandson's head.