"We've gotta leave him, Mike!"
I kept shaking Johnny's lifeless body, muttering the whole time under my breath. "Come on, Johnny. Come on, wake up, buddy. It's not that bad, Johnny, come on, Johnny..." His limbs twisted and contorted like a rag doll's. Burn marks made his face nearly unrecognizable.
The desperation in Tyler's voice pierced through the dull drone of the alarm. "Mike, we gotta move! Cops'll be here any second!" I stood up to see him scrambling through the blown out hole in the vault door. I followed close behind, blind grief morphing to hot, white rage.
"What the fuck happened, Tyler?" I screamed at his back, standing by the entrance while he shoved as many bills as he could into his duffel bag.
"I don't know," he responded in a flat, emotionless tone. "Something went wrong with the charges."
"Something went wrong with the charges?" I shot back. "You just blew Johnny the fuck up and something went wrong with the charges? He's fuckin' dead, man. He's goddamn dead and you--you killed him, goddammit!" I grabbed his shoulder in exasperation, spinning him around to face me. I didn't know if I was going to punch him or break down crying. But I stopped dead when I saw his face.
Tyler looked scared. Frightened like a small child, standing there with a bag full of money, suddenly in far too deep. We both were. He stood silent for a moment, even as bells continued to sound around us.
"I'm sorry, Mike," he finally said, his words heavy with guilt. "But I can't fix it. Grab his bag, fill it up, and let's go. We can still make the window. We don't have to go down, too."
I didn't respond. I wouldn't have known what to say. I went back to Johnny's corpse and grabbed the duffel bag still slung around his shoulder as fast as I could. My mind was blank as I filled it with cash. We had to get out. We could mourn later.
***
We both sat on the cold, concrete floor of Tyler's apartment, wordlessly counting out stack after stack of hundreds. It had been a good haul. Johnny would have been so proud. I was confused when I felt my fingertips graze cool leather near the bottom of Johnny's bag. My hand emerged with what looked to be a jet black wallet. I stared perplexed for a moment before letting it fall open.
"Tyler..." I breathed, the air rushing out of my lungs like a deflating balloon. My hands trembled as I turned the contents towards him. His eyes widened and froze in place, lips opening and closing like a dying fish. The wallet slipped from my fingers, clattering to the ground, lying open for both of us to see.
On top, a picture of Johnny, facing the camera and smiling. And below, the unmistakable, shiny, yellow glint of a badge.