When I was born my father said I had stars in my eyes and a smile as bright as the sun. He told me that as long as I was near, happiness was sure to follow. He was a busy man who built gadgets and gizmos for those who were underprivileged and disabled - things I didn't quite understand as a child, but knew was amazing. My classmates called him 'the mad scientist man'...but I knew my daddy and I knew he was never mad.
I was six years old and every Friday he would pick me up from school and take me to get ice-cream.
"Daddy," I would ask with my big toothy grin. "Can I have two scoops?"
"How can I ever deny that little face?" He always asked, squishing my cheeks. I would giggle uncontrollably and when he would hand me the ice cream cone, it'd be loaded with sprinkles. "Unfortunately," He would say. "This is the only rainbow I can give to you now...but just you wait until I trap one in a box!"
I would nod before digging in and the rest of the time would be spent talking about school and friends and cleaning my face with the promise not to tell mom.
Looking back on it, mom always knew I ate ice-cream before dinner because the dessert that night would be fruit, but it was nice to have a secret between daddy and me.
One Friday, we got ice cream and he said excitedly that he was going to take me to a movie! The animated one that I wanted to see so badly! It probably was just the same as all the rest - I don't really remember it anymore because that night, everything changed.
I'll always remember the bright lights and the sirens...a drunk driver was on the loose and didn't quite care that he was in a crowded parking lot. My daddy pushed me away, but the driver crushed his legs and destroyed his spine. The doctors said he was paralyzed.
For one to live, another must die. I knew this must be true. I'd seen in books, in television, in movies. The order of life was strictly controlled...there was no truly changing anything - only changing the circumstances, only exchanging people.
A great sense of power surged through me as I opened the heavy time machine doors. I wasn't quite sure what he wanted me to do. Change history? It was so broad. It could be from saving Abraham Lincoln to stopping bubblegum from ever existing.
Still - I had to do something. I couldn't leave my father's intelligence to rot in vain. December 9th, 2015...the day my father's body was paralyzed by a drunk driver...I had been right there and yet I had done nothing to stop it. How could I have? I was only 6 years old...he fought his hardest, lasted ten years when the doctors said he only had three...but he still died too soon.
'I could warn him,' I thought. 'Tell him don't cross the road! I see headlights!' or I could push him out of the way. I wasn't quite sure what the plan was when I saw the swerving headlights and my father walking me across the street. My heart jumped out of my chest...and I leaped.
For one to live, another must die.
I saved his life and ended mine.