(Aussies tend less to stay in dorms so writing in an appropriate way for here!)
I put my breakfast down and went to the door. Who the hell would even be knocking at this time in the morning? I am the only one in my house who wakes up this early, partly because I have class in an hour and partly because I'm 35 weeks pregnant and have been awake since 3am.
I open the door and stop in my tracks. What I see is unexplainable. I don't know how to describe it, except that it's me. I'm starting at me. This woman is different, sure. Her hair is longer and different. She's about 25kg heavier, but looks great. Glowing. Happy.
This woman speaks 5 words to me.
"You need to leave. Now."
I shut the door as I heard my boyfriend get in the shower.
"Who are you?" I ask. I fidget nervously figuring out in my head how the hell I'd explain to Nathan why I even answered thedoor, let alone explaining the body double. I stop as I notice her face, my face, contorts to a confused and pained look.
"I'll explain everything soon. While he's in the shower just oak done stuff and come with me. I'm begging you."
I believe her. Me. God, this is confusing. I run downstairs and start packing and oversized handbag with a few days worth of clothes. I wiggly get dressed in to jeans, a singlet and cardi and rather than spend the usual hour on my face and hair, I put my hair up and make sure my face is clean. I open the bathroom door and say a quick goodbye to Nathan, telling him that my study group called and asked me to come in early.
"Fine, I'll call you at lunch. You don't have money for the bus so you can just walk today." His usual response.
I waddle back upstairs, slip my flats on and walk out the door. I look at this version of me and we share a look that I can't explain. I don't know if I trust her, but I trust myself so silently we walk to her car.
I notice a booster seat in the back. I close the back door, my nerves are shot. I hop in the front and put my belt on. She starts the car and we drive. We drive for about 30 minutes, North, until she finally says "You can't go back there."
.....