McDuck Capital Bank
296 Bleeker St
NY, NY 10012
Atn: Donald Duck, Document Processing Dept.
Dear Mr. Duck,
In connection with the transaction enclosed on January 13, 2020, I have enclosed the following original equity certificates.
One thousand nine hundred and seventy-three (1,973) shares of common stock issued by Mickey Mars, LLC to Beast Finance Corp Fund II L.P.
Three hundred and eighty-two (382) shares of preferred series A shares issued by Mickey Mars, LLC to Beast Finance Corp Fund II L.P.
Please acknowledge receipt of the forgoing by signing and dating the acknowledgement on the back of this letter and faxing it to me at the number displayed on the enclosed business card or emailing it to me at MGaston @ Beastfinancecorp.com.
Signed,
Gaston - Junior Associate
------------------------------------------------------------
From: DDuck @ McDuckCapitalBank.com
To: MGaston @ Beastfinancecorp.com
Subject: Receipt of notes
Gaston,
We have received the package containing your firm's equity investment and will secure it in our vault this afternoon. I have sent a scan of the acknowledgment on the back of your letter to your facsimile as requested.
Best,
DD
-------------------------------------------------------------------
During the first quarter of fiscal year 2020, the document processing vault at McDuck Capital Bank received several dozen certificates similar to the above in connection to the Mickey Mars transaction. As Qualified Document Custodians under the Dodd Frank Act, McDuck Bank received a fee from its clients in exchange for securing certain investment documents within its vaults. The clients, in this case a syndicate of private equity investors working with King Arthur Capital (formerly Credit Suisse), sent these documents to McDuck Bank, US Bank, or any other qualified custodian of their choice in order to comply with Dodd Frank regulations.
McDuck had, as his reputation would have suggested, engineered his bank's position as a Qualified Document Custodian to his personal advantage. To begin with, he possessed a complete listing of all documents within the bank's vault which related to the Mickey Mars transaction on his personal computer under the guise of working from home. McDuck used this data to determine which of his bank's clients held the largest positions within Mickey Mars, and presented it a certain Mr. Chernabog.
Although the details of the meeting are forever unknown as Chernabog refuses to deliver testimony and Mr. McDuck's counsel has advised him to deny any recollection of the event, certain outcomes of the discussion between the two gentlemen have become clear:
Firstly, according to sources whom we will not name McDuck's personal account in the Cayman islands decreased by $1.7 bazillion. Although we cannot be sure where he transferred the funds, the sum of all balances of Chernabog's accounts increased by a similar amount shortly thereafter.
Secondly, Chernabog used the vast majority of his increased funds, $1.5 bazillion, to short several LPs as a qualified investor, including Beast Finance Corporation whose equity transmittal letter I have reproduced above with the aid of my crystal ball. These LP corresponded exactly with the top entries on McDuck's list with maximum exposure to Mickey Mars.
Thirdly, Chernabog fired his broker and hired a new agent, Mr. Goofey, to manage his accounts. Goofey reports that he "done goofed" and transferred the shares to an account unknown to him. The position later appeared in an account linked to one of the trust funds responsible for Mr. McDuck's nephews' education.
Finally, upon receiving notification that Goofey had made the transfer, Chernabog flew into a fit of rage, or rather a fit of even more rage than he normally exhibits, and began attacking the spacecraft responsible for shuttling customers from Earth to Mickey Mars on the red planet. This behavior continued at random intervals for 3 months until the trust had liquidated its position.
I will let you draw your own conclusions. I believe I have made my own apparent.
I propose, as a member of this board, that Mr. McDuck be barred from purchasing shares in Mickey Mars. I recognize that my investigative methods have perhaps been unethical, specifically with respect to my reproduction of private documents proprietary to Beast Capital. However, I found them necessary in order to illustrate my point. I am prepared to launch further investigation if necessary in order to thwart any attempts by Mr. McDuck to obscure the channels through which he may attempt to purchase shares. I am also willing to transform into a dragon if necessary in order to more adequately defend out operations against further Chernabog attacks.
Accordingly, I submit this document as a motion.
Merlin