Brigadier Clairvoyant stalked through The Magnificent's lair. The Magnificent had been rampaging throughout the city for weeks now, killing, stealing, and wreaking havoc. He was the worst villain the city had seen in decades. His craftiness made his attacks incredibly effective, and worse still, there were rumors that he was using the proceeds of these attacks to complete a brainwashing ray. The Magnificent had defeated Lord Puncher, had defeated The Industrial Captain, but Clairvoyant was different. Where Magnificent had trapped other supers, those supers who relied on their powers, Clairvoyant was different. Clairvoyant had to rely on his brain, had to find every advantage he could get to make up for his lack of physical ability.
This made it difficult for him to fight a normal villain. But Magnificent was worse than a normal villain, was craftier, knew how to beat a super. This was why Brigadier Clairvoyant kept his exploits low-key, and waited for situations like these. Because the best way to deal with a villain like nobody's ever seen is to give them a hero like they've never seen.
Brigadier Clairvoyant maintained his psychic aura, ready to detect the minds of any nearby guards. He couldn't be too careful. If he was detected, his means of fighting back or escaping were limited. So he merely had to stay undetected.
A guard! No, two. No, a lot of guards, in fact. All around one room. Brigadier Clairvoyant read closer.
*Why are we guarding the latrine? I get that supers'll think its important, but they won't fall for it for long, and it'll get me killed. I should have taken that job at Wal-*
Brigadier Clairvoyant moved on through the dimly-lit, sparsely decorated concrete lair. It made sense that it would be, as Magnificent would waste no money on trivialities. Any funds would go towards his dastardly plans.
That was when he saw the doors. Massive, double, oaken doors. Exquisitely hand-crafted, gilded with gold, ornate doorknobs. Guarded by two guards who appeared to be veterans of multiple wars, skilled enough to pose a challenge to any super. Brigadier Clairvoyant grinned. Now here was a challenge. Neither guard knew what was inside the room, either, which showed just how important it was.
Brigadier Clairvoyant began to think on just how to pass this challenge.
Ten minutes and several feet of shoelace later, he was in.
And he was shocked. The entire room was filled with exquisitely bound books. In the center of the room was an armchair as magnificent as its owner, facing a fireplace. But nobody was sitting in the chair, and nobody was in the room. Just books. Brigadier Clairvoyant moved towards the shelves, running a hand over the spines of the books, wondering what would bring Magnificent to spend so much on books, of all things.
Then he noticed the titles. Or rather, the title. One title, and a worrying one at that. *How to make sure no one is reading your mind*. Every book had that title. He took one last check for other people and picked a book off the shelves.
Why were the pages blank? Why would he-wait. There was something on that last page, what was it?
*Distract him. *
A gun clicked-