"Just a little further" Stasi said as they walked through the forest. Miyakel was breathing hard, half from the quick pace his sister kept, half from fear of the unknown. Their father told them to stay away from this place; that a powerful wizard put a poisonous spell from all who entered. Normally they would heed papa's advice, but when the Smif sisters called them cowards them at school on Godday, he and his sister were compelled to travel here to save face from embarrassment.
They pass over a creak, and Stasi warned her sibling to not drink from it. "We don't know how the wizard poisons people who come here, but it's best to avoid eating or drinking anything." Miyakel dreaded the thought of getting sick and having to reveal the truth to father, so he resisted the urge to quench his thirst.
Their path was overgrown, but manageable. The ground was more covered than the roads in their town, but was too straight to be a coincidence. It was obvious, even to a child, that this once was created by people as a passage way for many folk. He envisioned a time when it was clear and large caravans traveled through this area in horses and carriages down this road.
Suddenly his sister put her hand out on his shoulder, and became instantly silent. Miyakel froze, worried that they had come across something sinister. Slowly, she pointed with her other hand. The young boy slowly followed with his eyes until he saw it. A metal pole, twice the his height with a sign on it. Metal was rare, and never used for such a luxury as a sign.
The writing was grey and dirty, but somehow Miyakel knew at one time they were colorful, that time had eroded all the brilliance the sign once had. He couldn't read the ancient text, some of the letters were clear like (CBL), while other appears backward (R) or upside down (A). Nonetheless the sounds he could construct from it made no sense to him.
However, he was transfixed by the symbol. It was a triangle, with what appeared to be a circle. However the circle was an illusion. It was circle but every other 1/6 was missing. Additionally the center was showing, but a ring around the center was also removed. Something had made this sign, and it did so very deliberately. Although he had never seen it before, this symbol was foreboding. His mind was fearful of the alien design.
Miyakel held his sister's hand and tilted his head back toward the village. He had seen enough and wanted to go home. Mother would be making a fresh batch of bread, and they still had firewood to gather for the stove. Stasi apparently felt the same. This was as far as they were willing to go. However she pulled out some paper and the piece of sharpened coal that father had gotten her from last Spring's carnival. She copied what she saw, hoping that one day she could make sense of the sign. After she finished, he watched her carefully open her satchel and place in it the paper that read: "WARNING CHERNOBYL AHEAD."