The two mice threw long shadows as the light from the rocket's base cleared away the last dimness of morning. Each sat upright, as mammals are want to do, with their tails curled together in the manner of lovers, on the bleachers where so many humans had long before watched their astronauts travel into space. It had rusted, crawling with vines and tiny wild flowers, but still stood.
"Is this the sixtieth launch? Or the sixty-first?" asked Mirsk.
"Sixty-first." said Heefl. "Unless we count the ship that came down from orbit to collect those starving refugees in Tampa." He uncurled his tail to flick it in the air, knocking at a fly that buzzed around the pair. It spun off on an air current to bother someone else, no worse for the love tap. "But what does it matter? According to the grand master, they've all left. That was the last one."
"What do we know of her? This Last Woman?" asked Mirsk. She tilted her head to the side, only to suddenly curl up, frantically chewing at a spot on her belly. If Heefl did not lash out with his tail, she would have tumbled from their perched and into the tall weeds.
"She was the daughter of a politician." Heefl offered. "And was a farmer for the longest time. The last to hold out, trying to carve something from the ground. In her time here, she slaughtered many goats and sheep, but had done no harm to our people. We carry her no ill will. We should only be so lucky if she teaches the others up there, in the heavens, her way of living with the Earth. Not that it matters, as none will do so again."
Mirsk nudged Heefl, grooming his fur until she caught a flea. She crushed it between her teeth. "But will they really never return?"
"According to the grand master, they cannot. The air is too deadly for them. Those that stand too high choke on it and die. The grand master has said that there are places on this world where it is poison even at the ground. That none but those who burrow deep can survive there, for the air is fire in a thunderstorm, and acid in the dry times. It is not fit for them any longer."
Heefl directed his beady black eyes upward to track the rocket trail, one surrounded in a patch of dark grey against his otherwise off-white fur. The trail stopped as the black speck broke through the sky, escaping from the world, and presumably into space. Heefl didn't know space, it was a distant concept. But he did not yearn to know it, that would be silly when the world was already so big around him.
"If this is the Last Woman, and she is now gone..." Mirsk whispered fearfully. "What will we do? We have only ever watched the men and the women, tracked their ill deeds and reported them to the grand master while staying clear of their feet."
Heefl curled his tail around Mirsk's again, drawing her attention. Although he was the last of a thousand generations of observers, he was but a simple mouse, what could he say to assuage her fear? What of his own? There was uncertainty ahead.
"With the Last Human now gone, what can we do, my Mirsk?" Heefl asked, looking his mate in the eyes. "But live?"
Mirsk fretted at her belly fur again, silent in consideration. Her tail tightened around Heefl's, threatening to knot.
"Yes." Mirsk whispered. "*We* will live."
On that thought, they disappeared into the high weeds under the bleachers, unsure of where they would go or what they would do there. But one thing was certain, unlike the humans, they would *live*.