'How long have you lived?' The reporter asks. She's pretty, in a plain sort of way; doesn't wear any makeup, and doesn't really need to.
'I don't know' I smiled, it was a question that I'd been asked almost everyday this past week. Who knew revealing my immortality to the world would generate so many questions.
'You don't know? As in you've forgotten?' She asks.
'As in, I can't remember, although I'd wager at maybe four thousand years, give or take' I say.
'And why do you think that?' She sits forward, pen to paper.
I think for a second, 'One of my earliest memories puts me in Ancient Greece, but it was before civilisation had really gotten a hold; the temples were still being built' I shrug, 'but...I don't know, I'm really not sure.'
'You're Greek?' She says, her eyes move from my feet to my head, examining my hair, skin colour, and eyes. I laugh.
'Maybe'
'So you don't remember where you were born?' She says.
'Do you?' I arch my eyebrow.
'I suppose not, but I remember what I've been told' she says.
'And I was told thousands of years ago; do you think you could remember after all of that time?'
She pauses, 'Probably not'.
'Well, there's your answer'.
She shuffles through her notes, 'what about recent events? It says here you fought in the American civil war?'
'Was that a question?'
'Yes, did you?'
'I don't know, where did you get that information?' I ask.
'One of your journals, it was uncovered last year' she explains, confused, as if I should already know.
'Ah, I see. I remember loosing a couple of those' I laugh, 'although there was this fire, in some English city, hell it might have been the fire of London,' she's looks as though she's about to ask a question, 'But I can't remember the year' and she goes back to writing, 'I lost nearly every journal, and the few that remained were barely legible. In fact the only one the I could understand turned out to just be about a ship journey I took fifty years earlier' I begin to laugh, as if I've told a joke, but all I receive is a blank expression.
'I guess you had to be there' I smirk.
'Maybe' she says, 'what about world war 2? It's well documented you fought there, a sergeant in the British army right?'
My smile fades, 'Yes I...Fought'.
'Sorry, it can't have been too long ago for you. Do you need some water? Can we get him a drink please' she shouts to an assistant.
'No, please, it's fine, I just...A lot of good men died, many of whom have recently been put to rest' I say. 'I lost a lot of friends'
'I apologise, we can move on if you'd like?' She's good at lying.
'That would be nice' I say.