What a fantastic end to the night. Downtown always looked best after dark and the snow fall added just the right amount of contrast to the scene. It was my annual Christmas office party and we had just left the venue. As I opened the cab door to let my wife in she smiled at me and I thought for the hundredth time how right she was about not driving here. We knew it was an open bar and we decided to just be safe about it.
We were sitting in the back seat as I went over all of the office gossip about the people I had just introduced her to when she picked her head up my shoulder.
"What is that guy, drunk?".
I looked up just in time to see a pair of headlights swerve from the oncoming lane and into ours.
Everything was dark, well almost everything. Two glowing ovals floated in space right in front of me. On the left one of them read 'New Game+', and on the right the other said 'Exit to Reality'.
"What the hell is this?"
I was just in a car with my wife, but now...where the hell am I? I tried to search around but there was nothing else here and no matter which way I looked those two buttons were the only things I could see. It occurred to me that we must have been hit by that other driver. I've read before that when people have traumatic things happen to them their brains come up with elaborate scenes to process the information. This must be what my brain came up with instead of a tunnel of light, like this was all just some kind of video game.
I immediately dismissed the option of "Exiting to reality". If this was my life's version of the tunnel of light then there was no question, I was walking away from it. The sense of panic started in my heart and lit my entire body on fire in less then a second. My arm flew up and selected the other option without any more thought, I had to make sure she was OK. I couldn't waste anymore time here, I *had* to know what happened. The sign lit up, letting me know that I had made my selection. As my arm came back down to my side something occurred to me "Shouldn't that say 'Continue"'?
I blinked and then I was surrounded by darkness, I knew I was opening my eyes but it didn't do any good there was nothing to see. I could feel my body again but I couldn't move. I heard some strange noises coming from outside, but they were distorted like they was coming through a thick wall.
I thought right away that the car had been crushed and that I was stuck inside and upside down. The accident must have been bad. There was a pushing down near my feet and feeling that I was moving, slowly toward something. Then came the unbelievable crushing pressure on my skull, like it was in some kind of vice that squeezed down on it from every angle at once. I wanted to scream but my chest was paralyzed and there was no air in my lungs. "Oh God! What is this? What is going on?" The sensation that I was being pushed slowly through this coffin continued as I struggled to move my arms so I could create some amount of space for my self.
Then I saw the light. It wasn't the pleasant feeling of safety you get when you finally find the lamp in a dark room. It was a searing pain that shot through my eyes and stabbed into every corner of my brain. I could finally breath now, and I could finally scream. I risked opening my eyes again just for a second, just to see if I could figure out was going on. I saw men surrounding me, pulling me out of something. I knew that they must be the EMT's. They must have arrived in time to get me out of the wreck and I have never been happier to see another living being. I couldn't keep my eyes open for long though and the pain forced me to squeeze them back shut on reflex. I felt my arms and legs flailing around now kicking at nothing but air. I was finally free.
My entire body hurt like nothing else I had ever felt. I can't stand any kind of light and even when I get up the nerve to open my eyes again I can't see more then two feet in front of me. I can't control my arms or legs and I although I am aware of people talking, their sounds they are making don't make any sense. I must have a really bad concussion. I think my skull is broken. As my body is wrapped from head to toe in a warm blanket, I finally feel that I can pass out. Just before I do a thought finds its way into my mind; I'm six foot four, how fucking big is this monster that is now holding me?
A new bubble pops up in front of me: "Achievement Unlocked: Forever Reincarnated" The smaller text below it says: "Respawn to this world 100 times.". What the hell does that mean?