It's nearly 10 pm when you're driving down Basket Creek Road. There are no streetlights. This, combined with a heavy layer of fog, is really making you wish you had woken up a few hours earlier to make the 12 hour drive. It's been a full year since anyone has been to the little mountain home. Weeds have surely obscured the entrance, but sure enough you see a small piece of wood with the number "42" carved into it nailed onto a tree. You're here.
As you open the car door and step into the long grass, you find yourself again wishing you had gotten here earlier. The thought of snakes hiding in the grass terrifies you. Do snakes go out at night, though? Is it too cold for them? Even on these muggy summer nights? You can't remember your snake trivia, so you just hope for the best as you close the car door behind you.
The once red bridge has been stripped and repainted a dark gray. It sways as you drag your suit case across it. The brook underneath rages. It's been rainy lately. The water level is higher than normal. It helps to mask the problems with erosion that this area in the mountains has been having.
You reach the small house and look in your bag for the key. Did you remember to bring it? What if you left it at home? Fuck.
You find it.
You open the door and turn on the light. It's just the way you remember it. The black and white linoleum floor. Pictures of you and the cousins in the summer over the past 22 years. Pictures of distant relatives who would come up here before you. Some mouse droppings in the corner. You will have to lay out some traps tomorrow, but there's still too much work to do tonight.
You hate this part, but it's a necessity. You venture into the basement to turn on the water. There are only four stairs to get down there, but they creak loudly enough to alert anything down there of your presence. Not that anything would be down there, save for a few mice and bugs, maybe snakes. Those fears tend to stick with you though, even after childhood.
The water is turned on and you retreat back upstairs, closing the basement door behind you. You choose the small bedroom to stay in.
Opening the large trunk at the foot of the bed, you find sheets and pillow cases that somehow don't smell too bad. Usually you are met with a smell that takes a night or two to get used to.
You lay down, finally starting to think the long drive was worth it. You fall asleep looking forward to the week ahead of you.
In the morning you wake up and make a list of things to do for the day. You definitely will have to drive to Callicoon. You wonder if any more shops have closed in the dying little town. Without the "Flea Market" you realize that for the first time in 15 years you aren't going to be able to get a Cloisonne figurine to add to your small collection. Luckily though the supermarket, Peck's, is still there. You grab some groceries and as you drive back to the home you check to see which movie is playing this week. "Dawn of the Planet of the Apes" is playing for the next two nights. Maybe you'll see it.
You get back to the home. Spending the day getting ready. You break out the old rider mower, hoping it still has some life in it after all the disuse and mow down the snake-hiding grass. You sweep up the bedrooms, set some mousetraps, and find the old cushions for the porch furniture.
By the end of the day you are exhausted, but all your hard work will be worth it. Tomorrow your family comes. Then will be the time for the fun. Will you hike the mountain tomorrow? See if the old diving spot about half a mile down the brook is still deep enough? Maybe tube down the Delaware River if the weather looks promising.
You sometimes wish you could bring other people up here. Sometimes you find yourself describing it to friends or dates or coworkers and they look at you like you are crazy.
No cell phone service. No internet. No television. Half the time you are here you are cleaning. The place almost always smells or feels damp. Rattlesnakes are fairly common. The nearest town is a twenty minute drive away, which isn't too bad, but there's nothing much there. A few kitschy shops, one grocery store, a one-screen movie theater. You worry that if you were to bring someone other than family that they won't appreciate it. But you do, and that's what matters. You spend the rest of the daylight reading on the screened in porch, listening to the nature around you.