On September 14, 1994, a mugging went badly for everyone involved. In the ensuing chaos, a gun went off, killing a passing cyclist.
The cyclist was engaged to a woman named Diana Gaines. Upon losing her fiancé, Diana slipped into a deep depression. Because she was so consumed with grief, she lost her job as a kindergarten teacher and took a part-time job as secretary at a pharmacy. As consumed with grief as she was, her job was not done well. One day, as she slumbered at her post, men came in and stole a lot of very expensive medications.
Diana lost her job, and the men gained a livelihood that lasted them several months. In February of 1995, one of the purchasers of some of the drugs was unhappy with the shipment, and was cheated out of several tens of thousands of dollars.
The man, Güero Rivera, took out his frustration on his 13-year-old son that night, breaking both of his legs.
Ashamed of what he had done, he did not seek medical help, and the boy spent months in pain before his legs healed awkwardly and gruesomely twisted.
The boy left the state and became a waiter far from home, at a small restaurant that didn't mind that his gait was not smooth and that he took several minutes to cross a room.
One night as he worked, many years later, he bumped the very edge of a table as he passed, just enough to upset the glass of water on its surface and spill its content into the lap of one of the customers.
The occupants of the table were two high schoolers, on their very first date. 17-year-old Bryan Tate, with his perfectly-styled hair, wearing a borrowed pair of loafers because his sneakers were ripping at the seams. 16-year-old Marissa Davis, her hands shaking with anxiety, her bangs damp with a nervous sweat.
The glass of water spilled right into Bryan's lap, and Marissa, who hadn't noticed the limping waiter passing by, blamed her shaking hands.
Red-faced, she rushed out of the restaurant without saying goodbye to Bryan, though he tried to console her.
Days passed, and she couldn't bear to leave her room. Every time she tried, she was overwhelmed with waves of shame and regret and embarrassment until it buried her, and she rushed instead to nestle in her bed and bury herself in the Internet.
And there, in her room, she stayed. Because of the bullet.