The young man looked around, as he sat in his small airship. He finally saved up enough to get one. Although, it was really more of a hot air balloon with a couple of steam powered fans and a rudder to help steer. No longer would he have to rent one from that dirty scoundrel Lazirith. He would finally be able to harvest clouds for only himself, and wouldn't have to share half of his earnings with Lazirith. Today he would make a name for himself as the best cloud harvester ever, and maybe if he did a good job for the Wizard, he might teach him some tricks to use in a pinch. Besides pirates, you had to worry about dragons, birds larger than some airships, and the Hawkari, a humanoid winged creature with black skin, sharp talons, a beak and nasty magic. They stuck to the Nimbostratus clouds for the dark storm magic. So avoiding them wasn't normally an issue. In the two years he had been collecting clouds Jaxson had never seen a Hawkari. He made a last check that he had his cloud trappers, harpoon gun, pack and enough fuel to last him and he launched.
Jaxson got up to the Stratocumulus cloud level. From here Jaxson could see the entire world. Everything looked fake from this perspective. The trees and village he could make out looked like children's toys. The tilled fields like small checker boards of green and brown. The Strato clouds were good for quick money as most mages, witches, and wizards used the elements from the clouds in a majority of their spells.
Jaxson prepared his first cloud trapper as he was about to enter the cloud. He grabbed the bronze latch at the top of the glass container and twisted it a quarter turn, until it popped open, with the release of pressure. He didn't know how the Magesmiths make these but he had managed to buy five of them over the past two years. Not an easy thing when they cost half a gold each, but now he was able to collect a lot of clouds in one run. He positioned the bottle in the holder on the side of his basket. As soon as it was placed in the basket, once invisible runes on the side of the glass began to glow turquoise. To Jaxson they were scribbles, but he new that once in the basket, the basket runes activated the cloud catching runes and began to suck in the clouds. After about five minutes Jaxson seals the lid back on the bottle, and gives the latch a quarter turn to close it. He always wondered how the clouds could be so big then shrink so small but look the same as when they were big. Jaxson rummaged through his pack to pull out some bread and cheese to eat. As he sat chewing the day old stale bread and hard cheese he heard a screech.
"Fuck'n hell. What was that?" Jaxson said to himself as he peeked over the side of the basket. In the sky, barreling his way looked to be a baby dragon, being chased by a Hawkari. He reached down and grabbed his harpoon gun, lifted it up and took aim at the Hawkari. Jaxson knew the dragon at such a young age was far more manageable than the Hawkari. The harpoon left the gun as Jaxson got the Hawkari in the sights. The Hawkari noticed the harpoon at the last second and shot off a quick lightning spell to stop it. It missed and hit my basket. The harpoon struck through the Hawkari's chest, pinning one of its wings back. It instantly dropped out of the sky, spiraling until Jaxson could no longer see it clearly. He would need to get a new harpoon now but at least he didn't die today.
The beating of wings growing closer, snapped him back to the moment. He just realized the dragon was flapping its wings outside of the basket. Jaxson peeks over the edge of the basket, into the bright blue eyes of a baby dragon. The dragon was green, he knew this was a earth dragon but all dragons had the ability to fly. They stared at each other for a minute as Jaxson slowly pulled off a chunk of bread and threw it to the dragon. The dragon dove into the basket before Jaxson could do anything. Not that there was much he could do to stop something as large as a wolf. Luckily, he was only a baby. It snuggled up against Jaxson and he slowly lowered his hand, and began stroking the babies head. He went to pat his stomach but the dragon snapped up and barred his teeth.
"Hold on, Hold on. Its okay I didn't mean to hurt you." Jaxson said as he raised his hands up in defense. The dragon put its head back into Jaxson's lap. Jaxson caught sight of a gash in the side of the dragon just below his right wing. He slowly lifted the wing up, noticing the gash was more than he could mend himself. Jaxson made the decision to bring the dragon to the Wizard to see if he could help the young dragon. He could drop off the cloud he picked up while he was at it.
"Well little dragon. Lets see if we can get you all fixed up." Jaxson looked at the horizon and the ground as they started their descent.