"Hit him."
"What?"
"I said hit him."
Jacob's mouth set into a thin line, but he did as he was told, and delivered a strong blow to the angel's delicate face. Blood oozed from the side of his head, painting his golden hair a rosy pink, and in the dim light, it looked as though it were tinted with bits of sunlight.
"All you gotta do is answer our questions, Halo, and we'll let you go." Marin said, propping herself up on the angel's chair. She was becoming frustrated with the being that sat before them. For three days they have shot him full of questions, kept him in solitary confinement, and they still didn't even know his name.
The angel grinned and spat some of his blood onto the ground. "You're as likely to let me go as I am to answer your questions. I'm not stupid, Marinda. I've already come to terms with my fate."
"Then why don't you just answer our questions? It won't help you in any way to stay loyal to your brethren." Jacob spoke up. He was twiddling a knife between his fingers, an action that didn't go unnoticed by the angel. Marin almost laughed. She knew it was his nervous habit to always play with whatever he was holding, and at this moment, it just so happened to work in their favor.
The angel chuckled. "They are my family. I won't dishonor them. Not even with torture or death being threatened."
Jacob sighed and drove the knife into the table, watching as the freshly sharpened blade splintered and shattered the wood beneath it. Then, he motioned towards the door, silently telling Marin that he needed some air.
When the barn door swung shut behind him, Marin spun back on the angel. Three days ago, he had been caught harvesting a soul from their neighbor, and they jumped on the opportunity of taking him prisoner. The neighbor didn't make it, unfortunately, but losses had become the norm ever since Heaven and Hell met on Earth.
"You're a fallen angel, correct?" She whispered, yanking Jacob's knife from its place in the table.
The angel merely glared at her, though he was more surprised than angry. Her entire aura had shifted dramatically within a fraction of a second.
"Don't bother lying, I know you are. The burns on your back- two slits that perfectly match the outline of wings. You were cast out. Tell me, Halo, if your loyalty is not with your so-called brothers and sisters of Heaven, then who is it with?"
He actually looked dumbfounded by her words. He was looking her up and down, taking in slow, shaky breaths, until he finally sighed.
"You caught me." He breathed. "I am not aligned with Heaven."
"But surely you wouldn't work for demons?"
He laughed sourly, the action shaking the chains that held him in place. For a second, Marin wondered if the sigils branded onto the iron would still be able to hold him.
"I'd rather die than say I work for those black-eyed abominations. No, I work for a much...greater cause." He spat more blood onto the ground. His eyes met Marin's, their deep ocean blue struggling to connect with her in any way possible, but it wouldn't work. He was far too weak to use any kind of mind games.
Marin glanced over her shoulder to make sure Jacob was still outside, and then turned back to the angel. "Why are you telling me all of this now? You weren't talkative five minutes ago."
"Why did you suddenly change your questions when Jacob left the room?"
Marin bit her tongue and turned her eyes down to the floor. This angel fell, so he must have done something upstairs to warrant getting booted, but the major question on her mind was *who* his boss was. That was the information she wanted out of him, but it would be nearly impossible to break out of him.
The angel shifted in his chair. "I'm going to warn you now, Marin, my boss is not the kind of man you want to play with. I'm sure he has heard about what you've been doing to me, and when he shows up here to take me back- you'll wish you had listened to me sooner."
She held the knife up to the light. Jacob had gotten it from his father when he was seven, he said it was a very special blade that could protect him from any and all danger, even divine. Now, in the thin light that surrounded them both, she could see that something was written on the edge of the blade. *Do not forget, my son, God has abandoned you. *
Marin looked from the blade to the angel, and then smiled. "Well, I guess we'll see then, won't we?"