Sometimes, when the sun goes down on the horizon, I close my eyes and pretend that I'm back home. I can practically feel the stained green carpet scraping the soles of my bare feet. The wind pushing my hair back from my face feels like it's coming in from the open window across from me, and even the heat from the sun brings me back to a simpler time of sitting in an overheated, overcrowded kitchen with my family. Yet when I open my eyes, I remember that that home is unreachable and unreal; it lives simply within a memory that will one day slip away. I often find myself searching for a solace in these sunsets, and leaving empty. I get so close to a life that I once knew, only to be brought back to a dimmer reality where the sun has hidden itself out of our reach.
A voice calls out from behind me, beckoning me back to here and now, yanking me from my daydreaming. It's silly, really, for me to be yearning for a life that I probably made up; there has only ever been Underground for me, and that's the home that I should be spending my time on. "Winter?" The voice repeats, closer now.
I let one last breath escape through my open mouth before standing. I make my way through the tall grass, then slip through the tree line like a whisper. "Seth," I greet, silently stepping over broken twigs and dried out leaves.
"What are you doing out here, Winter? You know what Boss would say if he found out that you were here, let alone that you were sitting there in plain daylight – anyone could have seen you."
I gently pull my hair behind my ears and into a tight knot at the base of my skull. "And thought what, exactly? People out there don't expect much from someone like me." I force out a chuckle, trying for a moment to picture myself from their point of view: a teenage girl with jet black hair, standing just above five feet tall. I would seem helpless, innocent, and naive. "Plus," I continue with a small smile, "it's not as though sunrise is plain daylight."
Seth runs his hands roughly through his blonde curls. "You know what I mean." He puts a hand softly on my shoulder and catches my eyes. "They all look up to you, Winter. If any of those kids down there heard that you were just sitting out here, you know that they would all try to come Outside and sit here, too. You have a responsibility, if not to Boss, then to them."
"They're not my children, and I sure as hell didn't bring them down there," I snap. "Just because they happened to be taken in by Boss, like us, and they just happen to be living in the same facility as us, it doesn't mean that I have to treat them like they're my children or something. I don't have to shape everything that I do for their benefit."
I stop when Seth drops his hand from my shoulder and steps a few paces away. He studies the ground as though the answers to the universe may be hidden beneath the decomposing remnants of summer. He shakes his head before raising his eyes to meet my own. "We're all they've got, Winter. You know that."
Somewhere inside of me I know that he's right; it's the same part of me that's yearning for a home and a family. I've spent the past five years Underground, taking each day and each mission in stride, waiting for something to happen that gives me a glimpse to the past that's been taken from my memory. Boss told me, on that first day, that it was my thirteenth birthday, and it was time for me to grow up – time for me to take responsibility. He showed me around Underground, showed me all of the dorms and the classrooms, the lounge and the cafeteria, and explained to me the importance of my presence there. I was his prodigy, and I was to be in charge of Underground one day. I was to care for the younger children there, children as young as six, and I was to demand respect from any of them that were older than me.
It was never much of a choice for me. When you can't remember anything but your name, and what happened only a few hours earlier is shrouded in a deep fog, it's not as though you can decide what to do with a clear head. I did as Boss said, and I did it well. Five years later, I'm still doing what he says.
It's not as though I don't care about the kids that are Underground with us. I practically raised them, after all. My entire memory was taken up by long evenings training kids that were falling behind, and sleepless nights spent tossing and turning and praying that they would still be there in the morning. It wasn't that I didn't care about what happened to them. It was more about needing to breathe in fresh air every once in a while, and about pretending for even a minute that I belonged in a world of stained green carpet and open windows.
(This is what I have so far as a first chapter of an ongoing thought in my mind. Mostly hoping it's enough of a hook, but I am all for constructive criticism.)