Angel sips at her tea, leaning against one of the posts for the deck's roof. The steam drifts straight upward with stillness of the humid air. The incoming storm rumbles in the distance, the air itself crackling with energy and anticipation. As she looks out across the trees and bushes in her front yard, the leaves have been turned upwards, the plants eager for the rain after a week of broiling hot weather.
The tea's scent of raspberry drifts along, the scent of rain heavy in the air and another rumble of thunder, much closer, comes from the billowing clouds. Angel looks upward more, taking another sip off of the clear mug. A bolt of lightning streaks across the darkening sky and she counts.
"One one-thousand, two one-thousand, three one-thou—" The crack of thunder cuts her off and she takes a sip from her mug. "Three miles." Another bolt flashes and there's the immediate sound of thunder, not even allowing a ‘ one'from her lips. She sips more at her tea, watching and waiting as the sky grows heavy.
There is no rain yet, just the promise of it on a stiff breeze that finds itself blowing. The sycamore trees bend and sway, dancing as more lightning flashes across the sky. Angel sniffs the air, smelling the rain incoming and looks up again. More lightning, more thunder, and the wind begins to pick up. Even the holly tree bends this time and the gust picks her short hair up and throws it crosswise across her head.
Another sip of her tea, shaking her head to return her hair to its normal position. The clouds billow higher, the sky changing colors and becoming greener and a sense of unease threads through her. The weather was so unpredictable around here but she just had to see. Jessica said that it was beautiful. Angel drinks more, looking up again, waiting for the rain. There's a deafening crack of lightning and thunder, startling her and making her draw back under the porch further in fright.
And then the rain starts. It's large, plopping drops, thick in the air and dropping straight downwards at first. Each drop glimmers as if it has its own little internal light. Angel watches in fascination. She had always loved storms but this new event, the rain shimmering, it made the storms that rolled through absolutely hypnotizing. They even shimmer after hitting the ground for a couple of seconds.
A streak of lightning lights up the sky, the rumble of thunder immediately following it. Each drop of water outputs a rainbow in the flashes of lightning, the electricity in the air setting her hair standing straight up. A flash sends a streak of rainbow across the sky and ground, changing the color the grass with each new streak of light. The wind picks up, sending the rain down at a new angle with each gust.
The trees dance in the wind, rainbow patterns flashing on and off of their leaves and trunks with each strike of lightning and deafening roar of thunder. The gusts of wind make the rainbows twist and transform before her eyes, brightening the green light into all colors. Each flash gives a new picture, a new image that isn't ever the same as the one before. The yard has been transformed into a wonderland of pure colors and lights.
Angel sits where she's been standing, staring blankly out at the sight in front of her, not sure if her legs can keep holding her up. Jessica had been right. It is absolutely beautiful.