"Holy shit"
Those were the first words Dr. "Alien Expert" said as he reviewed the the weird recordings the extraction team found in the ship we took down 18 hours ago.
It's been 21 days since they showed up. Millions of lives have been lost and our only hope rested in these weird ass recordings. Of course, I haven't seen anything yet because I don't have clearance. I'm just another soldier standing in the corner while everybody is scrambling to figure out our next move. The aliens were kicking our asses, and by "ours" I mean the whole damn world, not just the USA.
The attacks began in northern Montana. 8 days later Austria got hit. Then France, Germany and Holland were attacked. Spain got the worst of it all. The country doesn't even exist anymore.
We needed something. Anything.
Various military leaders from different countries were here in the same room. Anxiously awaiting what the alien expert would say next.
"Holy shit", he repeated.
"Doctor Caellum, what do you see? ", asked Fleet Admiral Kane. "Does it show something that can help us?"
The doctor turned towards us with tears in his eyes. He could barely speak but I caught what he said.
"This isn't their first visit"
The room went silent. Doctor Caellum composed himself and explained the situation.
These aliens had been here before and had to flee Earth because they lost the war for the planet...against fucking dinosaurs. They've been planning this invasion for millions of years.
"So...", Secretary of Defense Oliver was flabbergasted. "What do you propose we do? Call Japan and ask for Godzilla? We're fucked."
Lieutenant general Takashi didn't seem amused by the Secretary of Defense remarks and just proceeded to ask the important questions.
"It took a lot of manpower to take down this ship. Can we still defend ourselves? Can humanity survive this attack? ", Takashi asked.
Doctor Caellum proceeded to explain with enthusiasm that the Aliens wrote briefings fearing the "new species" is not as useless as they seem. Cocky bastards.
The whole room went into a frenzy planning the next move. Everybody was trying to come up with their own plan. Wasting precious time.
I couldn't keep listening to the pointless arguing and just spoke up.
"Permission to speak freely, sir", I shouted, not exactly knowing whose permission I was asking.
The Secretary of Defense Oliver granted me permission. "Yes, private Lopez?"
"The briefings and recordings state that the Alien menace came here looking for a species that no longer exists. They prepared for an enemy that's no longer here. We now know how to hurt them. Let's show these fuckers that humans are not here for the bullshit".