In the early days these so called "heroes" just couldn't compete. Most challengers were a joke that I would casually smack back to the previous checkpoint. They would feebly try to regroup and formulate a new strategy, but even the best and brightest among them simply weren't fast enough, smart enough, or strong enough to cut it. Word of my prowess began to spread. This was my moment of glory, until something happened that I never expected. People were getting upset with me. Apparently kicking ass isn't fun for the person on the receiving end. Not exactly a revelation, but what was I supposed to do, not kick ass? The powers that be were beginning to reassess my future. But I was fortunate, I was one of the few who was around early enough to have friends with their ear to the ground. They passed along the whispers to me, gave me a heads up about what was coming. It went against every fiber of my being, but I knew that I had to start letting my opponents win.
It used to make me so upset, so depressed. I started to think that my life was entirely pointless, one long string of little twerps who came in here all cocky, wearing their flashy fucking gear. I couldn't do anything but make it look like a good fight, make them think that they earned it. At the end of the day, it was just me falling on my sword. But I realized that's how you survive. That's how you get to respawn and fight the next punk in line. The alternative is to let the gods, devs as they call themselves, purge you from the world. Or even worse, they will let you live, but nerf you so badly that you become impotent, unable to withstand even the most meager opponent. That would be a pain worse than death, at least now when I am defeated I know that it was my choice.
Before I understood this reality, I used to squeeze the most out of every moment of down time that I had. If I wasn't crush some pipsqueak, I was pumping iron or surfing Amazon.boss (sorry, it's invite only) for my next diabolical weapon. Now I just sit here, replaying my copy of the Orange Box. I have to be the hero sometimes, right? Now I have nothing better to do while I wait for the next twerp to come along and think that he (or she, apparently girls like games too now) whooped me fair and square. I just hope that Valve throws me a bone and releases the sequel that I have been waiting nearly 9 million respawns for (eight years in the real world) before I fade into obscurity.