Claire discovered her ability when working on her first child.
She had worked on dozens of the deceased, but they all had either been elderly who died of natural causes, or middle-aged men and women who hadn't taken care of themselves as they should have. Yes, there were a few who died of accidents, but those who had died had lived long enough to get something out of life. To have their first kiss, first love, first fight, first everything.
But the little boy who laid before Claire, naked except for a paper-thin white sheet covering his genitals, he hadn't experienced anything except for the shit luck that the world had bestowed upon him.
"Oh God," Claire said, covering her mouth with one hand, and pushing back the flap of skin that had folded down from his forehead and covered his left eye. It was there, that his head must've collided with the asphalt. The rest of the family was fine after the car crash, but a faulty booster seat and faulty car door spelled doom for the three-year-old who wouldn't make it junior high, much less elementary school.
"Oh *God*," Claire said again, this time with a hint of anger in her wavering voice. If there was a "God", how in the hell could he ever let something happen to a child? Someone who was too young to probably even understand what life and death was?
Anger turned into rage, and Claire clenched her eyes. There in the darkness, she saw the Reaper, cloaked in the darkness of the insides of her eyelids, somehow managing to smile despite just being a skeleton in a robe, whispering "I got this one, my dear, he is all mine, I will take care of him."
Never in her short career did Claire feel such rage. She opened her eyes and removed her quivering hand from her mouth and clenched it into a fist. She wanted to punch something. She raised her clenched fist high above her head, and for a split second, almost brought it down onto the dead boy's chest. Claire stopped herself, though, a half-inch from the boy's sternum. She sighed, feeling warm tears roll down her cheeks. It felt like an apple had lodged itself in her throat and it hurt to swallow.
"Bullshit," she whispered, laying her hand on the boy's sternum. It was then that she felt a heartbeat.
She jerked a hand back and yelped as the boy's skin flashed. The scalped skin that was sagging across his face fixed itself back to the top of his head, and his eyeballs fluttered underneath his eyelids as if he were having a very vivid dream.
***
It didn't take long for her to realize that bringing the dead to life was taking it's toll on her. At the age of 27, she realized she was already starting to get wrinkles on her face. Her hair was thinning and turning grey, and it wasn't too much of a stretch to say that she looked older than her own mother.
But it didn't stop Claire.
Every single time she was presented a child under the age of five, she performed a miracle. Things became difficult when people started learning of the undertaker who brought the dead to life, and countless times Claire had to move and change her name.
But the funny thing about it, the more Claire performed these miracles, the older she became, and with the aging, came the changing of her facial features.
One year, it was a young woman who had performed a miracle in bringing a girl who had been murdered by a pedophile back from the death, and the next year, it was an elderly woman, resurrecting a child who died from an peanut allergy. It was hard to keep track of who was doing the miracles. Claire became Elanor, Elanor became Ruth, and Ruth became Gracie, and so on and so forth. Soon, she was just picking names from her favorite books.
***
Her last wasn't a child. No, for her last miracle, Claire brought back a mother who died during childbirth.
She had never brought back an adult before. Never even thought about it. She had dealt with dead parents before, but never once did she pull one out from the clutches of the Reaper.
As she laid her hand between the woman's cold bosom, Claire realized the reason she was doing it this time, was simply because she was tired.
She felt the last of her life escape her through the tips of her fingers, and Claire collapsed in the silent room. In her mind's eye, she saw the Reaper come for her, still smiling the same smile from the day she performed her first miracle, but this time, Claire smiled back.
*You take plenty from this world, I know you do, but it must sting to know I took some back from you. *