They all laugh.
They have always laughed, at least ever since my power was discovered. All the boys that could fly and have super strength, the ones with flexibility, telekinesis, and even invisibility. They all thought mine was pointless, and that I didn't deserve any power. I was still obsessed with researching superheroes and villains, dreaming of what I could've been.
Who knew the one boy that wanted more than anyone else to save the day, to be the hero, would get the power to expand pasta. Yes, you're probably laughing at it now. As my school days went by, then my college years, and throughout most of my adulthood I watched as all my peers were the heroes. The ones that stopped the bad guys, like I always dreamed of. They laughed.
At least, until May 25th, 2468. I was working early in the morning at my average job, drinking my average coffee, thinking about my average life. I had to work there, I wasn't a hero like all the others, I was a person. Nobody else was at the office, it was still dark outside.
Suddenly, a tremendously large man burst through the office door, heaving as he brushed the splintered pieces of wood off of himself. I cowered, crouching under my desk, because I knew who that was. He was Hybrelly, one of the most wanted supervillain terrorists in the world. He was known for targeting civilians and public places, devouring all the food he could find, and next devouring the people. I had some time to get positioned quietly under my desk, and I moved my chair to hide me. I remembered from my research that he would first find the food, so I assumed he was in the break room, eating from our fridge. My lunch was the only one in there.
Hybrelly moved around the office, looking for workers. It was only a matter of time before he found me. Suddenly, a lightbulb went off in my head, and I knew what had to be done. I stood up from my hiding spot. When Hybrelly turned to face me, with that sickening grin on his face, I looked him dead in the eyes.
"Don't *ever* eat my leftover spaghetti."
His stomach started expanding, and the look of fear in his eyes told me to keep going. It was getting bigger and bigger, until Hybrelly exploded in a burst of blood and guts as I shielded my eyes.
They all laughed. But not on May 25th. On May 25th, *I* was the hero.