*Good thing I just finished with Fullmetal Alchemist, otherwise I would have had to look these up. *
"So, babe, these are my friends," Casey said to his girlfriend, Monica.
A fat man gnawed on a chicken leg, sticking out a single greasy hand.
"Nice to meet you," Bob said. "You smell good. Reminds me of the smell of an apple for some reason. Actually, carmel apples sound pretty darn good right now."
Monica grabbed a napkin off the wrought-iron table and wiped her hand off. She shivered a bit, disgusted by the grease that had been on there.
She watched a man standing a far ways away, talking to some woman and acting like she wasn't even there.
"Don't mind Andrew," Casey told her. "He's, well he's a bit special. He won't greet you unless you greet him first. He seriously needs to grow up."
"Alright," Monica replied hesitantly, not really sure what to make of that.
"I love those shoes," Lisa remarked, walking over to them. "And that dress. So beautiful."
"Thanks," Monica replied, finally not disgusted by one of his friends. That was until she ran her hands a little too seductively over Casey's body. Casey, in the meantime, had a dumb smile on his face, completely ignorant of what was happening. Typical, Monica thought. Just like a man to not even realize that a woman was practically throwing herself at them.
"Actually, we should probably take a seat over there with my other friends," Casey said, looking over towards the couple sitting at a table a few feet away. "It's their engagement party after all."
"You're going to get the bill, right?" Bill said as Casey and Monica sat down. To Monica's surprise, he was completely serious.
"You are one cheap bastard, aren't you?" Casey replied with a wry smile.
"He sure is, and thrifty too," Jenna added. "Of course, when he sees something he wants, he wastes all of his money on it. I swear, my fiancé has zero impulse control."
The day went on, and Monica was enjoying herself. Bill and Jenna were a surprisingly delightful couple to hang out with. She didn't particularly care for the fact that Greed sneakily swept the silverware into Jenna's purse, but she overlooked it. He seemed like a nice, fun guy.
"Did you know we used to date," Jenna told Monica later that night at Casey's home. Casey and Bill were out on an errand.
"You and Casey?" Monica replied innocently.
"Yep," Jenna smiled. She moved closer to Monica. Suddenly she was leaning in, her hands on Monica's face, pulling her into a kiss.
Monica almost fought it. She really did. But a fire ignited in her. The thrill of getting away with such a thing, right under everyone's noses at that, kept her hooked. Her lips had barely touched Jenna's when the front door swung open and the guys walked in. She expected them to be irate. But they smiled and cheered. The sudden desire was gone, but now Jenna was making out with her, all to the pleasure and applause of the men standing there.
After a few seconds they stopped and the men went into the kitchen.
"Another time, perhaps without these pesky men," Jenna whispered seductively.
Monica was going to tell her no, but then Bill came out and suddenly that fire, that passion for Jenna, burned in her again. She smiled a wicked smile and gave Jenna a wink.
As Casey and Monica said goodbye, walking back to Casey's car, a large man ran up and hit Casey straight in the jaw. He kept hitting him.
"Stop!" Monica yelled, not realizing that was Ben, her exboyfriend.
"We're best friends, how could you?" Ben yelled.
"Sorry, I guess?" Casey said. "Come on, you don't care that much, do you?"
"I just wanted to beat you up I guess," Ben said.
As he walked away, Monica was left speechless. In fact, she didn't say anything all the way back to Casey's house. He definitely had some weird friends. She still found herself thinking about Jenna, even though she would be marrying Casey in only a week.
As they walked up to the front door, a man was laid back against it, snoring.
"Dan, wake up you lazy ass!" Casey shouted. The man stirred, then slowly extended a hand to Monica.
"Dan's the name," he said. "Sorry about being late. I guess I'll get going now."
Dan got up and slowly staggered his way away from the house. He practically seemed drunk.
"There's one last thing," Casey said as they settled in bed.
"What?" Monica asked, thoughts of Jenna running through her mind. It took her a second to see the flames radiating from Casey's side of the bed. She let out a large scream as she saw him, deformed with red skin, horns sticking out of his head.
"Honey," he said in a deep, demonic voice. "I'm horny."
-361