"Trying to remember the last time I saw you here Dennis" he chuckled, looking through the notes on the screen in front. "You had a few appointments with the asthma clinic you never turned up to, has everything been fine?" He gave me that look, the look only a trained doctor can give – that questioning, caring, empathetic gaze which lowers those barriers everyone usually has.
I glanced up, "I don't really like coming to the doctors. I know it sounds childish but I don't like the idea of medicine. Like the idea that there are chemicals, that we as people think is fine to use one year, but then dangerous the next." I realised I was rambling, and smiled apologetically "Basically I just don't usually feel all that unwell, and even when I do I just let my body deal with it, you know?"
My explanation seemed to satisfy him, "Alright then, so what made you come to this checkup when you've missed so many in the past?" I glanced at my watch, I needed to hurry this up.
"I just got back from holiday, doc. We were backpacking across Asia, me and Lisa- “
"Lisa?" he cut in, curiosity evident in his voice.
"Oh yeah, keep forgetting how long it's been. My wife, Lisa. She's fine, nags me too much but hey that's life I guess" a grin slipped unto my face as I continued. "Yeah she's the reason I'm here to be honest with you, she said if I didn't come in I was sleeping on the sofa from now on. So what happened was, I decided to go adventuring on my own, and got bit by a massive mosquito. I hadn't thought about getting immunisations and stuff, like it just seemed unnecessary and now… well now she's worried I have malaria or something, you know how women worry."
He leant forward, and started typing away something into what I assume were my patient notes. "Well that's definitely something that would be a worry. Now I'm just going to take a blood sample, and we'll let you know if anything comes back. Until then, don't share your food with others, as just a precaution, and don't donate blood in the intrim."
I'd resigned myself to the fact that I would have to have blood taken, but that didn't stop me flinching when the needle pierced my flesh, and I tensed from head to toe. He handed me a cotton bud to stop the bleeding, before he gasped. "Dennis your arm! There's not a mark on it!" he nearly shouted, stopping to compose himself. "I mean, well that definitely healed faster than usual, or maybe I've just managed to reach the next level in needle mastery" he chuckled to himself, and I forced myself to laugh too. He talked me through the process, and told me it would probably be a few weeks until I heard anything back.
The next week was uneventful, dropping the kids off, shopping, and a night out with a few of my high school friends (one of those reunions you can't really say no to). I was just laying on my sofa, head propped up with a pillow, rewatching old South Park episodes when the phone rang. The home phone.
You see the home phone NEVER rings. I mean everyone has mine and my wifes mobile numbers, and for most services we've only given our mobile numbers. It'd gotten to the point me and Lisa were thinking of cancelling it altogether. Very intrigued as to who would be on the other end of the line, I dashed to the phone and picked it up.
"Hey" I answered.
"Hi Dennis" I immediately recognised the voice on the other end. It was Dr. Peterson, but why was he calling me? "This might be a bit strange, but your blood results came back. We don't know whats going on. The blood sample we took, had somehow built a protective layer around it, and it took us a while to even be able to work out how to analyse the blood. I don't want to lose you with the science, but your blood is unique. You have cells that… that we didn't even think were possible. It's truly incredible. It's fantastic. The cures we could- “
"Doc you're scaring me." By this point I was truly lost. How was he going to call me up and instead of talking about whether or not I have a disease, he was talking about unique blood, and cures. It made no sense. It must be his idea of a joke. Hell, doctors must get bored of people coming in with colds, and sore throats.
"Oh I'm sorry Dennis. Your blood has a unique cell type that seems to freeze any type of harmful pathogen or cancerous growth. You have malaria. You even have HIV. It's truly incredible. There's insignificant amounts of both diseases in your blood but it hasn't done anything. They haven't affected you. They can't spread. Now to stop beating around the bush I'd like to ask you to come in for a few further tests sometime? Maybe when- "the door knocked, and acting on impulse I hung up the phone. It was too much to take in. Was I even human then? What makes a person human?
Before I could get lost in my thoughts, the door knocked again. I decided to just ignore it, until they knocked again, almost banging on the door. I stood up, and shuffled slowly to the door. I inched it open, and saw two men wearing suits. My house isn't a fancy neighbourhood, the suits seemed so out of place, especially in this weather. "Mr. Bradley?" I nodded, "We're going to have to ask you to come with us." It wasn't a question, it was a statement. What had I managed to get myself into?
If anyone wants to read some of my other work (I'm still fairly new) check out /r/KNDwrites