Gary's father always made sure to let him know that he was the reason his life was shit due to his wife dying while giving birth to him. If you ask anyone who knows Gary they will all agree that bruises were almost like tattoos on his skin. They never left.
His childhood was a living hell yet he swore to himself that he would transform all the abuse he was receiveing into examples of what he should never do to another human being.
When he turned 15 his father was drunker than usual and beated Gary up so much that he had to spent 3 days in the hospital. Gary did not want to comeback to his home after that, he was terrified. After taking a deep breath he went to the police station just to get completely ignored by the officers.
Gary's situation was hopeless, he had been wandering the city for 3 days with no safe place to stay and starving. Suddenly, walking down the street he came across a place were people fed the homeless. He ate as much as they allowed him to. An old lady who voluntereed there offered him to stay in her home if he was willing to help her feed the homeless. Gary agreed instantly, a warm bed was all he wanted.
Five years went by, Gary's father went to jail for almost killing another man in a bar fight. Gary took the chance and came back to his old home, horrifying memories came back to him when he opened the door but after a month he was now somewhat comfortable.
Everyday he would go to the shelter to help the old lady that saved his life, he became loved by the regular homelesses because of his empathy and surprising ability to cook.
One day, a recognised chef from the city decided to cook in the shelter for charity. He ended up mesmerized and astonished by Gary's cooking. So much that he offered a job in his restaurant. The abused yet lovely kid accepted with tears in his eyes, he would finally earn enough money to make his dream come true, open his own homeless shelter.
That night he went to sleep with a wide smile. At 4 AM in the morning a dog's bark interrupted his deep sleep. He went outside kicked the dog in the stomach until it shut up. He came back to sleep like nothing happened. He had the best sleep of his life. Gary woke up, made himself a cup of coffee, sat on his chair and looked out the window just to see the dog laying dead just across the street. He kept drinking his coffee a smirk drew in his face.