She was almost beautiful. She lay below us still, warm and curved and welcoming, but in my heart I already knew it was over. She had been our first. Of course, we'd had a few dalliances close to home - a tentative touch here, a short overnight stay there - but she had been our first since leaving the place of our birth. She had been the first one that visiting felt like coming home.
We had left our comfortable hearth to be with her, setting out in our youth with little more than a few vague promises and a picture to remind us of her beauty. As we traveled, living and dying and striving in our ships, she whispered to us, and we saw and heard only her beauty: Her sensuous oceans. Her ample grasslands. Her rich, joyous atmosphere, curving up like the brightest and most welcoming smile humanity had ever seen.
There were signs that what we saw was only the idealism of innocence - A string of craters, like tract marks down her left continent. The angry hiss of static when we were less gentle talking with her. Her sudden outbursts of violence, from tectonics with the stability of a teenage girl's angst. We saw them, but they only made her more beautiful to us, for we could overcome them. We could be the one she needed; the one to heal her. Oh! for the wisdom of experience - but she was our first.
When we had finally arrived, full of hope and exhaustion, she was everything we dreamed. She welcomed our touch when our shuttles brought us to her pale and delicate surface. She hummed at the gentle embrace of our satellite networks. We were *alive* with the joy of new love, of great hope, and of impossible dreams. And so we began to build a home together, to live our life together.
But like many young loves, ours was not to be. The eruptive outbursts of her youth lost their charm as their true cost became clear. She had been dishonest, too, we learned when our gentle and loving probing left us suffering the pangs of embarrassing disease. And we, too, had failed her in our adolescence: Open pit mines stood a testament to our broken promises of gentleness. Our own setting upon each other, vows to be better than our nature now that we were with her forgotten in the complacency of routine.
Still we stayed, long past when we should have gone, for we could not shake ourselves free of our dreams of her. How many of her sins and ours could we forget, staring deep into the clear blue depths of her lakes, and cultivating her rich fertile soil? Too many.
But in the end, her betrayal had been complete. Now the missiles of the Other reach out to our ships like the swinging fists of a cuckold husband. We claimed to the Other not to have known, to have been innocent. But in our hearts we knew we hadn't wanted to know. The price we pay may yet be absolute, and yet it feels trivial weighed against the lost dreams - against the lost love.
She was almost beautiful. And we had almost deserved her.