There's a thing that happens when you jump into a too-cold pool on a hot day. If you've done it, you know what I'm talking about. You might even have experienced something similar getting out of a mercifully warm car on a frigid day, assuming you're close enough to either pole to get a respectable winter. Your whole being goes into lockdown for an instant.
Meeting an Interstitial is kind of like that, only worse.
It doesn't help to remind yourself that they straddle the third and fourth dimensions. It doesn't help to remind yourself that they can't really read minds. It helps a little bit to drink, but it also increases the risk of their ceaseless, amorphous oozing giving you motion sickness.
The Interstitials come from either very far away or right next door, depending on how many dimensions you can perceive. The selective pressures of their home world necessitated an awareness of the three dimensions humans know and love as well as a fourth. From our perspective, the Interstitials appear as one or more shifting masses. Sometimes they float and sometimes they squish against the floor or walls or ceiling. Their real bodies - the ones hanging out of our world and into that unknowable other - have at least six limbs that correspond more or less to our legs. You can never, ever see a whole Interstitial but if you're lucky (or very, very unlucky; how strong is your stomach?) you might see one mashing itself more fully into our dimension. You see, all an Interstitial can show you is a three-dimensional "footprint" of their four-dimensional self.
The U.N. Council on Exodimensional Relations frowns upon characterizations of the Interstitial home world as "a nightmare of twisted horrors," "a nausea-inducing hellscape," or "what they would put in the dictionary next to 'FUBAR', assuming you could take a picture of how FUBAR it really is. You can't take a picture of a feeling or a smell, and none of you know how lucky you are for it." The U.N. Council on Exodimensional Relations reminds us that the opinions and testimonies of all human visitors to the Interstitial home world are subjective, and that hardly anyone has been rendered permanently insane by their trip. I'm legally required to include that disclaimer and it didn't fit anywhere else.
'How did the Interstitials get here from there?' I imagine you asking. That's a good question, and it's hard to answer. Their spacecraft naturally extend beyond the third dimension. What we humans can see looks something like an Interstitial of massive proportions who learned to stop constantly undulating. There are no hallways or doors to speak of inside; rather, the interior suggests a tangled web. The whole thing feels organic and raw. Human passengers have reported inexplicable nausea and headaches, accompanied by explicable nausea and headaches induced by transient gusts of ozone, ammonia and sulfur. The Interstitials have been very tight-lipped about their design and construction. I think I know why.
Interstitials shit spaceships.