(First response to a writing prompt ever, constructive criticism please)
Kevin arrived home and plodded to the door. Sales had been killing him from the inside for years. Tired legs carried him to the front door. he couldn't find the key, probably lost in his pockets somewhere. However he couldn't shake the feeling something felt off, it had him on edge. Perhaps it was the cold, he absently wondered. A sharp giggle, like that of a young child snapped him from his reverie.
Kevin lived alone.
Looking up through the textured glass of his front door he saw there were far too many lights on, he always made a point to make sure all the lights were off. There were three figures inside, one was much larger than the others. There was a muffled murmur of conversation as the figures prepared what looked like dinner. The smell of a hot, fresh pasta bake took him back years in a second to a childhood of wonder and happiness, now lost in the doldrums of mediocrity.
He backed away from the front door, as he fell into the drivers seat in the purple sedan he took out his ID and examined the address, the words seemed to stretch and morph, not content to lie still. The address still matched though. Perhaps he wasn't totally insane yet. Then who was inside? Robbers? Cousins up for a visit? His confidence renewed (But more confused than ever) he strode to the front door and knocked.
*Taptaptaptaptap tap tap*
There was no response from within, he tried again.
*Taptaptaptaptap tap tap*
Still nothing.
If there was to be no response from the front door, he would enter through the back. After all, it was his house. He walked around the right side of the house, past gardens that were a little overdue for some weeding and maintenance. the figures inside were inaudible now, the silence was eerie. He briefly considered the wood splitter in the shed, but decided against it. No robbers would bring their family in for tea after all.
He rounded the corner and walked up his back porch, the dining room would be visible if he continued along the porch, but the large glass sliding door was the only one on the porch. Entering his home, he looked to the right.
There was a family of three sitting for dinner. At the head of the table was a beautiful woman with auburn hair and deep blue eyes, her two children, who couldn't have been over 10 sat opposite each other. They had failed to inherit their mothers hair, instead the first had her hair pulled back in a brown ponytail. the second child had not bothered with styling, leaving a scraggly mop of brown hair atop his head.
"Hello?" he asked, none of this was making sense
The woman turned and stared at him, mouth agape
"You can't be here" she curtly said
"I don't think you understand ma'am, this is my house" he replied confidently
Taking him by the arm she led him outside
"It was your house, you live somewhere else now" she muttered
"Was?" he recanted
"Kevin, what day is it?" she asked tenderly
"Tuesday, How do you know my name?" he demanded
She gazed deeply at him with the piercing blue eyes of someone who had known the greatest love the world could give. They were the eyes of someone who had that love rent and taken from them, broken to pieces and incinerated in hellfire. Tears dripped down her cheeks, she embraced him and whispered the most painful words he had heard in his life
Shocked, he stared down at the band on his wrist.
"It was an accident, an 18 year old behind the wheel with a BAC of 0.15. He survived, but you had some major trauma to the cranium. The doctors did their best, but it was very severe. I'm sorry" she croaked, it was all she could do.
A white van pulled into the driveway.