The burning tar stuck to my legs as I made my way across the bog. Teeth clenched, I pushed forward, trying to make out the far off letters. It was all I could do not to scream, a mental distraction to ease my suffering.
I'd been walking in circles for months now, since there was little else in the form of entertainment. It was all any of us did, walking. Idle feet lead to idle minds, and idle minds are the most vulnerable. When you have nothing else to think about but your own faults, your own regrets, your own sins, you torture yourself. Save him the trouble, as it were.
So, I resolved to give myself a purpose, much like the other souls lost in this place. I would walk for eternity inside of these circles until the end, whenever that may come.
It was coming. It had to be.
My feet splashed again, and I moved closer to whatever it was. This was my new purpose. After twenty years of walking, I finally knew where I was heading, even though I didn't know how much longer I'd have to go. But eternity is a long time.
It was getting closer now, the wake from this nightmare. It was getting closer every day I stayed here, every step I took.
I couldn't be more than half a mile away. Just a few more weeks, and I'd be free from my prison. A smile crossed my face for the first time in twenty-four years. It was so close now. I took another slow step.
The door was coming into sight. I could tell I was close because now I could see it was a door. Above it stood the words in blood-red text. "EXIT." Another step forward. Another. Another.
I was so close now, so close to being free from this hell. The tar gave way to mud, gave way to dirt, gave way to grass. I ran across the empty plane and stumbled to the wooden structure.
EXIT.
EXIT.
I stumbled and collapsed at the heel of the door, panting in the molten air. My eyes scanned over the writing again, and again. There was something written below.
EXIT.
DOES NOT EXIST.
My hand burned when it clasped the handle, and I screamed. I turned the handle but it would not budge. Again and again, I pounded on the door, tears pouring down and evaporating off of my face. What had I done? Why was I here? Why wouldn't this door open for me? It was my exit, the salvation for my innocent soul. I had been spared! I collapsed in the grass as it blackened into pitch.
For a year I laid there, stoic and silent. When I slept, I dreamt of what was behind that door, when I woke, I'd turn the handle in hopes that it might open. Just like the tortured souls I'd passed along my way, I thought of my faults, regrets and sins. I was never good with people. I was never good to my wife. I was never good to my mistresses either. Maybe I was never good, period. Maybe that's why I was here.
One day I awoke to the sound of music. For twenty five years, I hadn't heard a note, but now there was an entire symphony playing, building and rising in a grand crescendo from just a few inches beyond the door. My hand gripped the handle, and it did not burn. It opened for me.
Beyond was a great light, the likes of which I'd never seen, even in my life before this. Pulling myself to my feet, I took a step forward into a shallow, cool pond. As I entered further the door shut behind me, leaving me standing in a river.
I looked across at the others, all standing, looking back at me. Slowly, I made my approach. A small girl was the first to great me.
"Hello." She said. I replied the same.
"Where am I?" I asked next.
"Where sinners go."
"What do you mean, where sinners go? Didn't I just come from hell? Aren't I innocent?"
The young girl smiled and took my hand. "There does not exist an innocent soul. Only those who have repented, and those who have yet to."