"Too long I have waited, Don Jorge" Cristobal said with a worried smile on his face.
"Don't trouble yourself mijo, It'll only be for a month, maybe less since this time
a year the *molejeros* are not in active patrol" Don Jorge replied while he was staring at the shipping route map.
*This time a year was ripe for travel and many legal and illegal excursions left out of Ponce de Leon city*.
Cristobal thought leaned over the edge of the wood walkway besides Don Jorge's humble hut.
Don Jorge came from a long family of seariders that had fought in the first Cuban war with the British empire.
He has intimate knowledge of the ocean waters around the eastern coast of Africa and the and a lot of contacts that will help him get a seat in Bocanegra's boat.
Bocanegra is, by far, the most successful smuggler out the coasts of southern India.
He even has operations out of the coast of California. So far only two expeditions have been caught, and most likely due to informers
that somehow found a way into the boats.
How Don Jorge and Bocanegra ever came into contact is still a mystery. A mystery Cristobal is never hoping to solve.
Cristobal had to beg, for many months to Don Jorge, doing all sorts of odd jobs to get the spot he has sorely wanted for years.
All of his brothers had already left and were probably a few days away from Chenningham.
Cristobal knew that even with the *molejeros* on standby mode, the trip was still dangerous.
Just being cramped in that boat in Jesus-knows-what conditions was prime for diseases, storms could ravage the boat to many miles off-course, which was already as far away from the active patrol areas. The pirates are what Cristobal fears the most, it is not uncommon for *balseros* never to be heard from again, Specially at the Johannesburg turn.
Cristobal would've liked a California trip, as the Chinese didn't care if a bunch of *balseros* arrived in India. The patrols
were a lot more lenient, even some of the officers ran operations with Bocanegra.
Cristobal didn't have the means to go through Carolina, through Mexico and finally arrive at California.
Don Jorge could've gotten him a spot on the California Expedition, but the getting there part was up to him.
"Mijo, you don't have to go you know. You can stay here and work the fishing boats with me. You are already commiting yourself
to a boat"
"I have to Don Jorge, there is nothing left for me here."
"I understand your position Cristobal, it's been weeks since we heard from your brothers."
"You think the last Bocanegra expedition might've been caught?"
"I can't tell for sure, but Bocanegra is the best at his business, his reputation is what brings thousands to do more things of an even questionable
nature, to try to earn a spot in his expeditions."
"If you end up deciding to leave, send word with with Marisol. She'll be having you until you board the boat."
"Thank you Don Jorge, I will call you as soon as I land in Chenningham."
"*Vaya con Jesus, mijo*"
"*Y usted. *"
Cristobal knew Don Jorge didn't want him to go, but he knew that Bocanegra was the least of all evils. Another random expedition
could have resulted in a midsea abduction.
Marisol was Don Jorge's only daughter, at least the only one he recognized. She moved to Ponce de Leon a few years back to work
in the emerging tourist restaurants of the southern coast of the city. Marisol was almost a female version of Don Jorge, tough as nails and loves water
more than she loves men.
Cristobal would be arriving at Ponce de Leon in three days if the roads were clear of any of the militias opposing the free trade
agreements with India. Government presence was tight in the highways and along the coast, in case threats of fighting erupted. Carolinians were also
worried of a possible aliance with Mexican rebels, although Cristobal thought it might be impossible given the dislike of the two nations. Ever since the Texans decided to
become Mexican instead of Carolinian, tensions have been running high at all sorts of levels. This was another reason the California trip was not a realiable option
for him.
Marisol was waiting for him at the bus stop, she looks like she just got out of work. Her hair was not prettily arranged, not like she cared anyway, and she smelled like
seafood and grease. An oddly familiar smell to Cristobal.
"My...My...You have grown" Marisol replied with a picaresque smile.
"I guess" Cristobal replied dully. Marisol was not a pretty woman. No amount of sweet talk would make Cristobal want to be
flirtatious with her.
"Father said you'd be coming today. See any rebels?"
"Luckily no, a lot of Goverment police though."
"Guess fighting erupts at any moment."
"When does Bocanegra leave?"
"Already want to leave?"
"I just want to be ready."
"In that case, life is not what you see in those bollywood movies out in India. Most likely you'll be hiding from immigration for the rest
of your life. If you're clever enough and get some sort of legal status, people will still mistreat you. You'll probably be working second
hand jobs. Even *balserillos* dislike us."
*Balserios* are the kids of the *balseros* that manage to get a more equal lifestyle to their Indian couterparts. They are notorious
from staying away from *balseros* and balsero culture.
"I think you are overreacting. Is not as bad as you put it."
"There is lot of work and besides my brothers are there."
"Brothers you haven't heard of in weeks."
"What are you implying?"
"I'm not implying anything, just being pragmatic. Boats get lost all the time. They should've sent word by now"
"Marisol, I thank you for your hospitality, but I will go work in India, and make sure I make something of myself and help out my brothers."
"If you say so."
EDIT: English is not my first language, so I apologize for any mistakes. Secondly this short prompt just hightlights how I envision a more or less Latinized US.
begin split into three coutries, Carolinas, roughly eatern US, and texas, Mexico (now includes NM, AZ, CO, NV) and California (a more prosperous independent nation).