It was 12:31 in the morning, and I was browsing the internet on my super-fast PC when I heard a knock on my door.
"I'm busy babe, go away." I switched on some heavy metal in attempt to deter my girlfriend from bothering me any more.
The door opened, and as I glanced over, a tall figure wearing a black hood and holding a sickle entered the room.
"WHAT THE FUCK!!!" I yelled, grabbing a knife close to my desk and flinging it towards the stranger. The stranger raised a bony hand and caught the knife.
"Chill, dude. I'm not here for your soul." The stranger put the knife on the desk and placed his sickle against the wall.
"Don't you dare touch my girlfriend!" I reached for my cellphone, but his hand grabbed my wrist. Fear ran through my body.
"Do you know what my job is?" The stranger asked frustratingly.
I paused. "You're the grim reaper, right?"
"Correct. What does the grim reaper do?"
"Collects souls?"
"FINALLY!" The Grim Reaper replied. "Someone knows what's up." The Grim reaper pulled up a chair and sat down. "If you know what I do, why did you throw a knife at me?"
I glared at the Grim Reaper. "You just waltzed into my fucking room, that's why! If you aren't here for me, then are you here for my girlfriend?"
There was a knock on the door, and my girlfriend poked her head inside.
"Can you turn it down a bit? I'm trying to sleep some." She glanced over at the Grim Reaper, who waved his bony hand at her. Her eyes widened with terror, and she screamed. Running towards the kitchen, she brought back a knife and pointed it towards the Grim Reaper.
"GET AWAY FROM MY BOYFRIEND!!" She stepped into the room, trying to find the Grim Reaper's eyes. "I am not afraid to stab you to death!"
The bony hands took off the hood, revealing a skull. "I'm not here to collect anybody's soul today, OK?" He raised his hands in the air. "Please put the knife down, it's making me uncomfortable. What is is with you guys and knives?"
I walked over to my girlfriend and took the knife out of her hand. "It's ok, honey. If he were here for either of us, one of us would have been dead already."
"I am very good at my job, thank you very much." The Grim Reaper bowed pleasantly.
After she calmed down, my girlfriend spoke up.
"If he isn't here for our souls, then what is the Grim Reaper doing here?"
"I'm so glad you asked!" He smiled from cheek to cheek, despite the fact that he had no face. "We fellow nerds need to unite and wallow in our nerd-dom."
"So, you're telling me that you are only here because I'm a nerd." I pushed my glasses up. "Tell me what you've got."
Rummaging through his cloak, the Grim Reaper pulled out a large duffle bag. Placing it on the desk, he unzipped it and pulled out several Magic cards.
"Are you a big Magic Fan?" He stared at me with enthusiastic eyes.
My mind raced frantically for a good answer. I had played magic once, but had hated it. I played Warhammer 40K, since a 3D model was much more exciting than a 2D playing card. But could I tell the Grim Reaper that?
I looked at my girlfriend, and her lips said that we needed to go outside.
"Hey, I gotta go to the restroom," she said. Jumping out of my blanket, she quickly rushed outside.
I turned to the grim reaper. "Would you like some water?"
"No thanks," he replied. "Thanks for the offer."
"Ok, I'm getting something to drink." I quickly walked out of the room and into the bathroom, where my girlfriend was standing. I shut the door and turned on the fan.
"Babe, what am I supposed to do?" I whispered frantically. "You know that I hate Magic! How could he not have seen all of my 40K stuff?"
"What do you expect me to do? I don't involve myself in your hobby," my girlfriend replied. "He's not here to take our souls, so there isn't anything to worry about. Just tell him the truth!"
"Why am I so scared to tell him?" I stressed.
"Hey, I really needed to go to the restroom, so give me some privacy." She pushed me out of the restroom and shut the door.
I walked into my kitchen and grabbed a mug. As I opened the refrigerator, I grabbed some apple juice and poured myself a glass. I pulled out some cheese slices and began to munch on those.
"Dammit, I have work tomorrow," I muttered to myself as I glanced at the time. It was 1:00 now, and I didn't want to keep our guest waiting.
I walked into my room and to my surprise, the Grim Reaper had sprawled his whole card collection across my desk. He smiled back at me.
"WHAT ARE YOU DOING???" I yelled at him. "That is MY desk that you are messing up. I want you to pack up your bags and GET OUT OF MY HOUSE!!!"
The Grim Reaper was shocked. "But I didn't even get to show you my foil --"
"I HATE MAGIC!!! I HATE TRADING CARD GAMES!" I pulled my hair in frustration. "If you couldn't tell by my room, I have invested ALL of my money into Warhammer 40K." I waved my hands in the air, gesturing towards my shelf. "Plus, it is now 1:00 in the morning, and I have WORK tomorrow. I don't have time to delve into your hobby, because I already HAVE ONE!"
The Grim Reaper sat in silence, then shoveled all his cards into the duffle bag. He sadly got up, put the hood over his skull, and picked up his sickle. As Julia walked in, she looked surprised as the Grim Reaper walked out.
"Sorry for keeping you up so late. I'll bring my 40K stuff this weekend." The Grim Reaper extended his hand, opening up a dark portal. "Mark, Julia, it was a pleasure meeting you." Waving a sad goodbye, he stepped into it and disappeared with a flash.
"Mark, what was that about?" Julia asked. "He said he was coming back. Are we going to die this weekend?"
I paused, and thought for a moment. "If he was bringing his 40K stuff, I probably should re-read the rule book. But anyway, goodnight, babe. You should get some sleep too." I kissed Julia and shut the door. Shutting off my computer, I turned off the lights and crawled into bed. Had I escaped death, or found a new friend? Regardless, I just hoped that the Grim Reaper would field a painted army, unlike my co-worker who I had played last weekend.