It all started on a Wednesday. It was just a typical Wednesday and there was nothing special at all about it. The sun wasn't shining, the birds weren't chirping, and there sure as hell wasn't anything to suggest that this would be the day my entire life would be changed forever. There was that feeling though. The feeling I've had my entire life. The feeling that someone, somewhere, was watching me over my shoulder. Observing me. Waiting for the right opportunity to approach me. But for what? My friends called me paranoid when I tell them about this "feeling" but you know as well as I do that you've had this feeling too. The feeling that something is sitting just over your right shoulder and you can feel them there. But then you turn around and...Nothing.
I was walking down 4th ave when I saw it. It was sitting on a table outside one of those outdoor cafés. A letter, with nothing but the words, "read this Mark" on it. I'm not even sure why I it drew my attention, or why I picked it up. It could have been for anyone named Mark (This is New York City, there's a million Marks). Come to think of it, why hadn't anyone else picked it up before me? After I grabbed it, I didn't know if I should have sat right down and read it, or ran home with it. There I go again, with the whole paranoia thing. "Ok, Calm down Mark, your tripping out, and you need to relax man" Said the friendly little voice inside my head. I put the letter in my pocket, and started walking home with it, trying to draw as little attention to myself as possible.
I sat down on my couch and put the letter down on the coffee table in front of me. My mind began to wander from place to palce, and my focus grew wein and tired. This happened quite a bit, everytime I sat down for too long, or grew complacent in any task I was doing. I've gotten it checked out before, and the doctors always tell me it's nothing. "Just drink some water to calm down" they say, "It's probably just caused by anxiety and stress". I try and tell them that this is different, that something is fundamentally wrong with my mind, but they never listen. It was soon thereafter that I walked over to the fridge to get some water to calm my pacing heart, and as I began pouring water into the cup I was now holding, I noticed another note attached to it. "It's time to read the letter, Mark". I don't need to tell you what went through my mind the next 10 minutes, before I finally did get around to opening up that letter.
I was expecting a few paragraphs telling me what was going on, but all I was given was 4 haunting sentences. "Do you remember where you were from 1918 to 1920, Mark? Do you remember what happened to you? Because I do. And if your ready, I can show you".
That's all it said. It would be quite impossible for me to remember what I was doing during those years, because it was 60 years before I was born. As a matter of fact, it was 30 years before even my Father was born.
Ok, whoever you are, I'm ready. "IM READY!!" I screamed. nothing. Well, that was pointless. My friends and I are accustom to playing pranks on each other, but they have always been light hearted. Never anything this...eerie. They also understand how paranoid I can be and are sensitive towards it. What fun is a prank if everyone doesn't laugh afterwards, right? No, this doesn't feel like my friends at all.
I walked over to where I keep my phone, thinking that maybe I can call some people I know that might be behind this or at the very least, can help me find out who is. I open the drawer and I see a book that I'm sure wasn't there before. Its hard to explain, but this book looks very old and used, but it also looks as if it was taken care of...Like it was a very valuable possesion for someone. On the front cover, it said, "The Diary of a man", written in what im sure is really old blood. I skim through it real quick and see every entry starts with a day number and words written in pencil. There are long entries and short entries. I felt the ever growing bubble of anxiety in my chest, taking over my mental functioning and reasoning. All I knew, and the only thing I could make sense of, was that I needed to open that book and read it. I opened it to the first page and the writing looked...familiar. But I had no time for that, I needed to read the book and figure out whats going on.
Day 4: WHO ARE YOU? LET ME GO
Day 5: I know you took this from me last night. I know it. WHO ARE YOU?
Day 6: whoever might read this: Please help me. Im trapped in this room. It has no windows, only a bed, a sink, a toilet, a clock.. and this book. One of the walls is a big mirror. I know someone's on the other side looking at me. PLEASE LET ME OUT.
day 7: I dont understand whats going on. At 8am and 5pm someone slides food through the little small opening on the bottom of the door. Atleast the food is good, they keep serving me fishsticks. I love fish sticks. PLEASE LET ME GO.
Day 8: nothing makes sense to me anymore. im stuck in nothingness. Nothing happens. I eat twice a day, but no one say a thing. All I ever see is the one hand that slides the food through twice a day. I yell but I know its no help. I've yelled every single time and no one answers. No one ever answers.
Day 9: fishsticks for lunch and fish sticks for dinner are getting old quick.
this goes on, day after day. I can see whats going on here. But who is this guy? Why do I have this? Nothing makes sense. I cant read every entry, I needed to know what was going on quick.
Day 30: I fucking cant do this anymore. My life is nothing. I can't leave my mind. Its all I have. And this book. do you know how slow your life becomes when you stare at a clock and say every second out loud for 4 hours straight? I have nothing.
I skipped a few more pages.
Day 54: I dont know how I got here. I...cant really remember where I was or what I was doing before I got here. I remember being at home, cooking dinner, than something hit me. I know it hit me in the back of the head because I could still feel it when I woke up in here. I feel like they have total control over my mind. I feel like they have erased some memory of mine...A memory that is very important to me understanding why I am here. You know who Im talking about. The people behind the mirror. I can feel them everyday. Watching me, observing me.
I skip a few more pages still.
Day 79: I deserve to be here. I alienated everyone that ever tried to get into my life. I havent talked to my parents in years. The girlfriends ive had, ive lost...Always my fault. Does anyone even know im gone? Are they even looking for me? I doubt it. I am just a man who disapeared, and no one even noticed.
A few more pages..
Day 104: FUCK YOU FISH STICKS! I FUCCKING HATE YOU.
I just dont really understand whats going on. Im about to put the diary down and smoke a bowl, when the page next page catches my eye, and it felt like someone had ripped my heart out of my chest.
(be back in 20 minutes to finish this, got to finish up some thing at work).