The morning was overcast, a confusing illusion of alternating brights and darks that made everyone waking up straighten in panic at the *afternoon light* shining through their window. The first licks of fall crisp peppered at the window of a taxi puttering through crowded streets, stray medleys of red and golden leaves crackling under the tires'tread. Inside it a woman was adjusting her corrective lenses, craning her neck over a slight stain on the passenger seat in front of her to peer out ahead.
"Turn here, please?" She asked.
The driver nodded, making a sharp right in to the entrance of an alley lined with multistory layers of graying brick and concrete.
"How much?" She inquired, opening the gleaming black leather of her handbag.
"Twenty-two," huffed the driver, "but this isn't where you wanted to go, ma'am."
"It's fine," she said, handing him a bill.
From outside, someone would have seen two things of interest: a middle-aged woman wearing business attire stepping awkwardly out of a taxi, preparing to carry her handbag and a single briefcase in to the shaded uncertainty of a Chicago back-alley; a taxi driver, staring equally with suspicion and shock at a fresh one-hundred-dollar bill.
"Ma'am," the driver said with annoyance, "this is too much. I can't break this."
"Oh," she said, adjusting her glasses again to peer at the bill, "is that a bad thing?"
The driver thought about this. His conscience wrestled with his suspicion, until avarice jumped in to the fray and stole the victory.
"No," he said, "that's fine. Have a pleasant day miss...miss...”
The woman opened the handbag with a flicking wrist, briefly glancing at its contents. The driver's face fell by a fraction of an astronomical unit.
"Mrs. Scharre," she said, closing the handbag. "Have a niceness day."
Mrs. Scharre winced at the linguistic error, closed the door, and walked off at a brisk *step-step-wobble-step*. The driver took no notice, and sped off before she changed her mind.
Ten minutes later Mrs. Scharre was sitting at the end of a conference table, unclasping her briefcase and spreading its contents on its laminated surface in neatly ordered stacks. It spanned nearly the length of an intensely lit room within the fourth floor of a wan office complex. Sitting to her left, a man in a gray jacket with brown hair on its way to silver leaned in closer to her.
"They're late," he covertly whispered, "again."
She stopped, considering this, and continued her preparations.
"They are consistent," she said with a monotone, "and that is what I like."
The office's double doors opened with a hollow creak. A casually dressed man with a tan messenger bag strapped to his shoulder peered in and around the inside.
"You're Mrs. Scharre, right?" The newcomer asked, his sharp eyes darting between the two.
"Yes," she said, not looking up.
"Awesome," he said, "I'm Tony. We spoke on...”
"I'm aware of who you are," she interrupted, "take a seat in the appropriate place."
She blinked, stopped her shuffling, and gave a quick side-long glance to the man on her left, and then Tony. Tony cocked an eyebrow, and sat on the opposite side without comment. She cleared her throat, and began to read from a thick pile she'd made to her right. The man to Mrs. Scharre's left stood up, leaning over the table to extend a hand.
"Don't mind her," he apologized, "she's grumpy in the morning. I'm Gary."
"Glad to meet you," Tony said, returning the hand with a firm shake.
They sat retook their seats. Silence ensued, broken only by the turning of Mrs. Scharre's pages.
"So," Tony awkwardly offered, "is there anyone else coming?"
Gary glanced at a watch on his wrist.
"Any minute now, but we can start. First I'll need you to sign some...”
Mrs. Scharre's hand shot out in front of Tony with a packet. She dropped it, and went back to turning.
“...Things. A non-compete, non-disclosure – basically everything we need to save our collective skins." He finished, casting her an annoyed look.
Tony blinked. He blinked again.
"She was serious about the," Tony said, adding air quotes to, "*alien* thing?"
"We have considered our options, and it's been unanimously decided among us that a story about extra-terrestrial contact would adequately draw attention away from our business interests. We've also decided that your affiliations with multiple media outlets in addition to your popularity as a public figure will make this possible." Gary said.
Tony waited for the joke's punchline – maybe a camera crew to pop out. Nothing happened. He bit his lip, and tapped a finger on the table in thought.
"Does a position with our organization still interest you?" Gary asked.
Tony's face fixed in to a contemplative mask. He looked at Mrs. Scharre, at the packet she held, at Gary, at the papers turning in her hands, and...
Tony's face became a mixture of puzzlement, and uncertainty. Gary - noticing the change – tracked his gaze across the table to his right, up to Mrs. Scharre's hands, the pages fluttering in precise motions, and her eyes darting across their surface with alarming speed. His smile also transformed – in to dumbfounded panic.
"Judith," he said quietly, "what are you doing?"
"Reading," she said, with a tone that suggested this should be obvious.
"Judith, you are aware the pages are upsidedown," he said in low tones, "aren't you?"
She stopped reading, and closed her eyes in concentration. As if with effort, she blushed.
"I like to keep sharp," she said, opening her eyes and staring evenly at Tony, "but if it bothers you, I will cease to do so."
"That's incredible," Tony said in awe, "like the scary kind of incredible. Count me in!"
Gary let out the breath he'd held in a noiseless *whuff*.
The door opened with a loud thud as two more figures walked in. The tallest of the two – long multicolored knit scarf twirling behind him as he walked in as a neon blur of tracksuit – wordlessly took a seat to Gary's left. He was balding, somewhere in the confident highground of his thirties. The other's age could only be guessed. Covered from head to toe in multiple layers and colors of winter clothing only appropriate for an arctic climate, the ageless brunette took a seat to Mrs. Scharre's right. In unison, they turned their heads and beamed at the stunned Tony.
"Right," Tony said to Gary after a long pause, "intelligence and eccentricity go hand-in-hand, I guess."
Gary winced, and managed a blank-faced, "They very much are – to my left is Mr. McReady. To Mrs. Scharre's right is Ms. Palmer."
The two, in perfect unison nodded and without a single pause said, "Hello Tony it is a pleasure to meet you welcome to our humble office in downtown Chicago, Illinois."
Mrs. Scharre looked up abruptly. Ms. Palmer, and Mr. McReady buried their toothy smiles under six feet of cement, and sat back in their chairs.
Gary, sweating slightly from the spectacle, addressed Tony with forced formality, "I'll give you a brief overview of our problem."
"Alright," Tony said, seemingly amused, "lay it out for me?"
Gary nodded.
"We have had the benefit of greased wheels with respect to regulations that would otherwise restrict our interests in the harvesting and resale of lumber in and outside of British Columbia. That is going to change fairly quickly – it's been discovered that a large oil reservoir is buried there, and we intend to use it. Our efforts will inevitably suffer once this information spreads. And it will spread – quickly. Our sales within the United States make up the bulk of our revenue, and where most of our opposition will come from. Mrs. Scharre has alerted me to a very convenient explanation for the deforestation, and inevitable contamination of that entire area – that we are a cover up of a larger goal by prominent citizens within our government to search out, capture, and stem the tide of a hostile extraterrestrial species that has begun to colonize the area. We need you to make sure there are enough people here who believe this that any opposition will be met with resistance. Everyone will eventually forget, and we'll all walk away richer."
"That's it," Tony snorted, "that's your big plan?"
Gary smiled.
"No," Gary said with a wink, "That is *your* big plan."
Tony sat in stunned silence.
"I...I'll see what I can come up with," he said, mouth dried to a desert wasteland.
Gary reached over to shake his hand, and said, "Mrs. Scharre will assist you with your paperwork. I'm overdue for a lunch meeting, so I will leave you in her...their capable hands." He said, reluctantly including the two anomalies.
Tony shook his hand, "Thank you, I look forward to working with everyone."
Gary left. The door snapped shut.
Mrs. Scharre slowly looked up at Ms. Palmer, and Mr. McReady. Something silent and chilling passed between them. Mr. McReady spooled his scarf around his neck, rose up out of his seat as if gravity had no place in his immediate lifestyle, walked smoothly to the doors and with a loud click they locked from the inside. He took up a defensive posture in front of the double-doors, and smiled. Mrs. Sharre's hardened gaze turned on Tony.
"Paperwork…" she intoned with all the mirth of a funeral march.
Tony reached in to his bag, grabbed a manilla folder, and with a half-cocked smile slid it over to Mrs. Scharre. She reached out, flipped it open and began reading it all within the same blur of motion.
"All of you need more exposure," Tony said, "because that was terrible."
Ms. Palmer started to let out a series of whistles, clicks and polyphonic hoots but Tony cut her off with a glare.
"No," he said, "From now on, you speak like them."
"Is the crash-site safe?" Asked Mrs. Scharre.
"Yup," said Tony, "and any others can land where they like. Once they're cloaked from view, the ship's landing sites will just appear to be deforested sections."
Tony surveyed the room with an imperious sweep, and said, "Phase two can begin as soon as this charade gets underway."