"Look fuhrer, look here! these people have made a writing prompt where killing you is a sport and the entire point is to be the most creative person who killed you!" I claim while pointing at the screen of my laptop, which I brought with me into the past. it's amazing how you can connect to the internet of the future in the past just by bringing something from the future into the past, it's a strange occurrence called "temporal information bridging" and is based on the idea that the universe is composed of information, so bringing something from one point in time doesn't necessarily disconnect it from that point in time, in other words because there's an internet signal in this specific location at some point in the future, bringing a laptop connected to that specific internet connection at that point in time into the past doesn't terminate the connection.
makes my head hurt just to think about it.
"so...even now my enemies in the future who have demonized me continue trying to hunt me and doom me." the fuhrer clutched his head, and i could sense the existential anguish.
"to think all this time I would be immortalized as their private devil! to think I could have done so poorly in my life that i am like the demons of hell! you time traveler, you have confided in me when I needed you the most, when you first came to the past you protected me from these other time travelers, brought order back to the reich and killed these fools contending to slay me. now that too has become a running joke in some alternate timeline! what a tragedy this life of mine is! that I could become so trivial and hated that I cannot even defend my image from the ravages of time!"
he slammed his fist down on the laptop, breaking it before realizing his error and fuhreiously apologizing.
"what must I do to atone for this? how can I bring myself from the hell I have coming to me?!"
"furher." I began. "you're not to blame, you suffer from a disease, syphilis."
"yes, I recall you mentioning that...but does that absolve me?" he asked angrily.
"No, it doesn't absolve you I suppose, but you aren't entirely responsible for your actions either." i explained. "you fight two enemies now, the time travelers and their future, and your own mind, ailing, breaking. you can repent for the crime of the holocaust, the people will still hate you of course, they'll never pay attention to your redemption because the story of the wicked adolf hitler holds their hearts in far greater sway. but you can prevent yourself from doing the world any further harm."
I hand him a gun.
"the japanese believe that death by suicide carries its own form of honor, that to act out of duty to that which you believe by taking your own life is a firmer statement than simply dying fighting for it. you regret the holocaust, you accept your illness and we both know there is no cure for your mind's degraded state. you will only get worse from here, if you truly wish to redeem yourself.....well...show the world by sacrificing your life for that redemption."
"will anything change?" hitler asked suspiciously.
"no, but good people, german and jewish, will be spared the madness of adolf hitler the villain, because adolf hitler the repentant man stood against his own mind, his worst nemesis, and defeated it for them."
adolf turned the weapon over slowly before nodding to himself.
"very well then.....but do me a favor, yes?"
"what is it?"
"remember me for this...remember that I redeemed myself and renounced my foolish, wicked actions....if the future hates me so be it, but please....remember this final moment."
he put the gun to his temple, I stared impassively as the flash from the muzzle rang out, shattering his skull.
with a sigh I returned to the future where the judges awaited me.
"amazing, simply amazing! such a masterful manipulation of a man's emotions!! you're truly frightening!!"
they awarded me maximum points, and from there I decided to post this in the /r/ writing prompts of reddit on a return trip to my vacation home in the year 2016, which happens to be the old fuhrer's home.
all in all it wasn't that hard, driving a crazy man to suicide? pff, easy.
getting hitler to redeem himself by humbling him with visions of the future?
that shit was the hard part.