He stared into the Distance, it wouldn't be long now...he could feel the presence of the Red Flame...and it wouldn't be long until he arrived.
Delta adjusted his helmet, as he stared into the green river below, the continual slush from the factory pouring in, tarnishing the clear blue coming from up river.
The factory was necessary for the production of the the metal Orentium, the only material capable of energy productive fusion on the planet. Unfortunately the byproduct was a chemical that could only be disposed of and deactivated in water, and as such the government had given them special permissions to dump in rivers as it saw fit, regardless of the toxic effects it had on the local area, and destruction of the local environment.
He arrived in a blazing fluorescent torrent of red fire, suitable to match the rage he currently held. Delta merely stood arms crossed at the top of the factory.
"Delta, you know why I must do this, please move. Heroes shouldn't fight each other, and you know this company more than deserves it...they have cost so many lives already.."
"The second you deemed it allowable to attack this factory, was the second you lost your status as a hero. The law allows it, and it is within its right to operate, regardless of the circumstances."
"BE REASONABLE DELTA! This building has already killed thousands from its pollution in the area, how many more must die before you see this problem?"
"You Narrow minded fool Red...do you know what this factory produces? Without it the energy requirements of this country wouldn't be satisfied, many more would die from the lack of energy."
"Delta, there has to be another way. They will be forced to understand that if I destroy this facility, and never allow it to be rebuilt...."
"This world works off of give and take Red. The corporation does more harm than good, it may take lives but it gives even more back in exchange. The world isn't a fair place. This isn't some fairy tail universe Red...There isn't some end-all be-all solution that will result in the perfect world for everyone. If you think so than you are a fool."
"Don't you have any morals Delta? This isn't right. What's more important, your loyalty to the law? Or loyalty to the people in this country."
"I have morals...but I also have foresight, and respect for the law. Something you do not. It appears you don't understand anything anymore."
"Oh I understand, I understand that you've become a pawn" Red blurted as he coated his whole body in his trademark Flames.
Delta adjusted his visor and balled his fists. "I have nothing more to say to a fool like you. You intend to break the law and I cannot allow that. I'll make sure to destroy your statues when you're beat...you don't deserve them anymore."
"Go ahead and try." Raged Red
Red fired a beam of flame straight towards Delta, only to have it deflected by a single hand. The cool blue and grey of the defender's uniform providing a stark contrast to the scorching flames.
"Pathetic..." Quipped Delta "My Turn."
Before Red could react Delta had appeared behind him and grabbed him by the neck.
"I HAVE EXISTED FOR 600 YEARS BOY, YOU ARE NO MORE THREATENING THAN A MATCH TO ME. I HAVE SEEN THINGS YOU COULDN'T IMAGINE, AND THAT IS WHY I CAN DEFEND THIS FACTORY...IT IS FOR THE GREATER GOOD."
Red engulfed his body in flames in a vain attempt to have the iron grip released. Delta Put his palm to the back of Red's head and much to the shock of the burning hero the flames suddenly flowed into Delta's hand, and slowly the fires of Red started to flicker and fade.
"WHAT ARE YOU DOING TO MY FLAMES?!?!?" Questioned Red
"I am merely giving them a more useful home. Don't worry, I will use them well." Retorted Delta
Red's fire had extinguished, his red uniform being the only aspect to identify him as the hero he once was.
"I respect the law...Red, If I thought the same way you did...you would already be dead."
Red could feel the piercing gaze of Delta through the opaque visor. He never thought he could be defeated this easily. His mind had gone blank and there was nothing but regret in his mind.
"You are subject to the law, like everyone else...and you will be tried as such. Enjoy your time in prison. But know this.... your biggest punishment will be regret."