James set his bags down in front of the desk and sized up his opponent. Female, five-six, about a hundred sixty pounds, and a poof of blonde-but-your-grey-roots-are-showing on top a small hill of makeup. A plastic name tag announcing her as "Kathy". A fleshy grin did little to calm his unease.
"Hello, will you be flying with us today?" Kathy was, despite appearances, bright enough to make utterance. Not that James needed to be reminded that ability cannot be determined by appearance.
Silently, he reached into his pocket and placed a card in her hand.
*I am mute. I can hear you just fine. I can understand you just fine. I cannot speak to you. I will write to you instead. * **Please do not shout at me. **
"Oh!" Kathy's surprise was more palpable than most. "Well, I'm sorry to hear that." Her manners, however, were not. "How can I help you today?"
James was already busy inscribing instructions on his notepad. *My name is James Snyder. I need to board flight 7510 to San Francisco. I have two bags I need to check in. I would like to go through the special security line. *
Some long suppressed memories of being humiliated in the normal security lines started to bubble to the surface. James choked those back down to the pit of his stomach.
"Well, James, I'll need to see your driver's license and the credit card you used to make the transaction." Somehow she had missed that he had already placed those on the counter. "And I see here that I already do have record of you here, and it does mention your … your, uh…." *Condition, you idiot. Just say condition. * "… well, never mind that. I can give you access to the special security line. That'll be fine."
Still looking forward to the day when all airport transactions could be handled completely by computers, or robots, or androids, or pretty much anything but Kathy, James flicked the side of his cards to give the appearance that he had just now tossed them on the counter. His sleight of hand caught Kathy's eye, and with a curt "thank you" she was busy typing the relevant information into the system. James' attention was directed to his right where, overwhelmed by lack of cooperation from her toddler, a young and pretty mother was struggling to lift a large bag onto the scale.
"Please place your first bag on the scale, sir." Kathy's interjection snapped him back to the unpleasantness at hand. "I have your boarding pass and security checkpoint pass, and we only need to check your luggage." James was, of course, already familiar with the procedure, but easily lifted booths bag onto the platform where they were weighed, tagged, and sent off to oblivion. Without a word, Kathy engulfed the boarding pass in a wasteful paper envelope, snagged James' credit card and driver's license off the keyboard in front of her, and passed the ensemble to James' expectant hand. "Enjoy your flight, sir!"
It wasn't every day James got to hear words so hollow. But no matter; this part of the adventure was, at least for James, over.
James made his way to the left and turned the corner to the security checkpoint. Like most Friday afternoons, a buzzing line of loud, obnoxious people stretched and wove over itself at least half a dozen times. *I wonder if I could count all those people, * James thought to himself, before wondering why he would have ever wondered such a thing in the first place. But James wasn't going to have to deal with that line. His line, the accessibility line, contained all of three people.
James was about to redeem his pass through the easy line when something at the end of the longer line caught his eye. A young mother with an apparently disoriented toddler. The pretty one he had seen before at the ticketing counter. Just about his age.
Without a word, James joined the long line.