2 nights in a row the Elf wasn't where I left it. Somebody's lying to me and I hate that. A family's all about trust. I'm not cool with being lied to not even for a joke. Besides it's not funny.
Nobody's moving it tonight he's in jail. I unscrewed the vent in the living room on the wall and put him in there. Kids couldn't be quiet enough to get a ladder to climb up and remove the vent guard. I'd wake up. Wife wouldn't know where to find a screwdriver. She wouldn't go through all that trouble just for a prank anyway.
[Next Morning]
Not again. Where's the little asshole at? I'm just going to act like it's not bothering me. They love to see me upset. I'm not giving them the satisfaction this time.
"Dad where's Melvin?" says Eric (son).
"You or your mom would know." I say.
[2 days pass]
Me: "Honey, I'm pissed at you. What've you been doing on the roof? You don't need to be climbing around on the roof. You could get seriously hurt?"
(Jenna) Wife: "What are you talking about?"
Me: "Melvin the freakin Elf on the Shelf. He's on the roof!"
Wife: "I've not been on the roof!"
Me: "Where's Eric?"
Wife: "Backyard"
[We both go to the backyard]
Eric swore it wasn't him and I half-believe him. Me and my wife told him how dangerous it was. We made him cry. He still swears it wasn't him. Is there a chance he's right? Maybe whichever one of us is doing it can't remember. Maybe sombody's sleepwalking. I used to when I was young but grew out of it. At least I thought. Eric was my age when I was sleepwalking. Jenna takes Ambien sometimes. Could be any of us 3. I've got to know. Time to buy a security camera.
[Security camera set to record. Elf sitting on kitchen table]
Ok time to review the footage. Elf just sitting there sitting there. Skip. Fast forward. Fast forward. The Elf stands up! He's like a little tiny robot walking. Holy Shit! He's floating around. I'm living Paranormal Activity 6!
I've calmed down now that I've got me, Jenna, and Eric in a hotel. I've never belived in the supernatural but demon possession/haunting now seems plausible. I'm going to put this on Youtube and ask for advice.
[Next Morning]
Phone rings. Unknown Atlanta number. What the hell I'll answer it.
Me: "Hello."
Lady: "Is this Mr. Schmidt?"
Me: "Yea"
Lady: "Hi I'm Laura from Elf on the Shelf. We believe we've accidentally sold you a prototype Elf on the Shelf. We're experimenting with a new model that hides itself."