I went to school in Florida, Hillsborough County to be exact. In typical outrageous fashion which my state is famous for, we have what's called a passing F. It's when you get a 51% on a final exam, yet still pass the class. If you get anything lower, it shows your overall grade was inflated and therefore you didn't truly learn and must retake the class. The passing F keeps your overall grade at a C, without holding you back from moving to the next grade.
I explain this to you today because many teachers disagree with a passing F. They believe it's a ludicrous standard made to push kids into college, despite the fact they may not be ready. So was the case with Mr. Yokamoto, our physics teacher.
Yoki, as we call him, came from a strict Japanese upbringing. His upbringings made his class exceptionally hard where many students wouldn't pass. It also made him feel the passing F was a sham, a pillar for American laziness. In order to throw the passing F aside, he determined that a grade curve would be based off of the highest overall grade in the class. Which was mine.
My fellow students were feeling the pressure. I had a few points shy of a B in Yoki's class, one of the highest he'd seen in his 30 years of teaching. If I managed to get an A on the exam, I would secure not only the highest grade ever achieved in the class, but te first A Yoki gave out. Like the nerd that I was, I calculated that I could get everyone in my class a passing grade if I pass with an F. Nothing more nor less than a 51%. My peers eventually found out; and to say they were angry was an understatement. They believed I was going to jeopardize their passing for my own. I was threatened, harassed, and picked on about the passing F for what seemed like forever. I was eventually told very blatantly, that if I kept a few of the seniors in the class from graduating, I'd be in immense danger. I was told by my fellow juniors that my reputation was at stake. In typical Florida fashion, I even had various athletics coaches come speak with me about the importance of, and what staying eligible meant for people's college hopes and dreams. Yoki, being a smart and disciplined man, had also known this calculation. He pushed for me to fend for myself and not only pass, but get his alluding A. This had become a test to determine my legacy. Would I shoot for my own aspirations, or would I follow along helping friends and peers. At this point, I knew what I had to do.
Despite my struggle, unsure of what grade I would receive, the day had come where I was to find out. The test had been hard, I couldnt try for a passing F without putting my own grade at risk, yet i couldn't get an easy A no matter how hard I studied and tried. Everyone else's overall grade was beyond salvageable based off of their test scores, unless my passing F came through.
For everyone else's benefit, I received the highest grade 42.8 points out of 84 possible, which by county rule is rounded to an even 51%. I had passed two tests that day, one of physics, and one of life. Becoming a hero to my peers, and at the time, an enemy to Yoki.
Years later I saw Yoki again. This time as a peer instead of a student, I spoke with him about our incident, and he told me I had taught him something that day. It wasn't that I sacrificed my own glory for the sake of a positive reputation, but that I achieved personal glory through helping others, which is what Yoki had been doing all along by being a teacher.
I failed my teacher, and technically my test, but I passed my class and passed a test of life, all in one shot.
Edit: Sorry for the errors, I typed this on my phone.