"Where's 3?" Prime pulled at his sleeve to look at his step counting watch. Then he glanced up at 2 and 4.
"Dunno" said 2, hand resting on the fridge door. "Red Bull?"
"He hasn't been in contact all day. Not that that's unusual." 4 shuffled the print outs of apartments he'd spent the day searching and calling about.
"It's almost 11:00, what if he's not here to merge?" Prime looked at his dopplegangers pleadingly. Missing a merge had happened before. Last year 2 had been unconscious, laying next to his overturned ATV in the woods until well into the next day. That hadn't been so bad, actually, the black out, or maybe it had been a short coma, had made reintegrating 2's memories much easier, since there wasn't as much to sort through.
The problem with merging was that nobody's brain got better. Prime might have been the original, but the ability to split off dopplegangers didn't make him smarter, or his brain any more capable of processing input. Reintegration was usually kind of like deja vu. He remembered things, but they seemed distant, like they'd happened some other time, to someone else. In a lot of respects, they all agreed, that was probably true. They had the benefit of shared experience, but it wasn't a perfect blending. If they each studied hard for a day, then Prime might be able to access that knowledge, like remembering a study session with a friend. It wasn't entirely his knowledge, but it wasn't inaccessible.
But with more than a day's experiences, the knowledge drifted. More than that, the core personality drifted. It wasn't like deja vu anymore. It was like looking at your own life like a movie, watched from another room. There was a sense of disconnection. Of dissociation, as 4 had put it. And it hurt. Study too much, too long, and the brain tires. Study even longer, and it begins to ache. Now imagine the studying isn't for an exam, it's to make sure that Prime wakes up as himself, without a psychosis or a stroke.
Snick! 2 popped the Red Bull open with one hand, and started guzzling it almost immediately. It was a good thing too, reintegration burned a lot of calories, something about mass energy conversion. That's one thing he hadn't studied. The caffeine wouldn't carry over, not more than what Prime would get from sipping weak tea. But they should probably all be eating.
"I want to go over the apartments in a little detail before we..." 4 trailed off. Prime felt it odd that a doppleganger that didn't exist outside the cycle of splitting and merging wasn't comfortable talking about it. But then, the whole culture didn't like talking about where babies came from, despite being obsessed with practicing for it.
Prime's phone buzzed 3 times. "At last." Prime slid the phone from his pocket, looking at the TXT his doppleganger had just sent. He also noticed the time in the corner of the screen, 10:49PM.
His face fell. He hit the dial button, cursing.
His own voice came back to him, almost instantly. But not his greeting. 3's greeting. The moron had sent him to voicemail as his call had come in. He dialed again, and was greeted again by his own voice, but someone else's words.
4 looked up expectantly. 2 had finished the Red Bull, but hadn't pulled the fridge open for another yet. He shrugged his shoulders at Prime, expressing both curiosity and boredom. Prime wasn't sure how he did that, but he was too busy hacking out a TXT.
P: WHAT DO YOU MEAN, NOT COMING?!?! WHY ARE YOU THERE?
3: I'm done. Happier here. We could all be, I made it OK.
P: You should have talked to me. NOT YOUR CALL. GET OVER HERE.
3: Going now, be back in a week. But maybe we should talk about 5 when I get back.
Prime tried to send a few more TXTs, but his phone said they were queued, 3 wasn't receiving. He managed not to throw his phone at the table, but he felt the plastic creak in his grip. He forced himself to set it down.
In an instant, the rage vanished. Prime felt...resignation. Maybe it was going to go this way for all of them, eventually. His shoulders slumped from their angered tension. He collapsed into his chair.
"3 isn't coming." It was a statement, one he realized was true. Always would be, now.
"What?" 4 exclaimed, his voice rising an octave in surprise and indignation.
2 left the little extended-stay kitchenette empty handed, and dropped into the chair across from Prime. He raised an eyebrow. Prime couldn't raise just one eyebrow, had 2 actually practiced that?
"He's at the apartment." Prime's voice wasn't flat, not totally. But it was almost conversational, matter of fact.
"But what about Cynthia?" 4 blurted this out, not really having shifted down from indignant shock. Not having picked up that neither Prime nor 2 were indignant now.
"He says he made it all right. I don't know how. But if any of us..." Prime trailed off there. If any of them could make it right with Cynthia, could unring the bell of the terrible things he'd said to her, if any of them could, it was 3. Did that mean he could go back?
"We can't." 2 looked right through Prime. Right into the spot he knew Prime was heading for. Prime hated him for it, and knew he was right all the same.
"No, I guess not." Silence stretched out for a minute, then two. It was 10:57PM.
"Listen, the new apartments...Let's look in another city. Somewhere we won't likely see Cynthia, or run into 3." Prime put his hand on 4's shoulder, to show appreciation for his efforts, and apology for their being wasted. It was also the first part of the merging process.
"Sure, sure." 4 sounded distracted, almost dreamy. He never sounded like that outside merging, but maybe it was his chance to let go.
2 reached across the small coffee table, and took Prime's hand. He squeezed a bit, supportively. Maybe merging was about letting go. 2 would never offer that kind of connection otherwise.
As the dopplegangers went slack, and Prime felt his arms tingle and then burn with the energy and essence of them, he thought about 3. And about 5. They'd found someone, someone they belonged to, even more than they belonged to him. Just before he felt the warmth of merging crest to a peak, and the sense of being more complete than just a moment before, he felt a pang of dread.
What if they all left him? What if he would be the only one left, alone?