"Ruka-sama...I deeply regret this, but I'm the messenger. Not the sender".
Asher's Japanese was...for a better word, *lacking*, so instead of continuing the explanation, he kneeled further down, reaching for the hem of Iwasaki-san's robe and wrapped the blood-soaked length of the blade in the rich, decadent fabric. Silk shushed thinly on the metal, its bright-rose hexagons, tsubaki and cranes turning a deep, thick shade of maroon.
It should've been kept pristine, to avoid obstruction. When Asher felt the blade to be sufficiently clean, he held his fingertip up to scrutiny, watching the angled piece of metal slide back into the carbonized phalange. With a series of clicks and hisses, his fist clenched and unclenched, testing the servo integrity.
Beneath him, Ruka Iwasaki was twitching, a mess of pale flesh thrown about the kimono drapings, hopelessly trying to crawl forward - blind, almost deaf, maimed beyond recognition. Bloodied and matted hair kept her visage mostly obscure from him, though a tell-tale string of maroon-tinted saliva stretch down, to the very mattress.
The woman's bare back pulsed with a swarm of raging dragons and koi carps, as she glitched, dripping blood, towards Asher. Towards her lost treasure, her pearls that Asher so savagely ripped out her now weeping meat. Now, bathed in the filtered, sliced-up light that seethed through the shoji, they lay scattered at the bed's footing, glistening - abandoned.
Asher ran a hand through them, picking out a cranial neuromodulator and gently wiping it over his suit.
"I'm afraid I'll have to take...these...back", Asher moved the duffel bag closer to the *sukeban's* futon. With a practiced, trained-in efficiency, he began cleaning and putting her parts away. It was too silent and cold for him, so he had to talk, to break the ice somewhat, to show the girl some human connection through her ruinous misery. Ruka-sama couldn't speak anymore, afterall. Only tiny, animal noises signified some presence of life and cognition, the erratic grasping motions of her left, live hand.
Behind the sterile mask and safety glasses, Asher's narrow face folded into a frown, as part after part - a Heiwan forearm module with built-in, springloaded tanto, a BMW gastro-buxt hydraulics loop, a mil-grade glandular VX dispenser, on and on - was cleared from fluid and lowered into the bag. The Neon Orizuru put so much faith in Ruka-sama. She had that papercut edge they sought in new muscle, and lavished her beauty with expensive, lethal gifts.
Too bad, that she overestimated their significance. It was not what you could do with them, but for what purpose, and that was exactly what Ruka Iwasaki had forgotten. No power was limitless, and the still-bleeding gash on his own cheek was proof of that, in case his own pride will once whisper foolish promises into an eager ear.
"Mr. Orochi sends his condolescences", Asher leaned in closer to her, his hard, ball-jointed thumb pushing through the dark tangle of Iwasaki-san's hair, into the hollow of her eye and cheek, clearing away tears. The words came out awkward and stiff.
The woman shuddered under his touch, sending haptic feedback all the way up his own reinforced periphery.
Ah, she grew lighter. Mindful of her frail state, of the asynchronic beat of Ruka-sama's heart, Asher slowly pushed an ornately embellished wakizashi that he previously pulled from the sukeban's own centerpiece stand, into the girl's remaining hand. And smiled, when he saw her fingers wrap around the handle. Strength was always commendable, circumstances be damned.