"It is time now, father. I must depart on my quest to fulfill my holy greatness," said James as he stood in the doorway, covered in white flowing robes as gentle winds beckoned his body to free itself of the threshold. His father, balding and middle aged barely looked up from the comfy chair as his son stood with the holy light blasting from behind his head. "On this day, I shall bring onto the world a new age of joy, but it will come at the cost of tremendous strife. What say you, father? What shall I do to temper the world's terror as this new age dawns?"
His father cleared his throat a little as he folded the newspaper over and saw an advertisement for a lawnmower he wanted. Most people didn't read the newspaper anymore, but Milton was old-school. He glanced at James above the rims of his glasses and then went back to the paper. "Well, you probably shouldn't talk like that if you want people to take you seriously." James blinked. He didn't know what to say.
"Is that...is that it, my father? I go forth to usher in a new age, have you nothing else to give unto me before I depart?"
"That's what I'm talking about. No one says unto and go forth anymore, James. I mean, your mother and I put up with it...because, well because you're our son, but...but you probably should put a lid on that," Milton elaborated.
"Father, please- I love you so greatly, impart unto me a greater word of wisdom before-"
"And don't go around telling people you love them," Milton cut in, dropping the newspaper now. "People don't want to be told by random strangers that they're loved. You'll- you'll end up in the loony bin." James stood speechless. Milton watched him for a second and then turned on the TV and started watching the football game.
"Well...I guess I'll just go then," James shrugged. Milton nodded halfheartedly as he turned up the volume. "I'm- I'm off now. I'm off to change the entire world. So...uh, so goodbye!"
"Alright, goodbye James," Milton mumbled. James looked around, unsure of what else to say and closed the door silently, as to not disrupt his father's beloved football game.