It all started like any other day really.
I can remember the time, it was 11:30a.m.
I was walking down the street, on my way to work.
The sun blindingly encompassed everything, so I had to pull out my sunglasses.
So, I'm fiddling around in my jacket pocket for them and just as I get my grip on the shades in question, I crash hard into a random passerby.
She was nice enough, she handed me my sunglasses, apologizing furiously.
Her eyes as I recall, were the most vivid cerulean.
Her body, was very sleek and shapely.
She had curves in all the right places.
Anyway,
We said our farewells.
Parting ways, never to see each other again, right?
A few years later, most of my family had passed away, save one crazy uncle named Dave.
No one in the family ever visited him, as he'd murdered my aunt a few years back.
They didn't lock him up, not in jail anyway unfortunately for him.
The lawyer on his case got him off on an insanity plea.
Which, if we're being honest, he was.
He snapped.
He and my aunt were in the store.
She asked him if he wanted roast for dinner.
According to two witness accounts and the store security tape, it was at that moment he decided to strangle her to death with one of those bags specifically for vegetables and fruits.
It was brutal.
I always wondered what was going on in his head at the time.
It had to be something pretty powerful to do that to someone he loved.
I felt sorry for him.
So, after my mom's funeral I decided to head to the "hospital" they were keeping him in.
Oddly enough, I walk in and there she was.
Those eyes.
I could have spotted them out of a police line up.
They were etched into my skull, she recognized me too.
So we say our hellos, that's when she asks why I'm here.
Well of course it would have been sly and potentially swoon worthy, had I said something like; "I looked you up, because that day we met when we crashed into each other, I fell madly in love with you." However that was simply not true.
I didn't know this woman, I didn't care about this woman.
She was just another face.
As far as I knew she felt nothing for me either.
We were strangers after all.
So, I answered truthfully.
"I'm here to see my uncle."
She looked shocked. The kind of shock a person gets when you tell a slightly off-color joke, or the second in between burping and saying excuse me.
She asked me his name, I told her.
She then informed me he'd passed away just that morning.
Now, I don't know if it was the fact that I'd lost mom rather recently, or that I really truly felt sorry for Dave. Not one visitor in 10 years, just slowly stewing on his thoughts.
Then finally someone's coming to visit. Somewhere in the afterlife I imagine he's either really pissed or laughing his ass off.
Someone came to visit, and before he could see them, he dies.
A tear began to fall, I wiped it away pretending I was rubbing my eyes.
She looked concerned.
She took my hand and led me to a chair in the waiting room.
That was her job, to console people here.
Well that and receptionist duties.
We talked, and basically exchanged life stories.
Apparently she'd had a rough road as well.
Orphan, abused by most of her adoptive families in one way or another.
At any rate, we decided to talk more.
We exchanged cell phone numbers, and began texting one another for about a month or so.
We would hang out and watch movies, we weren't really dating, just being friendly.
Well one day out of the blue, she decides to ask me out.
I agree, because I had grown rather fond of her by now, we were best friends.
What could go wrong?
A few years pass, and we're happy still and doing all those gross romantic things that guys pretend to hate around other guys even though we really enjoy them.
We had our fights like any other couple.
Stupid little arguments, but those eyes...
I started to grow more and more distant towards her as time passed.
I watched the life and hope slowly dissipate from her lovely eyes.
We were killing each other.
No, that's not right.
I was killing her...
It was like watching a movie of us to me.
I could see what I was doing, and how it hurt her, but I just couldn't snap myself out of it.
I couldn't talk to her.
She'd always try to come back with something positive, and it made me sick.
I wanted to shout at her. That being a damn optimist wasn't going to solve anything.
It got under my skin so badly.
One day, she got some terrible news.
A friend of hers had passed away, she was devastated.
I could see it, she was literally coming undone.
This was going to bury her.
I thought, "Maybe I should say something, or do something."
A part of me wanted to. I wanted to help this beautiful creature I had fallen in love with, so badly.
A bigger part of me, the part that consumed me, didn't even care.
I felt so guilty, that a part of me just couldn't even muster up enough effort to say anything to this girl.
I tried.
"I love you, I'm so sorry." I hugged her awkwardly, and then left for work.
Well she seemed strange for some time, but months went by and things went back to normal.
Her eyes didn't shine like they used to, but I thought we were doing well.
Then she stopped saying it.
She stopped saying "I love you."
I was worried, but thought maybe she's preoccupied.
I began saying it first, she'd say it back,
I'd ask her to promise, we'd go about our business.
I leave for work on a Friday.
I come back around 12, her car's gone when I arrive.
Okay, that's normal she must be out with a friend.
I walk in, set my things in the floor, get myself a Diet Mountain Dew.
Something feels off, but I can't quite tell why.
I look around the house things seem to be missing.
I go into the living room and it's barren. Like I missed an apocalypse.
I walk into the computer room, and on the desk is a note.
It's from her.
Basically saying how because of me, she had to leave, and thought we'd both be better off.
I wept.
I wanted to beg and plead and bring her back.
But the more I thought, the more I blamed her.
"screw her. "I said.
I'll never date again.
I thought I loved this woman so much, but I didn't treat her right.
I was a jackass.
I hate that I'm an asshole, I hate that she's gone...
And I hate her.