It was eight p.m. in DeFrayne's Twenty-Four Hour Laundrette and quiet. The air was warm and snug like an old duvet, the only sound the gentle thrumming of the machines, and old DeFrayne himself was close to falling asleep amongst the boxes of detergent on the counter when the door opened. The cool night air and the rumble of tyres briefly intruded on the cosy scene, and with it came a man.
He seemed quite a shifty man, thought old DeFrayne to himself. Normal laundrettiquette was to walk in, give a friendly smile to the proprietor of the establishment, and busy yourself with your washing. This man was different. He darted in like a magnet might enter a fridge emporium – so quick DeFrayne had barely even seen him. No attempt was made at a friendly smile; instead he skulked round the side of the laundrette in the shadow of the dryers as though desperate not to be noticed. When he came to a gap between the dryers he army-rolled across it.
DeFrayne left his position by the counter and approached the man. He was crouched by one of the washers, fingering the material of some brightly coloured spandex and muttering to himself, apparently quite on edge. He was dressed in what appeared to be a bathrobe.
DeFrayne cleared his throat. "Can I help you?" he asked gently.
The man screamed and burst into flames.
"I know you!" DeFrayne said, three bottles of fire extinguisher and half a bottle of gin later. "You're whatshisname. Fire Man."
The man's lips tightened before parting into a winning smile. "Flame Man," he said, "correct."
"Ah yes," said DeFrayne, looking again at his charred laundrette and reflecting sadly that Fire Men tended to be better at putting out fires than causing them. "Flame Man." He put on his best customer-service smile. "What brings you and your flames to my laundrette?"
"I was hoping to do some laundry," said Flame Man. He held up the brightly coloured spandex. "My suit's a bit, ah, dirty."
"But of course." DeFrayne pointed to a set of instructions on the wall. "Washers are three pounds, dryers are two."
"It's a bit complicated," Flame Man pressed. "See here…" He deposited the spandex on the counter and fiddled inside for the label. "There's this circle… and this circle inside this square… and this picture of a cupcake… and this ‘ B'with a cross over it."
"Is this blood?" asked DeFrayne queasily, pointing to a large red stain on the suit.
"No," Flame Man admitted. "It's jam."
"Ah, that's alright then." DeFrayne relaxed visibly, and turned his attention to the geometry – and cupcake – that had so baffled Flame Man. "Let's see… super low heat… only the mildest of detergent…" His brow furrowed. "Criminy… how much did this cost you?"
"Got it on the cheap," Flame Man said proudly, puffing out his chest beneath his bathrobe.
"I can tell." DeFrayne rubbed the bridge of his nose between his thumb and forefinger and poured himself another gin. "How can something flameproof require such a delicate wash?"
"Look mate, I'm not Batman," Flame Man shot. "I can't afford all that high quality gear he has knocking about. Can you wash it?"
"I…" DeFrayne finished his gin. "Why d'you need it washed anyway?"
"I'm doing a birthday party tomorrow," Flame Man said. "I can't have all the kids thinking I'm covered in blood."
"A birthday party?" DeFrayne looked at Flame Man in disbelief. "I thought you fought crime?"
Flame Man raised his hands in the air. "Like I said, I'm not Batman. I've got to pay the bills somehow."
This was too much for DeFrayne. "No!" he snapped. "I'm not spending my entire evening attempting to wash your suit for some girl's birthday party just because you couldn't eat your sandwiches sensibly!"
"It was actually toast," Flame Man said haughtily. "Not my choice." He eyed DeFrayne sadly. "Are you saying you won't clean my Super Suit?"
"Yes," DeFrayne said coldly. "That's exactly what I'm saying."
Flame Man cast an eye over the deserted laundrette, with only the solitary machine thrumming away in the corner. "Funny," he said. "I would've thought you'd need the business."
"There's something about nutters setting fire to things that scares customers off," said DeFrayne.
Flame Man smiled. "It was empty before I turned up," he said. "Come on, you've got loads of detergents back there. One of them must be mild enough for my suit."
"I'm afraid not." DeFrayne's hand moved from his gin bottle to beneath the counter.
"Must be worth a lot too," Flame Man mused, peering over the counter at the back room full of stacked boxes of white washing powder. "I noticed that was the first thing you did when your little business set on fire was move those boxes from the counter to the back room."
DeFrayne brought up a gun.
Flame Man smiled. "My suit washes just fine, thank you," he said. "If you knew anything about laundrettes you'd have seen instantly. They're even on that sign you were so keen to point out to me." He picked up the suit and held out the label for DeFrayne to see. "Circle – dry cleanable. Cupcake – machine washable. Circle in a square – tumble dryable."
DeFrayne's eyes flicked to the sign and back to the suit. "I don't see no B with no cross over it on my sign," he said in an ugly voice.
"Of course," Flame Man said. He darted forward and pressed the suit over the gun – just as DeFrayne fired it.
DeFrayne leered at him. "Guess I'll never find out," he said.
Flame Man leaned further over the counter, still clutching the suit over the end of the gun barrel, until his head was right next to DeFrayne's ear.
"Bulletproof," he whispered.