The Starship 'The Ship' had been surrounded. Resents were pouring in from every imaginable direction and the vessel was out of fuel. The two inhabitants of the ship were standing in the ship's cockpit. The large glass ceiling surrounding the room shook, as the Resents's ships pelted them with lasers, chairs, table lamps, and other assorted items that they found lying around, the majority of these 'weapons' had no effect but Resents were too stupid to realize that.
"So, this is it," the young, red-haired, girl asked as she stared at the shield's durability chart on one of the monitors in the room, "Once the sheilds break down and something breaks the glass, we're done for."
"Kid, what have I told you," the twenty-something aged man, who demanded to be called 'The Hero', asked, "Whenever we get into a situation like this there is always a way ou --"
"But the self-destruct requires so much time to get to," she forcefully interrupted, "We don't have the time! And besides, we'd still need to get to the escape pod first."
"Then we'll just have to stall for time, get to work on opening the vaults to where the button is," The Hero said, sitting down in the captain's seat. Once settled down, he pulled down one of the monitors that hung above the seat and with it one of the microphones.
"What're you doing? Say something about us being spies?"
"No, I have a better idea that they can't prove." He opened up the communications application on the monitor and searched through the 'nearby ships' option to find what he was looking for: the fleet's commanding ship.
Soon after beginning the transmission, the monitor's screen changed to showing a dark interior of a ship with a single, gooey grey figure on the other side. The Hero simply smiled as it began to talk. "This Fleet Girelpish. Reetreet Nebulae, surrender or destroyed," the figure stated in a loud and booming voice. The threat, however, didn't appear to be all that serious to The Hero, mainly because of the figure's poor English and seemingly made up words.
"Hey, cool your jets, I'm The Hero and this is my partner The Kid," he tilted the monitor to the girl, who was busy plugging away at a screen on the side of the wall.
"Don't bring me into this," she glared for a moment before going back to opening the vault.
"We come in peace," The Hero continued, "We were just passing through on the way to somewhere important."
"You aware great war, correct," the Resent pieced together. Of course they knew of the great war, they were currently trying to get to a base within Resent territory that needed their help.
"Of course I know, it was a big risk coming all the way out here. But i'm not on the Galactic Federation's side or anything, i'm just trying to meet up with a friend."
"Who that?"
"The commander of your entire species, the head honcho, the big guy. Y'know, your leader."
"We're doomed," The Kid groaned, before going back to the task at hand.
"You want leader" the Resent asked.
"Of course, we were going to have tea and biscuits," The Hero said, as if he wasn't pulling stuff out of his ass.
"Wait moment." The Resent said, before seemingly dragging its body off screen.
The Hero took the moment to look back at The Kid, asking in a hurried voice, "How much longer till you get the thing ready?"
"Gonna need another minute or two. Why did you think this would work?"
"Resents are incredibly stupid, that's why."
"What is incredibly stupid," a new, more soothing, and more grammatically correct voice asked from behind The Hero. He turned around to see that a new figure, near identical to the one of the fleet's leader, had appeared on screen. Before The Hero could respond, the figure began to talk again, "I am Rexeland, leader of the Reetreet Nebulae. You two must be the ones that have called us. Why have you demanded to speak with me?"
"Uhh," The Hero stuttered, internally debating whether Resents were *that* stupid, "Well, um, uh, Rexeland, it's been awhile. Don't you remember? It's me, uh, Que-Gorp Slabseedap."
"Slabseedap," Rexeland responded awestruck, "Is that really you? You look so different."
"Well, you know, with body transfers and vocal cord replacements, anyone can appear different nowadays," he said after a moment of silence caused by him realizing they are that stupid.
Rexeland's voice suddenly became darkened, troubled. "So, do you still remember what happened? O--on, Panea?"
"Oh, uh, of course. How could I forget?" The Hero had no idea what he was doing.
"The fleet commander, he said that you came to see me. D--Does this mean that you've forgiven me? Does this mean you still love me?"
"Hey, Hero," The Kid called from behind, "It's open, should I press it now?"
"Yes, uh, of course!" The Hero said to the image on the screen.
"Great," the Resent said, doing its equivalent of crying, "Then the war is off! I'll call the Galactic Federation and tell them that it's ov --"
Rexeland's victorious outburst was cut short by a synthesized voice coming from The Ship, "Self-Destruct sequence initiated. Please proceed to one of the available escape pods. Destruction of ship will begin in 60, 59, 58..."
All color drained from The Hero's face as the countdown continued. "I'll, uh, i'll be right back." This promise was subsequently followed by The Hero running away and screaming like a little girl, trying to catch up to The Kid who was already in an escape pod.
The pod departed through a small chunk of open space that the Resents had neglected cover. Their escape was soon followed by a large explosion originating from The Ship that claimed the lives of all the Resents in the area.
"What," The Kid asked as The Hero glared at her, "You told me to press it."
They rode the rest of the way to their destination in quiet.