Unrequited love is the worst kind of suffering a man can endure. I pined for her, my Anna. She with the hair like chocolate and her skin as pale as the moon in the sky. She moved like grace through a crowd of sinners, touching each person who had the benefit of knowing her. I was not among the lucky.
High school ended and the years softened the ache that had settled within me. I went through relationships like colds, seeing her face in each and moving on. I learned she left our small town and with her went my chance at happiness, but I was happy for her. Truly I was.
It was a cold day in December when I saw her again. She wore the years apart like the fine scarf wrapped around her neck and her eyes reflected the places I imagined she'd been. With nothing more to lose, I said hello and she spoke to me. I offered her a cup of coffee and a place to warm up and she agreed with a smile that I would've killed to see in high school.
By the end of our impromptu date, I'd learned that she had indeed seen the world, had been to places I could only imagine and done things she was hesitant to talk about. We each had our demons and I knew a girl as beautiful as Anna had surely made her own share of mistakes with men.
Reluctantly, she agreed to a second date. Then a more enthusiastic third. I was in love before our first kiss, shared on the bleachers behind our old high school under a full moon. I learned she liked to bite when she kissed, a quirk I fell in love with. It was heaven on earth.
I dropped her off that night already planning on the ring and proposal. She liked emeralds over diamonds. White gold over yellow. She was a simple girl with simple pleasures, just looking to rediscover her roots and settle down.
The sensation came to me in a flood. I knew it meant that she loved me back and I rejoiced. It was a common bond that could never be broken. She was truly my souls mate.
I stopped for flowers in the morning and noticed the cashier as if for the first time. She walked weakly on her left foot, perhaps due to an old cheer-leading injury. She was slow and I knew I could break her neck as quickly as a cat's and deposit her body behind the dumpsters where no one would discover it until I was safely out of town.
I vomited and left the building without the flowers, leaving the cashier with a questioning look upon her face. My Anna had the answers and I knew it would be a rational one.
She was sitting on the sofa with eyes that looked like she'd spent the night crying. She embraced me when she saw me and my fears evaporated in the air between us. There had to be an explanation. This was meant to be a happy occasion after all, but even as I held her, I knew I thought of all the ways I could kill her and how easy it would be to slip a knife between her third and fourth rib into her heart.
My eyes strayed to the kitchen. I felt her heart beating against my chest and thought of the ways I could separate it from her body. I knew it would have to be cooked on a low heat to keep in the juices and that the human heart was best paired with Pinot Noir. I loved her and in spite of myself, my stomach grumbled.