"He looks so normal..." A woman whispered; still loud enough to hear.
"This is before he snaps, what happened to him? He looks well enough. What happens in the next few weeks do you think?" the second woman replied to the first.
I've had the feeling that people were watching me for some time. Since my child hood, strangers have gawked and stared at me as if I were some sort of spectacle. I would catch people taking pictures of me in public, and would often be frightened by the staring eyes. My parents thought I was overreacting, and told me to ignore it.
"Why would they be staring at you honey?"
Why indeed.
The women across from me were facing the opposite direction, but would casually glance at me over their shoulders when they thought I wasn't looking, but I was always watching them from the corner of my eye. They had entered the cafe shortly after I had, and they didn't order anything. Their focus was on me, and for once I had the courage to ask why.
"Excuse me. Why are you talking about me?" I said to the strangers.
"Did he just -" the first woman was interrupted by the second.
"What? No we aren't talking about you." Said the second, nervously.
"I heard you, just now. Why are you here watching me?" I said, standing up now. As I stood from my chair the strangers shrieked.
"Don't hurt us, PLEASE!" The first said, sprinting with the second towards the door. I was dumbstruck. They had obviously been here to see me, and yet they were terrified of me. After a moment of confusion, I noticed the women had left their cellphones and purses at the table in their hurried leave. I approached the table and picked up one of their cellphones, curiously. It was huge; wider and taller than my Galaxy Note, and thicker than my wallet. I could see the added thickness of the phone was in part due to an attachment that snapped onto the back. I popped it off and the inside read "Verizon 2010-2020 mobile adapter." On the back of the phone itself read the phone's name as well. "Samsung Universe 6X"
"What in the fuck..." I remarked. These devices made no sense. I kept up to date with most technology and had never heard of this. It barely looked like a Samsung device, the buttons were wonky and the size was enormous. Turning the device to the screen side I pressed some of the unmarked buttons until the screen came on.
The device's date read March 25th, 2056.
At this point my brain was aching. All signs pointed to these women being from the future; they were here to see me as well. I set the phone down and turned back to my table, and I saw them through the windows. They must have realized they left their belongings in the fluster, and turned back to see if I was gone. This was my chance for some answers, and I wasn't going to ruin this opportunity. I bolted from the cafe towards the strangers. Realizing I was after them, they took their leave as well.
I wasn't very fast, but these women weren't either. They screamed at me to stop, but I needed to know. I had been waiting my entire life to know, and now might be the only chance to find out. I had caught up to one, and grabbed her arm. She reached towards her watch and pressed a button, while the other woman grasped her arm as well.
Everything was black, for a moment at least. Then everything was bright, even with my eyes closed, even with my hands over my eyes. The brightness was piercing through every part of my body. It didn't hurt, but I could feel the light pulsating through me. Then everything was dark again.
When I came to, I was holding the watch, in a different time and place than I had ever been before. Looking at the watch I struggled to find an undo button. I couldn't be here a moment longer. I couldn't be here a second longer. I found a button that read "revert time" and I pressed it immediately.
Everything was black again, then bright once more, and black again.
When I awoke I was in the streets were I grabbed the woman. The thoughts of that place were still ingrained into my mind. Stabbing my conscious with the images of that terrible place. Replaying over and over.
Nobody should have to go to that place.
Nobody should witness what I saw, I would make sure of that.
I would make damn sure of that.