(To be safe, I'm labeling this NSFW)
"Now then...How shall we begin?"
I awoke only a few minutes ago with a pounding headache, naked and tied to a chair in a dark basement. The man standing before me was impeccably dressed in a well-tailored suit and snappy shoes. He was brandishing a red-hot iron in front of my face.
"Branding is traditional," he said waving the iron around in the air, "and I daresay, I quite enjoy starting with it. It sort of...Makes you mine, you know?" He grinned. "But for you...I think I'll do something special. After all, you were very hard to get a hold of."
I tried to scream...To call for help in complete desperation that someone, anyone, would hear me. The sound was muffled. This madman had gagged me. There was no begging for mercy.
The man surveyed his various tools and instruments. Picking them up one by one and scruntizing them. Even though my vision was still blurry from whatever he drugged me with, I could still tell his devices and blades were far from surgical. They were rusty, dirty, bloody too, like he used them all before and never cleaned them.
"Maybe we'll start big," he said as he picked up a long nail. My eyes widened with terror as he stepped quickly towards me. With one hand he held my head still and slowly inched the nail closer to my eye. I swear, it was mere millimeters away when he pulled back. "Nah...Too sensitive. Don't get me wrong, we'll get to that, but I'm a man who likes to build up."
He walked over to the corner of the room and picked up a large hammer. He swung it over his shoulder and began strolling towards me once again. I began to panic as he got closer. He stood just off to the side and brought the hammer down until it just touched my foot. He began to act like he was about to tee-off against my foot. As he raised the hammer into the air about to swing down, he laughed a maniacal laugh before feignting the swing and bringing the hammer back to rest over his shoulder.
I was crying and panting heavily through the cloth that was stuffed in my mouth. A stream of hot urine trickled down my leg.
"Ooo!" The man said placing the hammer down and gleefully rubbing his hands together. "I haven't even touched you yet and you're already this much of a mess! This is going to be fun!" He walked back to the table of his horrid tools. "I think I know what to do with you now..."
I could bearly see him anymore through the tears flooding from my eyes. I kept telling myself that this had to be a terrible, terrible nightmare, but the cold steel of the chair and the chaffing of the ropes binding my hands grounded me in reality. I couldn't see what the man was looking at, but before he could turn towards me, his phone rang in his pocket.
He groaned and swore as he answered it. "What?!" He snapped. "Oh! B-boss! I...Sure, I can but you see...I...I...Yes sir, I'll be right there." He hung up and wlaked towards me. "Seems our playdate will have to wait. You won't go anywhere, will you?" He mocked and patted me on the cheek. He turned around, walked up the stairs, and shut off the light.
I was alone in the darkness. The only sound I could hear was my muffled sobs. There was nothing for me now, only despair as I waited for him to return. I tried to escape. I jerked my body in any direction that I could but it was no use. I let out a stifled cry of defeat.
Then I felt my hand move. There it was! A glimmer of hope in that dark basement! Through some miracle, a knot was loose and I was able to free my hands and escape the chair. I fumbled around in the darkness for sometime before finding a lightswitch. When my eyes adjusted to the brightness, the first thing I saw was a macabar display of photos on the wall, each featuring a previous victim of this psycho.
I took a deep breath and calmed myself before rushing up the stairs. I looked around the corners and peeked through cracks in the door to insure it was safe. I stole whatever clothes I could find and moved towards the front door. I had to get to the police. I had to get this man arrested.
My hand was on the knob when I turned around. Behind me was the door to the basement I would have died in. It seemed like something was compelling me to stay. Instead of fear, I was now feeling anger. I took my hand off the door and waited.
It was a hour or so later that the man returned. As he rounded the corner, I swung a heavy frying pan into his face. As he fell to the floor, reeling in pain, I smothered him with a rag soaked in chloroform.
He was securly tied to the chair when he came to. I was examining the very things he planned to use on me. I turned to him.
"I hope you don't mind, but I burrowed a suit. It fits me rather well, no?" I picked up a hot iron and walked towards him.
"Now then...How shall we begin?"