My 11 year old son is really into writing. He whipped this up (I have not read it yet)
I walked out of my containment pod in the morning, and the fluorescent lights blinded me for a few seconds. A few scientists rushed down when they heard the seal in my pod release. Mist flowed from the pod and drifted into the lab. Different scientists monitored and checked the artificial organisms in my body with an X-ray. I hated having to sit in that pod for at least two hours per day, constantly being pestered and monitored before I could even leave the depths of the lab. It was uncomfortable and hot in the X-ray pod. After being released from the pod I walked upstairs in my jumpsuit, itchy and annoyed. It was too tight in my suit, but I knew better than to complain. Before leaving, I snatched a cellphone from my pod that I hid there. I stole the cellphone two weeks ago from father, but he had so many it was barely noticeable. I had been chatting with people online for days now, and they were quite nice. I wish to meet real humans other than the scientists and servants in the manor. I made sure to use the cellphone discreetly when my father wasn't forcing me to sit in diagnostic chambers to make sure I'm perfectly healthy, or making me learn how to lie to reporters and manage a company. I understood it was dangerous to steal things from father, and that he was only doing this for my benefit, and that this was for my own good. Right? Right. I thought so. I continued through the maze of corridors to find that my father was having a heated debate with someone on the phone. I waited patiently, like I was supposed to, and then we begun our classes. I sat impatiently, having occasional spasms. Not because I was unhealthy, the exact opposite. It was because I didn't want to be here. I had no choice in the matter, I was aware of this. So I sat dutifully and waited. After ranting for what seemed to be hours, but was only thirty minutes, I was excused to go to my next class. Just before I got up, I asked, "Father, may I leave the manor?" My words were like glass that were just dropped and silence overwhelmed the room. He looked furious, veins bulging from his neck. "No," he said in a calm voice, but it reeked of anger. "You may not. Is something wrong? This is the first time you have asked this. Maybe you should go back to the lab." He said with authority. I sat up. I clutched the table to support my weight, which seemed to grow until my legs barely stood up on their own. "… No," I said. "Excuse me?" He bellowed, not even bothering to seem calm anymore. "How dare you defy me!" He yelled, and he walked towards me. He didn't stand a chance. Life went by in flashes, and soon he was on the ground and I was running out of the manor. I sprinted out of the doors and I saw it all. The birds, the sky, the sunlight on my face. I ran. I ran as far as my legs could take me, the machines inside of me moving like clockwork. I was running away from the place that kept me prison. I was no longer afraid.