As he was looking at the whiteboard in front of the class, Brandon knew he discovered something that was unique.
He didn't have the "Eureka" -moment until last night. He repeated the tests he had been doing for months now. Every test brought him closer to the speed of light.
He knew there was something to be done and yesterday he finally tested it. The speed of light was something he found interesting when he was young, and he finally realized it could be broken.
As Brandon proceeded to day dream, his teacher came closer. Brandon knew he needed to look like he was paying attention, but he couldn't ignore the fact that he finally solved one of life's biggest mysteries.
The teacher was slowly approaching his table and Brandon look at the teacher. "Pay attention, Brandon, this information might save your life one day", Brandon started smiling. "Sir, I think I already get what you're saying.."
"Ha, you must be one of those kids that thinks he got it all figured out". Brandon's smile got bigger. "No sir, I actually don't, I don't understand how something could travel faster than the speed of light"
"That makes sense, Brandon, because nothing can". Brandon's face had the most glorious expression it had ever had before. "Sir, I already know that it's possible. I tested it last night".
His teacher started laughing. "Aren't you smart, Brandon. How did you do it? Did you throw a ball? Did you flick the switch off and on? Did you Elon Musk the shit out of the light?"
"No, sir. Actually, I thought it was rather easy. I simply measured the distance of a particle that seemed like it could travel faster than light. And I was right".
His teacher had a confused look on his face. "Everybody knows that nothing can travel faster than the speed of light, Brandon. What's next, you're going to tell me you invented time travel?"
"Well, sir, even when traveling faster than the speed of light it's still not possible to travel in time. All you can do is go faster than the light. See, if the light of the sun takes 8 minutes to get here, and you travel faster than that light, all you see is stuff that happened within those 8 minutes. You could hypothetically travel back in time by 8 minutes at most, depending on how much faster you travel than the sun light"
In all these years the teacher had never heard so much bullshit. "Get out", the teacher said. "If I wanted to hear made up shit about traveling and space I would call my Scientology friends"
"Sir, I swear I found a way to make stuff travel faster than light. If I can do it through a home test, imagine what we can do in the lab"
"You're banned from the Lab, Brandon. You're banned from my class now too. Get out. I don't want to hear any words coming from your mouth"
"Make me", Brandon said. "I'm sorry? ", his teacher looked like he was about to slap Brandon in the face. "Everybody knows the that the formule is E=mc2"
"Yeah, everybody does know that, and everybody is wrong", Brandon got furious. "I literally found a way to travel faster than the speed of light, and I will show you"
Brandon came back to the same class the next day. His teacher stood in the doorway, looking at Brandon like he was a piece of trash. "What's that? ", the teacher said. "I will show you it's possible to get faster-than-light-speed travel. ", Brandon was determined to make his teacher shut up once and for all.
As Brandon was setting up his equipment, his teacher was making jokes about him to the rest of the class. "Ladies and gentlemen, if you ever want to look like a fool then make sure to pay attention right now"
Then it happened. This loud noise coming from Brandon's equipment. The class went silent. Brandon just stood there with a crazy look on his face. He knew he did it, he knew he found the perfect way.
His teacher looked at the equipment. He looked at the class. He turned around and looked at Brandon. He started to feel nauseous, his head started to turn white. Everything he had ever known in life was falling apart. As the room went dark, all the teacher knew was that he had never seen anything like this before.
That teacher's name? Einstein.