A dust cloud is rising in the air behind me as my old ford grumbles loudly down the familiar driveway. I can feel my stomach clenching up, my mind torn over what I was about to do. It was two o'clock. She should be gone to see Aunt Pearl at the old folks home, like she always did after church on Sunday. "Just have to hope her habits haven't changed since we last spoke," I thought nervously.
I reach the end of the drive, and I can here the wind chimes on the front porch tinkling through my open window of my truck. My stomach clenches up again, a mixture of guilt and need this time. I can feel small beads of sweat trickling down my back. As I step out of the truck, the warm breeze blows through my shirt and cools me. Suddenly I'm 20 years younger, sweaty and out of breath, playing in the yard like I did everyday when I was a kid, breeze blowing through my shirt and cooling me down. I can still see her, younger too, out in the back, hanging laundry on the line and telling me to stay out of the neighbor's yard. The memory fades and I feel shame. I know that there is only one thing that's gonna make that feeling go away. One thing that's gonna make all the feelings go away, and for a little while I will be at peace. I just have to get up enough cash to get it.
It is time for me to do what I came here for. I'm going to get in, get that pocket watch that I know is sitting in her jewelry box on the dresser, and get out. I keep telling myself, "Just do it, and don't look back." I go around to the back door, and it's locked. I'm pretty sure my key won't fit anymore, given how our last discussion went. I pull the screen door open without hardly an ounce of resistance, and break out the smallest pane of glass closest to the door knob to unlock it from the inside. I push the wooden door open and step onto the kitchen floor.
The linoleum is shinning bright in the sun, and it smells like pine sol. She always did scrub that floor on Sunday mornings. I can hear her voice echoing in my head," Cleanliness is next to Godliness." I start to walk back towards the bedroom, but stop. The dust on my boots from the driveway is leaving muddy prints on the floor. She would have had my hide for this when I was a boy.
My heart starts tightening up, thinking about how hard she tried to raise me right. It wasn't easy, being all on her own, and I know I didn't make it any easier for her. She worked her hands to the bone every day of her life, and she did it all for me.
What am I doing? I run back out to my truck, heart pounding in my chest and ears, disgusted with myself. Dust is rising in the air behind me again, driving away as fast as this old truck will go.
This is my very first post in this sub, and I am sure that there is all kinds of problems with my attempt at a story. For anybody who happened to take the time to read it, thank you! This was really fun.:)