I open my eyes in a panic, sweat beading and then falling down my face. I look around and the sun in shining through the maroon curtains of my studio apartment. Everything seems to be as I left it the afternoon before, but there is a heavy, unfamiliar air in the room. I notice the throw cover I lazily hang to separate my twin size bed from the rest of the apartment has been ripped to the ground, and that the kitchen faucet rhythmically drips against the cold steel sink. I was alone last night like I always am, I think. No one has been here but me in over three months.
I'm not allowed to think about it much longer, as the feeling in my stomach bubbles over and pops once more as it had been doing all night, slowly worsening. I pinch my eyes shut, knowing what's coming next, and for just one moment, as the pain peaks like a giant wave waiting to break, I think I may just die this time. And just as quickly, the wave reaches the shore, and I know I have a few moments of peace. I open my eyes and look around. I can't help but surrender to the weight of them after a few moments, and I drift to an uneasy sleep, as the tension escapes from my stomach and from the rest of my body, dissipating into the small space I call home.
The next wave takes what remains in me and decimates it. The pain blinds me, numbing me to all feeling and sensation. The relief never comes as I close my eyes involuntarily.
I finally come to and realize I had been asleep for a while. I open my eyes and, fighting the blinding lights and white room, I see that the natural maroon lighting of my apartment has been replaced by white hospital lights. Beyond the thick glass walls of the room that was smaller than my apartment - though I didn't think it got smaller than that - stand people I have never seen before, looking at papers and analyzing the rhythms of the machines I now realize I am hooked up to. The men all stop and slowly turn their unexpected gazes at me as I begin to curl my sore body into a seated position, only to be shocked back down by a face that made the sea of unfamiliar faces fade away.
The prominent cheekbones that made my mother seem so much prouder than her nature would actually allow remained strong, though the rest of her seemed to be worn down by the years. The same mahogany curls fell across those cheeks and down right above her shoulders, though they seemed more ashen now. Her frail yet determined hand touching the impenetrable glass and reaching to pick me up and hold me, and I recall the day in my childhood where, in my insistence to become a world champion roller bladder, I fell and scrapped my knee. And I recall the comforted feeling of being cradled in her arms in fetal position. And I recall never wanting to leave the warmth of the embrace.
And just as I begin to reach out, I crouch and close my eyes to the familiar feeling that boils over in my stomach. Falling in and out of consciousness, I see quick flashes. I see my mother's crystal blue eyes well with tears that could not be held. I see her strong posture and I see the unfamiliar men gather, bowing and shaking their heads, unsure. I see the green lines of the machines jump and dance. And I see a sign, sloppily and quickly written above my bed, the only writing visible to me in my haze. It read "Patient Zero".