NEDD looked down at the rhythmic sound of wood clanging against your gargantuan cloven hoof.
*sigh* what is the world coming to? That this semi-naked warrior with nothing but a wooden sword had reached his domain meant the guardians of all the lower levels had failed to prevent this nobody to pass, there was no way he could have actually bested them was there?
How had this human reached the feet of the Nether Elemental Daemon of Destruction, Unspoken Shadow King of the Greater Nether Realm and Lord of all the Arcane? He went by NEDD because his given name was horrendous, but he was still the most powerful warrior bar none! He stood protecting the gate to his mistress' layer and none had ever passed him. Few ever reached his gates and those that did normally took one look, bowed before him and backed away to find a less daunting prize.
The challenger took a final swing and his wooden sword staggered against his hoof. There was a mark on the armour plaiting but it looked like bits of wood ground against the chitinous plate, rather than any damage to his person. The challenger backed off and dropped the broken handle on the stone floor, littering was not something he liked but the maintenance goblins would be round later to clean up anyway so it wasn't a problem.
The tiny human shuffled his pouch and withdrew another wooden sword and resumed.
NEDD sighed and buried his face in his hand. This was growing tiresome. Standing from his basalt throne he paced to the other side of the room, far outpacing what an I enhanced human would be capable of. Once he reached the other side of the hall he turned and true enough the tiny human was only a third of the way to him.
Deciding to humour the creature he drew drew his blade and sliced the chain holding open the door. He stood at 40m high so when the 100m wide by 50m high door fell it released a tremendous shockwave that knocked the human skidding across the floor. It stood up and looked around for it's sword. It was gone.
NEDD paced across the room and hauled open a draw inset to the wall. The door was enchanted so that when it closed it would disarm challengers, anything held in their hands would be teleported to this draw. He picked through the contents and found what he was looking for. He picked up the jewel studded necklace and for humour grabbed the wooden sword.
He glanced over to where the human stood watching him and threw the sword and necklace so they skidded to within a few meters of the challenger. The human moved to pick up the items and NEDD sat down again on his throne.
For a daemon NEDD had a particularly nice voice, it was deep and strong and reverberated so that you felt the lower consonants rather than hearing them. "What brings you to this place mortal?" NEDD was technically mortal too but he could pull off the look and did so as his standard greeting to challengers.
The human spoke but being so far away and so quiet he could not be heard. NEDD cut him off "Put on the necklace! You should have crafted one with the sisters of Thaler's Vale?"
It was a statement left hanging that demanded a response and as he human put on the necklace he received one.
"Hello, I'm Peter."
NEDD's brow furrowed, that was not quite as informing as he hoped. Just being blunt might work better.
"How did you get here?"
"I ran most of the way."
Again not really telling him anything useful.
"What...How..." NEDD paused and grumbled to himself before speaking loudly but clearly "I dislike pointless threats but you may not have realised that I am a guardian of this hall! I can CRUSH you with almost no effort and will do so without hesitating. How exactly did you make your way past all the previous guardians?"
The human paused "killed them."
Now that was interesting "Go on..."
"I was created by an incredibly powerful Mage. Born under a new moon that coincided with a solar eclipse at midday on the winter solstice. Conceived with no mother. 7 virgin sacrifices fuelled my creation and the blood of a thousand warriors."
NEDD raised an eyebrow, "and they call you Peter?"
"Well I had to be called something didn't I?"
"And they chose Peter..."
"Why is the name Peter the part you're questioning here?"
"I just struggle to see how they'd go to all that trouble and name you something as banal as Peter."
"Mhmhehmmm" The challenger mumbled
"What was that?"
"If you really must know, Peter is not my given name. It was my wizard creator's name and I took it when I killed him"
"Now that is more believable, now onto the rest of your tale. You don't look very..." Peter looked at him questioningly "...threatening."
"Well I'm not really, I don't have super human strength or the gift of otherworldly magic. I'm clever but not nearly as sharp as a magically enhanced mind. I'm fairly squishy, I cut easily, I'm regularly seriously injured by plants and rocks that are just lying about. I have a ludicrously high pain threshold but I'm really very easy to kill."
"I'm sorry, I must have missed something. How do you plan on getting past me?"
"Well that's simple" and with a smile he took his pathetic wooden sword and sliced his own neck open."
"Oh..." that was rather anticlimactic.
But then Peter stood up "I've been killed literally thousands of time getting here, but never permanently. The early guardians took a few attempts to learn how to kill them, some of them just got worn down over time. A few just let me past because they got bored of killing me. If I'm killed very badly I'll loose any armour I have which I why I only have a wooden sword but I won't ever stop."
"Oh, that does explain allot."
Peter and NEDD just looked at each other for a while before Peter spoke. "So what now?"
"What a question!" NEDD leapt to his hooves and swept across the room. In two paces he was at Peter and he swung his feet in an arc.
Peter died first upon contact with several tones of very solid hoof. He then redirected in the air just long enough to regret starting this, before he smashed into the stone wall and his head exploding.
"What now Peter? What now?"
The human stood, drenched in warm fresh blood. In front of him NEDD burst into flame and drew a pair of swords that probably sighed more than a house each. "Now I face an opponent worthy of my effort!"
The fire elemental pointed his sword at Peter and the world turned to flame. Before he was roasted for the first of many times Peter thought 'here we go again'.