No one ever says what space is really like. They say it's cold. They say it's silent. They say "no one can hear you scream." All that bollocks. I tell you, space is one thing. Boring. I've been the captain of the HMS Hannibal for forty years Earth time. In all that time I have learned two things. There are no such things as space pirates, aliens, alternative universes, or black hole anomalies. Two, I wish there were. Something should have have happened in all my years. All my years as captain have been one dreary hypersleep to the next. Get up, check crew vitals, give the sick ones meds, check flight path. Usually, I take my time awake to write. Oh, and check the messages for the crew. Most times the alerts are just differences in pressure or fuel. Occasionally, we'll get a message from the big guys down on the Dot. Those rare occasions usually mean some noteworthy event has happened on Earth so as to warrant sending a message millions of light years to us. Heading to Mars is not a short trip and it takes approximately 1,000,000 Pounds to send a message directly from Earth. The four or five times it has happened I made sure the crew paid special attention, seeing as how it cost more than our collective salaries. The message today, I guess the reason I'm writing this is at all, was enough to give even a stodgy old man like myself reason for concern. After all, it isn't everyday you learn that the last star is going out. I didn't really pay close attention to the stars. After all, ever since Mars was colonized there was no need to navigate by stars anymore. Simply follow the coordinates and signal. Some ships were even being manufactured without windows. No cause for them. The Hannibal being one of the first, he still had all his Bow and Stern windows. They tried to remove them once. Damn near had to drag me off the technician who tried to shove the bloody work order in my face. Now I see the great coincidence in my fisticuffs with the worker. The last star. Stella Polaris. The North Star. The only star left in the sky. Granted, many of the stars went out years ago. Their lights were only just now reaching Earth. However, the North Star was the last star going out in our time to see it. On Earth, it would probably still be lighting up for at least a millennia. However, still quite the event to witness. Our course would lead us by the Stella in a few hours time. She was set to super nova a few hours after we passed by. Be a shame really. I should probably wake the crew but it's few hours. It won't take them long to process the information. It didn't take me long. Come to think of it, this may be the closest I ever get to those science fiction cliches that don't actually exist up here. Well, that's ruddy mysterious. Perhaps, when this star goes out, that's when the real mysteries and cliches take place. Huh...glad I'm around to see it.