The cabin was almost silent, almost everyone was asleep. All I could hear before plugging into my iPod was the soft whirring of the engines, the low flirtatious murmurs and giggles of another young couple a few isles in front, and the soft footfalls from the approaching Stewardess, Lisa. In an instant that all was gone, replaced by the Middle Eastern inspired music of one of my favorite bands: The Tea Party. Though they were best known for Temptation, I was listening to my favorite song, Sister Awake. I think you might call it a ballad, though I'm not sure. Labels like that still confuse me.
My eyes went down to the book my darling was reading, The Life of Robert Frost. She demanded that I read it after she finished, saying it was right up my alley. It was a biography of sorts, but instead of a real person it was an inhuman supernatural monster. The author, she explained, was trying to show how relative "evil" is.
Closing my eyes, letting my head fall back against the headrest, I let out a low, happy sigh. I was happy. Sarah thought our week-long vacation in France was spontaneous, but like today, it was not. I had planned the perfect week for us ending with the perfect last day. This morning started with breakfast in bed, served to us by a pretty young lady named Charlene, followed by a bit of shopping and a long walk along the beautiful country roads just outside Paris—the highway a long way to the west. There we saw colors we barely ever saw in Canada. Late in the afternoon, we went for dinner and then back to our hotel room for one final session of love making. Even now, hours later, I could still smell her and taste her lips.
"Here you go sir," Lisa said almost under her breath.
I opened my eyes and turned to her. "Thank you."
She asked if there was anything else I needed. There wasn't and I conveyed that with a warm, real, smile and a shake of my head. After Lisa was gone, I brought the coffee cup to my lips and took a small sip. It was fragrant and bitter with hints of chocolate, cherries, and a sort of spice I couldn't quite put my finger on. That sip of coffee was exactly how I wanted to end this.
Looking back down at the cover of the book, I picked it up and read the page she was on. My heart skipped a beat and then fell a little, just a little. She was no more than twenty pages from where Robert would meet a beautiful young woman named Sarah in a Vancouver coffee shop beside a used book store named 'UnRealistic Fantasy'. They would quickly fall in love and marry, and just after their seventh anniversary Robert would take her for a seemingly spontaneous vacation to Paris. The Red Eye they took home never made it to Toronto International.
Everyone on board was killed, everyone except for Robert.
I closed the book, unconsciously dog-earing the page Sarah was on, and set it reverently on the make-shift table top. Sister Awake was just about to finish, so I picked up my iPod to pick another song and saw the time: 2:47. I closed my eyes and turned to my love, leaned over and kissed her softly on the temple, whispering "I love you", before adjusting myself in the chair.
Looking through the plane's portals across the vast empty isle to my left, I watched the bright white light of the other Boeing 727 less than a minute away. And as that light enlarged and became brighter and brighter, I sipped my coffee.
* edit: Holy Crap I need to learn Reddit formatting.