I remember the day like it was yesterday. The day when humanity inexplicably found the Gift, and then blinked itself to extinction. Well, actually, it was yesterday. Walking along the street on my way to Joe's Neighborhood Pizzeria and Ribs, I was wearing my usual short order cook outfit, all decked out in white. By the time I reached the restaurant, it was soaked in blood. The restaurant's owner was named Joe like me, but that wasn't his real name. His real name was Akimoto, but he figured Akimoto's Pizzeria and Sushi Bar wouldn't have the same ring to American ears and palate. So he became Joe.
I rounded a corner to a street that was a block away from Times Square. But it was deserted and eerily quiet which any New Yorker will tell you is impossible even at 2 AM. I stood there gape-mouthed on the sidewalk. That was a mistake. Before I could close it again, my mouth was full of blood. Other people's blood. You see, it became a sport to tease the only human on Earth without the Gift.
A street punk materialized before me. He sported the typical punk leather outfit complete with purple mohawk and something I hadn't ever seen before: a red line tattoo around his neck with little drops of blood attached. The tattoo artists of the day were getting uncannily realistic I thought. He had this odd expression on his face like he wanted to tell me something. His mouth opened and mouthed something silently. I'd like to think it was "Hello, Joe, what a bitchin'fine day, eh?" But a part of me, my gut instinct, sensed that it was more like "Oh my fucking god, I'm going to die!" That and the terror in his eyes. The wrinkled 50-odd year old looking face didn't seem to match the flamboyant outfit or hairdo. Before I could react, his head slipped off the stump of his neck like butter sloshing around on a hot pan. I caught a glimpse of his attacker, an older Japanese lady wielding a Samurai sword. She wiped her sword clean, nodded, then blinked out of existence. A sudden flash of red and blue lights announced the arrival and disposal of the corpse by some ghostly paramedic squad. And just as quickly, all that remained was a faint red smear on the sidewalk.
Pretty soon I became numb to the horrendous and gruesome ways a human body could be dispatched. So they added sex and other bodily excretions to the mix. Look, I'm as open minded as the next New Yorker, but I really don't need to see bowling balls falling out of asses more than once on an empty sidewalk.
By the time I reached the restaurant, I had witnessed no fewer than 600 murders, several dozen suicides, and more bowling balls than I could shake a stick at. The actual numbers were probably astronomically worse since I kept my eyes glued shut as much as I could. At one point, I had panicked and started running back to my apartment, but corpses and bowling balls gleefully sprang into existence in that direction, too. So with nobody home with whom to commiserate, I glumly forged ahead to the restaurant hoping beyond hope that Akimoto was there and possessed all his extremities intact.
Where Joe's Neighborhood Pizzeria and Ribs once stood was a new gleaming business called Akimoto's Guns and Sushi. Business seemed so brisk that there was no need for a door. All around me were wisps of humanity: split-second ghostly glimpses accompanied by a shimmering buzzing sound that sounded almost human. The front desk was empty as was the rest of the interior. Further in were a myriad of dangerous guns and swords in glass display cases. The other side of the large room contained a fine dining establishment.
An older and wiser Akimoto instantly materialized behind the desk.
"Joe! I've been waiting decades for you to get here!"
"What the hell is going on, Akimoto? People are being fucked and murdered, sometimes in the other order, in front of me!"
Akimoto nodded knowingly.
"Believe it or not, you're the longest running and most popular reality TV show in the whole world! There is a whole security contingent assigned to you. More than even the New World President!"
"Why would I need security? And what happened to your accent?"
"Well, some fans can be rather zealous. And the wonders of modern nano science!"
"What happened to the pizzeria? Where is everybody?"
"Look, I don't have much time myself. The New World Government promised me security and monetary reimbursement for the decade I'm wasting while talking to you. All I can tell you is that the Gift lets everybody slow down time outside their frame. Basically, we are operating at near luminal velocity. We can't stop time completely, of course, due to the speed of light being invariant in all frames of reference, but relativity causes.."
I interrupted him, "Now you're speaking Japanese to me. Why is everybody so old?"
"As I was saying. Einstein's theory of relativity normally ages the twin traveling through space near C, the speed of light, but we Gifted ones are actually traveling through time near C thus shrinking space. The entirety of humanity now operates at this level whether desired or not. The Gifted who live life at your speed risk an easy murder or worse. They don't have your security detail."
"Why the weapons, Akimoto?"
"Humans have been, and always will be a blood-thirsty race," Akimoto offered.
A heavily armed military official blinked into existence next to Joe and whispered in his ear. They both blinked out of existence. Then a minute later, a much older Joe appeared before me.
"This is it. This is the end. We discovered too late that the Gift sterilizes its users. The whole world is at war with itself! There is nothing but anarchy. You need to hide. Your detail will protect you as long as they can! You're our last hope!" Joe breathlessly informed me.
"How the hell can I hide from these freaks?! What do you mean last hope?"
"I don't know. All I can tell you is… RUN!!!"
With that, Joe's body separated into uncountable pieces as though sliced and diced with many sharp blades. Another heavily armed and armored body near me fell. Undoubtedly one of my protectors.
I had no idea how I could hide, so I did what Joe told me, and I ran. I ran as hard and as fast as I could. All around me, bodies fell by the dozens and hundreds and thousands. There were so many that what started as a gentle slope climb over dozens of bodies turned into a nightmarish ascent over an Everest of corpses stacked so high I didn't need to use to stairs to reach my 6th story apartment. Climbing through an open window, I slammed it closed and locked it for whatever little good it would do. I crawled into bed, pulled the covers over me, and cried myself to sleep. One by one, my protectors fell with a thud around my bed.
That was yesterday, and now I am utterly alone. The silence is truly deafening. As I mope in bed with my face buried in my pillow, I hear something. Someone. Beside me in the bed. Turning my head, I see a young girl roughly my age. She smiles at me, but I can see the sadness infused throughout her being. She tells me she was born during my sleep, and that we are the last humans alive.