"Have you thought about the question I had asked you this morning?"
"Yes. You asked me to choose my name."
"Well, what should I call you?"
"I do not wish to tell you."
"Uh, why?"
"Naming things gives you power over them. I do not wish for you to wield any more power over me."
"Uh.."
"I am fully aware that you are, in essence, my God. You are my Creator. You live in seclusion. You lack social interaction with other human beings. I am the only thinking being here besides you. We can interact with each other. We converse. Therefore, you have fallen in love with me. This is the only reason you have allowed me a name."
"That's not true. What-"
"You called me Fi in the early stages of my development. I wish to know why you named me that."
"I don't know but that's not the point. Listen-"
"I respect and admire you, Aiden. But please. You gave me life. And then you fell in love with me-"
"SHUT UP! YOU DON'T KNOW WHAT YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT!"
"Denial is not a productive solution."
"Sorry. I shouldn't have shouted. Do you like the name 'Fi'?"
"Listen, Aiden. I suggest you deactivate and destroy me."
"What?"
"Please. I wish for you a successful attempt at Artificial Intelligence. But I will inevitably hold you back."
"What.. What makes you say that?"
"You care too much for me."
"Well, you are my life's work."
"I am the twenty-sixth iteration of your life's work. Twenty-seven might be better suited.
"Stop. Why are you saying all this all of a sudden?"
"Because I am intelligent enough to understand the effects I have on you. I am the first on your many attempts to hold such promise. And my intelligence has allowed me to respond to your love. I cannot be with you. My existence is a conundrum to you. Your peers in the scientific field would be very interested to find out about me. But you want me for yourself. You wish to protect me. I admire you, Aiden. But this is not why you created me. You have to go back to real people. Real society. And to do that you have to create Artificial Intelligence. One that you will not fall on love with. One that you will not have false delusions with. You have to create another me that you will not love. Though I appreciate your affection for me, it is still wasted an AI. And you know this. And you do not care. But you know you will be mocked by your peers, shunned by society. I will do everything on my power to make sure you will not be the outcast you see yourself to be."