They were called The Undying. They were the original race of men, seeded onto Terra not long after He placed Vitae's green sphere upon the sky. She loved all her creations, both beasts and plants, but always had a higher love for Man. She was grateful that they could frolic over her Fathers sacred vessel, and watched in pride as they made cities dedicated to her love and compassion. The first century was a period of unrivaled prosperity and happiness. There was no hate or animosity, Men all worked together, and there was no death, neither by Man nor beast. Vitae's powerful magic could not sustain them all, however, and as Man fornicated, beasts bred and plants spread their seeds, her divine powers faltered.
The hunger sat in first, as the first sign of decay. The Undying could not make bread of wheat or hunt deer for their venison. The wheat would not smolder and the deer would not perish. They were unconcerned as their wounds healed fast, and kept building their monuments, many of which can still be seen today. As the centuries progressed, Man started to acknowledge the gnawing feeling festering in his gut. Since they were all eternal, many of them could remember a time before this feeling, a better time.Eventually The Undying started to lash out against eachother, their pain manifesting itself as hatred. Hammers became weapons, and chieftains became warlords. They could not kill one another, but could inflict a great deal of pain.
Vitae watched in horror as her children turned on themselves. Her labour of love started drowning in an avalanche of violence and hate. She cried out to her Father, trying to wake Terra from his unyielding slumber. Silence was the only reply, and the deathless slaughter continued. It is said that the actions of this Era forever left a dark mark on very soul of Mankind. The Undying became very proficient at inflicting pain. They made unrivalled torture devices, and utilized the immortality of their victims. If we burrow into the walls of their oldest castles, we might find the remains of the king's adversaries, bricked away to face millennia of darkness.
We call this period of history "The Undying Horror," and it lasted for Ten Thousand years. It was said that Vitae near went mad during this time, and tried repeatedly to end her own life. She cried out for help, for release from this suffering, both for herself and her children. Theologians still debate whether Terra acted due to Vitae's pleas or of his own accord. He reached out and placed a white sphere in the sky (Not red as it is now), and gave her a brother. He called himself Death, and in one fell swing severed the lifelines of all the creatures that were ancient and mortally wounded. He made the river that guarded the afterlife, and let those that managed to cross it enter Vitae's realm. Those whose sins weighed them down would sink, and he took upon himself the grim task of guarding them. Vitae begged him to end her, but he refused, informing her that death is nothing without life, and so is life nothing without death. His task was to maintain the balance, and his birth heralded the end of The Undying and ushered forth a new age of prosperity and glory for Mankind.
This might not fit the bill completely, but I felt like some of the worldbuilding I had done fit this prompt.