A rotund shadow darkens the alley next to little Jimmy Taylor's house. He's been good this year, or so he would claim. The kid that he's been ruthlessly bullying at school for the last few weeks would disagree, but Saint Nick's obesity is a burden on his omnipotence, so Jimmy will be spoiled all the same.
He enters via the front door, with a pick made by his elves. Those little ageless beauties can craft picks for anything. If he wasn't bound to this job for eternity, he would have made an excellent thief.
He creeps up the hallway, deftly missing the creaky floorboards. He remembers this house from last year because they had a Bichon Frise puppy that voraciously soiled his leg while he was raiding the fridge for snacks.
The presents are deposited quietly under the tree, and he makes his way slowly upstairs to Jimmy's bedroom to lay out a stocking. As he climbs the stairs he realises that something isn't quite right - is someone watching him? The air turns cold; the hairs on his arms begin to stand on end. He can see his warm breath flowing into the icy air, and when his eyes re-focus after reaching the top of the stairs a tall cloaked figure is stood before him, with a large silver scythe. The being grins - 32 well-kept, dazzling tombstone teeth; a smile that would happily shatter fragility. The figure turns and enters Jimmy's bedroom.
Saint Nick lurches from his fear as he realises what is about to happen. He moves astonishingly quick for a man of his size, and as he reaches the bedroom he sees Death standing over Jimmy's bed, his grin somehow widened.
"Don't do it" he says. "The boy doesn't deserve it".
A mocking laugh is returned; baritone humiliation that rumbles into the depths of the Earth.
"The boy?" comes his reply, as he approaches Nick. "It's YOU that I want". He raises his scythe into the air; suddenly Nick can see a thousand colours at once, he experiences joy, sadness, humility; every single emotion that can and has been experienced throughout his life. He watches his childhood and his maturity, touches his mother's golden hair, rides the awesome wind on his dad's seemingly giant shoulders.
And then he's back. The scythe hits, and he's free from this burden of a life, forever.