Cancer, old age, suicide. There are many ways a person can die, and whenever i meet someone, I already know how they are going to die, just not when. I never used to believe it, until my best friend committed suicide, that was enough to convince me that I wasn't crazy. I managed to get used to it, until one day, it really threw me off.
"Attention, workers, we have someone new joining us today!" Our supervisor babbled. Always so fucking cheerful and annoying. No wonder they're going to get a heart attack. "This is her first day in this company, so give her a warm welcome...I introduce...Stacy!" Stacy walks in through the door. She has a slim figure, and is very attractive.
"Hi" She says. She has a warm voice. "I'm Stacy What's your name?"
"Hello, I'm..." I know how she's going to die. Oh god, dear god no. I'm Going to kill her? It can't be true, how can this be possible, i don't even have it in me to...
"hello?" She says "What's your name"
"Oh sorry. I'm Simon." I say.
"Anyways, what department do you work in" She says
"Engineering" I reply. I really need to keep my distance from her. I don't want to end up killing someone. That would be very bad.
"Oh, me too!" she exclaims. "It'll be a pleasure to work with you."
"yeah" i mumble. We walk to our office, and begin our work. Many times she tries to talk to me and i just ignore her. After about a week she gets fed up with me.
"Have I done anything to annoy you?" she asks "because I have tried to be super friendly with you, and you've just been a massive asshole about the whole thing."
"Sorry, I'll try to do better."
"OK" I continue to ignore her and she starts to complain about me to coworkers. This continues for several months until a work dinner that changes everything. She'd had a lot to drink that night, and eventually her frustration comes to the surface. She walks up to me, and punches me in a face. A crowd surrounds us, chanting "FIGHT, FIGHT FIGHT!" at the top of their lungs. She swings again at me, and i block out of self defense. She grabs a bottle, and smashes it against the table. I know now that one of us shall die tonight. She swings the bottle at me, I turn, narrowly avoiding her strike, grab the bottle, and stab her in the neck. She falls to the ground, eyes lifeless.
I sit in a court room, in front of a jury, waiting for the judgement.
"For the count of manslaughter, we find the defender guilty, and sentence him to 25 years in prison."
I guess that avoiding the future caused it.