I wonder if my soul understands the idea of birthdays. A questionable assumption I have asked myself many times. Indeed, a poignant question to ask oneself on the day of their namesake. But not very odd, if you knew what we did. What we possessed.
Speaking of possession. What a scary word if you think of the cinematic definition. Of a body overcome by a demon that usually speaks the Latin tongue, and I say tongue because in the movies that's a plot device to make said demon seem a bit more dramatic. In reality it made a good case for a corrupt loony bin doctor to subscribe one of those seven days a week pill box to you. But what if it wasn't out of the realm of impossible. Nor strictly a Christian motivation. This body stealing capability.
Isn't anything possible in the multiverse? Believe me, I never thought of quantum physics when we stumbled on this ability-that I necessarily consider science either. We were a bunch of fourteen year old guys (give or take.) Clearing our minds in what came to dub "meditation" that freed us from a rough daily reality.
Spirit jumping a hundred years into the future, sometimes a thousands years in the past. Exorcisms? Lobotomies? Virtual reality? Some questions don't have simple answers. If only it was easy to explain to an outsider, the assassination of a warlord by a group of field mice.
I think about it on weird days like this one. As the hands of a giant of a nurse shoves horse pills down my throat. Before my mind flutters away on wings of medicated insanity as usual. Yet, just as this character assassin hands me a paper solo cone of water to wash another year away. It finally dawns on me that it's my birthday. Solemnly looking out the window at the sky, and courtyard, and the bright green grass shiny with dew.
As my mind melts away. I people watch one last time.
The cute nurse taking a smoke break in the courtyard. A boy holding his mother's hand as they walk towards the entrance. A few People exiting vehicles parked off the side of the road. One making awkward gestures and hand motions as they stand in a wide huddle together. Before they finally start to walk in a small party, crossing through the grass towards the hospital. Their feet leaving dark prints as they move closer and closer.
My stomach flips upside down as if it decided to start a cycle of rejecting the pills. Then a long forgotten, boyish rush of adrenaline pulses through my spine before it expands into my extremities. That is when the realization occurs:
It's a birthday party.