The yellow fire of this universe crackles and smokes on the last of the birth-fluid that Ntlia brought with them, looking like the First Above shining amongst Her Void siblings before the multiverse wormed up from Her throat. The three sit in the tense silence of the living. Fourthmale's underbelly crawls with the imaginary ghosts of the sixlegs who died with everyone else, and he finally allows himself to nibble very gently on the last of his cards, once again experiencing in maddeningly tiny amounts the sweetness of the sad black moons. He dreams of family, of starshine, of the warmth that the Void never saw use for.
"We are now aberrations." The silence is broken by Ntlia, their previous life as the Philosopher General betraying them to existentialism. "We should not exist in this universe. We should not exist in this multiverse. If our Red Hand was still active, we would not exist, and all would be in order."
"But we do exist," replies the last of the three, mandible-deep in the birth-fluid in a futile attempt to stave off the presence of inevitability. "That is our lot, Philosopher General. Would you deny your own destiny for a concept from a dead universe?"
(Fourthmale's dream wife serves him a hot cup of stonewater, which is pleasingly grey. His dream child, yet unnamed, clicks and stutters at him endearingly, and he responds with a motherly whirr.)
"You have always been an aberration, Mad One," spits Ntila, turning away. "I had potential."
(Click. Stutter. Whirr. Real love. The joyful black moon swells.)
The aberration wraps its shroud around itself tighter, shielding against the pain of the past. "Does it matter now?"
(Click stutter whirr the shifting of abdominal plates the cracks in hip-springs and the kindness of those who do not yet understand kindness)
"Am I supposed to leave everything I lived and loved behind just to experience a life as a prisoner of the Void?"
(Click click click click click click click click)
"I did not-"
"I do not want to hear about whatever it is, Mad One, that you have experienced in your… your unnatural life that you think I want to hear! I don't care! The fact of the matter is, we have nothing left, except your condescension, this burning birth-fluid and… and Fourthmale… with his...”
Ntila falters in their despair as Fourthmale sits up, scanning the area, wide awake with glowing blue sclera. A gentle clicking sound can be heard from his abdomen. Fourthmale moves methodically to the very edge of our universe, and humming in joy-terror, he steps off, floating into the unknown.
The two sit in the tense silence of the living.