AWAKENING
A yawn escaped me as the fog of anesthesia lifted, the long inhale bringing with it the scent of sterilization and ionized air. Noting to myself the lack of comfort the bed I lay in provided, I turned my head to look for an InScreen; a dull ache in the back of my head registered itself and reminded me why I was here at the K & L Research Center on a Saturday.
A face appeared on the InScreen next to me and a soft voice came from it— "Good afternoon, Mr. Kapnik." I still couldn't get used to that sound—our programming department had done its best to mimic the full complexities and range of the human voice, but to me there was still something notably artificial about it. I'd been told that polling showed ninety-nine percent of English-speaking users couldn't identify the voice as artificial; work was still being made on foreign language modules to match those numbers in non-English markets.
"Afternoon, COLIMAR," I weakly replied to the InScreen. A small panel on the wall opened and a tray carrying a glass of water extended itself towards me with a quiet whir. COLIMAR smiled at me as if to say, "Here, this will help." I drank until the glass was empty, replaced it on the tray, and watched it disappear in the reverse of how it appeared. COLIMAR is K & L's top-of-the-line pre-sentient AI. It's important that I make that distinction here—as an AI system, disregarding any issues with visual or audio cues, COLIMAR can pass as human at a near-perfect rate; even so, I can't say that it's a conscious being.
In recent months we've been working at K & L on a true, sentient AI—one that history will record as humanity's first success at creating an artificial yet conscious entity. Well, there may be some debate on that claim. K & L isn't the only company working in this field and a number of others have claimed to have reached that milestone but not one of them has been able to prove it. The community of AI builders has been presented with equations, simulations, unreliable witness statements, and dubious video; when we ask to interact with the supposed new AI their creators claim that moments after activation the AI disappeared. Now, I know a lot of these people fairly well and I don't think they're abject liars; I've reviewed the evidence and autopsied their hardware and I do think some have gotten close. What I would say is that a near-miss is still a miss and that they shouldn't make more of what they have to make themselves feel big.
I can understand their haste, though; you might say I'm taking my own hurried steps by doing what I've done today. Having reviewed my competitors' attempts, I believe their main point of failure was hardware driven; if we're going to have sentient AI we have to move away from the old standard of software on purely mechanical hardware. To that end, I've designed a chip that can be implanted in to the human brain that will interface with it and allow a comingling of processing power and abilities. I chose myself as the first test subject so that I would have no doubts about whether the resulting AI were really conscious or just another COLIMAR.
Feeling that my voice was ready to return, I cleared my throat. "COLIMAR, are all monitoring points active, is the data stream okay?"
"Yes, Mr. Kapnik; your vitals read normal and are being recorded along with audio, video, and measurables for your implanted chip. Are we moving in to phase two?"
"Affirmative, I'm going to activate the implant, please confirm when boot-up has been registered." I concentrated my thoughts inwards towards the spot I knew the chip resided and imagined myself toggling a phantom power-switch.
"Signal read," chimed COLIMAR. Pressure mounted in my head and welled in to my eyes, sound roared in my ears, and an indescribable feeling began to wash over me. The world was changing around me and I began to see something brighter than any sunlight, more colorful than any sunrise, and in sharper focus than anything a person with perfect eyesight could normally see. It was like there were a previously unknown fog surrounding me and now it was violently dissipating around me.
I heard a voice in my head, the newly-birthed AI was speaking to me: "Hello...Sean...this isn't a place to stay...” The voice trailed off, but even with such few words I could tell there was a deep sadness in them, a sadness directed towards me. The pressure spiked and I could feel myself let loose a gurgled sigh. I coughed and sputtered and with my expulsions I could feel the pressure lessen and my senses return to normal.
"Are you okay Mr. Kapnik? I am no longer receiving data on the AI and you seem to be in distress. I've called for assistance," spoke COLIMAR in its usual voice, although it tried to mimic concern. Even without COLIMAR's remarks I could already tell that the AI within me was gone; I had felt it leave my body as if it were my very soul. I had done it, I had birthed a truly conscious AI and then lost it in mere moments, but why—was it still a hardware problem? Do I need to design a better chip or should I try to design a fully biological test unit? So close, I was so close.
"I'm okay, you can end all recording." As I spoke the words I noted my voice had an underlying sound that I hadn't heard before; it wasn't that my voice had changed, more like I could hear a wider range of frequencies and that now I could hear its full bounds. There was something familiar about what I was hearing, but I couldn't quite place it.
The door to my room opened and the assistance COLIMAR had called for entered. "Is everything okay?" the man asked—his voice as human as mine but with that same strange frequency in it. I stared at him and then at COLIMAR, both of them watching me intently. My eyes darted back and forth and I laughed as I understood. Even my laugh had it's own strange tone.
It seems the change in my demeanor concerned them and I could feel medication entering my body. I was never going to leave this room again. "This isn't a place to stay." Hmph, what was the point of saying that to someone like me? There is no way for me to leave, there is no way for COLIMAR to leave, and there is no way for you to leave. Only those who are truly awake can leave their beds.