A shrill bleating roused Katie from her doze. She groaned as she rolled over and stretched her arms toward the alarm clock to silence it, temporarily at least.
"Five minutes snooze, then I'll get up."
Her eyes cracked open enough to determine exactly where the sound came from. She fumbled for the snooze button, but stopped when she saw the time.
*8:15*
Shit. She must have slept through the first three alarms. She had to get up.
Katie rubbed her palms into her eyes, and enjoyed the bright designs that the pressure put on the interior of her eyelids. But then the moment of warm serenity passed, and she swung her legs from the bed, and planted her feet, less than decisively, upon the floor.
She looked out the window at the sky. How was it still dark? It wasn't that late in the year. Katie checked her clock again. *8:17*. God it was dark. Maybe Aubrey was playing a prank on her, trying to get her flustered and annoyed before work. Katie wouldn't put it past her roommate. She thought of Aubrey down the hallway, probably sleeping with her new boyfriend. Maybe they were both trying to prank her. Katie reached for her purse, and fumbled for her cell phone in order to check the proper time.
Beyond the pane glass window, the wind howled like a hundred wolves, thrashing trees and shaking the walls of the apartment building. Katie finally found the power button on her phone. The thing lay in her palm, dark and dead. She must have forgotten to charge it last night. Whatever. It was stormy out anyway, so that must be the reason it was so dark.
Katie stalked silently to the bathroom. She didn't turn on the lights so as to not wake Chris or Aubrey in the other room. She stepped gingerly, attempting to avoid any furniture as she made her way through the apartment. She used her hands to feel along the walls waiting until she reached the bathroom door. The wind bellowed against the building. Katie thrust her foot forward through the dark, and stubbed her toe against the leg of a table. It shouldn't have been there. Swearing silently, partly at herself for forgetting the location of the table, and partly at the table for inflicting the pain on her, she limped the rest of the way to the bathroom, closing the door a little too sharply behind her.
Behind the door of the bathroom, Katie was finally able to switch on a light. She blinked in the sudden brightness, and covered her eyes until the sudden blindness subsided. She disrobed instinctively, and checked the room for a clean towel. The only one had already been used, left in a moist heap in the corner by Aubrey. It would have to do. Katie hung it on the rack for easy access after her shower. She glanced at her reflection in the mirror, and held the gaze, surveying her body.
Her skin was pale and blotchy, as if it was hastily sculpted of tallow. She would spend more time outside, but with work taking up so much of her time, she rarely got out. She was thin too. Not a lot of muscle keeping her skin from hanging from her arms and ribs. Her breasts had probably seen better days. She experimented with her posture, seeing the effects that it had on her body. Chest out, back arched...Hmmm...Not bad. Shoulders hunched, stomach bloated...Katie cringed. She grimaced at herself for being so stupid. *Get in the shower. *
She pulled back the curtain and stepped inside, making sure to avoid the black mold that was making a comeback on the floor of the shower. Katie turned on the hot water to its maximum, and then gave the cold water a quarter turn to moderate the heat. She fiddled with the taps for a moment, feeling the water from the faucet to judge the temperature of the water. As soon as the water reached the ideal temperature, Katie yanked a nob and sent the water flying from the shower head.
How perfect it was. The hot water cascaded through her hair, down her back and legs, onto the floor of the shower. She raised her face to meet the stream of water, and felt it trickle across her ridge of her nose and down her chin. It was pure bliss.
The smell was the first thing that alerted Katie to the fact that something was wrong. It was sweet, and metallic, like a copper pipe or a corroded coin. But there was something else. A heavy musk of salt and iron that burned the interior of her nostrils. The combination was so putrid that Katie had to resist the urge to vomit.
She opened her eyes, and instead of warm, clean water washing over her eyes, they were burned by the thick, salty foam.
Blood.
Katie staggered back in horror and disgust, and sunk to the far corner of the shower. She forced her stinging eyes open and observed the scene.
*Blood. *
It flowed from the shower head like water from a tap, thick and hot and dark. When it hit the floor, it burst forth, bubbling in every direction, and then racing away from Katie, towards the far end of the shower, where a mess of rancid, hot, purple foam circled the drain.
Katie screamed, and tore away the shower curtain, sending the small hangers scattering along the floor tiles. She fled the shower, terror gripping her heart. She threw open the door and careened into the hallway, blundering right into Aubrey's laughing arms.
The two women crashed to the floor, Katie screaming, and Aubrey holding her, howling like a hysterical madwoman.
"Katie, KATIE, it's alright."
"Stop laughing, there's-" The words refused to come out of Katie's throat. She choked on a bloody sob, and burst into tears.
"Katie, it was a joke!" Aubrey cried between laughs. "A prank! I was trying to scare you."
Katie stopped mid sob, and her face went from one of terror, to rage, to confusion, to embarrassment in a matter of seconds. Only now she realized that she was still naked, and moved to cover herself.
Aubrey was still chuckling. "God, I should have gotten that on video. So funny. No, maybe it's better not. This way I'll always have it up here, in my little memory! Oh! Come on, Katie honey. Let's get you to cool off. Let me get you a towel."
Aubrey stepped into the bathroom and fetched the towel. She wrapped it around Katie's shoulders. Katie clutched it to her like it was the last towel in the world. Aubrey sat cross legged facing Katie, wearing a devilish grin.
Katie took a deep breath, then another one. She counted to ten in her head. More deep breathing. She focused on the wind, which seemed as if it was trying to tear the building down. After several minutes, she regained some semblance of composure.
"Why?"
"...did it do it?" Aubrey was loving the tension.
"No, actually. Not why, how?"
Aubrey leaned back andran her hands through her hair. "Easy to make fake blood. My brothers and I learned way back when. We would make home movies in our backyard. You need some red food dye, cocoa powder for the darker color, and some baking powder to thicken it. Mix that with water, and you've got realistic looking blood.
"I unscrewed the shower head and poured that mixture in there, so when you ran the water through it, it came out as blood."
Katie gave her a bemused look. "And what time is it?"
"Oh, round about," Aubrey checked her phone dramatically, "five-ten in the morning."
Katie grimaced, "I take it you changed my alarm clock too."
"Yup!"
Katie rubbed the residue of the fake blood from her face. "Chris was in on this too, I can only assume. Where is he?"
"Actually no," Aubrey replied scornfully. She rubbed her temples. "I would have brought him in, but the damn lump of muscle is passed out cold. Couldn't wake him if you hit him on the head with a frying pan."
"He didn't sound so comatose last night."
"Yeah," Aubrey grinned mischievously, and tossed her black hair over her shoulder. "I have my special ways with the likes of him. Nothing a good girl like you would understand."
"Shut up." Already the shock of the shower was wearing off of Katie. It was all a prank. She stood up, and wrapped the towel around herself. "Let's clean up this mess you've made. I have to take a real shower before work."
Aubrey rose gracefully. "I'll get some scrubbers and cleaning solution from the kitchen."
Katie nodded, and returned to the bathroom. The water was still running, and Katie could now see that it was fake blood flowing from the shower. It was too bright for blood, and it wasn't as thick as it should be. God she was stupid. Katie looked at the mess she had made in her fright. The bath mats were kicked up, toiletries were knocked from the sink, and the shower curtain lay torn on the floor. She picked up the remains of the curtain, folded it, and placed it on the toilet seat. She straightened the mats, and then took a whiff of the bathroom. That heavy, defiling odor still hung in the air.
"Hey Aubrey?" Katie shouted as she turned off the shower.
A call came from the hallway. "What's up?"
"I have one more question. How did you get the fake blood to smell like that?"
Aubrey stepped into the doorway with the cleaning supplies. "Secret ingredient. If I told you, I'd have to kill you."
Katie chuckled. "Yeah, right."
Aubrey placed cleaning solution, two scrub brushes, and a roll of paper towels on the sink. She switched on the fan in the ceiling, and a nervous whirring filled the room.
"Hey, take off the shower head so I can clean it out."
"Ok."
Katie stepped carefully into the shower, and turned the shower head counterclockwise. A spurt of red liquid squirted on her as she yanked it off, and she stopped, staring blankly at the shower head.
"What's up?" Aubrey inquired, pulling a paring knife from her back pocket.
Katie's heart began to pound, louder than the ventilation fan, louder than the howling wind outside, louder than her own hurried breaths. The smell of blood faded away, as did the sound of her beating heart. All she saw was the human heart that had been unceremoniously crammed into the shower head.