John picked up the little black cat from the street. Her head rolled limply to the side. The car that had hit her hadn't been going that fast. The driver would have only heard a small thud, but the cat was undeniably dead. There wasn't any blood. Surely no creature could just die without any wounds? If she wasn't bleeding then she had to still be alive.
John carried her inside. The cat looked exactly like Trixie, but this couldn't be his pet because Trixie was an indoor cat. She'd never had the slightest interest in going outside. John could have left the front door permanently open and Trixie wouldn't have even considered leaving. So this couldn't be Trixie, no matter how similar they looked. Even though both cats had that same patch of white fur at their throats.
This was just the sort of thing that Trixie would do. She was probably hiding somewhere, making him worry about her while she was napping in a closet, or on a bookshelf. He put the dead cat down carefully and went to fetch a bag of cat treats. Once Trixie heard the rattle of a bag of treats, then she would come running, no matter how fast asleep she was. John walked around the house, going into every room, calling her name and shaking the treats. Trixie didn't come.
He stopped, the bag frozen in his hand, as he saw the corpse again. This was Trixie. She was dead and he'd been an idiot to not recognise her at once. John threw the treats at the wall. Why had this happened? Why couldn't drivers be more careful? People were always speeding along this road and nothing was ever done to stop them. What kind of maniac ran over a harmless cat? He'd kill them, if he ever found out who'd killed Trixie then he'd kill them himself.
But that wouldn't bring his baby back. He picked her up again, cradling her close now that he was sure it was her. In life, she never would have allowed him to hold her this tightly. She should be meowing in complaint, she should be giving him a warning scratch.
"Shh, Trixie, it's ok," John whispered, rocking her back and forth. "It'll be ok."
If he could just make her comfortable then maybe everything would be alright.
"You know," John said, trying to keep his voice calm so that Trixie would know that she hadn't done anything wrong. "You know, you should put your tongue away. Maybe you'd feel better if you did that."
Trixie didn't move and her tongue lolled out of her mouth in a way that it never had before.
"Please, Trixie, please, just move a little. We can have tuna for dinner. It's your favourite."
John held her tighter, closing his eyes as his voice cracked.
"You can have tuna every day. Would you like that? No more dried food? Please?"
But Trixie didn't respond and John knew that she never would. His little girl was gone. She didn't look like herself anymore. She'd stopped being a living thing and now she was just an object that resembled a cat. Her fur was just as soft as it had always been, but it didn't matter anymore. John was alone. Just like he'd been alone before he'd adopted Trixie. He wasn't meant to have friendship or love in his life. He'd never done anything to deserve them. He could barely get on with other humans, why had he ever thought that having a cat would be any different? He'd doomed poor Trixie the second that he'd brought her to his home, because nothing good could come into his life and survive.
He held her until she started to become cold and then kissed the top of her lifeless head. Trixie had been a good cat. He should have taken more care to make sure she never got out. He was going to miss her; the soft purrs when he petted her, the midnight crazies when she ran through the house late at night, the 7am wake up call to let him know it was time for breakfast. No other cat could ever compare to her.
John put her down and went to find a box that he could use as a little coffin.