The darkened scenery flashed by outside the window of the train, but I paid it very little heed. Fields are pretty and all, but when you're bored out of your mind on a five-hour long journey, it's easy to feel like sheep are the bane of your existence.
Especially if you're tired on a train. You don't want to be counting sheep if you're trying to stay awake, right?
I checked my phone for any new messages. Nope; my friends were ignoring me. Or they had gone to bed. Whatever. Free wifi was one of the perks of taking the train instead of a car or a bus, but what was the point of it when there was nothing interesting on the internet? The little charge bar in the corner read charging. It was up to three bars now - half power. With four hours to go it was likely it would be fully done by the time I got off, and I would have snagged a free phone charge just by being in the right place at the right time.
The lights in the carriage were dimmed, and the blue-white glare of my phone was likely the only thing keeping me up. Sighing, I turned it off and stored it in my pocket. I should at least get some rest, even though I no longer liked sleeping on trains. I set my watch alarm for three and a half hours later, and rested my head against the curtain bundled at the edge of the window: a makeshift pillow.
The glare of the screen was still a square burned into my retinas, but it soon began to fade into the grey nothingness of eigengrau. Little dots of colour sparked on and off and swirled about and formed the coca-cola logo which dissolved into nothing before reforming again in the shape of another brand.
This was the worst thing about sleeping on trains. The rapid variance of magnetic fields they put over the whole thing charges any electrical devices you have for indefinite use, but the whole thing is paid for by using those same fields to transmit subliminal adverts into your head. Ethically dubious, but approved by the Transport board three years ago and now you find no train without them. To be honest, nobody cares.
Only, when there's no other source of images those subliminal messages translate into your conscious mind and you see them. It's distracting and I hate it. I just want to sleep. I don't want to watch mindless repetitions of logos that are meant to build up brand familiarity. I want to sleep.
Sleep sounds good. Sleep...
That night I dreamed I was being chased by a giant Coca-cola bottle.