The pitter-patter of little feet across the metal grating across the living quarters punctuated the otherwise dull hum of computers and machinery which, in-turn, punctuated the maddeningly monotonous silence of deep space. Sarah sat reading her daily reports, preparing for another shift in sick-bay. Her daughter Megan tugged at the corner of her purple robe, smiling up at her mother with the most endearing green eyes. Innocence was trademark, innocence and the faith of her mother.
"Mom" Megan began, "are we going to settle another planet today?"
Sarah turned and smiled but shook her head. "Next week."
"You said that last week" Megan grumbled and turned to go back to her studies.
Hundreds of families across one hundred generations aboard one mammoth ship. A thousand years ago it was launched with the singularly simple goal of depositing a collection of humans on another planet to build a colony. Planet by planet, system by system the *H.S. Renewal* has visited a laundry list of exoplanets but each has been crossed off like items on a shopping list. One simple task had turned into the longest mission in mankind's fifty thousand year history. In fact the current generation of explorers could be called human in genetic makeup only. None had any first-hand knowledge of Earth or the Sol system as contact with Earth had been lost some two hundred years ago. It is unknown who fired the first shot but we do know it was the United States who committed to full-scale nuclear retaliation. Now the *Renewal* contains the only known surviving Homo sapiens. Survival the primary goal, education the primary means of attaining that goal. Survive, educate, populate; that is the motto of a faction of the refugees aboard that still believe their voyage ever had a mission. Another faction believe it as the last voyage of the damned, set off a thousand years ago by fools. Sarah styled herself a believer but James, her husband, fell firmly into that second category, known as *denialists*.
"Five-to-one she nails aces that chemistry test today" James bragged as he sat down opposite his wife with his morning coffee.
Sarah giggled briefly, her eyes never leaving her reports. "I just hope she passes."
"Pass? She's been studying her little ass off for the past two weeks, she better do more than just pass" James explained.
"I studied for almost a week longer than her and I barely passed."
"A doctor that barely passed chemistry, only on this voyage of the damned is that possible."
Sarah shook her head and sighed. "I know you don't believe but I do and I asked you to keep that denialist talk out of our quarters."
"No, you asked me to keep it away from Megan. She's buried in her chemistry textbooks, I could scream out chocolate ice-cream and she wouldn't hear me. Besides, at this point nobody would know how to start a colony even if we did find a suitable planet. We stopped educating builders with your great-grandparents and we stopped educating architects with their grandparents!"
"Damnit Jim, we have a ship full of engineers and materials scientists! Find us a planet and we'll settle it. I'll give you five-to-one on that!" Sarah's retort was sharp and much less playful than her husband's tone.
"Okay, okay, sorry baby" James sighed and composed himself again.
"I'm sorry too" Sarah sighed herself and placed one of her hands gently on her husband's. This time she did remove her gaze from her reports, only to issue him a conciliatory smile with a duration of seconds before continuing her reports.
James took the hint and stood up with his coffee again. He straightened his uniform and stopped to kiss her on the top of the head before walking toward the main entrance to their quarters. He stopped one last at the threshold and turned half-way back to the dining table and his wife. "We've got two mesoplanets and a thermoplanet to survey today, I'll let you know what we find."
Sarah turned around in her chair and blew him a kiss "find us a home."
James chuckled, "yeah, right. See you tonight." He blew a kiss back to Sarah then turned again and exited their quarters.