When the first ships arrived, we were excited. They moved with a speed and grace that we previously thought was unthinkable. First contact with an alien race! We tried for two long years to contact them, even launching a space ship to try and get to them. However, there was no response, they just seemed to sit there, ignoring us.
Two years later, when the other ships warped in, the battle lasted for less then thirty seconds. Both sides fought hard, firing weapons that ripped through the outer ships without mercy. The first ships were destroyed and the second group of ships left left. There was a lot of discussion about why this was. We finally came to the conclusion that there were two groups who were at war. However, that told us almost nothing about the sides.
What was originally supposed to be a first contact mission became a salvage mission. We knew almost nothing about what the alien tech did. However, we knew what some of it looked like it could do.
However, once you know that something can be done, it's only a matter of time until you figure out the how. A decade later, we had reverse engineered the weapons and in system drive that they used. We had spread to every planet in the system and in less then a decade, humanity left the cradle.
We always knew that they would come back eventually. Although we did not know when or how. Our finest military minds analyzed the battle a thousand times. We ran skirmishes with our reverse engineered weapons. We thought long and hard about how to fight a war in space.
We had built roughly thousand warships in the last ten years, so when we detected that not one but two warp signatures about to arrive, we were ready.
I stood on the Bridge of the Flagship, IWS Enterprise, and watched the tactical screen as two massive fleets dropped out of warp. One from galactic spinward, one from galactic anti-spinward. One matched the first fleet, one matched the second fleet. Both of them were massive fleets, each easily twice the size of our fleet. I took a breath in.
"Open all Hailing Frequencies. Send the Diplomatic Package." I instructed. "Let's see if they listen this time." Then I turned towards where the camera was. The new language the Empire had adopted to communicate with the Aliens did not roll off my tongue easily. However, what I was about to say next was well practiced.
<"This is Grand Admiral Fletcher on board the IWS Enterprise to all unknown craft on behalf of his Imperial Majesty, Emperor Ban Ki-moon. State your intentions in the Sol Empire. End Message. ">
I switched back to my native English to talk to by bridge crew. "Maneuver the fleet away from the two other fleets, I want it to be clear we are a third party to this. If they duke it out, I don't want to be caught in the crossfire."
There was a brief acknowledgements and we waited. The two fleets still had their weapons powered up, but they had not shot yet. My guess is that they were analyzing each other and us just as hard as we were analyzing them.
"We are detecting messages coming from both fleets, their not talking to us yet, so it's encrypted. The analysis is that they don't know what side we are on and so can't commit to battle."
I nodded, that was expected. "Do you think they got our message?" I asked.
"Certainly, there was a massive spike in traffic when they received it. What we don't know is what they think about our message."
"If their in space, I'd assume they know math."
"Right, but we don't know how they would understand the message, or if they are going to be hostile regardless."
The three fleets sat in space, there was a little bit of maneuvering, so I kept our fleet neutral. It was several hours before we got a reply.
<"This is Admiral [Name], are you with us or against us?> The first fleet responded, it was plain text, we also got a similar message moments later from the second fleet.
<"Send this response, We are neutral with regards to this current conflict. We do not wish conflict with either of you and would be willing to help mediate a mutually beneficial peace between the three of us. "> I ordered.
The tech nodded, encoding the message and sending it off to the two parties. "It is as we expected Admiral, nether side has the ability to overcome the outer without assistance from us."
"Do you think we can parlay this into peaceful talks?" I asked.
"Possibly, we still don't have enough information."
"Very well, but prepare a diplomatic boat."
"Yes Sir."
Once again we waited. The techs said that they two fleets were exchanging messages. Finally, we received what seemed to be a unified response. <"Both Fleets will withdraw at this time. We will each leave a single diplomatic ship here so that we may establish diplomatic relations with the Sol Empire. ">
I nodded, relieved that so far first contact had not turned into a war. However, the hard part was just about to get started.