If you could have one power, what would it be? Time control, that was my preference. The ability to stop anyone, anything, and alter what is to happen. My personal favourite, was freezing time while it rained around me, getting a flashlight and my camera, and taking a picture of all the raindrops suspended midfall. It's in a full size poster above my bed. But more realistically, I use it nearly every single day...Small things like cutting queues, and tripping bullies, recovering snatched handbags, small stuff like that. It can be tempting to feel the rush of watching a blade driven deep into someone you hate, or watch them unknowingly drown as you move them into a pool, so easy to steal their money, or worse, that which they hold dearest themselves, often kept till after marriage. But I don't do that. I have a very strict set of rules. I don't steal, kill, rape or do anything against my moral compass.
Time stop isn't only useful for taking photos. My favourite use, is sitting in front of a beautiful girl and just stare at her, nothing more. I don't touch her, I don't affect her in anyway, I just stare at them. Often for hours on end, but when time doesn't move, how can you tell?
That's how I met her actually.
Going back over it, I gotta admit, it was almost like God was telling me, "This is the one." I saw her when I was cutting queue in the coffee shop - petty, I know. The sunlight streamed against the blinds, casting light as soft as cotton candy pillows after a long day, highlighting her brunette shoulder length hair, the curve of her jaw, the way her smirk looked as she read from TIFU. She was the one I wanted to break the no touching rule for, but I didn't. I stared into her eyes, beautiful emerald green with golden flakes, the steam from her warm cocao misting up before her.
"You gonna say something or just stare at me all day like that." she said.
I jumped backwards. 'It can't be' I thought. 22 years and never once has someone else moved when I froze time.
"Wha...What? Wait? How?" I stammered.
She did the most adorable smirk ever and I swear to God my heart melted into a puddle.
"You're not the only one ya know, I've been watching you." she said, "You and your adorable antics" she added, her nose scrunching up adorably.
"Coffee?" I asked. "It's on the house."
(To be Continued?)