The border between Canada and the US was locked down completely. In a daring move President Obama decided to build a huge wall across the 49th parallel to show that Trump's not the only one that can keep illegals out.
But Steven needed to get to America, he lived the dangerous life of a maple syrup smuggler, delivering to private businesses who couldn't associate themselves with the poison that flowed out of Quebec and Ontario. Steven was based out of Vancouver and had contacts across British Columbia but ever since the closing of the 49th parallel he'd been unable to make his deliveries. To say his customers in Portland were mad is an understatement.
As the crates of syrup began to pile up in his garage Steven began receiving messages from the Portland mob. Ever since the wall went up syrup had been coming in as slow as molasses and the supply was viciously below the demand. As Steven realized the potential for a monopoly on the illegal trade of Maple Syrup plans began to formulate.
At 7:00pm the next week Steven took off on his Naden Big Laker loaded with crates of Maple Syrup onto the Fraser River. He planned to sail south along the Haro straight to land at Port Angeles on the northern coast of Washington where he would meet members of the Portland mob and sell the product.
As Steven passed the city of Victoria to his west and neared the oceanic border between the two countries he spotted a bright light coming towards him. he began to break out into a sweat as he worried that his contraband would be found. As the vehicle neared its speakers erupted "Stop, you are piloting a Canadian made and licensed vessel into US waters, I repeat stop your vehicle." As Steven slowed the boat he wondered what the sentence was for Maple Syrup smugglers. The police craft came to a stop adjacent to Steven's boat and two officers boarded his Laker...
"That's a lot of fucking syrup"
"Yeah"
"The hell you doing with it?"
"Makes a great coating for bait"
"You fishing?"
"Um"
"Because I don't see no poles. Listen I think I know what your up to, there hasn't been any good syrup in Washington for months, you trying to resupply the states aren't you"
"I need business and this is the only way to get it"
"We'll let you through, for a price."
"Take three kilos, that's worth around seventy."
"Alright then, we'll let you go on your way, I think this could turn into a mutually beneficial partnership. Next time you come to the States ask for Rick at the Port Angeles police station."
"Will do officer"...
Steven arrived in Port Angeles at 9:00, waiting at the docks was a group of big men wearing brown suits. As soon as he landed they began unloading the crates, moving them into a large van. After the Laker was emptied one approached him handing him 13,000 Canadian dollars. Before they departed the man spoke.
"There's a lot of money in sticky business."