"So President McCain, what do you think will be the chances for the Republicans in 2016.I mean you have no incumbent, you don't really have a front runner for the Democrats, what do you expect?"
As former President McCain looked into the camera, he had trouble thinking of an answer. He wanted to talk about how the GOP was too divided and how many folks on the religious and conservative right had felt their hadn't been a true conservative in office since Reagan, and even then, no one really knew what he would have done since he wasn't in office for so long.
He wanted to talk about how even with a similar split between far left and moderate democrats, they still were winning due to votes from minorities, as well as riding the fact that they convinced the Soviet Union to hold free elections and let their republics and satellites vote for independence. Never mind that Putin had started wars against Georgia and the Ukraine under a democratic administration. He even wanted to mention how Democratic policies might have led to an 08 financial crisis though saying that would be the equivalent to farting in church.
Of course he could talk about his troop reductions for the Iraq war and his stand against torture, but he still kept some troops there, even if all they did was train Iraqis.
"Honestly Stephen, I think that it'll be interesting. I think we have a good shot. Obama was a fine president. He certainly did get some things done, but I think people will want a change."
"Yeah I think that people will want that too. Its not like President Obama can run for a third term."
"We'll you never know, some people say he's sneaky."
The crowd burst into laughter.
"So is their any candidate you really like. I mean is there anyone who makes you think, well maybe we won't get our ass stomped this time?"
"I think that maybe someone like a Marco Rubio would do okay. The Democrats are just all over the place. Bill Clinton's practically ran for the job since 96 but I think he's too old. I like Bill though. He's a character. I'm kind of surprised Obama beat him in the primary in 08. I'm sure I could have beat him at least.............. But seriously I think Bill is a good man"
"That's right. Ladies and gentleman let's give a hand to former President McCain everyone."
After the show was done, former president McCain got a call.
"Hello John, It's me Barack. Did you hear the news? President Carter just passed away. I've already called Bush and Cuomo and Gore to come to the funeral down in Atlanta. You are going to come correct?
"Of course Mr. President"