The news stations shut down the day they came. All of them. All at once. Then all the television stations blipped out of existence. Then the internet. The electricity was the last to go. It was like they were sending us back in time. I guess they didn't want us to communicate with each other, like they didn't want us to know what was going on. They wanted us in the dark, alone.
Some people started fleeing at the first sight of the ships. They packed up their belongings, grabbed their kids and started running down the street, or getting into their cars and pushing through the mounds of traffic that lined every city corner. Where they were going I don't know. Maybe a police station, or an army base. Some place they felt safe.
Other people looted the vacant shops and houses, breaking windows, fighting over cans of string beans and loaves of bread. Playing tug a war with their lives over canned vegetables. People got shot, beat up, left to die out in the debris-filled streets or on the sidewalks. All the while the ships watched over us from above.
Then one day, as I awoke from a fitful night in my small apartment, I suddenly had a strong urge to peek through the splintered boards of my living room window, into the outside world to gaze up at the ships that I had stared at many times before.
But they weren't there. They were just...gone. The sky was clear, the sun shone down into my eyes. Everything was still: peaceful almost.
I grabbed the axe that had laid beside me on my nightstand for a month now and began to hack away the wooden boards that covered my front door. I heard nothing but my heart in my ears.
Once the boards gave way, I cautiously opened the door and stepped out into the light. I squinted in the sudden onslaught of blue sky, dots sparkling over my vision. Where were the ships? Where had they gone?
I could see a few other people peeking out of their fortresses. Curtains were moved aside; doors were unlocked and people stepped out onto their front steps just like I had done. The silence grew. It was almost more unwelcome then the ships themselves.
Then I heard it, a slow drum like beat. It didn't seem to be coming from the day outside, but more from inside me. I could tell others felt it too, their faces twisting into the same confused expression that must line my face at this very instant. We clutched our chests but it wasn't our heart that was beating in time, it was something else.
Something was happening. Something was wrong. The ships weren't here anymore but the creatures who manned them still were. Something deep down in my core told me so. They were here and they were coming for us.