Caius paused, sighed, and placed his goblet on the stone slab between them. "Another wine. I'm gonna need it."
Favian obliged, taking care to remove the cork silently. "So what happened to him?"
"You remember the way Aurelius, in the river drills, would always insist on helping the last soldier up the bank before finishing it himself? He couldn't let another man go down, just wasn't in him. It kept him out of a centurion position, I know it." He took a sip. "Also made him perfect for this mission. Just make sure Caius gets back alive, they said. Well, he was born for that kind of assignment." Another pause, as he set his goblet down and rubbed his brow.
"I don't know why he couldn't just look after his fucking self for once!" Tears welled in Caius'eyes, but he banished them with a grit of teeth.
Favian looked around the cave nervously, pricking his ears for footfalls. He studied Caius'dimly lit face, silently urging him to continue.
"You have to understand, we'd been paddling up that godforsaken river for months. The rains had come and gone, we'd gone through most of our original crew and two sets of conscripted natives, losing them all to sickness, or arrows, or any of those insane jungle beasts they grow down in the southlands; snakes, swarming fish, leopards. And those bloodthirsty chimps. Fuck, the sound of those things.
"But what befell Aurelius, my god. At least with a chimp you can fight, with a leopard you can run, but these things -"
He stopped his tale as they heard a crash in the passage above. The two soldiers froze, listening for a sign to retreat to the crevice again. After long moments of measured breath, there was nothing. Caius steadied himself, took a drink, and went on.
"We'd reached a point in the river where we felt sure we were near the source, close to the ‘ mythic fountain'of the traveler's legend. Supposedly there was a point in the river where we would pass a sharp bend and come upon a confluence of three waters into a shallow lake. ‘ A steamish, bubblish bath from devil!'”--Caius mimicked the traveler's broken Latin. "Supposedly at the bottom of that lake lived the god-shells."
Favian's eyebrow raised. He'd heard legends of the god-shell, but wrote them off as military grandstanding, something to give hope to the dwindling ranks.
Caius sensed his skepticism. "You never held that piece of god-shell, did you?" He flared a grim smile as Favian shook his head. "Say what you will about that traveler, his blade was like nothing I've ever felt."
Caius lightly ran his finger across the lip of the goblet. "Were this a god-shell goblet, that would have cut me to the bone. The traveler's blade was as light as eagles'feathers, yet you could place it over a campfire, mold it into any shape you desired, and it would cool rigid as bronze, and twice as strong. I saw with these eyes the traveler mold his blade into a visage of Diana, and back again, in only the hour of the setting sun. In my darkest moments on that river, this vision pressed me on. Such a weapon, if produced for an army…"
"But where did it come from?"
Caius'gaze wandered to the cave depths. "We had it, too. Sure enough, Aurelius dove to the bottom of that pool and came up bloodied but ecstatic. ‘ It's there, he said! Hand me the straps!'Within hours we had hauled one of them up."
"What? What was it?"
"How to describe the god-shell? In essence, it was some kind of oyster or clam, but each one was the size of three men, and instead of mottles on its shell, it was all spires, and flourishes like acanthis on the temple columns, spiraling and sprouting, and razor sharp, spangled in colors from aged copper to deep oxblood. The traveler's blade was made from it, I knew immediately.
"Now this lake was the length of ten circuses, as wide as five Tibers, and the bottom was completely lined with god-shells. It seemed such an ordeal, but if we could bring back a couple specimens, we could breed them! And with an army clad and armed with god-shell, we could beat back any of these bastard Vandal hordes. We could push the borders outward, we could tame the very jungle! And just imagine, the splendor of our temples with this wonder as ornament! It was a worthy cause. Aurelius, you died for a worthy cause, I swear."
He drained his goblet and placed it on the slab. Favian did not move to pour another. Caius eyed him menacingly, and Favian poured again.
"Now remember it was just the two of us and the boat at this point. But we let the thought of glory overcome our better judgment. We drained the last of the voyage's remaining wine that night, and fell asleep in our tents beside the pool, instead of climbing back aboard the boat.
"When it happened, I remember thinking it was a dream or nightmare. I opened my eyes to look out on the lake and I saw one of the shimmering shells, slowly, almost imperceptibly rising from the flat plane of the lake. How could I react, when it was like nothing I'd ever seen? How could I prepare?"
Favian waited for him to gather himself, ever wary of the thought of intruders.
Caius continued – "Aurelius never woke up. I still wonder whether I did. But just as slowly as the god-shell rose, so quickly its shell flew open and a tongue thrust out--just past me--and it was around him! I saw his eyes bulge in awareness for a moment before the thing tightened, wrapping around him, this horrible pink pulsing mass, it just took him. It receded into the shell, with him in its grip, and before I could even sit up it was all gone—sunk back into the depths.