I haven't been in my best times in the past few days. All I know is I killed a man, in cold blood, with another person identifying himself as my partner and finally congratulating me on a job well done.
Had I known what I was I would have responded with a standard response a cold blooded killer might have given a comrade, which is I do not know. The instant I saw blood on myself I grew into a panic, breathing slowly, heavily, realizing what I have done, and having this man beside me congratulating me about it. it was very unsettling. wait, unsettling is downplaying it. IT WAS REALLY FUCKING TERRIFYING. I was so confused I ran to the nearest opening I can think of in the crowds staining blood on the people around me as I shrug to run to whatever sanctuary I can find.
I finally settled in a barren alley, trying to figure out what I have done. first of all I tried to remember the scene but it was too much of a strain even for me, I can't remember anything at all, as to why I did it, I don't know, as to who was with me, he told me that he was an ally or something, as to where I am, I don't know. 'Why has this happened to me' was all I can think of at that moment.
I then went to a shady apartment of some sort to clear things off my mind. With a stroke of luck I am actually a pocket-wealthy person, as I managed to collect around $300 on myself, using it as payment for a night's stay. My name? I can't even remember a simple thing as my own name. so I settle for Frank. last name? uhhh anything goes...hmmm...uhhh.... Baker. Frank Baker's the name, or what I will be for now, as I write to check in, and hurry along my room.
Laying in bed, resting from the nightmare of a day I have had, I try to think for clues, I thought 'the knife back at the scene would surely tip me off', 'why can't I remember my partner in this incident, who was he?', 'why was I there?', 'what was my motive?'
I thought to myself long and hard, and after weighing my thoughts I convinced myself to go back and examine the scene of the crime, inconspicuously of course. I rent a new change of clothes and luckily I have been endowed by my unknown parents with genes of bearded men, so hiding myself won't be a problem so much as to shaving the beard off. finally at a glance in the mirror I see myself quite well endowed with facial features as well, but sadly I thought of this face also as the face of a killer as I hung my head in dismay.
With my makeshift coat and new garments I shift along returning to the scene of the crime, to find it riddled with sirens, and people of authority. as I try to walk along observing slowly, I overheard 'must have been a hard life' 'I mean how can a man murder someone who can't even remember himself, a man with amnesia' 'And a young man himself!'. I was suddenly taken aback, all I could think was to despair in the form of regret, knowing my victim's innocence, and how could I have, with my hands, killed such a man.
I felt guilty, I was trying to think of alibis, I started to panic once more, and I felt that everyone was there to gang up against me, I felt small in the world at that moment, all I could think of was run. but that might put me into more attention than I am currently needing. what do I do.... what do I do...
suddenly I felt a tap on my shoulder. I wasn't able to see who it was, then I felt a tugging on my hand as I was dragged to a secluded place, by this unknown captor.
(continue)
edit: something something