Shoot! I woke up late.
I pulled whatever clothes I could find out of the drawer; they're all basically the same. I check the mirror to make sure the top is lighter than the bottom. That's the only fashion tip I know, and I need to look good today. Today is the first day of high school, a new start, and I am not going to mess this one up. This past summer, I finally convinced my parents to move me to a private school. In my public school experience, I was constantly bullied. They laughed at my appearance, my hobbies, my voice and I was done with that. Today I was going to make a great impression, make lots of friends, and finally be that popular kid. It all begins with this, the first day of high school.
I put on my backpack, grab my lunchbox, stick a slice of toast in my mouth, and I'm out the door. If I sprint, I might be able to make it before the opening ceremony starts.
As I round the corner onto the main road, I see a cat. I've heard bad things about cats. Some of my neighbors tell me that dark cats cause bad luck. I'm hoping this doesn't mean I'll have bad luck at school today; I ignore the thought and keep on running.
I see the gate up the street and there are still other kids walking in! Thank God! I'm going to make it! The five minute bell rings as I make it through the gate. Now I need to head towards the auditorium. I stop to check one of the floor plans posted in the halls; I find the auditorium and continue towards it.
I stop outside the doorway. I'm a little out of breathe, so I want to regain some composure before I make my grand entrance. I take a deep breathe. As I'm about to step through the door, someone shoves me to the ground.
I lie there for a few seconds. Everything is ruined. My grand entrance, my chances to be popular, my new high school life is gone. Tears form, and I try to hold them back as I pick myself up. Suddenly I notice something change. It's impossible for me to describe what I see, but it makes me feel warm. There are still shades, some lighter some darker, but there's something more. Nothing looks like it did before.
My thoughts are suddenly interrupted.
"Why were you lying on the floor?"
I look behind me and there's a girl staring at me. I try to describe what I'm seeing, but nothing comes out of my mouth. I end up just staring at her.
"Whatever, bye."