I blink into the silence of North Main Street. The year is 2002, and the trees have begun to wilt into shades of amber. I enjoy the scene – alone. In the storefronts, I see the cut-outs – sitting at the table in my favorite diner, waiting in line for a coffee that will never come, or perusing the dusty old items on the shelves. In the past, I attempted to communicate and learn the faces of all the cut-outs, but I gave up. How long has passed? One year? Ten?
I walk on the cobblestone streets to my old car – a beat up Honda that belonged to my daughter before she gave it to dear old Dad. I remember her voice still, full of concern that I needed to be safe. Amelia's hair used to shine in the sun when she walked through the door, but when I visit her old apartment, she sits at her desk with the luster gone from her hair. I touch her face from time to time, but it's blank. One day, she disappeared like everyone else. I haven't forgotten her yet.
I drive to our family home where my wife and I raised our daughter. Maggie's hair had started to turn grey before she disappeared, but I can still remember the burnished golden locks straying onto my pillowcase. When I walk through the old wooden door, Maggie stands in the kitchen unmoving, and I feel the loneliness grasp my heart again. I have taken to exploring to avoid her blank gaze, traveling as far away as I can stand to be. I won't go far because one day I might not make it back. I leave again, but I want to know that she was still there like we promised.
Our neighbors sit permanently in front of their TV, dead long ago. Honestly, not much changed. They seem as nondescript now as they did before they disappeared. Sometimes I think I should have been a better neighbor and invited them out, but chances are they would have turned me down.
I sit in the car and consider turning on the radio before I realize it will be silent. Never will I hear new music again; I replay all the old tunes in my head even the ones I never liked. Is Queen still popular? If I like Queen and I'm the only one who is doing any liking, does that make them popular again? There's Bohemian Rhapsody again, but I don't remember the words.
I drive to the edge of town to the municipal lake. It has become a ritual. At least until I disappear too. I assume that one day I will disappear or die. I will waste away, but until then, I like to sit on a bench by the lake. I used to bring my family here on the weekends. We would swim, but no one swims anymore. We would barbeque, but I cannot remember the last time I had a meal. We would play tag, but it's not much fun playing tag with the cut-outs. We would watch the sunset, and I do this still. Alone. I am always alone here.
The sun sets, and I close my eyes, soaking in the last rays of light. There is warmth on my skin and in my heart. It is nice to feel so human…
There are fingers intertwined with mine. I open my eyes – Maggie. How long have we been in this awful yellow room? There are wires and cords attached to me everywhere. She smiles at me and runs her hands along my face. Amelia sits on the other side, smiling. And crying.
My voice rasps, "Why are you crying, little love?" I reach for my daughter's hand, the evening light hitting her golden locks and making her seem like my girl once more.
"I'm just glad to see you again, Dad."
One blink. Then two. I recall a diagnosis, right before they all disappeared, but I struggle to remember the specifics. I forget a lot lately. "How long have you been gone?"
Maggie leans in and looks concerned, "We never left you. We were always right here." Her voice cracks, "I would never…"
I see them again, still in my life as beautiful as always but silent and unmoving. I smile at Maggie and squeeze her hand. "Sorry, love. I must have forgotten."
The girls share a look, but I close my eyes again. "Let's watch the sunset together again like old times, okay?"
The sun begins to set with the most brilliant display of blues, purples, and pinks. Both girls hold my hands, and I smile. They are full of all the luster in the world. How could they have ever disappeared?
Finally, the sun dips below the horizon.
And I disappear.