Thankfully the theater bathroom was empty as he rushed inside and found the urinal. One perk of having to use it right in the middle of a showing.
He let a slow breath as he relieved himself. Dammit, he needed to hurry up, Deadpool and Deathstroke were about to cross paths and he was missing it because his pea-sized bladder couldn't hold anymore.
He started looking around, trying to take his mind off the fact he was missing what had to be the most epic fight in cinema history. The bathroom had patches of slightly off-color paint across the walls and dividers covering up some graffiti. Naturally, there was some that had been added since they last passed a paintbrush through here.
The graffiti carried the usual notes: "*Call X for a good time*", "*X & Y 4-eva*", "*X iz ghay*".
"Wow, ‘ X'sure has been busy," he thought.
One in particular caught his eye: "*Protulit ex inferno*". As well as the small caption below it: "*summons items from Hell*".
He let out a short snicker. Yeah, right. Sounds like something that kid from 4th period - who even carried around a ‘ spellbook'- would dream up.
His business finished up, he zipped his pants back up and lightly tapped the handle of the urinal with his fist, flushing it.
He rushed over to the sink, turned on the tap and wet his hands.
"Prostitute ex infer- I mean, *pro-tu-lit ex inferno*," he muttered while grinning.
His hands sufficiently wet, his shoved one under the soap dispenser, and used the other to pump it. Nothing came out.
"Come on," he muttered as he pumped it again, "how ‘ bout some damn soap!"
At once, a generous portion of some thick, red-ish liquid was deposited on his hand. He couldn't quite place the smell of it, but whatever it was, it was *strong*. Exhaling as he smeared it around both of his hands, he set them under the flow of water and started to wash it off.
Hands cleaned, he elected to dry them on his jeans as he jogged out instead of using the air-dryer. Those things took forever and never finished the job anyway.
edit: typo