Years of watching action stars grit and grin through the pain of a gunshot gave Bill hope in those last seconds. Each breath betrayed the blood gurgling up his lungs like a ship sprung a leak. Reality set in when he tried to stand and chase his attacker. Reality set in when he realized no one would be there to share this last moment with him.
No last words. No polite fictions that he will be fine. Just him alone in an alley he never took until tonight to see if it would save him thirty seconds on the way home.
Bill did not expect the pound as if struck by a hammer in his chest. He did not expect the searing heat of the metal cauterizing the edges of the neat crater it pocked above his heart. He did not expect the haggard addict to actually have the gun he promised. He did not expect his life to come down to a wallet with $21 crumbled bills and a bunch of plastic cards that would have been a red-tape hassle to replace.
He did not expect his years of Church and Kindness to amount to only a seating upgrade.
Bill laughed when he learned that Heaven, Hell, and Purgatory are just fire and brimstone synonyms for First Class, Economy, and Business. The only reward a good life will get you is more legroom on the inter-celestial express and a tiny bottle of water to sip while you wait to be processed at the gates.
Bill now reconsidered his morality and mortality as he sits boxed in by a car full of priests, rabbis, and monks. He breathes deeply finally having settled into his seat. A flock of old men fighting to square away gilded coffins of knickknacks, each one arguing their cargo is more precious than the others. Only the Buddhists know how to pack.
"Excuse me," Bill said. He climbed over a ninety-year old nun clutching rosary beads and whispering to the man she was going to meet.
Despite death, his stomach rumbled. He wondered what they would serve in the dining car. Nectar of the gods? He would rather steak.
Bill sat down in a booth in the crowded car and when the waitress gave him a menu he was happy to see a Ribeye listed. That and a beer and he might nap his way to eternal bliss.
Dying is hungry work, and Bill sat hunched over the cow flesh. He looked out the window at the purple band of the milky way disappearing on the horizon. When he looked up a stranger hovered near the edge of the table.
"Mind if I sit?" a cheerful voice said. "All the seats are taken."
Bill debated this question for the first time ever. He had the first class ticket, what would kindness reward him with now? Nothing. Unless this was a test from God.
The man sat down. He looked familiar, but it was not until their eyes met that Bill's body pulsed with the hot flush of danger. He grabbed his knife tightly.
"You!" Bill said to the man who pulled the trigger. The man who shot him. The man who took his life away...his family away.
"Do I...” the murderer said. Before his own eyes grew wide. "You."
"How could you...?" Bill struggled to get the words out. He was filled with anger, sadness, and confusion.
"I was hungry…" the murderer said matter-of-factly, eyeing the man's steak. His stomach grumbled.