Carey had grown from small to tall in view of the woods behind her nana's trailer. Ma was usually working, or drinking, or yelling at daddy, and nana herself had died some years back (but it was still, and would always be, nana's trailer, said Ma), and so Carey would gather sticks and throw rocks and apply as much imagination as a child of average intelligence could muster to the trailer's brown, scrubby yard. Carey was a brown, scrubby child, so she felt at home in the yard, and in the other yards in the park, shuttling between them with the other children like a ragtag flock of confused, dirty geese. Sometimes one of the older children would gather the little ones around and reveal from within a crumpled paper bag a large glass bottle filled with yellow liquid, and would call it beer, and try to make the others have a taste. Carey, who had what her nana had once called owl eyes, had seen what the drink called beer had done to daddy, and to ma, and had also seen the older children crowded around the bottle, one of the boys with his pants around his knees, so she refused a sip and took her beating from the others with both fists raised. The children got into scuffs weekly, daily during the oppressive summer months, over smuggled beer, or cat taunting, or just plain boredom. These were children at whom teachers tutted, from whom nicer children from town backed away, on whom lice and sores could regularly be found.
None of the trailer park children ventured into the woods behind nana's trailer.
The woods were known by all, in that park and the one down the road and likely by the parks on the other side of the leafy expanse, to be off limits. No ballsy youth nor drunken divorcee nor curious child was foolhardy, inebriated or unloved enough to venture into the dark thicket of tangled brambles and branches. Once, Carey had asked Ma why they didn't go through the woods to visit Aunt Jan, nana's sister's daughter, who had a clean trailer and hugged Carey when they saw each other at Christmas. Ma had shook her head, the way she did at fancy envelopes from the state and at daddy when he said he had a lead on a job. "Don't nobody go into those woods who wants a chance at coming out the other side." She paused, and Carey thought that was it, but after a minute, she continued. "There's all kinda dark things in these woods, Carey-bear. You stay away now, you hear?" Carey didn't know tree names, didn't, in fact, know that trees had names, but she knew the smell of rotten sap that spewed from the black cottonwoods, and she saw the sick that spread across the leaves in summer and that mottled the bark in winter. The woods did not grow, not anymore. They stood, a silent warning, and only those who lived in the trailer parks dared sleep near its shadow.
Carey, with her owl eyes and tall limbs, with a dead nana and few friends, was not much different from the other children in the park, but being different is not always a precursor to walking a different path in this world. In Carey's case, her path shifted on a Tuesday night, which was Ma's late night at the 7/11 and daddy's night to make dinner. Most nights he heated up some pizza rolls in the microwave and let Carey watch him play Xbox, but that Tuesday he had gotten nothing but duds on his lotto tickets and couldn't be bothered with anything other than his crumpled paper bag and large glass bottle full of yellow liquid. Carey, who eventually got hungry enough to want to do something about it, was in the process of microwaving the pizza rolls herself when Ma walked in, took one look at daddy and at Carey, who had just climbed up on a stool in order to reach the microwave, and started hollering.
"Jesus fuck, Daniel, can you even remember to feed your own daughter?"
"It's not that late," replied daddy, not moving from his chair.
Ma's nostrils were white with anger. "It is nearly midnight, you piece of shit."
Carey turned away and put her rolls in the microwave, tuning out the yelling by watching the green numbers tick slowly downward. When nana was alive, Ma and daddy had to take their yelling outside or cut that shit out, but when Carey tried to suggest that they do so after nana died, daddy had hit her upside the head and told her not to use bad language. Nana had been better about keeping the peace, said Ma, but Carey wasn't sure what that meant; all she knew is when Ma and daddy got to yelling, she ate dinner in her room and kept the door shut.
After the microwave beeped, Carey took the rolls out and headed back towards her room, ignoring the fuss, but was stopped when daddy grabbed her shoulder.
"Isn't that right, honey? You'd prefer to come live with daddy?"
"Don't get her in the middle of this!" Ma yelled, snatching Carey's other arm. The pizza rolls went flying. Carey, whose stomach felt cavernous, felt her eyes fill up with tears, although she wasn't exactly sure why they were doing that. Confused, she pulled away from both parents and dashed out the door, her heart beating rapidly in her chest. She ran next door to the Viegel's trailer, but only Old Man Viegel was awake, drinking from his own glass bottle on the porch.
"I need supper," said Carey, her face wet with tears. She could still hear Ma and daddy yelling. Old Man Viegel looked at her ponderously and was about to take a swig of his drink when three thunderous cracks sounded from nana's trailer. He paused, then set the bottle down on the porch.
"Better go find your own, then." Old Man Viegel coughed, turned his head, spit out a chunk of black goo, and turned back to Carey, grinning a jack-o-lantern grin. He dug into a leather pouch on his belt and came up with a shiny rectangle. "You'll need this."
Carey took the proffered item. It was a silver Swiss Army knife. Daddy had one just like it. No one had left their trailers at the sound of gunshot; not even a light had turned on. Carey knew that the other families would feed her for a day and then call the state. She had seen them come, in smooth cars with their smooth talk and dirty looks at the dirty children and dirty trailers.
"Thanks," she said, and turned and ran off the porch and into the woods at a full sprint.
The rotten sap scent enveloped her as soon as she got past the first layer of underbrush. She could feel the small cuts being made into her arms and legs as she ran. She knew that if she ran far enough in one direction, she'd come out the other side. Daddy had taken her hunting a few times, and she knew how to tell a straight line using the sun and even the moon, but the darkness of the woods admitted no light. She kept her steps in line, focusing on a straight path, an imaginary arrow leading her straight to aunt Jan's house. She could see it in her mind: a thick red line, shining in the dark, pointing the way--
Carey stopped. In front of her, where there had just been darkness, was a thick, shining red line. It glowed softly, and Carey wouldn't think it was real, were it not so completely different from the pitch black of a moment before. She tried to move her legs but they had frozen in fear. Her face was wet again. She wiped at her cheeks and felt her cavernous stomach rumble, and lifted her right foot and started running down the red path. It didn't seem to end, or turn, and she could see nothing else in the forest besides the path itself; it did not exist to illuminate, but to guide, and so Carey followed it, hardly noticing that her arms and legs were no longer nicked by wayward branches.
Down and down she ran, all traces of the trailer park swallowed up in the darkness behind her. She wanted to turn and see if the path remained behind her once she passed it, but instinct told her that to slow down would be to lose herself in the woods, and so she kept running, and running, and running, until her lungs were on fire and her feet were numb, and all she could focus on was aunt Jan's trailer, and how maybe she should have grabbed some of those pizza rolls off the floor before running out--
Carey almost fell in her effort to stop running, windmilling her arms to keep her balance. The thick red path had abruptly ended at the foot of a set of stairs, painted red, and lit by a small lantern on the bottom step. The stairs didn't seem to lead anywhere, but next to the lantern on the bottom step was a white paper plate, covered in pizza rolls.
Carey's skin crawled. Her mind tried to process what she was seeing and couldn't, but her stomach had no such qualms, and so after a few moments of deliberation, she threw herself on the pizza rolls with wild abandon. They tasted like normal pizza rolls, burning the roof of her mouth when she bit into them, crunching like they did when Ma used the oven instead of the microwave.
After she had eaten them all, she put the plate down and wiped her mouth. In her hungry frenzy, she had forgotten about the path, had in fact forgotten that she was in the woods, but now that she had eaten, she was able to take stock of her surroundings--
---and immediately wished she hadn't.
M