"For the last time, I don't know what number you're thinking of"
"Come on" said the prison guard
"This has to be some sort of hate crime" said the prisoner to himself then to the guard "Also for the last time, a medium talks to ghosts, they don't know what you're thinking"
"Wait really?"
"Yes"
"How was I supposed to know that"
"Because I kept telling you"
"So how do you make someone a medium"
"Wait you thought getting me to guess the number you're thinking of would make me a medium"
"Does it not?"
"Again it would be psychic and no"
"So what makes a medium?"
"What makes someone able to talk to be an intermediary with the dead?"
"Yeah"
"Nothing"
"Really?"
"Yes"
"What about a near death experience?"
"Some people seem to think so"
"Hmm…"
The guard walked off.
"Why did I tell him that."
The guard came back.
"Where did you get a bucket so fast…wait"
"Open the cell"
"No no no"
The guard threw the water on the prisoner.
"For the last time I don't melt in water, that's not even a stereotype…oh shit it's learning" said the prisoner as the guard tased him.
…
The prisoner came to on a stretcher being pushed down the hall, a see through figure floating ahead of him.
"Can see ghosts yet?" said the guard
"Nope" said the prisoner
"Dick" said the floating apparition
"I knew it"
"Wait can you see this ghost?"
"Ha tricked you"
"I didn't think you were that smart"
"I'm not I tested the water taser thing on myself to see if it work"
"Where did you even find the time for that"
"I don't know"
"Stop he's got the prisoner" said a voice behind them.
The guard picked up speed.
"What are we doing" said the prisoner
"Don't worry about it" said the guard, before pushing the stretcher through a set of doors.
"I'd like to go back to my cell now" said the prisoner
"Be free" said the guard
"No no no" said the prisoner as the guard gave the stretcher a shove.
The prisoner turned around to see the guard with his hand out stretched.
"May the wind be ever at your back" he said before gun fire erupted behind him. The guard jerked as blood flew from his torso. He collapsed to the ground, then lifted his head, held out his hand and said "go"
The prisoner turned around as the stretcher picked up speed. He had forgotten the prison was on a hill. The stretcher rolled towards the front gate.
"Oh good" said the prisoner.
The stretcher broke through the gate and continued down the hill.
"Why does this prison have such shitty security" the prisoner yelled as he and the stretcher rolled towards the busy road at the bottom of the hill.