Demitri slicked his oily hair back so the part was nice and even. Being the taxi service for lost souls was no fun anymore, after years of pleading for mercy before being sent into the pits of hell, he hoped to find someone who wouldn't beg him for mercy, that's where his Demon virtues ran out. Letting out a frustrated sigh, he made his way up the hotel elevator, his destination.. Room 316. A young man had taken his own life after being rejected from a marriage proposal. "Damn sentiment. Gets 'em every time." He said as he read his objective list, his boss, Satan. Had a bad habit sometimes of being a bit of a micromanager, making sure everything went EXACTLY as planned.
By the time Demitri was on the floor of the "stiff" Liza was just arriving at the scene of her next pickup for the man upstairs. She was dressed in a white evening dress with fur neckline. Liza, an angel whose afterlife consisted of floating and squeaky clean living.. White was becoming a bit overused. Hell..She said Hell! How exhilarating! Hell, white was the big guy's favorite color! But she had a wonderful afterlife, minus the work.. She hated this part. Having to play judge for the lost souls, even if they went upstairs or down. Both parties were required to be present by celestial order, or some silly tripe like that, what she wouldn't give to run away and do something exciting again! She straightened out her dress and hastily made her way to the room. Room 316.
Demitri was lazily spinning in the office chair, avoiding any work that could be done. Not that he didn't want to, he'd love nothing more than to send this poor sap into the brimstone and be on his way, maybe he could enjoy himself up here for a while. Y' know, just enjoy being on the lobby floor of the universe for a while. "I know there was a 'Do not disturb' sign on the door, but in your case, I'll make an exception." He smiled up at her with eyes that could see through any poker face. Liza did not return the coy greeting. "let's just get to work. These sort of things don't give us pleasure upstairs as it must give you all on the bottom floor." She said not even looking at him, but pulling out a small golden book. Demitri knew if anyone would understand what he was going through, it would be an angel. He couldn't get any lower, so he gave it a shot. "Liza, do you like this? Do you enjoy the afterlife?" He said.. Demitri the demon asked Liza the Angel with sincerity in his dark eyes.