The man walked slowly with a stumble in his step, seemingly without aim along the long dark highway.
A sleek red sports car slowed as it passed him, screeching to a stop along side the man causing him to pause his journey. "Where ya headed?" The driver asked; a heavyset older man dressed in fine clothing but with a worn look in his pale blue eyes.
"Headed down toward the sea of trees" it was a nickname given to a local forest because like the one in Japan, this one also beckoned to those who had lost there way.
"Well come on then, it seems that our destination is the same. Tom." "Jason." The ride was a silent one as each man contemplated his fortune, the complications of life and what might be there at the end.
They pulled into an old parking area, empty other then a small yellow car so covered in grime that it looked to have been there for years. Tom shut the car off, reaching into the back and grabbing the rifle that he had brought with him. Jason opened the door and got out, adjusting his backpack and heading out into the darkness of the trees.
"Hold up!" The larger man didn't even bother to lock the doors, wheezing slightly as he hurried to catch up to the other. "I know why your here.." he fidgeted with the gun, awkward with it; he wasn't really the hunter sort and only taught himself to use the thing online for this very purpose.
Swinging his head back toward Tom, his greasy locks lifting in the stagnant air, Jason's eyes were just this creepy intense almost black that was as empty as a miscarriage. "You know, do you? You think you know what I am going through? What in the hell could someone like you know? Driving around in your pretty little car with your pretty little wife and your pretty little children and grandchildren...come on man.. how the fuck could you know what its like to yearn SO BADLY to be able to take care of your family but your powerless to the rush from that poke in your arm or that crackle and sizzle through that glass?". His voice shook as he spoke but it was almost spooky in the way that it sounded devoid of emotion, as if the man had forgotten how to feel or any emotions other then pain and shame.
Tom sounded distant when he spoke. "Yes I've got money. Actually I've got a lot if it. But my wife and my daughter were taken from me 15 years ago and there's no getting them back. I'm alone. I've tried other women, I've tried joining groups but there is just nothing that can fill that void that I have inside that was carved out of my soul the day I lost Mixie and Diane." His thoughts were racing but not on his upcoming release, he was wondering if he could somehow make a difference in this mans life, save him before giving up himself. "I've got money, just like I said. I will give it to you, whatever you need.. you can have enough for your family to do well better than just getting by. You are so lucky to still have them man.. you've got the world before you. Take my car and get the hell out..."
The look on Jason's face could have squeezed water from a rock. So destitute, so alone when he was being offered anything he could possibly want. "It wouldn't work man. Thank you but it wouldn't work. If I was in the picture the money you gave my family would go straight into my lungs and arms. You don't think I could use that much? Watch me. I've stolen shit from my own family, sold my damn food card letting my own damn kids go hungry. I'm a poor excuse of a man and an utter waste of a life. You on the other hand can still be happy. You can find love again. You can have anything that money could buy..."
"I can't buy my wife and daughters lives back"
------------------------------------------------
Back in the low income housing area of the city a government phone ground and shook on the kitchen corner. A worn out woman with a toddler at her knee quickly grabbed it because she hadn't seen her husband in two and a half days. It wasn't a text from her husband though, it was a text from the bank.' $88,572,777.00 added to your savings account. Your new balance is $88,572,787.00'
(My very first time writing anything other then poetry. Let me know how the story was and then all the editing I know has to be done
..lol)