23/7/2014
Today, something really bad happened! But I'm still sure it's my lucky day. I finally got a job from a newspaper, after my immigration. My supervisor told me if I get any good story I'll get paid handsomely. So I got myself a camera.
Turns out, it wasn't a very good idea to bring a camera on the street. A couple masked guy follows me to the back alley, I pulled my gun, but damn, my gun doesn't shoot. Looks like I shouldn't have bought it from that shady guy in the back alley. I thought I'm doomed.
Then, there's a man in black armor, masked, jumped down from nowhere. He hits those bastard so hard they all fall on the floor in no time. Then he stares at me, I understand what he wants. I threw away my gun, and he looks away. He's so cool he doesn't even have to speak a word. I ask him can I take photos. He didn't answer but I don't need him to, I just took them before he's gone.
I took those photos to my S.V. and he told me good job, it's very rare to have first handed photos so close to this ‘ Batman'guy. He paid me a stash of money. Oh my it's my lucky day.
…
8.13.2015 Sunny
I've been after batman for so many months. Apparently his photos are expensive as hell, and I got a couple of them I could feed myself well. I even got spare money to go out with Elena! She's truly the brightest gem of my life.
I remember how we met a couple months ago when she worked as a waitress in the restaurant 2 streets away. She's so bright I fall in love immediately.
10.26.2015 Sunny
Another score. A couple nice shots of Batman. Man I'm getting good at taking photos, they look so great! I'm sure I'll get good money for these. By the way, he saved me again, this time I was in the bank waiting to withdraw some cash for the spending of the coming week, some thugs bust in and just trying to take everything from everyone. Batman saved the day before they even got their hands on me. Good job, Batman, that's maybe the seventh or eighth times he saved me. Maybe living in this city isn't that dangerous at all!
Tomorrow I'm going to get these photos to my S.V. and I'm going to buy a ring to purpose to Elena. I said it a million times but this time I'm for sure.
10.27.2015 Cloudy
This is a cloudy day, but for me, it's the brightest day in my life.
The pay I got from my S.V. wasn't as good as before. He told me it's the economy and shit. No big deal.
Elena accepted my purpose. I'm the luckiest man in the world. Thank you Elena! Thank you Lord! Thank you Batman!
3.30.2016 Rainy
No. No. No. No. Elena is sick. Really sick. The hospital told me the medicine is very expensive. Our saving is not even close to what I'll need for her. What should I do. No.
I'm not letting her die. The doctor said she got a month before the medication must be in place. I don't know what to do.
4.2.2016 Sunny
There is a… ‘ job offer'from a guy in the back alley. They promise good pay. They said I can sign up before seventh. All I have to do is drive a car, for a certain group in a certain time. I don't know. I might take it, but even if I take it I'm not sure the money they pay will be clean. But Elena, she's getting worse.
4.3.2016 Sunny
Elena won't be happy if I take that job. No, I'm not taking it. She seems to get better than before. She is so beautiful… I can't afford to lost her. I must figure out something.
4.4.2016 Cloudy
The Panama Papers! Just like I thought there must be something in it I can write about! Turns out there is, but not like what I thought. Not politicians. It's Batman. A lot of offshore company clearly indicates where those equipment Batman uses came from, it didn't go anywhere else but straight to his house.
He is Mr. W. How does no one know? It will be big money, and Elena is getting worse again.
But Mr. W, he saved me a couple times, and he saved Elena too. How can I sell him out? I must talk to my S.V.
4.5.2016 Rainy
The moment I tell my supervisor about the story, he closes the curtains of his office. We talk about Batman, mister W., and the situation Elena is. The S.V. told me the identity of Batman Must be kept. I'm partly in relieve. He gives me an amount of money, not enough for Elena, but enough for me to shut up. I thought I was at least a little closer to have enough money for Elena.
But what happens when we finish our discussion, my S.V. open the curtains again! I saw a black figure flashes through. I'm sure it's Batman.
The night I receive a call from the hospital. All the fees Elena needs are paid by some unknown person, and she'll mostly possible to be fine in no time.
The moment I know what I'm doing again. I'm on my knees, crying like a baby.
…
7.12.2016 Cloudy
Two years. It's just two years and so much happened.
Today I went to the hospital with Elena. She's pregnant! I must tell everyone. I'm the luckiest man in the world! And I just got luckier than ever before!
Anyways, does no one in Gotham read those Panama papers? I know Batman might not be a significant figure outside the city, but really, it's pretty clear who he is from what is in the paper...Well, I'm not selling him out anyways.