Alice crouched besides the moat and smeared mud across her face and hands. She had the pale skin of a northerner, and she would make an easy target beneath the full moon. When she was convinced that she would appear as nothing more than a shadow in the night, she unraveled the rope and hook and snuck up to the base of the tower, keeping her hand by her sword.
The tower watched over the valley – a lone unnatural structure in the forest. The trees and wildlife around the tower had already been corrupted, turning into mutated, twisted forms of their former selves. Even the tower itself pulsated with some dark energy. Somewhere up there, no doubt squealing like a little boy, was Prince Josef. But, more importantly, somewhere up there was also the wizard Zildread.
She tossed the hook up. It caught on a window and she began climbing upwards. Two goblins stood guard at the top, but they had both lapsed in their duties. One of them lay face down on the floor, the other snored loudly in a rocking chair. A large and mostly empty barrel of mead sat between them.
"Bloody drunken Goblins," she whispered to herself as she climbed through. Goblins had an amazing propensity for alcohol. She cut their throats and continued moving.
If she had any luck at all tonight, she would slay the evil wizard Zildread, who perpetually threatened the peace of the Valley, and satisfy her thirst for revenge in one swift motion. The wizard had brutally murdered her father, and she had tracked him across the realm ever since. Not only that, but if she saved the whimpering prince Josef, the king would pay her the prince's weight in gold. The feeble man wouldn't weigh a hell of a lot, as he was mostly bones and skin, but either way she looked at it, it was going to be a hell of a lot of gold. If she succeeded tonight, she would walk away not only a hero, but a very *rich* hero.
She ran upwards until she reached the tower's zenith. She waited outside the final door for a moment and drew her sword. She could hear voices on the other side. She kicked the door down and stepped in.
Zildread, crooked and hunched beneath his robes, looked up. His face twisted in surprise, anger, and fear. Josef, to her surprise, sat not in chains, but in a plush chair, a chalice of wine in his hand. He also looked far more cute and mature than he imagined.
From the look of things, she had misread the situation. And so had the king when he said his son was kidnapped.
"What the blood hell is happening here?"
Zildread lunged for his magical staff, the source of his powers, but Alice drew a throwing axe from her belt and tossed it. It nailed the wizard's robe, just missing his flesh, pinning him to the wall.
"Prince Josef? In alliance with Zildread? Somehow I'm not surprised. I'd just like to know why." She leveled her blade at him.
"Very simple," Josef said. "We're supposed to get married."
The king stepped out from behind the curtain, as did a monk and Alice's own mother.
"I'm so sorry, dear," Alice's mother, the Dame of the North said. "It was the only way we could get you to come. I know we got you to agree to the marriage, but you just kept not showing up every time we set a date. This was the only way we knew we could get you to be in the same room as him."
"You look rather lovely," the King said, even though she was splattered in mud, gripping a sword, and ready to kill. "Beautiful bride indeed."
"Wait, so you set this whole thing up, so I could come save the prince so we would get married? This is a marriage ambush?"
"Really, dear, I think you go very well together."
"And you came to save him," the king added. "That means you must have some affection for him, deep down inside."
"No! I told you! I'm living my life as a nomadic adventurer from now on! I'm going on quests, seeking treasure, you know! Doing stuff!"
"No need to get upset, dear," the Dame said.
"I think there's plenty of reason to get upset. And what about Zildread?!"
"Oh, yes," the King said, "Almost forgot about him… guards?"
Two men with crossbows stepped out of the shadows and shot Zildread where he stood. "Wait… what? We had a deal! You said if I helped you marry them I'd go free!" The arrows cut him off and he slumped to the floor.
"See, kill two birds with one stone," the king said to himself, rather pleased with the way things were turning out so far. He had managed to convince the wizard to fall in his trap and he was finally getting Josef a wife.
But before any of them realized, Alice was already out the window and into the countryside, headed away from marriage and towards new quests adventures, the moon gleaming overhead.