"She runs from me now. I think she's almost as afraid of me as I am of her" Grayman relented.
He had found himself at the most peculiar bus stop again. It was rusted and hidden away on a forgotten road, in a town that wept every night.
"I think she hates me, and it's all my fault. You see I was a fisherman once." Grayman sighed and looked down at his new silent friend. This man had a peaceful presence about him. He sat upright in a wheelchair with a slight bow at the top, His face was sharp but completely hairless, his eyes saw everything clearly yet were hazy and lazy, and his ears were blue from listening to the world for so long. Yet he still smiled.
"I fished with her for thirty years. We would sit on the same dock together everyday as I cast my line out, all the while catching nothing but seaweed. My line would snag something big and I would smile and thank her, but it always turned out to be seaweed. She would smile, laugh a condescending laugh and tell me to try again. In hindsight it was naught but an elegy wrapped in encouragement my friend, as sad and clear as day. Then one day I caught a message in a bottle. She told me it was what I had been looking for this whole time, a dream come true, but it turned out to be someone else's dream and I threw it back."
Grayman frowned as he said his next words.
"I stopped fishing."
"I didn't mind the seaweed so much as I minded her. As I got older she replaced her laughter and smiles with snickers and sneers every time I brought in the seaweed. They just added more and more weight to my pole until it was too heavy to hold anymore. I set it down and started to wait for the fish to come to me without caring if they actually would."
He trailed off, completely stunned, as his gaze fell into his silent friend's eyes. Grayman saw an expression that he had never seen before. It was the stare of a fisherman who had seen a lot of seaweed.
"So you've come to this forgotten place to get distance from her too?" asked Grayman.
A fog rolled in from the west and began to envelop the pair beneath the bus stop. Grayman half smiled as the sound of a bus driving over cobblestone began to weep its bittersweet elegy.
"Tell me quickly friend, what you make of my story before our bus arrives. I can see it in your eyes that you know her too and have held a heavy rod in your hands."
The man sat silently in his wheelchair and started to roll something over in his left hand. He turned it over many times and didn't say a word.
"Please my friend, share with me your tongue instead of your ears. We have the entire bus ride to sit in silence together."
The old man opened his hand and revealed two folded pieces of paper. He began to weep as he broke his silent vigil for Grayman.
"My son, as my eyes have conceded, I too sat with her on the dock. My grasp has been too weak to hold on to the rod and I too have pulled up nothing but seaweed for years on end. You are wrong about one thing though, she does not snicker nor sneer. If you truly listen to her, she is beautiful and completely silent."
He began weeping harder.
"She speaks to you in the same way that your shadow follows you and thus I weep. I weep for the hatred you feel for her, for the desire you have to run from her when all I want is to sit with her on the dock, one more time, in silence."
As Grayman listened to the man in the wheelchair he became increasingly frustrated. The man he thought had understood him was trying to protect her!
"You aren't like me after all! She haunts me and yet you defend her with the few breathes you have left. Tell me, why are you even here if you have so much love for her?"
The old man sat in silence as the bus came to a full stop in front of them.
The mist cleared as the door opened. The town stopped weeping as the man in the wheelchair handed Grayman one of the pieces of paper along with a blood red pen. It was a blank ticket with two lines for a date and signature.
The man in the wheelchair unfolded his ticket and sighed. To Grayman's surprise the old man had a date and name printed on his already.
"I once found a piece of seaweed that made her smile. The light would dance around the leaves like a wild bonfire and it was as beautiful as your first love. It was made up of the same stuff as all the rest, but it was different somehow. More temporary yet infinitely real and it became the most entrancing thing I've ever seen. It was through my eyes, not hers that I saw beauty for the first time."
The old man let out one last exhale and turned around. He exchanged his ticket for silence and disappeared into the bus.
Grayman watched the old man board the bus and then dropped his gaze to his hands. In them he held a blank one way ticket and a pen, something the man in the wheelchair had not received. A plot to torture him one last time from Her. An evil trick to make him stay. He resisted her tricks and signed the ticket, but as he finished he heard a soft snickering. It continued as he boarded the bus and got louder as he watched himself snickering in the reflection of the bus. Silence was only a few steps away.