"Why God? Why can't you just send me one helpful person? Next!" Grim hollered into the hallway. For over 250,000 years he's been showing up to work without taking as much as sick day and now the boss finally grants him a one dy paid leave on one condition and he can't even get that done. He's collectected millions of souls without even as much as one set of messed up paperwork and now he can't find a replacement on a days notice. "I can't go another quarter of a millennium without a break," he thought to himself, "I really need to talk to Lou about getting an intern."
He reflected on how fun it was that people always said "why God" when facing imminent death. They had to know that Lou read everything death related. It wasn't curse or something evil, he just got screwed with having to make the schedule every week. Lou wasn't that bad of a guy Grim thought. His sense of humor was a little dark at times but you try spending eternity with rapist, murderers, and perverts; I'm sure it wear on what you thought was funny too
"Please God, let this be the one. I just want a margarita and a day without dead 12 year olds" Grim mumbled to himself as his final candidate shuffled in. He was an old man wearing a tattered brown cloak similar to Grim's. The man looked weary from old age. Despite his weariness the man had an energy about him that was familiar to Grim, though he hadn't paid much attention to it at first.
"So, Mr, umm?" Grim looks at the old man to fill in his question.
"Does it matter?" The man asked with a teasing look on his face.
"Well, um, I'd like to know who will be collecting my dues for a day incase."
"Why?"
"Incase there's any issues, that's why. I don't know how familiar you are with my work but there's certainly no room for errors. Boss man wouldn't like that."
"I'm very familiar with your work. That's why I'm here, because I too am familiar with the fickle bitch that is eternal work. If you must call me something call me Friend and if your boss has an issue I'll call him directly."
Grim thought he knew all eternal beings, so meeting this man came as a bit of a shock to him. Normally he'd be a little disconcerted by this but the old man's attitude made him oddly comfortable.
"Okay Friend, why is it you want this job?" Grim asked curiously
.
"I'm a close acquaintance with a man of many consider to be rather important and for a long time I've sat by his side, watching you slave away and it's time I thought I do the right thing. I know you weren't talking directly to God when you said his name but I heard your call and came."
"Well aren't I blessed" Grim proclaimed condescendingly, "but still, you're from a whole other world, how're you so sure you can handle my work?"
"I'm not. I'm sure what you do is dark and could harden if the strongest of men but regardless I'm here to do it."
"You're ready? That's what you're telling me?"
"Yes."
"Yes? So concise." Grim stared long into the old mans eyes. There was that familiarity he felt again and he just couldn't shake it. "You're ready to drag an eight year old by the hand away from his crying family? You're ready to hear his lifeless shouts? You're ready to hear the sorrow in his voice as the realization that the only person who can hear him is the man dragging him away? You're ready to be that man?"
A look of grief washed over the old mans face. It was the first time his emotions had budged at all since the beginning of the interview. All he could do was look down at his feet.
"That's what I thought. Sorry Friend but I can't have someone who looks at that eight year-old and gives his family hope for one more day because of a sudden burst of conscience. I don't like it any more than you but I have to follow the schedule. Lou and your friend make the rules, I'm just beyond lucky son of a bitch who has to carry them out."
Grim began fumbling with the papers on his desk and angrily muttered under his breath "looks like I'm not getting that damn margarita now." Just then he heard the faintest noise from the old man.
"You're right" the broken voice said.
"Excuse me?" Grim asked in shock.
"You're right" he said again.
"I'm right?" Grim said perplexed. "Ha, you're goddamn right I'm right. 250,000 years since I took over this job, I think I might no it's not for ever Eternal looking to clear their conscience. Go home Friend, maybe on my next day off we can hangout. I did kind of like you for a second there."
"You didn't let me finish. You're right, that's why I have to do it."
"Come again?" Grim asked shocked.
"You are right about everything. I can't do that but that's exactly why I have to. It's apparent by the way you talk about this job that you don't like it but you do it because someone has to. Let me reward your selflessness with my kindness. No one can repay the 250,000 years of anguish you've experienced doing your work but someone can give you a night off to just relax with a martini."
"Margarita."
"Regardless, let me give you that. Let me give you something my fa--friend and Lou have never given you."
"And what's that?"
"A thank you and a night off."
"There's something off about you Friend and I feel as though I may know you by a different name entirely but I'm going to take you up on that."
"Thank you Grim, that's all I ask."
"Be here at 4:00am tomorrow, the cloak and scythe will be waiting for you, however I will not. I'll be enjoying all 24 hours and not a second less."
"Enjoy your day off Grim."
"And survive yours friend."
"I will try" he said with a forced laugh and a smile, trying to accept the daunting task he'd just accepted.
"I'm sure you'll be just fine. You surprised me today kid. They should call you Jesus" Grim said with a wink as his new friend walked away.
"He knew this whole time? He didn't pressure me and he even tried to push me away to save me the agony. He truly is the most selfless of all the Eternals" Jessy thought to himself as he walked away. "Saint Grim" Jessy mumbled with a laugh as he began to ascend a glowing light.
EDIT: formatting