The sky was cloudy. It was a good sky. This meant the drones wouldn't be out hunting his friends. Abdul mustered up the courage to ride farther out into the desert than usual. Even though the sky was cloudy, there was still the possibility of getting blown to bits by the ghosts in the sky. Through the biting winds and blinding clouds of sand he rode until he spotted something that caught his eye.
Something shiny was stuck in the middle of the sand. For some reason, it shined even though the sun wasn't out. Almost as if it was calling to Abdul, beckoning him to it. He rode towards the object and got so close that the light almost scared his horse and he held tight on its mane else he'd fall off. "Praise Allah," he said to himself. It was a lamp. Its bright light had gone away and he picked it up out of the clutches of the sand dunes. For some reason, there was a bit of dust on it. He rubbed it on his clothes to make it shine again.
Suddenly, a giant plume of blue smoke rose from the tip of the lamp and swallowed Abdul. He panicked and began firing his rifle. His horse, scared from the smoke, threw him off and ran away deeper into the desert. He started screaming and cursing as he reloaded and fired his rifle some more into the blue smoke. Then a loud voice echoed in his skull and brought him to his knees. He covered his ears and stared in awe at the figure animating from the smoke.
"Heyyoooooooo!" it screamed. "Oh boy! 100 years will give you such a crick in the neck!" the genie said twisting his head completely around his shoulders. Abdul screamed and scampered away backwards on his hands and feet. The genie turned towards him and vigorously shook his hand. "Congratulations, buddy! You are our lucky contestant today in our popular new game show: Who Wants Three Wishes!" The last words appeared in colorful letters in front of Abdul. His eyes were as wide as oasis pools. "First things first, buddy, what's your name?" A microphone appeared out of nowhere and the genie shoved it in front of his face.
"Uh, Abdul?" he stuttered.
"Congratulations, Abe! You have just won Three Whole Wishes! Anything your heart desires can be yours with just a few spoken words," the genie said as he showed Abdul his wildest fantasies within his mind through blue smoke and water. "Now, here are some ground rules. Number one: I can't kill anyone," the genies said removing his own head, "so don't ask. Rule two: I can't bring anyone back from the dead," the genie said as a rotting zombie, "it's not pretty, man! Finally, Rule three: I can't make anyone fall in love with you," the genie said turning his head into a giant pair of lips and smothering Abdul's head.
Abdul's face was red and he shoved the genie away from him. "Enough! There will be none of this comedic nonsense!" he screamed. The genie was confused; usually people liked his routine. "I am Abdul, one of the glorious leaders of the mighty ISIS army! No one shall command me and no one shall live in sin under my rule," he proudly proclaimed in front of the genie.
'Great,' the genie thought, 'another nut job. Why can't I get anyone normal for a change? Well, might as well toy with this one too.' The genie smiled and bowed his head. "Pleasure to meet you, Abe!"
"Abdul!"
"Whatever. Listen, I'm here to serve your needs. Your wish is literally my command. Where would you like to start?"
Abdul thought about this for a minute. Anything his heart desired? Why not indulge himself with a reward for finding such a magnificent weapon against his enemies? He clapped his hands twice, "Genie, I wish for one hundred virgin wives. Now!"
"It is as good as done!" Genie snapped his fingers and in a giant cloud of blue smoke appeared one hundred women wearing hijabs. "There you go, one hundred virgin wives!"
Abdul panted like a Pavlovian dog as he chose which wife he wanted to start with. He chose the first one he saw. He grabbed her arm and stared into here eyes. "You and I will return to my home at once and make glorious children to continue my bloodline."
She screamed and pulled her arm from his grip. She yelled something in a language Abdul did not understand. The other women heard her and removed their hijabs. One hundred beautiful, Russian UFC fighters charged at Abdul and left him broken, beaten, and scarred. The crowd of women let out their battle cry and charged towards the city. Abdul's pain kept him from moving an inch.
"Oh, sorry Abe," Genie said, "I didn't know what kind of women you were into." He lifted him up against his will. "How about we try again? Got anything in mind?"
Abdul let out a frustrating groan and stared daggers at the genie. "You pathetic worm. Fine, I wish for the Western World to be destroyed! Now, no one will fall under their evil influence and they will follow Allah's true way of living." He smiled deviously at the genie.
"Consider it done, Abe." Genie snapped his fingers.
Abdul looked around and waited for something to happen, but nothing did. He didn't know what to expect. "Well, did you destroy it or not?"
"Sure I did!" Genie said pulling a newspaper out of thin air. "Look, see? Westworld is officially cancelled! That's what you wanted right?"
Abdul screamed into the cloudy desert sky. He started yelling numerous curses and insults at the genie while he tried his best not to laugh. Abdul pulled himself on to his almost broken ankles and slammed his fists against the ground. He started screaming prayers, "Allah, why have you done this to me?" Just then, he heard gunfire in the distance. Explosions rose from the hills east of the town and more gunfire was heard. "What is that? What did you do?" he asked the genie.
"Oh yeah," Genie said rubbing his chin, "I forgot to mention that the hundred wives you asked for were combat trained by the best soldiers in the world." He pulled a spyglass out of this air and pointed it at the battle going on in the hills. Genie whistled, "Looks like they did not take kindly to your friends."
Abdul watched in horror as his friends were being massacred in the hills. "NO! Make them stop at once!"
"I don't think you want to waste your last wish," Genie said in singsong.
Abdul clenched his teeth and growled. "Fine you miserable, disgusting, filthy, sinful, swine! Here is my last wish: I want a legion of the most loyal ISIS soldiers!" Now Abdul would have his revenge by taking his newly formed legion and wiping out anyone who stood in his way.
"Are you sure you want that?" Genie asked.
"Yes."
"Are you really sure you want that?"
"Yes!"
"Are you really really really sure you want to use those wor-"
"YES! YES! YES! I know what I want you disgusting subhuman creature! Now make it happen, now!" Abdul stomped the ground on the last words.
"Okay, here you go," Genie snapped his fingers, "an entire legion of the most loyal ISIS soldiers!" The desert before Abdul was filled with soldiers dressed in ISIS uniform.
Abdul had him beat. He laughed as his stood on his almost broken ankles and raised his fist to his new army. "Allahu Akbar!" The soldiers in his army removed their coats and raised their fists high in the air. Abdul saw that they were holding something in their hands. When he realized what they were, his heart sank and a cold chill washed down his spine. "Wha-"
"What's wrong, Abe?" Genie asked. "This is what you asked for, right? A legion of the most loyal ISIS soldiers ready to die for the glory of Allah." Genie looked at the horrified expression on Abdul's face and felt satisfied on another job well done. "Ohhh I'm so sorry it looks like your wish limit has been exhausted," Genie said as he printed out an incredibly long receipt. "Here's my bill sorry I couldn't stay longer and you have a nice day. Bye!" With that he disappeared back into his lamp in a cloud of blue smoke.
The legion of soldiers let out their battle cry, "Allahu Akbar!" and detonated the vests on their bodies destroying themselves, Abdul, and a large piece of desert just outside the city.
Edit: a question mark.