I was a fluke, a genetic irregularity that never should have been. The day I was born, doctors noticed a strange, rectangular lump on my right arm. After running extensive tests, they could find nothing wrong with the small organ that had taken up residence in my arm. As it was kind of like an extra blood pump, any attempt to remove it would have killed me, so they left it in, figuring it was better to give a new mother a 'healthy' baby than to kill her firstborn. I wish they had ended my life before I could experience the horror of seeing those things.
Before we get to the meat of my story though, I'll give you a brief synopsis of my childhood. I was an early learner, being able to speak complete sentences at only a year old. Then I was able to walk, run and jump just three short months later. I would have to attribute this to the extra organ. It seemed to be an evolutionary step forward. I was always the youngest to ever attempt and succeed at basic functions. Fast forward a couple of years to my seventh grade class. I found out I had Savant Disorder, a rare form of Aspergers that meant I was exceptionally talented at one thing and unbearably terrible at everything else. In my case, I was blessed with the arts. I would draw and paint beautiful landscapes, compose music (once I got my hardass band director to cry. The song I had created apparently reminded him of a dead relative), and write simple short stories that would capture the imagination of all my closest friends. Speaking of fiends, I only had a handful, but we were all very close. I was the constantly positive shy goofball and sometimes my rampant optimism got the better of me, making some encounters extremely uncomfortable. By the time I had graduated from my high school, I had matured into an awkward young man. Medium length wavy black hair, fair skin, and steel-blue eyes (courtesy of my parents being from Japan and Ireland). As soon as my nineteenth birthday came to an end, I started having these headaches. At first I attributed this to not having enough sleep. I was staying up all night responding to writing prompts on Reddit and sleeping for only three of four hours. However, even when I attempted to change my sleeping habits, the headaches continued with a vengeance.
About a week ago I was sitting in my bed, writing on my iPod touch, when I saw a bright flash of light outside my window. I got up groggily and pulled back the curtain. It was raining outside. "Probably just some lightning," I mumbled to nobody in particular. As I was getting back under the warmth of my sheets, I saw it again and realized there was no accompanying thunder, even though the light was bright enough to be right outside my window. This woke me up a little more. I stood up again, looking for a reasonable explanation, when I heard a knock on my door.
I opened it to reveal my dad, but that wasn't what caught me by surprise. Or rather he wasn't the reason I practically shit myself.
Perched on his shoulder was a bizarre little creature. It was about the size of a large rabbit, and completely hairless, its wrinkly pitch black skin somehow glinting in the light of the hall. It had six legs, claws digging in to the material of my dad's old faded Rush t-shirt. It had a vaguely humanoid face with dark, beady little eyes, but where a mouth should be, it had a long proboscis which was presently jammed into the side of my dad's neck. I wasn't sure if I was dreaming, so all I could do is stand there. My dad asked if I was okay. I nodded weakly. He didn't look too sure, but he said good night and closed the door. I could only stand there in fear. What was that? I had no way of knowing. In my stupor I stumbled over to my desk and got online to try to search for anything that may have resembled that thing. No results.
The next morning I woke up with my laptop's keyboard stuck to my face. As I lifted my head up, I noticed FaceTime request from my friend. I opened it. We greeted each other like normal, with a few jokes and stupid references. Then the mood turned serious. My friend mentioned that his grandmother had recently passed. As soon as he said that, I saw one of those creatures phase into existence and jab its proboscis into his neck, not registering even a twitch of pain from him. I knew he wouldn't believe me if I told him. He's a cynic. Of course he wouldn't. So I tried to carry on out conversation by cheering him back up. As soon as he cracked a smile, the creature pulled itself out of his neck, and the better my friend's mood got, the farther away it seemed to get. We said our goodbyes and hung up.
Over the past week, I have experimented with different things, different emotions to make these creatures appear and disappear. I learned that they are drawn to negative emotion - they feed on something in the host's blood. Because of the little organ in my arm, I am aware of their presence. My hand doesn't phase through them. I tried picking one up three days ago and it stabbed me with its sharp little claws. I mean, if you had been ignored your entire life and someone just grabbed you, wouldn't the surprise force you to lash out? These creatures now know I am capable of making contact with them. Now they're going after my family.
I just felt something in my shoulder while typing this. I'll be right back. I want to see if these creatures feel pain.