We all filed into the room. The man guiding me smelled like bad coffee and after shave, I could feel the humidity coming off of his hand on my shoulder. Sweaty palms, Christ he's more nervous than me and he doesn't even have a blind fold on. I wonder why.
The room we entered was interesting. So far. It smelled like old insulation mixed with dog slobber. For some reason it sent me back to the last time I was in school; the days of kickball and capture the flag. Gym class was the only thing I remembered or cared to pay attention to in grade school, I wonder why. They removed the blind folds and the picture began to get a bit clearer. The man guiding me was dressed like a referee, and we were in an old basketball gymnasium. The broken down Rec center kind that only gets used for AA meetings and craft fairs.
Why was I here? I'm pretty positive I'm not the smartest, or the dumbest person on the planet. Given, I did drop out of high school, but I've done alright for myself. I have a family, I support them enough.
"One question." Said the referee. "Where are we?".
One man quickly shouted out "A gymnasium dummy! ", the ref blew the whistle and two men in black suits came and dragged him out. Who's the dummy now.
Another woman, dressed in a multi colored frilly sweater and big glasses hesitantly let out "the United States of America?"
Whisle. Gone.
At this point six others started to huddle together to brainstorm, while the remaining participant sat in the fetal position on the floor, sweating. Withdrawals, I thought, he probably hardly ever knows where he is.
This is inane, I thought. There was obviously only one answer to this.
"Right now, we are here."
*tweeeeeeeeeeeeepth* the Referee let out a long screech with the whistle. "You! Explain yourself, what do you mean?"
I took a long breath. "Well, I could tell you that when we left Langley we got into a diesel 6 cylinder Van. I can tell you that we drove north west for 10 hours and it's now between 6:30 and 7pm. Which would put us somewhere in western New York or Pennsylvania. And I can tell you we drove around this building 3 times before parking, and entered in the east side of the building. But none of that would hold any weight. You took away our frame of reference. My senses could have easily been manipulated without having the sense of sight to anchor them. Not only that but in a 3 dimensional universe experienced through 4 dimension, the questions of "where" is always going to be relative, it can't be specific, or vague, without reference to another entity. If you want an absolute answer of where we are, the only one is "here". Acknowledging our presence in a shared reality, and that where we are now is different than whatever is beyond where we are now. It's the only answer. But we did enter on the east side of the building, that I'm sure of."
The referee gave the whistle three toots. The walls of the building all fell backward. Props, it was a set. Across the parkinglot was Langley HQ. We were hardly a hundred yards from where we left. Figured, it kept sounding like the same cars were passing us for 10 hours.
"But how did you know we entered the east side?"
"You can take the explorer out of the woods. But you can't take the woods out of the explorer."