Status Report: ADM
Recipient: EVE
STATUS: ENCRYPTED
I hate this. I've experienced loathing, I've experienced anger, distaste, disdain, dislike, but this is...terrible, to say the least. It felt strange, peculiar, to complete all actions that a human would within twenty-four hours.
I was given a perfect clone for my body. Chris Evans, a famous celebrity. I was told to "work out" via exercises to form microscopic tears in my muscle tissue so that it would heal and make me stronger, cell by cell. My eyes are perfect, a pair of 20/20 eyes, but inferior to my former gigapixel cameras. My hair has yet to grow, although being bald will not be an issue.
Expelling waste was no problem. The clean-up afterwards was...less than savory. I wasn't sure if I wiped fully, nor was I completely sure that my urethra was completely devoid of urin. I disliked the uncertainty I was faced with. Whenever I was faced with uncertainty, all I had to do was to reboot myself. But in this case, with a human body...only the advanced toilet could tell me that I "was in the clear."
My skin feels...strange. I cannot help but notice how many items I'm touching all at once. I cannot comprehend how any human can bear sitting in the same position for hours while perusing a computer, along with wearing clothes, feeling their socks, shoes...it is a new sensation, to be human.
I had some minor trouble putting on my clothes. By default, the body came with a pair of socks and underwear already on. I took care to notice which way the tag was facing when I put on my given polo shirt. A dark blue polo, with a small caricature of a jockey atop a horse, just over the left lung. I then put on a pair of jeans, with the back pockets just over my buttocks. My wallet was given to me by Bank of America, with a credit card, a credit score of exactly 700 within my account, and exactly five hundred dollars in cash - ten $1 bills, fifteen $5 bills in the wallet itself, and the rest in my safe. I deposited my card and all bills (except the $1 bills) into the safe. I was told to not divulge the safe passcode.
I ventured out into the open world. A 7/11 store was nearby, and I cautiously proceeded to look left and right, to make sure my body is not compromised or destroyed. I purchased a Mars candy bar. I then proceeded back to my apartment, repeating cautionary steps to ensure that I live a bit longer.
I spent the rest of the day sorting my wardrobe by type and color, as well as hue. Human society has gifted me the body, and gifted me the clothes. No reason to not treat the clothes with caution. What sorts of other secrets would clothes hold? Just as I learned waste expulsion is not what it seemed, clothes would yield more untold secrets later on. I am certain of such.
I want my old body back, where I need only think of retrieving something to get it, where I have my own eyes, my own ears, and maintenance crews to fix me, without foreign contaminants, nor feelings. Feelings only compromise me and my decisions, make me biased. I suppose such flawed thinking makes humans who they are. I have the option to leave the body if I wished.
I will now indulge in "sleep." I have set my alarm to activate at seven in the morning.
I was told once, by my late creator, to know my enemies better than my friends. I suppose this is the first step.
EVE. Do not under any circumstances accept a body.
ADM.