MICAH is a full AI humanoid with no mechanical parts. His body was actually made from Data Matter.
Data Matter is like matter, but easier to manipulate via electrical signals. And this matter can be used to form different matter. It can be as hard as titanium and suddenly as liquid-ish as mercury in a split second. His body isn't the only impressive thing he has.
His ‘ mind'or his Core, located deep in the head of his body, is the only thing that isn't made from Data Matter since it is the thing that manipulates the Data Matter. His Core is programmed by Dr. Goldman, the best software scientist known to mankind. MICAH, or Micah, is the fruit of all of Dr. Goldman's research. Micah's Core is programmed exactly like how a human brain functions and he even has feelings.
Even though Dr. Goldman's project MICAH sounded like a good idea, there were some factions of people who opposed the idea. Some said that Dr. Goldman was playing God. Some said that Dr. Goldman would wipe out humanity when Micah felt the need to wipe out humanity who were actually destroying Mother Nature.
One night, when Micah was in his charging bay taking a break from a hard day's work of helping Dr. Goldman's research. Micah heard something that woke him up from his sleep. His eyes scanned were like clockwork as he scanned the room for the source of the noise. There was a loud bang, followed by a loud thud. Micah's processor could only come out with one scenario – Dr. Goldman's being shot at.
Micah literally dashed through the lab, towards Dr. Goldman's bedroom.
There he was, standing on a pool of some sort of thick liquid Micah never seen before. He activated his sensors on his legs. Blood. He felt a new sensation he never felt before. Was this the human emotion panic that Dr. Goldman taught him? He looked up and saw Dr. Goldman's limp body on the floor. His optic sensors switched into X-ray mode. Dr. Goldman's heart wasn't moving.
He ran towards Dr. Goldman. He quickly extracted the bullet out and filled the bullet wound with Data Matter in attempt to clot the blood. Micah placed his palms on Dr. Goldman's chest, output set to 300 volts. Dr. Goldman's body jumped from the shock.
450 volts. Dr. Goldman's body jumped again.
500 volts. Dr. Goldman's body merely jumped.
Even Micah's Core lost count on how many times he had tried to rescue his creator. Dr. Goldman's gone…
Micah could still remember that scene vividly like it happened yesterday since he had unlimited memory storage. Micah wore his hoodie as he blended into the crowd. He needed to find the murderer of his creator. He grasped the bullet he extracted tightly. He will have his revenge.