The gas encroached over the top of the trench. William McKenzie's eyes saw the green smoke almost immediately and the words escaped his mouth, "Gas! Gas! Gas!" The soldiers in the trenches, most of whom were taking a break from the battle and smoking on cigarettes, sprung into action. They grabbed their weapons and then hurried themselves against the dirt wall in the trench, hoping their Mage would make it in time.
"Everyone, inhale!" A male voice shouted as he hopped into the middle of the trench. His long, ornate cloak spoke that he was a Magus of the Fifth Order, under directive from the King himself to guard and defend his territory and people. He spun his hands together and William watched in awe as a yellow aura filled in the middle of his palms. A collective inhale from his Platoon happened and the Mage yelled something incomprehensible to himself and the other soldiers. The yellow aura erupted out of his hands as he threw them over his head. It pushed against the green smoke and slowly, but very surely, pushed the smoke back over the top of the trench.
It took some time and the Mage kept his eyes shut the entire time. William was the first to step up, counting the forty-odd soldiers in his Platoon--three of whom from another Platoon that he picked up on their first retreat--and made sure everyone was accounted for. When he reached the number three, he heard the sound of a grenade hitting the mud at the bottom of the trench.
"Ambush!" Someone shouted and jumped on top of the grenade before William could react. It shot upwards into his stomach, tearing the soldier apart and killing him instantly.
"Protect the Magus," William shouted as the gunfire erupted. Two soldiers, Privates as William noted, lunged forward and grabbed the Mages' arm. They pulled him down in the middle of his incantation and broke his concentration. His eyes broke open.
"What is happening?"
"Ambush. I need to get you to safety," William said as he fired off his rifle over the trench. There was no telling how many Germans were launching an attack and William's primary objective was to keep the Magus safe. Territory control was minor compared to holding the most powerful beings in the world. And his secondary objective, he noted in his head, *eliminating* the enemy Magus.
"The incantation is not done. The gas will return!"
William blind-fired again as he watched a soldier's head on his left disappear into nothing. The enemy Magus was moving forward with the attack, ready and able with destruction magic. "Can you fight?" He ducked his head.
The Magus' eyes enlarged. His hands dug into his cloak and pulled out a vial filled with a red liquid. In a moment, he popped the top off and drank the whole thing. "I can."
"Good," William looked around. He could almost hear the German's footsteps. "On my mark," he said and held up his hand. He waited as the gunfire died down and the Germans approached.
The spoke in their own language and William wondered what they were shouting over the trench. He surmised it was similar to what he would have been shouting. They needed a confirmed Magus kill. William reloaded his rifle carefully, as to make less noise, he knew they wouldn't get one today.
He waited a few more moments, the tense air around him spoke great lengths. His soldiers were dirty, tired, hungry, and needed a good morale boost. Taking the enemy Magus and mounting his head would be a good start to boosting that morale. The German's food and much-better built trenches would be even better.
He heard a few buckets clang over head. It meant only one thing, the German's had approached *their* kill zone. He clenched his hand in a fist and then rushed over the trench. "Go! Go! G --"
The gunfire drowned out his words as he and his platoon lunged upwards and opened fire on the German's in front of him. Yet, as he quickly realized, there were only a few Germans in his field of view, all of which hit the ground as they dove over the trenches.
Instead, he and his platoon were trapped in the enemy Magus' sights, who was rolling in on a large, armored troop transport. His hands were flying over his head in rapid motions and a squad of elite German troopers hung loosely on the side. The gunfire died down as everyone realized the gravity of the situation. William's eyes drifted towards his own Magus, who was now, again, readying a yellow aura in his hands.
It was up to the Magus, William knew that, to defend himself and the King's army from destruction. He was almost done and the Magus let loose his hands above him.
William was closest and the first to be wrapped in the yellow aura, but just as he was, the enemy Magus released his own red aura, which erupted in a flash of light. The two bounced against each other, Magus powers intertwining and wrapped both friend and foe in aura's of death and protection. The yellow and red mixed together, binding destructive and restorative power together in something that William had never seen before.
The ensuing blast from the two powers combining knocked him to his feet.
He felt that it must have been hours before he came to--in truth it was only a few minutes--and he carefully lifted his head upwards from the mud and dirt. In front of him, the armored transport was turned over and four or five Germans laid dead next to it. In front of that, William counted at least a dozen British soldiers overturned, mangled, or completely decimated. He could hear voices, noises that approached him, yet the enemy Magus was nowhere to be seen.
Then he turned his body onto his side and felt the sharpness of a tree stump in his left abdomen. He looked down at the wound, saw the blood on his shirt, and cursed himself. His eyes refocused to the battlefield and in front of him, he saw the enemy Magus grabbing the vials from the King's Magus. The German wore dark cloaks and dumped the vials into a bag on his shoulder, before looking at William.
He said something and then stepped atop the Magus' corpse and walked over to William. He spoke in some language, spun his fingers in his hand and brought forth an aura that glowed red.
William looked upwards at him and grabbed his abdomen. He only spoke a few soft words, "Long live the King."
_______
*/r/BlankPagesEmptyMugs for more! I kind of rushed that end because of school/work, but I hope you enjoyed! *