*Haven't read nor watched American Psycho, but I'll give it a shot. *
There is something beautiful about watching a grown man weep.
Tears, you see, are one of the most beautiful things that God ever blessed us with. To many, they are only water and salt, but they tell all kinds of fascinating stories: years of memories; honest words that left an impact; cruel belts that also left an impact; a single rush of frustration, of helplessness, of soul-crushing despair.
People will talk about happy tears. They will say that they cry out of joy, or because something is beautiful, or because it has profoundly affected their soul forever.
These people are lying. There are no happy tears. When people claim they are tears of joy, because something else is beautiful, they do not tell the truth. They are tears of envy, because they know they will never have something as beautiful.
I have made over 25 grown men weep in the last two weeks. I find it very gratifying, to make them understand that they are awful, terrible people who cannot be helped, while at that same time listening to them tell me how I have been such a big help.
I don't do much, really. I simply sit in the chair, like some sort of doctor, and poke and prod and pinch until they tell me where it hurts. Then I poke and prod even more until they scream and weep for mercy from their own sins.
You see, I pretend to help these people. They come to my office, and I let them reveal themselves to me, get them to tell me their secrets, their fears, their deepest insecurities.
And then I exploit them. I break them down, and they do not even realize it is happening.
I love my job. People say that sick people see psychologists, and even sicker people become them. Maybe they are right, who knows?
I realize that you must think I am a terrible person for this, but I assure you that I am not. I am only helping to contribute more beauty to the world.
Water and salt. And beauty. That is what I bring to the world.
I hope you can say that you've done something as important.