I sat down on my bed, watching the fatigued workers jostle through the crowd, mindlessly heading home. I say bed, but cardboard boxes aren't exactly the best memory foam mattress. A lady dropped some loose change into my bucket before heading her way, her heels clicking on the tiled floor. Snow speckled her ebony hair, just a taste of what was to come this winter. I sighed, gathering my blanket, or what was left of it, tightly around me. It'd be cold tonight, from the looks of it. Announcements blared over the speakers - not very effectively, I admit - not that it mattered to me. It must've been about some train, for the herd quickened their pace, shoving their way through down to the platform. A well-dressed man tripped over my blanket, murmuring a quick (and insincere) apology vexedly before going his way. Just another unpleasant journey home for them, a daily reality for me. The crisp smell of the winter night mixed with the musty stench of hard work smelled like home to me, after all these years.
I looked up, staring at the flickering yellow lights. In all the years I'd been here, they'd never replaced the dusty lamps. Sure would be inconvenient, if one of them just decided to bite the dust. The warm, ancient glow was however mildly comforting on this otherwise cheerless night. Appreciate what you have, as my mother always said.
The gentle hum of silence slowly pulled me back to reality. Well, that was something new. Pinching myself to make sure that I hadn't just fallen asleep, I peered around bemusedly as I came to realise that everyone was gone. Or rather, nearly everybody. As I looked around, I noticed a little girl peeking at me from behind a pillar. A dainty, pretty little thing she was, with her pigtails and cotton candy pink dress.
"Have you lost your mother? Seems it's just two of us, huh?" I croaked out, relieved that I wasn't the only one here.
She shook her head, inching towards me. "What's it you want then?" I asked.
She shook her head again, refusing to answer my question but rather sticking her hand out stubbornly, as if determined to make me follow her. "If it makes you happy, fine," I sighed, taking her hand. Always had a soft spot for children, always would, I chided myself.
Her petite hand was warm, despite her gossamer-thin dress. Right, she must be been cold in that. What were her parents thinking, dressing her like so on such a day? More importantly, what was she doing here? Must've been way past her bedtime. Hurriedly shuffling back to my abode, I grabbed my blanket and draped it over her. "There, better?" She smiled, sticking to her silence.
We hobbled along, me with my creaky knees and her guiding me along with her well-oiled ones. I followed her up the steps leading out of the station, my joints protesting with every step I took.
Snow blanketed the park next to the station, covering every inch of vegetation. Yet again, there was no one to be found, somehow. She stopped at a bench suddenly, smiling brightly at me and gazing at the scene in front of us. Flakes fell to the ground softly, the wind murmuring softly in my wind. Winded as I was, I could not help but sigh at the peaceful scene before me. We sat there on the bench silently. What a ironic pair we were, her spry, young body beside my ancient, wrinkled shell. Yet I could not remember feeling such happiness as this, ever in my life.
As we sat there, letting the snow gently caress our faces, I felt my lids begin to droop. Perhaps I'd take a short nap, hopefully everything would return to normal when I woke up. I closed my eyes, beginning to drift away...