That day - that damn day - best I've had since they came.
I remember it like it was yesterday. Was it yesterday? Everything runs together now. Everything runs together since they showed up. It all flows like a big, murky river, and I guess I'm just trying to keep my head above water. They came into our world like a flood and left just as quickly, each leaving their mark in some way. Some crafted holes in our world where cities used to be, others killed single, wildly unimportant people. Others, the reddish ones, healed children.
We don't know why they came, but our world has been in chaos ever since. There's this group of people, a religion maybe, that believes those things were gods, coming to our world to punish us or to set things right. They gathered together from every corner of the world and started trying to "finish the job" those things started. They killed indiscriminately and brutally. We, the resistance, the weak and the few, were the only sane force left in this world.
I commanded a squad back then, six guys I would do anything for. Turns out they'd do anything for me too.
Blake, Matt, Joe, Luke, Dave and Elijah. We dropped the military titles after the invasion. It wasn't worth it anymore. We were just men, and I just happened to have the most experience. I wasn't a leader by title, but by necessity.
We were trekking through what used to be Brooklyn that day. May 3rd. It was Spring. The sun laid on our backs, warm and kind, and our shadows stretched out before us like old friends. We hadn't seen the enemy in a week, it had stopped raining, and we lost contact with command a long time ago. That meant we were on our own, but it also meant we didn't have to deal with objectives or goals. We just had to stay alive.
Joe broke down the door of a convenience store to look for a twinkie, and the rest of us followed him in to find some more respectable food.
We found a few packs of fritos, an arizona iced tea, but left the hot dogs as they were. We were about to walk out the door to enjoy our spoils, when Blake yelled back at me.
"There's something behind the counter. In the glass. It's a pack of something. Anybody know if I can eat it?"
I sprinted back inside. There's no way. There's no way they could still be here, still be ok. But as my eyes moved from the counter to the case behind it, I found them, that beautiful, sweet pack of cigarettes. I had never smoked before, but my dad used to spend hours telling stories about all the times he and his college buddies used to get together and smoke. He talked about porches and tables and dominoes and the way your head felt a ten feet off the ground when you breathed in that delicious poison.
I smashed the glass, pulled the pack out, and ripped off the cellophane.
No lighter.
My fingers, shaking now, reached for the first cigarette. I shoved it in my mouth clumsily, nearly breaking the filter. I could taste something, something incredible on my lips. I whipped out my pistol and fired a round into the air. My squad jumped and screamed, ran out of the gas station like girls - girls who had never smoked a cigarette.
I could hear some ancient AC/DC riff dancing through my head as I shoved the end of my cigarette onto the hot metal at the end of my pistol. That first drag, that first damn drag, hit me like hell. I took a few more and nearly fell on my ass. Tobacco doesn't treat newbies well. That was just fine with me.
I stumbled outside and passed six cigarettes out. I turned my back and walked toward the river as I heard six gunshots fire into the air. My lips formed a quiet smirk as the smoke rolled off my tongue.