It was- though of course, only at first- the worst thing ever. The others, from the shelf- they looked down and wondered- what would happen, if I could get back up somehow, there was a major commotion...at least, at first. I would wager it to have been mere days, no more than three, before it tapered off. The others still shouted down, of course, but I was soon forgotten. And since then.... nothing.
Not that I heard nothing.
That I was nothing.
If the regular brouhaha of the store; the workers' radios KSCH-ing and high-heeled foot falls KLOP KLOP KLOP KLOP, walking down the aisles. Spoil'd kids' anguished cries to their parents, demanding THAT toy TODAY, and then the screaming and the tears and the parents' forced submission- THIS was to be the glorious life of a toy, I wanted nothng of it.
But I'm nothing now.
Merely a forgotten item, lodged behind the yellowing beige metal of the shelves. A stolen toy with no thief. Sometimes, I fancy myself a collector. A collector of dust. And at one point, I'll have more of that than myself.
The workers call this place "Kay Mart." I have no idea who Kay is, but if I see him in another time, I'll give him right what he deserves- a solid clock to the cheekbone. All of the toys are made by lowest bidder, and it's obvious. The fur on the plush animals always pulled off in your hand. Plastic mold lines were definite and pronounced. (No wonder the lovely Strawbs across the aisle never gave me more of a passing glance.) We sometimes barely stood up on our own. Children are BRUTAL on their playthings- one of many reasons I despise them- and we are not made for that abuse. We weren't manufactured for any good reason, merely to make someone veerryy thick in the back pocket and keep the irritating hellspawn at bay until dinner was prepared.
When I first fell, I faced up. I'm fairly cerain my eyes are totally shot by now; day after day of staring UP into the bright flourescent lights. I'm sure even Hell will be dimmer.
I woke up to a shudder one night, and I couldn't see what happened until the next day; my box had flipped itself, so now I hung looking DOWN. I'm not sure which is worse, myself.
I can see a leg and an arm on the floor. They used to be attached to me.
The workers here are incompetant as all get-out. The crumbs, etc are just pushed behind the shelf. This rotting grape has been here for what feels like weeks. I'm sure it's alcoholic by now; at minimum fatally poisonous. How I'd like to devour it.
The saddest bit is my story doesn't have an end. I am doomed to spend my days here, looking down, staring at a fuzzy fucking grape.