Mrs. Kelderwax loaded a small drive into her desk, loading up the _Time Travel_ educational video for the second-graders. She hit a few buttons on the keyboard and dimmed the lights, a few of the children shouting in shock as one does when the lights are dimmed. Mrs. Kelderwax took a heavy swig out of her ceramic coffee cup (filled mostly with Kahlua). She leaned back in her chair and tried to stay just awake enough to make sure Timmy didn't try to get Samantha stuck in a rift portal again.
The projector on the ceiling buzzed, and then a hologram of the _Terrence the Time Traveler_ AI appeared in the center of the room. Mrs. Kelderwax's eyes drifted away from Timmy and over to Terrence's tight posterior.
"Hello, children! I'm Terrence the Time Traveler! And I'm hear to tell you about..."
A digital clock, numbers flying by in a blur, appeared next to Terrence.
"Time travel!"
There was a weak applause that exuded from the crowd of children. Mrs. Kelderwax sipped on her beverage.
"Time travel has been around for quite some time! It was first invented in the 90s by Anna S. Belkin and her research team at MIT! As you all were taught in pre-school, you can create a rotating hyperbolic time curve at room temperature when applying Kerchov radiation using a geodesic array of palladium-hydride superconductors, but remember! I'm not here to teach you elementary physics, kids! I'm here to teach you about some of the responsibilities you'll need to know about before you reach the legal voting age! And I'm sure you all know what age that is, right kids?"
The children all groaned.
"He sounds so...patronizing," Timmy mumbled to Samantha.
"Tweeeeelve," they all moaned.
"That's right!" Terrence swung his fist "Now let's get into the rules!" he said, starting to pace.
"One of the most important things you need to know about time travelling is that it's _okay_ to create an alternate timeline, so long as you stay within the legal limits as society dictates! First and foremost, when travelling to the past, you are not allowed to communicate with yourself in any way. You have what is referred to by law as an 'implicit paradoxical restraining order,' and to violate it is a federal offense! You may think it would be important to go back and tell yourself the answers to next week's test, or not to invest anymore of that stock in Organic Foods --"
"Or to call in sick and skip class today," said Erica.
"Verrry funny! Ha!" Terrence said with robotic enthusiasm.
"As I was saying: as enticing as these scenarios are, you're not allowed to do them!"
Several minutes passed explaining the various types of litigation involved with time travel, and various people who are also included in the implicit paradoxical restraining order. The children were all struggling to keep their eyes open. Mrs. Kelderwax's eyes were locked on Terrences rear like a pair of lasers.
"And before you get this time travel permit, you must first seek approval from the local town hall explaining the purpose of your _mission_. This is called your _mission statement_. This can be waived in the event of a tour, however, like to the popular 'Pterodactyl Isles Tour."'
Then there was a brief pause.
"So that's a your brief guide to the wonderful world of time travel! It's nothing to be afraid of, as long as --"
Terrence's form buzzed out of existence, and the room lights turned back on. Mrs. Kelderwax stumbled back up to the front of the classroom to resume the lecture.
"As you can see, the very idea of making time travel legal was ridiculous, kids. As soon as someone hacked the firmware on the machines disabling the limits, history plunged into chaos." She said, "so tonight's assignment is to read over the case study of the alternate history of universe timeline 637-h"
"The infinite heat-death singularity?" Glenn shouted excitedly.
"Yes, Glenn...That universe." Mrs. Kelderwax said. She then picked up her things and left the kids to their subliminal brain-inductor teaching helmets.