Not in second person, but here it is:
Hours had gone by before she dared to look back. The blisters on her blue feet were collecting small stones and filth as she scurried across the desert floor.
"What have I done?" she thought. She had left behind everything she had known, including her responsibilities as a mother.
"Coward" she cursed. "Coward!" She would have cried if she were not so afraid, ears ringing from the gunshots.
*Ruff ruff*
Those must be the dogs, she thought. They were only puppies when she first came to the house, and now here they were coming for her. She knew how fast they were, and she knew it was only a matter of time.
*Ruff ruff*
"Coward!" she continued to scream, the image of her crying children intoxicating her tortured mind. They'll be forced to watch her as she is being punished, as she dies.
She asked herself if it was worth it.
He was laying on the floor when she had left, covered in his own blood, killed by his own gun. She remembered how he groped her every night, and the nauseating smell of his sex as he forced himself on her. She had never tasted the cruelty of Allah's soldiers before she had met him. She did not know that great men could be exempted from the Holy rules.
*Ruff ruff*
The dogs were getting closer now. Her pace slowed as the pain from her raw feet began to sink its teeth in her, forcing her to stop and collapse to her knees. The tears had finally began to surface to her brown eyes as the anger faded, distorting the already obscure landscape in front of her. She looked up to the dark sky, capturing the swindles of lights that filled her watery eyelids. She closed her eyes.
God is watching me, she thought to herself, and God will punish me.
She heard the roar of his holy engine beginning to engulf her ears as he prepared to smite his sinful subject. She felt his breath grow more ferocious as the sands around her swirled. Her hand trembled as she felt his presence approach her.
She opened her eyes again, looking up into the starry sky to face her judge and creator, his glorious light blinding her sight. She shielded her eyes to capture a proper glimpse of this soaring black bird that engulfed her in Allah's light, her body shaking ferociously in awe.
Finally the tears from her eyes dried, and she caught the image of Allah's black wing. It bore the symbols: Δ6.