Weakly, I raised my head from the ground. I opened my sand-encrusted eyes and looked right, only to behold the sight of sand. I turned my head slowly to the left, hoping beyond hope that I would see something, anything, that wasn't sand. Alas, to my left stretched the sea of beige, unbroken. Slowly, I came to the realisation that I was actually buried in The fucking stuff from the neck down. Then I remembered the sandstorm. We had seen it coming miles off, but there was nowhere to hide, nowhere to run. There were five of us remaining at the time from the original twenty. Twenty men and women sent to follow the obelisk, and learn what secrets it held. We had found this dune, but it wasn't steep nor tall enough to protect us. I suppose the other four were dead now. The sand wasn't shifting. No movement. No life.
"Where ith th wadder?" I muttered to myself, my tongue thick and swollen from dehydration, mangling my words. I dug myself out from under the sand, and searched for my canteen. There it was, at my waist, but empty.
*I guess I've drank my last*. I thought to myself remorsefully. Shit, what would I not give for even a drop of water to soothe my cracking lips, and return the moisture to my aching tongue. *I suppose I might as well climb this dune, see what's around me, and where the obelisk is*
I wasn't prepared for what I saw at the top of the dune. It was right there! Due west, maybe 2 hours of walking. If I only had some water, I could even make it there. All around me, maybe a few days distant, there were cities, massive skyscrapers broke through the endless blue.
*I have to make it* I thought. There may be people from the cities there! They could save me! I have to make it! I will run! I started running, but my weakened legs got ahead of me. I felt my left knee buckle and I collapsed, tumbling down to the foot of the dune.
When I looked right and then left, I saw sand. No cities, just the godforsaken sand. Hallucinations, all of it. The cities, the obelisk, I had dreamt it.
"AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAARGHHHHHHH!" I screamed, pounding my fists on the coarse, pale sand. Then, I heard a shifting noise behind me. Slowly, I turned, only to behold the obelisk. Right there in front of me, not two hours off, but two minutes! I was there! I could see five men approaching, only to slowly fade and disappear as they came closer. But the obelisk remained. It was no illusion, not the obelisk. It was truly there.
I stumbled towards it, but once more, I collapsed. I tried to rise once, twice, thrice, but each time fell back down. I couldn't find the strength. With the last fibre of strength I had left, I reached out my hand to the obelisk, and I begged to it.
"Murthy, pleasss! Thpare me!".
As I finished pleading for quarter, a scorpion arose from the sand. But that was impossible, nothing lived out here, man or beast. Just another illusion. I tried to reach for the scorpion, to see if it were truly there, but before I could so much as raise my hand from this cursed sand, everything faded to black. I embraced the blackness eagerly, it was much more welcoming than the beige.