'He's been collecting paper scraps all week. just brings them to his old puppy bed and lays them there like he's building a nest." Caroline looks over to Geoffrey. "You think his age finally caught up with him?"
"If you're asking if I think Heimdall is losing his mind, the answer is no." Geoffrey answers. "If he's collecting scraps, there has to be a good reason. Take him out for a walk, Caroline. I'm going to go see."
"You're putting too much faith in an animal that still gets frightened by cats, despite being four times their size." Caroline shrugs. "Heimdall, here boy!" The old mastiff waddles over to Caroline, holding his leash in his mouth as he had been trained to do. "Come on, boy, let's go to the park." The spark in the old dog's eyes came back, burning brighter than any star in the sky and his tail thumps against the wood of the doorjamb.
Caroline clicks the leash onto his collar, grabs some plastic baggies and heads out the door for a long, slow hike.
Geoffrey waited until they were gone. He had his suspicions about the dog, since Heimdall brought him a picture of a rainbow over their national forest. Something about that simple act had made him wait until a rain and he brought Heimdall to the forest to watch the rainbows. Heimdall was thrilled. That bright-eyed spark of life was back.
So now, he's digging through the puppy bed and finding a few things of interest.
There's a picture of a fine dining restaurant's platter of Steak Diane. Heimdall loves steak and mushrooms.
The second picture is of a tennis ball launcher on a clay court.
The last picture is of a owner hugging his dog while the dog plays with a teddy bear.
Geoffrey gets it. It's a list of things his dog wants to do. Heimdall's greatest desires. His old mastiff wants one last bit of fun.
There's no order here, so Geoffrey calls up the nearest tennis club and asks if he can bring his dog down to play. The clerk says it's fine as long as he cleans up afterward. That's not going to be a problem.
He downloads a recipes for Steak Diane and gets the ingredients together, as Caroline and Heimdall return.
"Did you know your dog still thinks he can chase rabbits? He got winded after twenty yards and the bunny escaped." She sighs. "What are you up to?"
"Just doing something nice for Heimdall. You'll see." Geoffrey kneels down next to his best four-legged friend and rubs his head, whispering "Message received." in those big ears. Once again, it seems like Heimdall understands. The dog retreats to his own bed for a short nap.
While he sleeps, Geoffrey explains to Caroline what he found.
"You love your dog so much. I guess that's one of the many reasons I love you." Caroline gives him a quick kiss. "I'll make the dinner. Go have fun with your doofy dog."
When Heimdall wakes, Geoffrey herds him into the car for the first stop on this bucket list tour. Heimdall immediately brightens up at the sight of the ball launcher. For a dog of his years, only the lowest setting can be used. True, Heimdall misses more balls than he catches, but he brings all the balls back to Geoffrey eventually. The loving licks across his face tell Geoffrey that this is the right thing to do.
When they get home, Caroline has prepared the meal. A plate for her and Geoffrey and a bowlful of steak with cognac and mushrooms for Heimdall. For the first time in a long time, Heimdall eats like a king.
Geoffrey shakes the teddy bear with the little bell in it to bring Heimdall to him. Heimdall trots over, tired from the playing, full from the dinner and extremely happy. His tail wags slowly as Geoffrey places the teddy bear between his paws.
Geoffrey leans down, listening to Heimdall's breathing, never once moving from that position. The old dog looks up with a goofy grin and bright eyes, and in that moment, he breathes his last.
"Thank you, Heimdall. Thank you for thirteen great years." Geoffrey whispers, checking one last time for signs of life.
"Caroline, he's gone." Geoffrey says, looking up at his wife.
"Why aren't you sad?" she asks, offering him a hand so he can stand up off the dog mat.
"Because aside from you, Heimdall was my best friend. I'm happy that I got to give him what he wished for."
Caroline turns off the lights. "We'll bury him in an hour, Geoffrey. If you need to talk about it, I'm always here for you."