"What are all those lights, mommy?" Mercy asked. She held on to her mother's hand.
"Sixty years ago, they were stars. I don't really know what they are now. Most of them are satellites, I think. A few of them are space stations. You see the ones moving over there. The quick ones. They're part of the security grid. They protect us from the Lunarians." She said, taking a seat in the sand beside her daughter.
"What are Lunarians?" Mercy asked, squinting one eye closed as she considered the term.
"They're the men and women living on the moon. Two hundred years ago, scientist created cities on the moon to serve as labs." She explained. "Now, they want to destroy us."
"Are they bad people, mommy?" Mercy asked, staring with wide-eye wonder at the sparkling panoramic view above the sea.
"I want to say yes, but the truth is, they're just scientist. They want to learn. There were us who wanted to stay behind when NASA started colonizing. We want to keep Earth intact. They want to blow it up, and everyone on it."
"So, they're bad?" Mercy said, phrasing it as a question, but really just looking for comformation.
"They're bad, baby. They hollowed out the moon. See the moon over there?" She asked.
"I see it, mommy." Mercy crowed, pointing a crooked finger at the bright silver orb on the horizon.
"It's not a moon anymore. The Lunarians have turned it into a space station. They made it so it can travel through space. The only problem is, they need to destroy Earth to break it free. The military built the security grid around the planet to protect our satellites and communications from the Lunarians. They can't come home ever again." She said with a sad smirk.
"Can't they just say they're sorry?" Mercy asked. Her mother kissed her brow.
"If only it were that easy, sweetheart." She said. She looked up and felt a dismal dread. She had never wanted to travel into space, but just knowing that grid was there made her feel trapped. Knowing you're in a cage is probably worse then living in one.
"I don't like it, mommy." Mercy told her with a frown. "We should all be friends." She kissed her daughters brow again.
"I love how you think." She whispered, tickling her daughter to make her smile.
"Look, mommy. A falling star." Mercy shouted, coming to her feet.
"OH MY GOD!" Mercy's mother screamed, hugging her daughter in fear. She watched the security grid light up. She watched the flares of exploding rockets on the horizon as the security grid destroyed them, but it wasn't those that filled her with dread. It was the slow streaking arc of the rocket that made it through. The rocket descending toward them.
"Look, Mommy. It's coming over here. Can I catch it?" Mercy pleaded.
She hugged her daughter close and shielded her from the explosion she knew was about to take place.
"I love you, sweety." She whispered into her daughter's ear.
"I love you too, m --" She never got finish.