The master stood in a black robe, dark winds blowing through the street. Dark mana was giving their hands an ethereal quality. They knew who it was. The master of the dark keep, the ruler of the land. As she walked through the streets the air became cool, itchy. Her reputation proceeded her through dozens of cities, and they all knew what terrors would come forth from her hands.
Everyone smiled. The fervor rose throughout the whole city as they all began to feel the itchy tingle of the dark, the manipulative energy surrounding the master. Everyone cheered.
For beyond the edge of the city, upon a hill, was their opponent. Though it was noon, behind their enemy was a light as bright as the sun. From his footsteps rose flowers and the grass of life. The mana that grew a halo around him, an aura of every color of the rainbow, shined upon his elvish features. This was the usurper.
And city after city fell before him. Armies fell. Wizards fell. The city of Almorath was now a flooded fortress inhabited by sentient trees and rotting corpses. The city of Korin-Awar was the burial ground of vines, choking the life out of farmers. The beautiful crystal city of Yuli was crushed, the sparkles now covered by the petals of roses and lillies. These cities were all manned by powerful wizards. The battles were long, but very few survived such an onslought. The usurper, the conquerer, the beautiful elf killed not hundreds, but thousands. Thousands upon thousands. His life magic left no prisoners, and it left nothing ever created by the hands of a rival.
The majority of the survivors left for the necromancers keep. She was a prodigy, creating ghosts and shades when she was barely an apprentice. She was young, stout, short. When she was barely 20, the master ritual of dark masters was done in the public square - where she sucked the lifeforce from her master, absorbing the previous masters connection the the dark realm. She, alone, would be their savior.
And they cheered. And they hoped. And in the quiet, in the dark, in the scared buildings on the edge of the city they prepared to leave. For the beautiful one, who brought rainbows and death wherever he walked, came forth. None, they thought, could stop the monster. Not even their hero.
---- -
I'm motivated, so look forward to a continuation - to the battle!