Claw scratches are left on the inside of the tiny viewing window which was in the top of the door. The sound of a miniature window breaking was surprisingly quiet, stress on the glass then fragments tinkling on the tiled treatment room floor. Nothing compared to my screech:
"I'm not scared of you!"
My ringing voice echoes through the halls of the hospital, disturbing no one normal, I'm sure. The darkness of an 11pm winters night makes it a spooky side. If I yelled a second time, then that stern veteran of a nurse would come and shut me up. I know it.
But, it may help to see another person, since I know I am delusional, could an interaction with reality help?
I have to face my fears.
When I first felt weak and nauseous and not all right, I was worried, anxious and obsessed over it. When it came into the light, obviously cancer, though a battery of tests was required. I took it in stride, I was diligent in hiding my fears from family and taking all the visits and performances from others in stride, as well as I possibly could. I'm gonna be a survivor.
But the hideous form I saw pass my door? That broke my window? What could it be? I know it's a monster. What do I do though? Blood pressure through the roof, drugs racing through me, all part of treatment that makes me weaker, but not crazy. It's in my lungs, not my head, I have the documented proof for goodness'sake.
I throw off the covers of the itchy sterilized bed sheet and stand, I am in just my robe from home, better than the hospital gown.
As I inch to the door, I find I can't even look much out the window, I just see the door to another ward straight across, and its dark in the hall. Mustering all my courage I tentatively open the door, ready to pull it shut straight away. (It doesn't have a lock, why doesn't it have a lock?)
I walk in the direction that I think it went. I have nothing else but my slippers.
I absently grab a random standing drip pole, intravenous thing.
My stare is focused on the end of the hall. Instead of a normal hospital corridor it looks like an open black space, almost like a portal but I see no edges. I realize that the shadow monster is standing next to it, in the darkness.
I pick up speed, trailing the pole.
It looks like the monster is beckoning with some long talon hand, the one that broke my window. Its dark claw lifts and extends behind it, readying to slash me to ribbons. There is a pull towards ending it all.
I start screaming, "I'm not coming with you, I'm not going, I'm not scared!"
There is no face on the monster, within a few feet of the end of the world I swing with the pole and catch its middle, the recoil is fierce and the monster is forced back.
Whether it's the adrenaline or the fear, I don't know, but I keep beating it, beating the pole against whatever resistance I can find in the pitch black delusion.
Suddenly it is only the night and its dimness that I am seeing, and not the end of an abyss. I forced it out, somehow. The intravenous device is ruined, and I toss it onto the floor. Nothing else is disturbed, except for my brain and my shaking body.
Back in bed I know I won't sleep all night, that's not good for the recovery, not good for the tests and nurses, but I did something to save myself, maybe one day I'll sleep again. The battle with cancer is going on no matter what, so let whatever monsters come after me.