Many ancient scholars speculated that *if* the universe is a computer program, life should never, under any circumstances, know this fact, for *if* it ever figured it out, modern civilization would instantly crumble. Of course, those scholars never went a step ahead to see the ultimate truth; That *if* the universe is a computer program, the only reasonable explanation for its existence would be that it is a videogame. This is why, when Alexander Wilfery conquered the world as the first emperor of a unified humanity, the first thing he did was turn off the PvP. No more murder, no more wars, and no more boxing matches, because honestly, those *'matches'* were only rigged events organized for the singular purpose of betting.
Alexander Wilfery was a polarizing figure on Earth...to say the least. Some would argue that he was a tyrant, imposing his will unto humanity without the right to do so. Others would argue that being the only human with access to the source code technically granted him the right to do as he pleased. A third, small, but vocal group of people would say:
"Yes, okay, he can do whatever he wants, but why'd he have to take our boxing?"
His actions definitely influenced history for centuries to come, shifting the economy from one of service labor to a flourishing utopia of science and arts. One profession in particular, assassination, thrived in this new world due to its rare and difficult nature. Turning off the PvP didn't make humans immortal, only harder to kill. Now, instead of letting the thrilling anticipation of murder overtake them, assassins had to be trained from birth to repress their intent. Fortunately for the old families that already practiced the art of killing, this came extremely easy, since they already implemented this in their training. Unfortunately for Alexander Wilfery, the nurse administering his flu-shot was one of said assassins.
Sitting atop the doctor's table, Alexander slouched and pouted. He wasn't afraid of shots, he just wasn't a fan of them. His hands weren't shaking out of nervousness, they were just shaking out of exasperation...or boredom. When the nurse flicked the needle with her finger, he didn't gulp because the purple liquid seemed menacing, he gulped because his throat was dry.
"Lord Emperor..." said the nurse, "you seem on edge right now. Is something bothering you?"
"N-no, I'm just stressed from all the things I have to do this afternoon." He extended his arm. "Please, lets get on with this."
"As you wish, my lord."
The nurse grabbed Alexander's wrist and placed the needle on his skin, right before Alexander squealed and pulled his arm away. The woman's eyes widened with fear, backing away from the Emperor a few steps. She then said:
"Did I do something wrong?!? How did you kno-"
"No, no!" Alexander waved his hands in denial. "Forgive me, nurse, it was instinct. You didn't say you were inserting the needle, so it startled me."
The nurse fixed her shirt and said:
"Okay, Lord Emperor. This time, I'll warn you right before I do it."
Alexander nodded and the nurse grabbed his arm again. She then moved the needle slowly towards his vein, warning him once it was near, only to have Alexander push her away. The nurse's mouth gaped open, staring at the needle in her hand and back at a sheepish Alexander Wilfery.
"Listen," said Alexander, "you're gonna have to stab me with it, okay?"
"Oka- wait, what?"
"You'll have to force the shot unto me. My rational mind knows it can't harm me, but my body just won't let it enter. I'm sorry, I know this is strange, but can you oblige this strange request?"
The nurse grinned and dashed at Alexander, who dodged her by rolling away. She then leaped at him, doing a stabbing motion with the syringe five times, though Alexander evaded all of them fluidly. The nurse, breathing heavily, finally wrestled Alexander to the ground and, laughing maniacally, manged to connect with the needle. Afterwards, her laughter faded into a worried sigh. The needle was bent. It didn't pierce Alexander's skin. The Emperor quickly called for his guards, who flooded the room before the assassin could get away. Restraining her from behind, they inspected her and found a golden necklace of two fighting gloves.
"The Boxing Federation..." said Alexander. "So they finally made their move, huh?"
From this point on, assassination attempts on Alexander's life would become a rare occurrence. Everyone thought he was an omnipotent being, capable of sensing even the slightest of intents. His rule would go on for centuries, and his empire would last for thousands of years more. Of course, no one would dare to think that all of this fame only came to him because of his crippling fear of needles.
------------------------------------ -
> If you enjoyed this, you can check out more of my stories over at /r/WeirdEmoKidStories!