The air was heavy and foul. An unnatural stink that permeated the whole room, that seemed to emanate from every object. It overwhelmed and consumed all the synthetic and sterilized smells you would expect from a laboratory. It was enough to make anyone not used to it retch. And most times it was enough even for someone who is. Reed was getting used to it, but still he couldn't help it. He stood next to the machine, leaning on the desk and it letting all out on the pristine white floor.
He opened the windows and grabbed a lungful of fresh air. As fresh as can be at the wreckage of a city filled with nothing but corpses. This smell Reed had already become used to. What a sad state of affairs, he reflected. But it actually made sense. Human death, after all, is more commonplace, and more natural, than time travel.
As he regained his senses proper and leaned back on a chair, it dawned on him. It did not work. As the empty streets outside testified, as the smell of corpses should have made obvious, it did not work. The head of a rebel state and catalyst to the second most devastating war humankind had ever seen, killed as a baby, and still the nukes had launched.
Anthony Reed was still the only human left alive on Mars.
---------------------------------------------------
He went back to the drawing board. If preventing the greatest dictator Mars had ever seen from living past his sixth month couldn't stop the war, what could? Maybe preventing the rebel party from ever coming into existence? But how would he accomplish that, how do you kill an idea? Bronn hadn't been the only one with rebel ideals, the only one who wanted to turn a world into their image through military might. He had simply been the one with the most power and influence among them. He had been the tip of the iceberg, and Reed had merely shaved it off. He needed to think bigger.
The second Martian World War had been the result of limited resources. Mankind had done their best in terraforming and efficiently colonizing Mars, but the planet had limitations. It always would have, and humanity's needs would only increase as both population and standards increased. Mars was a doomed project, a bad idea. A flawed solution to the real problem – the loss of earth to the machines.
Reed pulled out the holofiles about the old world. They contained all the knowledge the human race had amassed during their stay on earth. The machine could displace you in space as well as time, but it needed an exact location and has range limitations. Reed input the intended geotemporal coordinates and calculated the next time the old world would be close enough to Mars to be in the machines Spatial range. Two weeks.
-------------------------------------------------------- -
This time he had chosen his target to be ten years old. Harder on the boy, on his family and, by this age, his friends aswell… but easier on Reed. Murdering a baby had not been easy. But to his dismay, neither had been murdering a ten year old boy.
Reed wanted to explore this old world, this fabled Earth. With blue skies and green fields, it was such a strange place. But his desire to see the human race saved from annihilation was stronger than his whims. The creator of the murderous artificial intelligence that deemed the best path to world peace to be the extermination of the human race was a limp bloody mass in his arms. He placed the boy down and set the device on his wrist to pull himself back in the time axis alone, to the anchor he had created before departure, then sealed his exoskeleton suit. When traveling through time it was hard to guess the conditions in which the destination point was in. The exosuit protected its contents from almost everything the universe could throw at it.
When he arrived he thought he might have accidentally pulled himself back through space as well and was back in a nuclear wasteland Mars. But that wouldn't make sense, without the AI revolution humanity would never even need to leave their perfect planet. No, this was earth… A nuclear ravaged earth. Without a superior enemy to decimate them, humanity had decimated itself. Even with a planet capable of producing all the resources it could ever need, humanity had exterminated themselves. Why?
-------------------------------------------------------------------
Bronn. Urza. Janos. Hypertron. Kim Jong-Un. Hitler. Genghis Khan. Anthony Reed had killed them all and more in their youth. The result was always and invariably the same. Humanity self-destruct. Reed was left depressed and disgusted. He travelled back to a time when humanity didn't yet exist and disengaged his exosuit helmet. The stink of time travel hit his nostrils, but Reed didn't flinch. Nothing could disgust him more than his own humanity then.