**Sunday Morning** [Slightly NSFW]
Her soft brown hair smells wonderful with her head resting on your shoulders. She is comfortably asleep in your arms as the sun toast the sheets and the cool breeze accentuates her lovely fragrance. Her arm rest gently across your chest and warm to the touch. She wraps on of her smooth legs around you and drags herself a little closer. There are few moments in life that can compare when a man realizes how lucky he is to be lying in bed with the woman he loves in his arms. She slowly opens her big beautiful brown eyes and smiles at the first sight of you.
You smile back and whispers to her, "Good morning, sunshine".
Hiding her blush behind the sheets she looks up and says, "I love it when you call me that".
You've been together for a few years already and still smile like fools when you see each other. It's not very traditional but the girl decides to make the first move then and there to take it to the next step. She's been planning for this day for months. Going over and over in her head about the details of how she is going to go about it. This just seems like a perfect moment for her. She leans to the side to take something out of the drawer. You have no idea what's going to happen next. She is excited and very nervous. But has no doubt in her mind that it's what she wants to do.
"Babe, close your eyes", she says.
You smile softly and complies not expecting what's going to come next.
With one sharp snap, she cuts off, your manhood with a large pair of scissor. You look down and it's no longer there but instead replaced with blood and empty space. You scream in horror and pain as you jump back from the blood soaked sheets. She looks at you menacingly, completely satisfied with the results. You back away in terror; confused and pale. Slowly things turn black and you begin to faint. With your penis in her hand, she lies back in bed, rolling around in inexplicable bliss.
Edit: this is probably the most disturbing thing I've ever written.