I sat down waiting for him to come by. It's probably going to be another boring conversation talking about some horrible topic which will never benefit any of us in the long run. Oh, here he comes, with his ridiculous smile on his face, and slumped sholdires.
"How are you. Tavel?" He extends his hand as if I am supposed to shake it. He waits for a second then sits down.
"I can't believe that you actually came," I say, watching his eyes dart around the room unfocused.
"Why wouldn't I"
"Because you're a coward" Everyone who saw him knew it. "You're afraid to write anything, to make anything, You are wasting your endless creative talent sitting in your room wishing you could be me" I had cut him deep, and that was worth it.
"And you"
"Admittedly, I have not done much with my life but at least I am doing something. Sure no fancy hotels, or names in the newspapers, but I can afford going to the Bahamas every year, something you will never achieve"
"Why is that?"
"Because, I am focused, I am risk taking and I am more grounded in reality than you will ever be" Just watching his face churn gave me pleasure. "You think your silly Bible can get you somewhere in life. It's ludicrous"
He smiled, looked down at the ground and returned his glance at me "I can see why you would think that. You do have success, fortune, and power, but you are empty"
"Empty," I ask
"Empty and stupid. That's not bad, mind you, but it does allow this pride to get in the way"
"Fair point, but do you think you're smarter than me"
"Definitely more satisfied"
"How" I yell "Because you can dream up all you could ever want because you never needed to take the initiative because you grew up as a white male in a decent home. You had every advantage given to you, and you did nothing with is, so I deserve what I have gotten"
"I think we're done here," He says with a grim expression
"I am not the coward here" I yell to him as he walks away "I am better than you will ever be" He doesn't even look back. "At least I don't have to justify my speciality by claiming I'm a pedophile" That got him to look back. A tear wells up in his eye, and he runs away. The grin on my face slowly grows into a smile, then I start laughing. I may lack creativity or satisfaction, but I am successful on my own merits, and I don't need anyone else to help me.
"Damn you" I whisper under my breath "Damn you and your infernal control over our body"