"Em, what's wrong?"
She wouldn't say a word. The portal dissipated behind her, but she stood there, unmoving. If it weren't for the rapid rising and falling of her chest, I'd have thought I was staring at a hallucination, born from the intense longing I'd had for my friend.
Her wide, terrified eyes had scared me at first, but recounting the past four years of her absence let me break through the wall of awkwardness. My eyes welled with tears. She was gone--my best friend since we were in diapers--for four whole years and everyone was convinced she would never come back. How could I *not* immediately want to hug her to death and threaten to never let go? I went over and put my arms up to do just that.
Instead of accepting the embrace and sobbing it out, though, Emily ran out of the room, jumped down the stairs, and left me looking like an idiot with my arms in airplane formation. After some shock, I zoomed after her.
"Hey, Emily, come back!"
I docked myself at the kitchen just as she reached for the fridge. She yanked it open like She-Hulk ripping out a beating heart, nearly taking the handle with her. It was then that I noticed she was really, really angry. Like, the last time she was this pissed was when I stuffed ice cubes down her bra during a sleepover.
"You..."
Finally. That was the first word she said...but it wasn't directed at me. She took something yellow, leafy, and prickly out of the fridge.
A pineapple?
"Go to hell!"
With that, she dropped the unassuming fruit onto the floor and trampled it underfoot. She growled and stomped like a horse possessed. I was lost for words, watching fresh produce being murdered in my kitchen.
"Em, what the fuck are you doing to my food," I finally said.
She halted her weird mosh pit and ran over to me. Now her eyes were narrowed and eyebrows arched as she grabbed me by the collar.
"Liz, you've gotta listen to me." With our faces so close she was practically spitting on me, I had no choice but to listen. She continued. "I came from the future."
Slowly, I nodded. I mean, I'd just watched her step out of a portal. How could anything else push my suspension of disbelief further?
"Okay...and what did you see in the future?"
"See this?"
She pointed down at the slushied remains of the pineapple I bought half-price a day earlier, stomping her foot one more time as if to prove a point.
"*These* are our enemies."
I looked at her. Then to the pineapple. Then back to her.
"Pineapples?"
"Yes."
"Pineapples are our enemies?"
"Yes."
"In the future?"
"Yes!"
"But...*pineapples*?"
"Yes! For fuck's sakes, are you gonna make me repeat that all day?"
I wanted to say "Yes, 'cause no matter how many times you say it, you sound like you just got off the loony bin." But the fire in her eyes told me to back down.
Seeing that I believed her, Emily grabbed some paper towels and my sponge and thoroughly scrubbed both her feet and the floor free of the tropical debris. She did it vigorously, like she was warding off all remains of Satan's blood or something. I was completely silent the whole time, watching her go through the process.
"It all started with a mutation signal being sent out to all pineapples across the Earth," she said after we were seated. "It caused the enzymes in pineapples to go all haywire. You know how pineapple's really sour?"
"Yeah," I said, still unsure of how I should be reacting.
"Well, that's because the juices in pineapples contain enzymes like the ones in our stomachs. So when you eat one, it's also eating you."
I nodded in understanding.
"Thing is, the mutation strengthened those enzymes about a thousand-fold. Now just touching a slice of pineapple allows the thing to devour you whole. And because of the mutation, the pineapples' metabolism also evolved and allowed them to merge our DNA with their own."
I thought for a second. "Wait, you don't mean..."
Emily stared me dead in the eyes. "It's exactly what you're thinking. They became intelligent, self-aware pineapple humanoids."
I wanted to laugh at the idea of a fucking pineapple with arms and legs, but the spooky vibe Emily gave it made me shiver instead.
"By the time it was broadcast internationally, it was already too late. The Prickly Ones, as they like to be called, declared war on human civilization. Since they were spread all over the world and all over towns and cities, they quickly won. What remained of humanity fled to the Arctic, since the Prickly Ones hadn't adjusted to such extreme cold yet. But they will eventually."
My head was spinning. "This is insane. You said this all started 'cause someone sent out a signal to start the mutation. Who would do that?"
Emily shook her head. "That isn't important, and it's too late to go searching for them now. After seeing it with my own eyes, I traveled back to the past so I could stop this mess."
Well, now this was starting to make sense to me. Just a little. "Oh, really? And what's your plan?"
"We have to inform people right away. Get this info on the news, Twitter, Facebook, I don't care as long as the world can see it. We'll ask everyone to gather up all of the pineapples in their area and dump them into a hole in the ground."
I scratched my chin curiously. "Sounds good, but we can't just leave them lying in the ground. What then?"
"We get people to drive their cars into the pineapple stashes."
"And then?" I glared at her, wide-eyed.
"And then..."
Emily licked her lips.
"It's smoothie time."