{019992773801813-2849387010-10289000566892873}
01879: It has been 1,879 cycles since the incident left the ship disabled without the lightspeed drive, leaving me alone and limping painfully slow through the rural landscape of the Cordiva Galaxy. My hopes of being rescued dwindle each day, as the likelihood of the wormhole which brought me to this galaxy collapsing grows. I'm beginning to believe that my survival may depend on finding refuge elsewhere, with one of the Type 0 civilizations that has been mapped out to live within range.
01923: It's official. I'm stuck in rural Cordiva with no lightspeed drive and no wormhole back to Garchen. I watched the wormhole collapse in spectacular fashion not long ago. I now have no choice but to boot up the lecterometer in search of transmissions from one of the nearby planets. Normally I'd be cautious about doing so, as this will effectively transmit my location to all local inhabitants, however I believe that there are few if any predatory peoples in this particular space. Now I play the waiting game to see what signals I pick up and lock on to their origin. Hopefully, the translator is able to decipher patterns in any transmissions and allow me to communicate with the transmitting species.
01927: Breakthrough! After a few cycles with no luck on the lecterometer, I remembered that infantile beings likely wouldn't have that technology yet - and would likely rely on simple radio signals. I fired up the relic radio which has probably never been used on this ship and up to this point, I hadn't understood why it would even be here. I received an overwhelming number of signals that all originated nearby, on the 3rd body of a yellow dwarf. The translator has found a commonality in many of the transmissions, which I believe to be the predominant language of the species. This is both good news and bad news - The good news being that I can hopefully craft a message that they'll be able to understand. The bad news is that they are young enough to still utilize multiple languages. When a civilization has yet to organize itself on one scale, they likely are still violent towards one another. If they're violent among their own on the small rock they call home - I likely represent an existential threat to them. I'll need to be cautious in my message. This could be the first contact they've had with an intellect besides themselves.
01928: The message has been sent. Decoding and translating 19874TTs of data suggested that the most effective message to portray my predicament and my peaceful plea for refuge was "SOS. Extra-terrestrial being in need of refuge. I come in peace. Will arrive shortly. Please withhold weapons." In any case, I'm almost in visual range of the planet and should be able to view surface activity shortly. Guidance has me landing in 2 cycles if all goes well.
01929: I can see them! While I've yet to receive a radio transmission directed at me (as far as I can sort through the mess), I'm now able to see surface movement. Most of the the planet is covered in [water], and the life appears to be carbon-based, just as it is on Garthen. The beings seem to move - a lot. I can see what seems to be hundreds of thousands of them gathering in large spaces. Their surface transportation network looks perpetually clogged, with few of the millions of vehicles able to move. I can't be sure that they've received my message, so I have it re-sending every 1/10th of a cycle. There's no indication of any rescue mission approaching me - even though I have sent my coordinates and trajectory. Therefore my plan is to land on the planet, which is much too inept to have any sort of atmospheric shield. Tomorrow's the day I finally get out of this ship!
01930: I'm in final approach, but it appears that my landing may not be necessary. Even though I've yet to find a radio response, I've noticed some activity that looks like a rescue operation. About 5-10 vehicles have leapt through the planet's atmosphere, and appear to be heading straight for me. I'm not familiar with the technology in use, although it appears to be rocket propulsion. As I watch the vehicles approach, I'm curious as to how they are going to decelerate. They're approaching much quicker than our safety protocols would allow - but perhaps they're planning a flyby maneuver. Any moment now I should be in the presence of this young species. I hope that I can provide some useful knowledge and information to help them mature and grow, and perhaps even begin a Stage 1 interplanetary relati--- END OF LOG
[Translated by U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency from debris recovered from ETV1 - 2/2/33 - PERMANENTLY CLASSIFIED]