"Shit. You see me, don't you?"
Thomas's mouth refused to move as he watched the tall cloaked figure. Everything felt cold and clammy. This was it. He knew this was it.
"Look don't freak out...just...pretend I'm not here!" Death said while waving his hand in front of his shadow that refused to reveal a face in any light.
"I...it's not my time...I don't—" Thomas was cut off.
"Calm down! You might be old but you only came here for a kidney stone for Christ's sake! Must have been a pretty big one if you can see me!" Death laughed feebly.
Thomas's fear had not fully melted away, but had fused with his confusion and curiosity to form butterflies that pressed and ached in his stomach.
Thomas finally found the words, "Th-thank you?"
"So...Thomas right? And no, I don't know everything. I do know everything about anything in my general vicinity. It's pretty useful. And generally annoying considering how many useless things I walk by on a daily basis," Death rambled, pausing awkwardly and staring at Thomas searchingly.
"I'm sorry, but have we met before? Oh right! Your Aunt Agnes! Quite sorry about that, didn't mean to take her at dinner, she just clearly wanted to leave and nearly jumped into my arms once she saw me. Your mother's cooking must have got to her!" Death gave up on jokes after this.
"I...why are you here? Is someone dying?" Thomas asked, his curiosity getting the better of him.
"Well, yes but that's just my day job. The Night Guy will get those ones," Death said wearily.
"It's a thankless job, really. I help prevent overpopulation and make sure you don't have to support all the incurably sick and wounded and half of you are terrified of me! I mean, double that for the Night Guy, but I don't really blame them. He can be a bit intimidating with the scythe and all," Death went on.
"Okay...so why are you here?" Thomas questioned, growing slightly more comfortable in the casualness of this unforeseen and supposed-to-be-unseen visitor.
"It's my hobby. Hospitals are great for it," he said.
"What hobby?" Thomas did not know what kind of hobby Death would have.
After a short pause, Death spoke, "You know what, it'll be easier to show you."
Suddenly Thomas was on his feet looking at his body.
"OH GOD I—"
"No you're not! God, you're squeamish! I just thought the nurses would find it weird if you were walking around at 2AM talking to yourself after having a kidney stone. So I took your soul out. Temporarily," Death said as he calmingly patted him on the back.
"Temporarily?"
"Temporarily."
"Let's go! I don't want to miss it!" Death said, gitty and excited.
______
Thomas and Death came to a small room labelled 4b. Thomas could only imagine what was inside: open heart surgeries, mangled limbs, dusty old men who might as well be corpses.
The door opened to a woman holding a crying baby. Death walked into the room, through the door silently. Thomas followed, half terrified, half curious.
"There, there honey," the woman said as the baby cried, "it's okay. I know. I know."
The baby's whines soon disappeared as she held the now sleeping child in her arms.
And for the first time, Thomas saw the eyes of Death. They were green. A very normal but bright green.
"So far away from me. It's beautiful, isn't it?" He said as part of the shadow of his face seemed to contort in what Thomas could only assume was a smile.
Thomas replied, "Yeah. Yeah it's beautiful."
They sat there in silence for a while until finally, Death turned to Thomas and said, "Well Thomas, it's been nice but you need to get back to your body before someone higher up, or down low for that matter, notices. It's been nice talking. Maybe I'll see you again, outside of work, I mean."
______
And with that, Thomas awoke the next day feeling oddly fulfilled from that strange, vivid dream he had.
_____
Edit: Man, everyone loves my Death! I'm thinking I should write more about him!
Edit 2: I decided to make a subreddit to post my stories in, since reddit has a nice format for what I want to do. http: //www.reddit.com/r/lifeofdeath
Feel free to check it out! I'll be writing more soon!