There went another butterfly. It was the most beautiful one I had seen yet. It's wings were a shimmery gold. The very edges of the wings looked like small, feathered black strokes and in the center of each wing was what looked like a single red crimson raindrop.
It was breathtaking and I needed to know what species it was and where it came from. So I googled it.
Nothing.
There didn't seem to be anything about a gold butterfly so...did I imagine it? I couldn't see how that was possible. Ten years later and I still remembered that butterfly more vividly than anything. I had decided to dedicate my entire life to researching butterflies and I had one of the biggest collections in the world. I was *determined* to find that golden butterfly.
Three years ago I received an invitation:
*" Dear Mrs. Fiasco, *
*We, the United States Research Foundation of Lepidoptera, are hereby cordially inviting you do conduct research in Tuvalu. You would be the first person to ever go there. This is a great honor and we sincerely hope you accept. If you do, please pack your bags immediately and be at Gate 9 of your airport by 8:00 am tomorrow morning. "*
I accepted their invitation, immediately packed my bags and went to Gate 9. There was a translator waiting for me with my ticket and the flight over was fairly smooth sailing.
Then I arrived in Tuvalu. There are no hotels, no cars, not even real houses there. It's a broken third world country, deprived of most means of survival. But it was absolutely breathtaking. There were butterflies everywhere. Millions of them! Most of them I had never even seen before and they were all different!
I thought I would never leave. I wanted to stay there for the rest of my life and just watch them, draw them, research them. I was fascinated by this Pacific Island.
My translator and I forged our way into the capitol "city" where we found children in filthy rags sitting on the ground, laughing and generally enjoying themselves.
I was curious. What could have the children so happy when they literally had nothing? We approached the children who seemed eager to show their game to us, to me in particular as I was something new and exciting to them.
They had paint in bowls made out of clay and mud. Their brushes were made out of twigs, leaves and grass. It was honestly cute.
And then I saw them.
Moths. Moths everywhere. The children were grabbing the moths, painting them, and releasing them into the air. They weren't real butterflies.
I was amazed, yet horrified. I went home as soon as possible, telling the Research Federation that I needed a few days of examining our own butterflies before I could reveal my findings in Tuvalu.
Those few days turned into weeks which turned into months which finally turned into a full year. I had locked myself away, frantically studying every single butterfly I could find. It just wasn't possible.
But it was.
Butterflies didn't exist. They were moths painted by those children.
I did some more research about Tuvalu. There was a very elite class of people, fifteen families all together. Those families made money off of those children painting and releasing butterflies. The more that I dug, the more I uncovered.
No wonder that golden butterfly had crimson teardrops.