"Sir? You're patched into the Global -Sat Feed. Just press the yellow button when you're ready to speak"
"Thank you, Lieutenant…Thank you,...James" The Commander, breaking protocol offered a salute to his still boyishly handsome second in command who smiled at the gesture before returning it.
"Its been an honor, sir"
The Commander nodded and looked up once more at the overhead telemetry readings. The gravity wells over Jupiter had failed. That only left a thin ring of horizon displacement wave generators and the sparse remnants of the Falcon Strike squad and the battered but still space worthy Enterprise –the last of their two thousand battle cruiser fleet.
Meanwhile a pulsing red orb near Mars represented the still growing in size Maleki-War Wake-Trying to take the fight to them had failed. Their mastery of FTL technology had enabled them to distort our probability drives causing the entire fleet to vanish without a single shot being fired. One million of Earth's finest, gone in an instant.
Commander Hadron returned his gaze to the yellow button for a few seconds before engaging the comm.
"Citizens of Earth- This is Commander Rusak-leader of the Hadron Legions. The gravity wells which have long protected us from previous Xenotype incursions have been destroyed.
We have also lost contact with the entire Battle-cruiser fleet.
They were our last, best hope in fending off these invaders.
At this moment our remaining forces are pulling back from the outer regions to form a defensive ring around our home planet while the enemy gathers its forces in high orbit above Mars.
We have made several attempts to establish communications with The Maleki but as usual our hails have gone unanswered.
My friends, a long shadow now hangs over the entirety of humanity but we shall not tremble in the face of this imminent danger.
The people of Earth have danced on the precipice of extinction more times than I can count...only to rebound stronger, wiser and more prosperous.
From our first steps out of the depths of the ocean to our ascent to the tree tops and now… to the furthest reaches of known space… we have met every challenge head on, our desire for knowledge and understanding burning the fear from our hearts.
I have long thought that to possess consciousness is the greatest gift this Universe can bestow to its inhabitants. What we choose to do with it is how we define ourselves as a people. We now know we weren't the first nor will we be the last to be given this wondrous ability to contemplate our place amongst the stars.
If this is how we must end our tenure as "stardust given life" then I do so proudly without a single regret.
A million years from now when some other species makes its journey to the stars, if they should happen upon our world they will find the faint traces of a brave and majestic race who did not cower in the face of the unknown.
So I ask you now, every man, woman and child -How will the tapestry of time record your last deeds?
Me? …When they dig me up, I want them to find my petrified hands wrapped around the throat of one of these sons a bitches.
Rusak, out"