The Swedes were once thought of as great friends of the Empire. We traded luxury resources, the two leaders even officially declared their friendship for each other. For centuries, Swedes served in the imperial guard, the vaeragers.
But after hundreds of years of peace and friendship they betrayed us. They attacked Antioch from the southeast. Our Army, while noumerous was out of Position, positioned to the northeast against the empire's archenemy, Polynesia.
The attack came swiftly. With seemingly endless numbers, the entire imperial Army was swept aside, and Antioch was taken. They turned their greedy gaze towards Adrianople next. The City could match even the imperial capital in terms of Population. Theodora issued a statement that the City must be defended at every cost.
The production of the entire Empire were shifted to producing military Units. Armories were errected throughout the lands, and the sizeable cash reserves of the empire were used to recruit merceneries.
The line Held, and the Swedes were pushed back. Peace talks were initiated, but the Swedes demanded Adrianople. Instead a counterattack was initiated.
After decades of bombardment and significant losses, the City was retaken for the Empire. But the Swedes too brought up more and more Forces, and soon took the City back. The stubborn General sitting bull that had led the Charge demanded to remain in the City as it fell, and perished.
But with great loss of life, the City was retaken yet again, its shattered Walls no longer an obstacle. To help defend it, experimantal Gatling Guns were pushed to the front lines, and they proved to be effective. It was another few years until the Swedes finally retreated.
The City, once the young but hopeful gem of the Empire, was devestated. Sack after Sack the Population dwindled, and now was reduced to next to nothing. Another peace summit achieved nothing.
After consolidating their Forces, Theodora now launched the counterattack. The Workshops of the Empire had now turned into efficient factories, and more and more new weapons were invented and brought to the frontlines. The war that was begun with Pikes, crossbows and Trebuches was now waged with rifled muskets, cannons and gatling guns.
After taking another City, the Swedes finally gave in. The Empire not just regained Antioch, but also expanded. The War lasted 300 years.
But the future was uncertain, and the Empire has bled much. While technologically superior to the Swedes, the Empire was behind the leaders. Immediatly to the east, the old archenemy of Polynesia was still threatening the Empire. In the far east, new powers were rising: Rome, the "true" Empire, trapmled it's enemies. Germany was at the head of Innovation of every kind. The Inca established a colony right at the doorstep of the Empire. To the South, the Swedes began playing friendly again, but were still not to be trusted.