"Urghhhh.. Umphh.. AH!"
Pushing open a front door that has two fresh corpses lying against it is not an easy task. Made harder by the fact that the middle aged lady corpse was morbidly obese.
"At least being dead will do her figure some good." thought James. "What an inconveniance! Certainly not a task suitable to a beautiful Tuesday morning."
James squeezed his skinny frame out of the front door and carefully stepped around the bodies. He wasn't particulary upset by the site of the dead bodies - after all death was just a part of life. The very last part. He didn't like the smell much though. Or the inconvenience the dead could cause. In particular he couldn't understand suicidal people who could be so rude as to jump right in front of a train as their choice of fatality. The delays they caused! Didn't they care?
James had already left a message on the emergency services answer machine to come and collect the bodies and so felt he had done his duty. Bit strange they hadn't actually answered the phone line, he had thought.
He walked around the corner and saw a large red vehicle that instantly lofted his spirits.
"Ah ha some good luck this morning! The bus is actually waiting at the stop. Incredible!"
James hurried over to the stop. The door was open and he hopped on board.
"A return to Paddington if you please" he commanded.
No response.
"Sir! Sir?"
Still nothing.
James gasped. He couldn't believe it. The driver must have fallen asleep. On the job no less! Standards seemed to be slipping daily!
Well he wasn't going to be waking anyone. That would be too kind to this lazy good for nothing. He would instead write a letter of complaint. Let this man's boss deal him, which would no doubt end in his redundancy.
He stepped off the bus, feeling mainly annoyed but with a tinge of satisfaction.
He started walking towards the train station when he noticed a lump on the floor. It was a body and it's head was facing the wrong direction.
"Perhaps I should consider moving" he mused.
For the first time since stepping outside he looked around properly. In the distance in almost every direction there were lumps on the floor. Bodies.
It was quickly becoming a very strange day.