"Please, do not panic. we do not wish you any harm" said the crackled voice through our T.V. set. whatever this was, it had interfered with every electronic device that had speakers. hell, even the microwave was beeping in mores code.
that message played on loop, and everyone just stood around. i looked out of my 4th floor apartment down at the street, the disheveled hobo wearing nothing but a ripped trench coat and Heart-printed underwear ran around spouting "The end is near, yall'!"
Pfft. I've seen enough movies to know that they will start to ask for help or something; that humanity will be the heroes because we are awesome. something like that.
i sat back in my Lazy boy and sipped on my morning coffee. still too hot. i noticed that the microwave had stopped sending that annoying high pitched beep. i turned my attention back to my crumby flat screen i bought from the shifty guy at the thrift store. i mean, who could pass up a 30 $Toshiba? that's great. too bad i later found out it was laced with cocaine, but i suppose that's what i get. still a great tv though.
the screen flickered between emergency news and the static that had previously made shadows dance around my empty apartment. another sip of my coffee; still too hot. finally it stopped broadcasting in all of the different languages and now let out its message. if I'm to be honest, i was partially expecting to see some grey aliens or short green knomes or something. what i did see was...ok, you know that pokemon that's made of like, purple tar, with the comical eyes and mouth? i think its called muck or something. anyways, it looked like that. i swear, the eyes looked like they took googley eyes out of the dollar store and just hot glued them to this crusty grey half-liquid.
"we are here to help your species" ok, that's where i knew something was up. they are never 'good' if they want to help. they are going to put us into prisons or something. i've played halflife 2, this wont end well.
"before we presented ourselves, we needed to make sure that humanity has progressed enough to comprehend what we are about to give you. the first time we came, you insisted that we help you build giant stone triangles in the sand. the last time we had visited, your technology was sufficient enough but you were, and we quote "beating those goddamn Nazi bastards". so we waited; and let us say, you have done quite a lot. we have, however, noticed a couple areas that could be improved; like how some of your kind rejects the idea of being immune to polio. i mean, who gives that up? that's retarded! who the fuck would let their children die! I'm-"
the pokemon let out a sigh. a lighter, more purple muddy hand patted the main announcer on the side, mixing the two colors. kind of like when you start to mix 2 different kinds of playdoh. i think this would be a much worse mess to pick out though.
"anyways" the blob continued. "we were scared of...showing ourselves before. simply because before your generation of humans, there were the golden humans. those guys were dicks, you wouldn't believe. they were the most pretentious shits in the entire quadrant let me tell you. rivaled only by the Somonas. but they knew how to throw a rad party, so it made up for it."
"damn" i thought. "they seem pretty chill, actually. this might end well. another sip. too hot -well, its getting there. damn its hard to pay attention to these guy's rabble without coffee. i can probably watch this on youtube later, or at least get the gist of it. for now, I'm going to take a nap." and so i slept.