"So, tell me, Edgar, why do you think you're in here." A blonde girl of about 30 asked me, smiling so wide I could see that her nurses outfit matched her pristine white teeth.
"I'm telling you, I'm not a loony! That dog catcher took my boy!" I yelled. I knew I shouldn't have. I knew that screaming would only serve to reinforce the belief these people had of me that I'm off my rocker. But you have to understand, I was panicked, you know what those people do to bad dogs, and Rex was the meanest of them all. If my boy was emulating him, I knew it wouldn't be long before things got bad.
"Just tell the nice man what you told me" she told me, referring to a heavy-set man who most certainly did not look nice.
"Fine", I conceded, "I'm a single parent, a poor working man who couldn't possible afford a day-care, much less a nanny. Working in construction, bringing my boy to work was most definitely not an option either. I figure a boy of 10 could take care of himself for a few hours while I worked late, but I'm not the type to take risks. So, I brought a guard dog. That's Rex. No burglar's gonna risk breaking in with that behemoth shambling around the front yard."
"Tell us about Rex"
"He never really took to anyone, and people tended not to take to him either, according to the pet store employee. He was a loud dog, and anyone who'd try to approach him would be met with a menacing 'GRRRRRR"' At this point I unsuccessfully try to mimic a growling sound, I'm sure that won me some points with Mr. Nice Man. "However, when Rex met my boy at the shop, it seemed as though they had a sort of...affinity. So I brought the thing. It was perfect, my boy had a companion and a guardian for those long days I was working and couldn't be with him."
"Unfortunately, it was a bit too perfect..." I trailed off, wondering how I could have missed all the signs. Rubbing your equipment on anything you can get your hands on, well, I figured that was standard for a 10 year old. Using the toilet as a water bowl and using the litter box as a toilet, however, alarm bells should have been a' ringing.
"Is this the dog you claim to be your son?" Nice Man had finally spoken up. It brought a tear to my eye seeing my own flesh in blood trapped in his little cage like that.
"Yeah, that's my boy. I'm begging you, please. I haven't lost it, I know my son when I see him" At this point I was bawling. Must have been pretty pathetic, seeing a grown man crying like I was.
"Don't worry, Mr. Furz. I believe you." The nurse said, her smile looking more menacing than reassuring at this point. Turning to the Nice Man, she whispers "I think we have everything we need, let's get out of here. This man has gone to the dogs."