It was finally done.
I wiped the sweat from my brow, huffing in the stale air, glancing over at the old woman rocking in her chair, snoring peacefully with each sway.
"Grandma?"
Her eyes snapped open instantly, taking me aback.
"June 29, 2016, at 4:29.70 am." She blurted out immediately, casting her eyes around the room wildly. "Did I oversleep?"
I didn't need to glance at my stopwatch to confirm the declaration. I was certain she was correct down to the millisecond, since she had predicted this so many decades ago.
"Only by a few seconds, grams." I said, smiling. "It's done. I finally finished it."
"A few seconds..." She rubbed her eyes blearily. "Bah, boy, that's an eternity past. Anyone see it yet?"
"No, grams. I haven't even called my professor yet."
She mused over this for a few seconds, muttering softly to herself. Whereas others had only seen insanity, I had seen inspiration and genius - and it had propelled me this far, so I was prepared to give her a few moments to think out loud.
"Hit your watch again, real quick. Get it running again."
"Grandma!" I barked, surprised. "This is a *vital* scientific breakthrough, temporal accuracy is paramount! We've discussed this, remember? If I misreport the creation time, people might go back too far and blink themselves out of existence!"
She arched a grey eyebrow at me. "Are you stupid, boy? If you report an earlier time, yes. If you report the wrong time in the opposite direction, then as long as you stick to it for the rest of your life, nobody will know. Well, except for idiots who gamble their lives on conspiracy theories. They'll overshoot and sort themselves out, though. Hit the damn button, boy."
Hesitantly, I did, but not before confirming the time it read. 04:29.70, and counting.
"That'll buy you some time, I shouldn't have napped, but eh...I'm old." She beamed over at me. "So, you finally got time travel going. And here you were, so confident that with pre-knowledge, you'd complete it early, and create a paradox. Mama Teach is never wrong, no she isn't."
I grinned, somewhat chagrined. "Right. Mama Teach is right on the money with her guesses. Now, why do you *guess* you had me hit the button again?"
She mused for a moment. "Boy, what do you think will happen once you open the Alpha Gate?"
"People will be able to time travel to any point henceforth, up to and until the device is ever destroyed?"
"...and you don't think you'll ever get tourists, who want to see the exact moment it all began?"
I shrugged. "Yeah, which is why I set out a few dozen seats."
Her jaw dropped, and she began chuckling, slowly at first, but rolling into belly busters. "Boy, you sure are a naive little idiot genius, aren't you? Do you ever stop to *think*, or do you just *invent? * How many people in this world? 7 billion or so? And that's in just this snapshot. There are a near infinite number of snapshots a'coming, and while it won't be all seven billion plus at a time...Jesus, boy. D'you think the Eiffel, or Buckingham Palace, or the White House only get *a few dozen* gawping visitors total throughout all of time?"
I blanched. "Oh." Lamely, I added, "So I should set out more seats?"
After she had ceased laughing, looking dangerously close to falling out of her chair, she sized me up speculatively. "Now, eventually, a Bureau of Time that doesn't yet exist will be and thus exist now, and they'll regulate travel to make sure you don't have several trillion knocking at your door every hour for the next ten generations straight...but yes, the very *moment* you submit that proof that time travel is possible, people will start showing up. Hence, the watch."
I looked at it, still ticking down the minutes. "I see."
"No you don't, boy. We need time for me to explain a few things to you. Most important secrets. For one, you can never so much as whisper out loud how you finally got it working. Scientists, military folk, and the like will hound you until you die to spill those beans, and more insidiously, there will be ghosts - sorry, temporal travelers with advanced cloaking devices - eavesdropping on every second of your life from that point onwards, hoping that you tell even one person in strictest confidence how it works, so that they can go forward and reproduce it."
She paused, contemplative. "Hope you don't talk in your sleep, boy. And it's a very good thing that this - whatcha calling it?"
"The Manuel Sanchez Temporality Altering Drive, Alpha Gate." I said quickly, with a sheepish smile.
"Very humble. I notice *my* name isn't in there anywhere. At any rate...it's a good thing that the final calculation is purely a fixed intuitive leap. Nobody else will ever make it, even if they try to reverse engineer how you did. Trust me on that, *nobody* will. They'll all try, though, in desperation. And then they'll turn to trying to pry it out of you with spies, chemical baths, brain cloning, the likes..."
She smirked, her eyes shut as she rattled off the lists of tortures I could look forward to. "None will work, of course, so they'll retcon them so you can live a fairly normal life in the main snapshot. Don't worry too much."
This niggled my brain, something that I had always wondered. "Grams, how exactly *do* you know so much about the future, if I'm just now inventing the Alpha Gate? It's not like you could travel to the future before I created a means of traveling to the future, to see how I'd do all this...and yet, you have exact times. Even," I glanced again at my watch, "even times that are...er, were historically recorded incorrectly."
"Oh, you created a way to time travel, I won't take that accomplishment away from you." She paused, drawling out the words slowly. "But knock some of that damn hubris out of the chunk between your ears, you didn't *invent* a way to time travel. That's all on me. Incidentally, that's the second thing we need to discuss before you can set that watch right."
I stammered, taking the implication in. "But grams, I invented the Alpha Gate. There can be no time travel before this, because I'm the person who makes the time travel that everyone uses."
"Everyone *else. *" She corrected. "You don't think things through all the way, always been your biggest failing. Ah well, you'll get better...with time."
"You think that unmoderated time travel is safe for time? Let's use one example, time travel and Hitler are entertwined. There'll be people going back to kill Hitler. People going back to save Hitler. People going back to re-kill Hitler. People going back to interview Hitler. That's just *one* event that will be constantly in fluctuation, and a temporal link in the chains of time relentlessly subjected to twisting and tearing. You think that left unchecked, things will just somehow sort themselves out?"
"Uh...nobody can go back to mess with Hitler. I *just* made time travel now."
"Idiot. I'm using it as an example. There will be more Hitlers, under different names and different extremes. Can't you figure out what I'm trying to say?"
I ruminated on it. "Okay, so what *does* protect time from its travelers, if Cosmic Censorship isn't at play?"
"Not what, who. You will. Well, eventually. There's a long list of things you need to do, first, to get there. Spiritual growth. Physical growth. A trip to 2193 to get surgically induced immortality, from a specialist with a policy of only doing one surgery every ten thousand years, at a specific and exact time. Don't be late to *that* appointment. Things of that nature."
"...how, grams?"
She wordlessly tapped her rocking chair, drawing my attention down to it.
"**I** invented time travel. Don't forget it. And this is *my* gate. Built it when I was a little girl. I guess I should have named it...so how about Emilia Sanchez Temporality Altering Drive, Gate Nulla?"
I gawped.
"You can hit the button on that watch now. Well, maybe give it a few more minutes, just to make a safe margin. Remember: don't blab about how gates work. And above that, *never* mention that an earlier model exists, with the ability to go backwards even further and make even greater changes. You'll figure out how eventually."
She gestured towards my machine suddenly. "In fact, you already have."
I looked back over, numbly marveling at how different the machine looked. "Um..."
"Oh, I recognize that particular piece over there. Filtration device from after the Alpha Gate was shattered. Probably set up to prevent a particular time from being visited. You'll likely explain it as a bug in the hardware, or some kind of temporal lock, or...well, come up with your own mumbo jumbo, it ain't like they can call you out on it, right?"
I nodded weakly. "And I installed that...will install that...will have once installed that..."
"It'll be a confusing life for you, boy. And it starts when you hit that button on your watch, you won't have even a second to spare once you have all the time in the world. Just make sure you visit your old grams from time to time before I die."
I sat down, shakily.
"Incidentally, January 2nd, 2025. The funeral will be lovely, I suppose I'll see you there, at a minimum. Try not to flirt with ol' grams too much, I was a bit of a firebrand in my youth, and I won't really know you, or know why you're there. Not at first, that is. Just saying, seeing your own funeral makes a gal chug whiskey like no tomorrow, and I wasn't always just an innocent old cheek pincher. Try not to become your own grandpa."
I shook my head mutely, before poking the button on my watch to pause it again. If for nothing else, to escape *that* alarming conversation.
"Hello hello hello, sir! I'm Admiral Forthright of the 19th Division, and can I just say what an honor it'll be to serve with your great grandnephew? God, I *finally* get to meet you!"
I blinked up. "A pleasure to meet you too. Uh, excuse me. I need to make a call."
"Wait, am I the first?" He crowed excitedly. "Yes!"