Aisir awoke inside the ruins of the ship. He began to move, only to halt at the sharp stabbing sensations emanating from his side. It hurt to breathe somewhat. He tried to move his limbs, only to realize they too had become immobile.
"Curse it all..." He groaned to himself, as he began tugging at the harness. Eventually after some brute force, the restraints snapped loose. Aisir leaned far enough right to topple into the floor. The emergency lights lit the way to the exit. But for the time being, all Aisir could think of was the pain.
"Lieutenant Aisir...What is your status? Lieutenant, do you read?"
"Yeah, Bertha'll, I read." Aisir squeezed out between gasps as he laid on the floor of the craft."
"What is your status? Our scanners have lost your craft. Please report status..."
"Status..." Aisir forgot for a moment. Clawing his way to the bulkhead, he realized how badly wounded he actually was. The gash protruding from his side had cause him to lose a considerable amount of fluid. He could see the pinkish trail as he rolled to his left for a brief moment.
"Lieutenant?" The voice reminded him.
"Ship is down." Aisir breathed overcoming his nausea, "Repeat ship down...On surface of planet C130-B97, planet under observation...Respond Bertha'll."
"C130-B97, or as inhabitant species dubbed; Earth. Correct lieutenant?"
"Confirmed Bertha'll...Contact leadership of Quadrant, *erggh*, ASAP."
"Maintain communication..." Aisir continued crawling toward the emergency release hatch as the call connected itself over the next minute.
"Captain De'Xor responding. Report status lieutenant."
"Sir..." Aisir panted, "Ship has been shot down. Contact made. Life support destroyed...They have weaponry, sir. Weaponry, we did not anticipate."
"Impossible." The captain replied, "Our studies showed that the beings prefer war between themselves, lieutenant. Why would they have anti-ship capability?"
"I don't know how, but they do." Aisir said as he pulled himself some more. "They've apparently expected such a thing to occur. Scouting this planet was a mistake, sir."
"Pull yourself together!" The captain commanded. Aisir breathed more to calm himself as he listened. "You are Lieutenant Aisir, Bertha'll base personnel; of the Andromeda Federation. Stand strong!"
"I'm standing the *best I can*, sir." Aisir explained, as he gripped the release lever. The hatch exploded off, causing him to be blinded by the light. Aisir toppled out of the craft. Landing on the ground two yards below did not help his injuries. He felt something crack, and became rather feint. Lying prone again he glanced at his surroundings.
"Activate, video transmission." Aisir said as the device activated.
--
Captain De'Xor demanded the operators to open the feed. They were greeted a view of the ground, followed by Aisir's arms as he made his way to the top of the shallow crater. Rolling again, Aisir faced what appeared to be a path of some sort, made of black material. A yellow line streaking the center led to confusion of what the surface meant amongst the crowd. De'Xor gestured for silence.
"Oh...Oh...Curse it all." Aisir groaned, "Bertha'll come in...Do you have the feed?"
"We do lieutenant." De'Xor replied.
"You shouldn't...you shouldn't..." Aisir continued, the feed turning towards the horizon; green fields, buildings and a bright, blue sky, stretched away from him.
"By the Council...It's...It's *beautiful*...I've never seen anything like it..."
"Respond Aisir." De'Xor asked quietly.
"Never come here." He pleaded, "Please. Never come here...Tell my child, I'm sorry...Captain, please, *tell my child. * Tell my family *I'm sorry*...."
"Lieutenant," De'Xor responded "I command you-"
He paused as they listened for a moment. Something had arrived nearby. A ship perhaps? The crowd shrieked as the camera rolled over to face the sky, and a masked being aiming what appeared to be a large photon at what would be Aisir's face. They listened as Aisir gasped hard for air, his lungs taking it in as much as possible. Then; he became still. Eventually, another being stepped into view. This one wore all black, and was less heavily armed. Eventually he motioned for the armored one to lower his weapon.
"He's gone." The being stated, "Sit rep. Secure the area. Call in Biological for extract."
"Sir, yes sir." The armored being replied.
The feed lost connection soon after, and Da'Xor was left consider what to tell the Council, as well as how to approach the lieutenant's next of kin.
--
Like this story? Check out some more random stuff posted at /r/Jamaican_Dynamite/