One billion dollars to kill one billion people. That was the hardest contract in my whole life.
Let's start from the beginning. Technology in the US was in all time high, medicine was really good and really cheap, long story short, people weren't dying anymore and that was bad.
I was hired by the comission of president Trump, the US had 2 billion citzens, and Mr Trump wanted half of them gone.
I accepted the contract more as a challenge really. Could I kill 1 billion people and make it like an accident?
I started by the obvious. I infiltrated the command tower of an airport, I gave the officers in the area some slipping pills, putting in their coffe. After they were asleep I scrambled the plane's routes. I locked the door and left to watch the fireworks from the distance. With the number of plains I can say that I killed around 20 thousand people.
Next target was a train going to NYC. This plan was more elaborate. Not only did I take of the breakes of the train but I also disguised myself as worker from the station broke the rails near the plataform. I made a sort of ramp with them. The train arrived, got off the rails and into the plataform killing a lot of people. The station then started to crumble after the train hit some supports, it wasn't pretty and it was rush hour so I got around 500 thousand people. It was good, but not enough I had to step up my game.
The next target was when things got serious, a well known rapper was performing in LA. He was going to play indoors and he had sold 40 million tickets for the show. I did the simple thing, I infiltrated the kitchen area, knocked out the cooks and dumped a lot of propane tanks around the kitchen, and then I allowed their gas to go the stage. I called the police acting as a cook and talked about a gas leak. It worked like a charm, after I left the singer asked his fans the raise their lighters, the explosion was bigger than I thought it took the 40 million in the show plus 60 million from the area around it.
100 million still wasn't enough. But I had the ultimate idea. I asked Mr Trump for access to one of his plane carriers and 50 megaton bomb, Trump trusted me, I had done a lot to him by now and he was kind of dumb, so he gave me without a second thought. After that it was simple. I flied the plane to Washington DC, where it had an "engine" accident and fell down. The bomb exploded and 980 million people died, I was able to kill more than a billion people.
You might ask yourself now, "but why did you attack washington? You killed the president and you weren't paid!" The answer is I did it because I could do it. President Trump was a dick and I got him to let his guard down. And the money? Well there were a lot of bounties on the president's head and someone has to collect them right? Never trust someone that only thinks about money kid, that's a life lesson