I glanced at the clock again. 1:05 am.
Only four more hours until i'm free to leave this hell of a job. I put my head in my hands and rubbed my temples, willing my eyes to focus again after staring at the monitor for three hours.
"Mike!" the shrill voice of Laura popped my small bubble of tranquility, "You better not be sleeping Mr. Chate."
"Headache, Miss. I'm alright." I went back to typing numbers off the clipboard in front of me into the computer.
"I hope you get better. I expect you to finish inventory tonight."
*Yes your majesty. * "Yes ma'am."
She stalked away to torment some other poor coworker. Probably the janitor, she likes making him clean the toilets several times a night. It's too bad, Jack actually keeps the restrooms very clean, but Laura can't seem to deal with having an honest hardworking employee.
I peek at the clock again and groan. 1:06.
The buzzing of my phone pulls me out of my haze. I recognize the number but I can't quite place it. 484-7968. That's...my phone number from when I was a kid. The house I grew up in, I remember my mom turning the number into a sing so i'd remember it once I started school.
*" Okay, you ready Michael?" Mom smiled at me in the rear-view mirror. "You know the phone number? "*
*" Yup! 484-7968, now Mi-chael can call home, great! "*
*" Good job rocket boy, remember that. If anything happens you call me, okay? "*
*" Okay mama. "*
I answered the phone.
"Hello, is this the North Pole?"
I dropped the phone.
I recognized the voice.
I recognized *my* voice.
No, that's not possible. This isn't some Hallmark Christmas tale, this is real life. I'm working on Christmas eve...actually Christmas morning now. I'm not getting a call from Christmas past here, i'm getting a call from some kid, all kids sounds pretty much alike on the phone.
I picked the phone back up, still somewhat shaken.
"Hello? Mister Claus?"
I managed to choke out a reply.
"Yes, this is Santa."
"It is! Hi Santa, you don't sound old." I could hear the smile in his voice.
"I'm younger than most people think. What can I do for you kid?"
"Mama said maybe I could call about my Christmas list this year. She said she wasn't sure if you would be able to talk, I know you're very busy."
"Well, it is Christmas Eve." I chuckled despite the unimaginable conversation taking place. "What did you want to ask for?"
"I want to see the future." I froze.
"What future?"
"My future silly!" I could hear his laughter, gentle and innocent.
"You want to know your future?"
"Yeah! Do I get rocket boots?"
Part of me wanted to tell him things to make his life better. Do the things I didn't do. Be good to mom. Convince her not to take that trip to California. Get the pipe in the wall repaired before it bursts. Don't date Luna Prince in the 11th grade or she'll tell the school you have lice. Don't take the year off after high school to travel, start working so you can save up for that engineering school. Dad is lying, he's not saving the money, it's all gone. Don't work ungodly hours to pay the bills. Don't hate yourself for getting caught in the vicious cycle of go to school so you can work and work so you can go to school.
Don't be me. Don't be me. Don't be me.
He was still talking about rocket boots and race cars when I interrupted him to answer.
"Slow down kid," I tried to think about what I was going to say.
I couldn't tell a kid that his life was going to get worse from here. Sure, people could use a nice dose of reality...but not when they're five.
"Okay bud, I can't tell you much, but I can tell you a little." I heard a small squeal of excitement and couldn't help but smile. "Your future...is whatever you want it to be. You can do anything you dream of."
"Can I have rocket boots?"
"Absolutely. Do good in school, study hard and go to college, and make them yourself, you hear me? You can be the inventor that gives every kid on the planet rocket books. Heck, you could take my place and become a new Santa if you did that." I could feel his smile through the phone. "But I want you to remember something. Everything you do, do it for yourself. Be the best person you can be at everything. Be kind. Be good. Be strong, Most importantly," I took a deep breath, "don't ever let anyone else slow you down. You go out and make the world work for you, don't just work for the world." I knew half of this wouldn't even register with him, but saying it made me feel like I could make a real difference. As if I could give this kid the chance I didn't have.
It was silent for a while before he answered. "Okay Santa, i'll be good. And smart. And the other things you said." I smiled.
"Good to hear, kid." there was the soft noise of rustling from the other end, and then the sound of a bed creaking.
"Sorry Santa, I think mama heard me and i'm not allowed to use the phone." I laughed.
"I get it, Goodnight kid."
"Goodnight Santa!" I lowered the phone before I had a sudden thought.
"Hey kid, give your mama a hug every day too. Be good to her, you hear me?"
"I will Santa." He hung up.
I stared at my phone for a while before I looked back up at the monitor and began typing more numbers. I glanced at the clock. 1:08 am.
I groaned and dropped my head onto the desk.
--
The door creaked open as he lay frozen under his blankets, pretending to be asleep but forgetting that sleeping people breathe too.
"Boy I know you're awake, you were talking on that phone again weren't you." She turned the room light on as a gentle sigh came from under the blankets.
"Yes mama." He sheepishly held out the phone for her to take back. She looked down at it and laughed a little.
"Why did you call the house phone silly?"
"It's the only phone number I know."
*Of course* she thought with a smile.
"Talk to anyone interesting?"
"Yeah!" he popped up in the bed, "I talked to Santa!"
"Santa?" she asked confused, "well what did he say?" In response he wrapped her up in his small arms and lay his head on her shoulder.
"He told me to be good and hug you." She hugged her son tightly to her.
"That Santa is a smart man, "she laughed, "but now you gotta go to bed baby." She wrapped him back in the blankets and kissed him on the forehead. "It's way past bedtime for you and me."
"Goodnight mama," he whispered sleepily.
Mama went to the door and turned the light off, smiling into the dark.
"Goodnight rocket boy."