2:23 P.M.
The exact time I will die.
How do I know this? There's not really much to explain. One day I woke up and just knew, though I only know the time, not the date or the circumstances.
It has, obviously, been a major point of anxiety for me in the years since. I'm on multiple anxiety and depression pills, and both "disorders" prevent me from working, so I'm on disability. I live with my grandfather who lets me rent a room from him as long as I help with groceries and the bills. I lived with my mom for a while, but eventually she got tired of my anxiety and depression "flaring up" in the afternoon.
I've tried doing things to distract me, like dating or going to college. I dropped out of college when I couldn't focus on my homework anymore, and boyfriends would break up with me after they watched a panic attack. I've tried making peace with death, but it's so hard when you know at least a piece of when it's coming. I used to have a timer set for ten minutes before so I could prepare myself, but the alarm would give me more anxiety.
So I've given up. I wake up early with Grandpa, make us breakfast, and run errands as quickly as I can so that I can make it home before my time of death. Every day, he tells me I can stay out as long as I want, that he doesn't need me to take care of him, and it's true, I know it is. I know he doesn't need me. But my coming home is more for me than him.
Today, I am running late with the groceries. I come into the front door like a blur, grocery bags lining my arms as I hobble into the door.
"Need some help?" Grandpa asks me, bumbling over to me as fast as he can. I smile at him between labored breaths. "Nope! I got it all, thanks though."
I hurry into the kitchen and begin sorting through plastic bags as quickly as I can. The clock on the wall is marked 2:07. I want to be in my room soon for the inevitable panic attack.
"Katie? Katie!" Grandpa calls. I poke my head around the kitchen wall that divides the kitchen from the living room where he is watching T.V.
"Yes, sir?" I ask. He motions for me to come over with his hand. I set the box of cereal on the kitchen table, and hurry over. "What is it?"
"Sit down, Katie. All that stuff can wait," he waves me over to the easy chair across from him. I begin to protest, and he gives me a stern look.
My Grandpa fought in Vietnam. He wasn't a decorated soldier or anything, but I've heard a lot of the horrors soldiers experienced in that time, and the sheer number of soldiers who died. I've always wondered what happened to him over there, but have never wanted to ask. I drop down into the plush leather chair, and turn my eyes to watch the T.V. and the digital clock displayed on the cable box.
Grandpa is watching some C.S.I. inspired show. Two detectives on the screen are arguing how to approach a case when their boss walks in to talk to them.
"Katie, I'm sorry if this comes across as rude, but you are so *lame*." He gives me a stern look, and returns his gaze to the T.V. I am taken aback.
"Lame? What do you mean?" I ask. He turns to me again, laughing. "Katie, I'm seventy-six years old, and you're, what, twenty now? I've lived my life, and I know that you aren't living yours, and I just can't figure out why."
The clock shows 2:13. Anxiety grips my chest. Maybe ten minutes left to live, and I'm spending it arguing with my Grandpa. "Grandpa, I'm happy, really I am, it's just my anxiety --"
"Bullshit. Anxiety, depression, whatever, it doesn't matter at all. You have the means to overcome it, and you should." Though his words are somewhat insensitive, I understand what he's trying to say.
He lectures me for several agonizing minutes. Lectures me about the harms that can come from not living. How he passed up an excellent job in his late twenties that would've resulted in him being a millionaire right now, how he and Grandma never went on vacation and how he regrets it because she's gone now. The clock reads 2:20.
I grip the edges of the chair tightly as he continues to lecture me. On the T.V., the two detectives have located the murderer. They are yelling at him to drop his weapon and release his hostage. He is refusing.
"Katie," Grandpa begins, more gentle this time," it is impossible to know how much time we have. Grandma tried to make the best of her time, but I was concerned with money and saving. Don't let you--or me, or your mom, come between you living your life."
One of the detectives points his weapon, and the suspect tries to shoot him. The detective is faster, and pulls the trigger. A loud gunshot, and the suspect falls. 2:23 P.M.
I am crying and shaking in my seat, and Grandpa stands out of his chair to approach me. He fumbles for the cordless phone on the nearby table to call 911. He has never seen me have a panic attack.
I try to breathe, but there is too much stimuli. Grandpa is barking into the phone, detectives and police officers on T.V. are searching the building for the hostage. I am writhing and crying on the ground, having flung myself out of the chair onto the carpet.
I am alive. For now.