Part two, as requested. I wasn't sure where to put this, so I'm just going to comment a second time.
---
We started our way slowly through the tunnels. I can't say I was pleased to be following a crack-pot around, but at least he wasn't wearing tin foil on his head. Yet. We twisted and turned in the tunnels, and I waited for the moment when he would announce we had made it to the end. Instead, he tilted a hand drawn map this way and that. I wasn't sure where he had procured it from. He had said they didn't know the way out, so what was with the map, anyways? It seemed to me we were lost. I didn't say anything though, as these might be the last people left in our town. A familiar sound echoed around us. We all froze in our tracks.
"Is that the sound of a baby's cry?" The teenage girl whispered. We all exchanged uneasy glances between us. She instinctively started towards it, and I grabbed her arm.
"Don't." I whispered to her. My voice was harsher than I intended it to be. I saw tears in her eyes and she scowled at me for a heated second. The look melted away. Her eyes grew distant and misty.
"What if it's my baby sister?" She barely managed to say the words, her throat was so tight. I felt my eyes close. This was worse than finding survivors after a tornado. Worse than seeing mangled bodies on the road. This was real, I had to tell myself. We were being hunted. This wasn't a freak accident like a twister. My heart hardened a little. A gentle voice softly spoke.
"No, child. We have to assume the worst, and that's that they're going to use anything against us. We have to be prepared for any tricks they might throw at us. I'm sorry, dear. Your sister is gone." It was Ed speaking softly, gently to her. His eyes were wide and piercing as he stared at her. Her small frame began to shake. The sound of crying was edging our way, and I felt my eyebrows come together. My heart hammered a little bit.
Suddenly she was gone. In a flash she had torn herself from my grasp, and was running down the corridor. My arm remained raised in an awkward fashion.
"Stupid kid." I muttered. I almost started after her when we all heard the scream. It was cut short and the crying stopped. Then we heard footsteps. We all shined lights down the black corridor of the sewer. Her small body was crawling towards us. She was sobbing. One of her eyes were a sickening blue, I saw it glowing faintly, first, before I saw the outstretched and twitching hand. She was still sobbing, but her tears were orange. She coughed up the viscous liquid, now bright orange, and burning on the ground. We all took a step back.
"P-please. It...hurts." She whispered once. The emphasis on the last word turned my blood cold. Her hair was turning white with the rest of her. I wanted to end her misery, when she simply froze up. The change overtook her, and she lay on the ground. Motionless. My flight or fight was taking over, and I rocketed away from the safety of the others. I didn't care if I was with them or not, I was not being captured by those...those things. I heard shouts behind me, but I ignored them. When did I get so worked up? How did this happen? Just hours ago, I was safe at home, preparing for work. It was unreal.
I turned this way and that, darting around corners as silently as possible. If they got the girl, surely they were looking for other survivors. I wished I had listened to that text message last night. I wish I had found those escape spaceships. But no, I was a stubborn man, set in my own path. How I regretted it now.
My face smacked into something, solid, metal. For a fleeting moment, I thought it was them. I looked up, shielding my face. I felt my lungs release as I realized with a slow familiarity that it was just a ladder. I hauled my ass up it and opened the man hole cover. Had I hit a dead end? I looked around cautiously. With a start, I realized where I was. I was in a suburb on the outskirts of town. This was perfect. I could high tail it up the hills! I would be safe!
I felt a ping of regret. I had left the others down there, with them. I shoved that thought down deep, I didn't have time for regret. Not today. I stepped out into the light, carelessly throwing the man hole cover aside. It scraped loudly on asphalt. Without looking back, I tore through yards and across sidewalks, dead set on protecting myself. Maybe those other people would find their way out. I had hope for them, I did. My self preservation always won out in tense situations. That's why my wife left me. We were both hurting and to preserve myself, my sanity, I had filed the divorce papers. How I had missed her.
I turned a corner and felt my breath hitch in my throat. It was one of those machines, collecting from a family in a mini-van. I had nowhere to hide, not really. The hedges were all trimmed so short I would have to lay down to hide. Well, that's exactly what I did. I did an awkward army crawl forward, my body tense. I got a good look at the machine and with a jolt, realized there were beings inside. They didn't see me, but I got a good, close look at the life forms.
They were rather small, with a mottled olive skin tone. They couldn't have been larger than a grey hound dog. Large, grey warts peppered their skin, and on the ends of their faces were dark brown beaks. The eyes were ever colorful, changing from magenta, to orange, to blue, green and back. Two of them sat in the front seat of the machine. I noticed their clothing, dark red jackets, with some sort of insignia on the chest. They wore black gloves, and had four arms. They were spindly little fuckers, but I wanted nothing to do with them. I heard the whirring of the drone like 'wings' atop the vehicle. They flew a short ways, passed me, and landed again, at another home. This one had four kids all running to the car, each with an expression of horror frozen on their features.
I took the opportunity to get away as fast as I could. I hid myself for as long as I had the hedge. Then I darted to the house as quickly as my legs would carry me. It wasn't too long before I was huffing. I really was out of shape. I flattened myself against the siding, taking a breather. I heard more machines in the distance, but I wasn't too worried. The 'burbs weren't too populated, so I doubted they spent much time here. I waited for a minutes, before dashing to the next house. Further and further I went, looking at the treeline with a long-fullness I didn't know I could possess. I made it to the last house left. My heart was a jack hammer in my throat.
I ran. I ran and ran and didn't look back. I was mighty terrified, but I did what I had to. I left everything, I left everyone, and I abandoned myself to the wilds. It wasn't long before I hit the shrubbery, and then a welcoming blanket of firs and pines enveloped me. Still, I did not slow. I had to get away.
I had traveled quite a ways when I realized how thirsty I was, how much my throat was burning, and how much darker it was becoming. Using what I had learned from the boy scouts, I made a shelter, with no fire, and huddled inside it. Hiding, still. It was another day before I could move again, as those monstrosities had lumbered into the forest, looking for prey. They didn't take the animals, but they were searching for people. They had passed by without really noticing my little pile of sticks. I was petrified.
Somehow, I managed to find a small stream and followed it uphill. I satiated my thirst and stuck to what I knew. Squirrels were good meat, if I could trap them. I found grubs to eat and the trees were teeming with pine nuts. I felt like a wild man. My beard had grown thicker, my hair a little longer, and my body a little leaner. The stream widened and turned into a river, which I found to have certain types of small fish in. I stayed with it, living from it, and I grew closer to the wilderness. The sudden change in my way of life changed me for the better. I became patient, soft spoken, and revered all that nature had to offer.
It's been months now, since I've seen a patrol. Those greedy bastards really wanted to wipe us out. Despite their best efforts, I found others, like me, living in the wilds. We started a little 'clan', if you will and we made ourselves a leader. Me? I'm living as one of the best hunters of the tribe. I've been given my own hearth in a large cave we share. There's only six of us now, but that's five more than I had hoped for. Our lives are simple, and often filled with fear, but we are survivors. We are hunters. We will never be prey.
I still think of home. I miss the bed, the coffee machine, and hot showers. While I have grown fond of my new home, there's no wifi, no television, and no radio. We have but the babble of the river, the wind in the trees, and the occasional clank of machinery as those things search for us. We are living a wholesome life, in touch with our mother earth again.
Although, there's not a day that goes by, that I don't think of how much I'd kill for a cheeseburger.
---
Not sure that's where I wanted to take this, but there it is! Hope you enjoyed this a little!