It's frustrating to only have one of something.
It can be anything; a toy, a trophy, a marketable skill. When you've got one tool, you learn to solve every problem with it. For my village, that *one thing* was coal. We mined it, we sold it, we carved it into jewelry. We bought what we could not make with coins caked in black dust. I can recall even now the days that father brought me to the market with him. I remember one merchant in particular, his eyebrow raised in disdain as our hard-earned money stained his silk gloves. He was too good for us, but not too good for our money. But we are our money. We are our trade. My people have eaten and breathed coal dust for generations. The road to and from the mines is paved in onyx footprints.
Well, it was.
There was a collapse, and now there is no coal. There is no tool through which we may earn respect, no resource we have to offer the world. That is why I am here. I did not grow up with black lungs and bent back. I am young, and though I am hungry, I am strong. I was honored to be chosen, I suppose.
I cannot help but wonder, as I walk through this valley with torch in hand, if this is a fool's errand. No one has prayed or made an offering in Death's Holler in an unrecorded number of years. I raise the flame higher to observe the barren walls around me once again. There is nothing at eye level. The valley's namesake instead lies hundreds of feet above me. Skeletons the size of giants have been carved directly into the walls. I cannot tell if their empty eye sockets hold hope or resentment. They do the job of imposition well and I begin to feel unease at the thought that I am the first in decades to visit with serious intent. I reassure myself with the thought that a forgotten god is a desperate one. How vengeful could they afford to be?
Hours pass before I reach the end. The stone cadavers do not end, but not all of them look down in disapproval. Many are carves so as to be looking off into the distance, or with head bowed in prayer. Even if they are nothing more than statues, I am glad that their gaze is directed elsewhere. My own eyes are focused on the clearing before me.
The path ends in something of a cave. Unlike the path preceding it, long burnt-out torches line the walls. It is wider here, enough for a ceremony and a crowd of onlookers, although I see no benches or chairs. What fills the space instead is an alter, and some distance back, a stone chair, elevated much like a throne. Slumped in the "throne" is a skeleton, but a real one. The bones visible from underneath its robes are dusty and yellow. The fingers look as though they might to the ground, were they not clasped tightly around the edge of the throne's armrests. I walk over to the corpse to get a closer look.
I recognize its attire from Grandmother's books. She used to read me the stories of our people before we discovered the mines. She would tell me stories of my ancestors the death worshipers, and the ritual sacrifices they would make. Then Father would wheeze from the other room that *he* was the one making sacrifices now. I smile at the thought until I remember the rest. Grandmother used to say that when times were hard, and no lives could be spared, people would offer their own life in exchange for the gods' help. *Even a drop of blood will do...*
My eyes are drawn once again to the altar. It too is stone, any decoration long since rotted or worn away. The surface however, is indented like a bowl. The room takes on a more sinister feeling now. I can almost see smoke wafting from the torches on the wall. The skeletal priest looks as though he could leap from his seat at any moment. I look again at the altar. It feels almost...expectant.
"Fine!" I say, if only to hear my own voice.
I can spare a drop or two. I draw my knife from my belt and hold the blade to my wrist. My arms hover above the stone table, the sharp metal cold against my skin. I drag the edge quickly and lightly across my arm before rolling my eyes at how foolish I must look. Only a faint indentation appears, but I feel a slight burning sensation. I use my fingers to stretch the meager wound open until a line of red appears. I squeeze until I think there is enough. I turn my arm over, waiting nervously. I shake my arm as the bead forms, and eventually I am successful. A single red drop lands silently in the basin. I stare at it, the maroon liquid barely visible in the low lighting. I let out the breath I didn't realize I was holding and shake my head at my own foolishness. I stare at my arm, wondering if we are truly so desperate, only to have my thoughts interrupted by the hairs on the back of my neck. My attention turns to the skeleton on the throne. It hasn't moved, but I suddenly feel uneasy at the thought of not having it in my sight. Then, a voice appears in my head, this time not my own.
*My boy, I'm going to need more than that. *