"Uh, what do you mean ghosts?" Daniel Ross asked while scribbling furiously in his notepad.
"Well, those aren't the problem. There are only about ten of them, if you include the history professor. I'm much more worried about the werewolf, suspected war criminal, and the old man with a love for manacles as punishment for children." said Aurora Sinistra, the astronomy professor.
The interview was not going well. Daniel Ross was brought in to fix dysfunctional workplaces and had dealt with idiocy, incompetence, ignorance, and complete disregard for common sense many times. But talking with the seemingly most sane person in Hogwarts was getting a bit trying. The headmaster was some kind of lunatic to let things go on like this for decades. Daniel was grasping at straws to see if there was a way to improve Hogwarts that didn't involve razing it.
"Is there a normal person on staff?" He asked.
"Well, the goblin is a decent sort, as is the seventy year old cat lady. Oh, and the racist billionaire on the board of directors has a sharp wit and nice hair, I suppose." replied Aurora.
"I'll look into some changes in the staff and board of directors. I'll have to start from scratch there. How about the school itself?"
"To be perfectly honest, the moving staircases are a problem."
*Moving staircases? * Daniel couldn't help but write that down and underline it a few times. That sounded like something extremely dangerous. Especially with young children all around. It would cost a lot to renovate an ancient castle, but perhaps it wasn't quite as bad as it sounded. He took in a deep breath and counted to ten slowly in his head.
"Is the problem with kids getting lost or unable to reach class?" Daniel inquired with renewed calm.
"Oh no, the trick stairs cause some serious injuries. We just punish the students for being late." Answered the professor, as if it was obvious.
"But the castle can make them late!"
"It's tradition. Like the four houses."
"Four houses?" Daniel was almost too afraid to ask.
This was the worst case of criminal neglect he had seen in a business. While he had seen places that were run badly, this was the first time he had met a location which actively tried to throw children down stairs or plunge to their doom. Aurora, whom at the start seemed to be quite normal and rather attractive, was talking as if none of this was a big deal. That was somehow more disturbing than obvious insanity.
"Well, the school is divided into four houses. Friendly competition and all that." She said.
"That sounds...odd. I suppose the competition does help with the academic standards."
The astronomy teacher snickered at that.
"Gods no. They sabotage each other all the time and makes it near impossible to study. It sharpens their dueling skills." Aurora replied, obviously having a hard time not laughing.
"Dueling?" Daniel's face scrunched up at that.
"Yeah, students blast each other all the time. It's a good laugh for us in the staff room, and only *rarely* leaves them hospitalized. Not like Quidditch."
"Quidditch? Well, thank god you don't have that if it's more dangerous than children blowing up one another."
"Of course we have it. It's not quite common when children end up with all bones removed, plunge from extreme heights with no safety nets, or get hit with heavy iron balls at extreme velocities at higher altitudes."
"ARE YOU KIDDING ME? How often do these things happen?"
"Well...removal of bones was last year, plunging from heights this year, and the heavy iron balls happens quite frequently - it's part of the game."
At this point, Daniel had decided that everyone here was crazy. No wonder this place was bleeding money. It sounded like the hospital wing was a constantly full trauma ward. Or perhaps an asylum infirmary. More likely both. So, replacing the staff, restructuring the school system, and changing the interior design, changing the sports curriculum. A tall order, but not impossible. He had his work cut out for him.
"Moving on. The grounds, surely they are well taken care of." Daniel stated, clearly hoping that not phrasing it as a question would make it true. The grounds around the castle did look magnificent.
"Of course they are. There are only a few deadly animals here."
"A few? Deadly?" Daniel didn't notice the cold sweat starting to gather on his brow.
"Well...there was a sixty foot basilisk, I already mentioned the werewolf, the giant squid, gigantic spiders who love human flesh, soul-sucking demons that don't usually attack the children, hippogriffs, a cerberus or two, really, anything our groundskeeper likes tends to create horrible deaths in some cases." It looked like Aurora had trouble stopping herself from making that list longer - she noticed that Daniel's eyes were becoming rather unfocussed.
"Groundskeeper?" He all but whimpered, not sure of what madness to expect.
"Half giant. Rather slow, loves extremely dangerous beasts and grows them illegally. A dragon as the last one, if you believe the rumors...it's highly illegal but would be perfectly in character for him. He means well though. Even though he takes the children to the forbidden forest all the time."
"Forbidden forest...that doesn't sound too inviting."
"It isn't. That's why it's forbidden. Really dangerous place. Children get killed there. And there are the centaurs with...you know...a tendency towards doing the stuff that centaurs do with women. Children only rarely sneak out there, and they are usually supervised when sent there."
"USUALLY?!" He spat out, outraged.
"Well, we have to split them up into small groups when looking for things, don't we?"
At this point, the man was questioning if there was ever a sane person to see this place, *ever*. The list of "deadly dangers" was already spanning two pages, the list of "staff to replace" was growing by the second, but it seemed that the entire place lacked not only common sense, but the common courtesy towards anyone in their right mind. But what was far worse was that the staff seemed to think that risking children's lives was just how things are supposed to be. He thought that perhaps what this place *really* needed was a psychologist. Or eight. And perhaps one for him.
"OK, allow me to rephrase my lines of inquiry differently. Is there something or even someone here that *can't* kill a student?" Pleaded Daniel, at this point far beyond keeping his hopes up.
"Well, the cat lady doesn't seem the type. The rest do tend to send the children on excessively dangerous things. The suspected war criminal actually does a good job at keeping them safe in something as dangerous as potions."
"How is potions dangerous?" The fact that *suspected war criminal* didn't even register until after the question caught Daniel off guard.
"Think of it as chemistry, only with magic and particularly explosive and/or poisonous materials. Handled by kids who don't bother studying enough. We have a betting pool as to how long it takes before the war criminal snaps and starts murdering everyone. So far it seems like the divination professor is closest - in three years or so is her guess."
"Ah, that makes things better. Divination means that she can know who is at risk and then you can mitigate the deadly risks here. I thought you were all insane for a while." Daniel knew that at this point, it was most likely false hope, because giving children poisons and explosives when they have a proclivity for blowing up one another was making his brain hurt.
"Oh, we're quite fine. The divination professor is insane. And an alcoholic. And that incense in her classroom covers up more than just tobacco, if you catch my drift." Replied the professor.
"Weed? You have an alcoholic professor who smokes weed *in class*?"
"We wish. My money's on crack. Still, at least it's not dangerous as what happens in the greenhouses."
Daniel was quite sure that this couldn't be good. It was obvious that everyone here was certifiable. The sheer amount of *how the hell do things like this happen* was an affront to sanity. Fixing this would require money he wasn't sure actually existed. The thought of razing the place not being quite enough entered his mind. Sure, they agreed to pay an exorbitant amount of money to the firm in order to fix this place, but he had a creeping sensation that this would be the first thing he couldn't help with.
"Please don't tell me that the professor is half-banshee." He whispered.
"That's preposterous. Banshees and humans can't interbreed. Though some of the plants kill if you hear them scream, so you were kind of close on that point. Still, not nearly as common as the ones that just strangle people to death." said Aurora.
"Plants that scream?"
"Oh yeah, they look like little babies. We teach the kids how to cut them up. We give them protective gear for their ears though."
"You...teach...children...to...cut...up...BABIES?"
"No, just things that *look* like babies."
At this point, Daniel threw down his notepad, and just kept silent. There was no way that he could deal with the amount of crazy here. Actually, he wasn't sure he wasn't crazy anymore. Surely, there had to be better things to do with his life.
Aurora called a house elf. When she explained that they were a slave race, he just walked away. Nothing would be enough to make Hogwarts sane, let alone a proper business.