The words "colony collapse" have taken on a whole new meaning over the last few months, it started with the bees, and that was weird enough for most people, mass populations of bees dropping out of the air, so many crops lost because we had no way to pollinate them, mass starvation even in wealthy western countries. Of course there was also the cotton shortage, it still amazes me that with everything else going on, people were hit so hard by that. A third of the Earth's population in jeopardy of starving to death, and what is everyone freaking out about?, the scarcity of designer skinny jeans,...spawned quite the black market trade for awhile.
Of course as an Environmental Etymologist this was no surprise to me, I've been studying bee die-offs for 15 years. I tried to sound the warning bell, we all did, endless research papers, conference talks, even the occasional radio or television interview, but by the time the message was taken seriously, it was already too late.
The tipping point was NOSOI inc., their new range of pesticides promised a much more cost effective way to control Aphid populations, however after later investigations it was revealed that testing indicated a possible high risk for exposure, and toxicity to bee populations too. After years of expensive research and development, NOSOI had too much riding on their new product line to let it be shut down by regulations, so they buried the research and released the product.
Within three months almost all the bee colonies within the Continental US, mainland Europe, China, and Russia were dead, food prices soared, and the global economy collapsed.
As bad as it was, this was all within our expectations for a mass colony collapse scenario, what we didn't expect was what happened next, thousands of people worldwide started dying from an as yet unclassified neurological disorder, confusion, loss of control of motor-function, quickly followed by death.
The truly incredible part, was not how many people were dying, or how they were dying, but *who* was dying. Politicians, Wall Street CEOs, high ranking Police and Military, Silicon Valley tech billionaires, even some religious leaders and cultural figures, literally everyone who died from Morel's syndrome was a notable figure in business, politics or culture.
Some of my colleagues were even asked to consult of a few autopsy reports. Who would you call if you found a three inch seed-shaped mass in the prefrontal cortex of almost every major influential figure on earth?