He was rather well-preserved, his body protected from the harsh Martian climate in a strange-looking spacesuit. Alone, he sat, against the wall of the cave, covered in thick sheets of dust though the cave's interior was remarkably still.
The nervous Martian colonists funneled in. Jan, recognized by the group as their "leader" in the closest capacity Mars could be said to have one, led the small party into the cave with cautious, controlled pace. Diagrams and charts littered the floor, also coated in heavy, red dust. Boxes and consoles with faded screens and panels watched the cave's intruders in silence. The silence was palpable; the tension, unbearable.
"Someone get Ground on the line," Jan ordered, and one colonist quickly shuffled out of the cave to comply.
"Will ya look at this," one started. Jan turned around and saw a colonist had begun rifling through the papers and charts across the floor. The one he was holding looked to be a picture of Earth. Eons of aging had faded the sheet considerably, and yet, somehow, it was recognizable. The blue marble, riddled with swirls of green...a home they'd never return to.
"Here's a diagram of human anatomy," another added, and Jan saw this one had indeed found an illustration of the human body.
"And look at this!" Shouted a third, gesturing to something that appeared to be a message scrawled into the wall. Four words, written in an alien text.
"Quick, somebody, go run a scan on the papers found here, and have that imported to data management. Maybe we can crack this code," Jan ordered, and the group set in motion.
Jan walked over and regarded the corpse once more. *A lifetime stuck on this planet, but at least we've got company now, * she thought. With a heavy sigh, a tear dropped to the front of her helmet. *Neither of us are leaving this rock, * she added, and began to mull over it all. She'd die on the big, red rock, like this man had millions of years before her.
But none of the colonists knew that the deceased landed on Mars with a mission much braver than their own. A mission of solitude, an ensured lonely death. Millions of years prior, as the scientist in the cave breathed his final breaths, he looked over the machine's readings again and again, content to see that finally the seeds of humanity were growing in a planet besides their doomed homeworld. He approached the wall, and scrawled *Humanity on Earth: Growing, * before collapsing to the floor from the sickness that had consumed their planet. 200,000 seeding attempts, and finally a success. Their species would be saved.
The scientist died with a contented sigh, much like the one Jan breathed over his body in a time far, far away. Jan knew this discovery was *huge. * And yet, she had no idea how truly right she was.