Freddy Kreuger landed expertly on the floor of a new dream.
He always kept his eyes closed when he leapt. Thousands of times, the same blind ritual: he swallowed, squinted deeply, felt his scars become taut as he dissolved into the essence of thought, and abandoned the remnants of his shriveled vessel buried deep under some unknown black plain. For Kreuger, to venture forth into another's mind was to open a window in a stuffy room, a welcome respite from the constant pain of limbo.
And here he was, standing alone in a new world, a fresh animal to carve. His eyes, always blurry after a successful transfer, adjusted to this new place. Black. He turned his head, expecting as usual to be confronted with a cliched image: A cold, deserted suburban street, perhaps; or an empty, decrepit house that groaned with the gentlest breeze; or maybe a classroom of cruel totems, mocking and tearing at an embarrassed dreamer as they stuttered, cried, peed themselves, whatever.
The same. The same. The same. The young were so easily tormented, he often thought. They fear the mundane, the unknown: An embarrassing moment between lovers or a monster in the dark. If they only knew, he thought, what awaits through age and time. Time time time time.
Kreuger yearned for the novel, to encounter once again the joy with which he first sprinted through the nightmares of the young, drowning their sweet visions in rust, blood and fire. Then, each landing was a voyage into native lands rich with vigor and emotion. He fed off the pain of these dreamworlds, often terrorizing his victims for months - sometimes years - before butchering the innocent young. He was satiated, content with the responsibility some cruel God had silently given him those decades back.
Now, each leap had become labored. Tedious killings helped pass the time, but tormenting the weak had become too simple to satiate his demonic need for chaos. To land on fertile ground and discover a deluge of cliched nightmares was akin to biting into a steak and finding it filled with cigarette ash.
But this place was new.
It wasn't that all he saw was darkness. No. It was that there was nothing for the darkness to exist in. Indeed, as he looked down, he realized that he had subconsciously created the platform he was standing on. If not for this, he would have fallen into...whatever it was beneath.
He walked to the jagged edges of the platform and looked out. His skull began to crack, lengthen and narrow outward until it resembled a grotesque telescope with his bulbous eye at the tail end. He glassed the area around him, his putrid iris flitting back in forth in the socket. Blackness.
He tried to teleport to a new spot in the dream, but instantly found himself on the same platform again. Kreuger, who had become used to feeling a deity in these dream worlds, sat down. A vacuous silence beat against his scarred ears.
5 minutes, 5 decades, there was no distinction in the world of a dream. Krueger often used this to his advantage, carving his victims methodically for what seemed like days, but in all reality may have only been a few minutes of their dreaming. Time was a weapon for him. But for the first time in his storied afterlife, he felt himself staring down its barrel.
Hours seemed to pass in the black. He sat; He paced; He jumped; He teleported; He grew in size; He shrank; He sprouted wings and flew; Became sludge and fell; He struck out at the darkness; He screamed; No matter. He found himself, again, again, again, on the platform, swallowed by nothing.
Weeks, months, years. Alone.
He did not know when the changes began to show.
Was it the 1,000th time he leapt into the black, only to land softly once more on this infernal platform? Was it the hundredth time he tried to throw himself into another's dream, only to be brought back to this familiar void? Was it when the claw that had for so long been his greatest weapon, refused to fasten to his hand, slipping off with the smallest gesture? Or perhaps it was when his scars began to ache and, unbelievably, heal? Or even after that, when a cold lump settled permanently in his bowels, a lump that made him shiver and quake? A familiar sensation, something he hadn't experienced...
SHAAAAAAATTEEEEEEER
The windows blasted inward, a molotov cocktail landing feet from where he cowered in the corner.
"I didn't do it!" he screamed. "It wasn't me!"
His pant leg had caught fire. He scrambled to put it out with his hands, barely acknowledging the pain as his skin shriveled and snapped in the heat. Only after the fire was out did he acknowledge the yelling outside the factory door.
"You will die for what you did!" someone shrieked.
"My daughter! My daughter! My daughter!"
"Burn you monster! You faggot monster!"
There were at least seven people outside the door, throwing rocks and fire through the windows as quickly as they could. They were monstrous, and they scared him.
Krueger did not know specifically who the people were, but he knew why they were there.
I can still beg for forgiveness, he thought. These sheep have a way with forgiving.
"Please, I'm sorry! I need help!"
The flames grew, the heat grew, and the yelling outside became another wall. He was not getting away, swallowed by the heat. His skin was like burning oil, it melted and dripped off his fingers.
"They deserved it, some off them even liked it" he yelled meekly, his throat already blistered down into his lungs. "HAHAHAHAHAAHAHahahahahaaaaa......"
He was losing sight, and he could not hear over the roar and crash of the crumbling machinery.
"Iff thereee isssszzzz somethin...someoneeee withhhhh...the pooooowerrrrrhhuuuuuugghh...."
His throat collapsed. He could not breathe. He screamed in his mind.
"GIVE ME THE POWER TO BRING RETRIBUTION, TO PAY THE PAIN BACK. I HAVE NOT FINISHED MY CALLING! WHATEVER OLD GOD STILL WALKS, BRING ME TO YOU...."
His body was alight, his red and black sweater fusing to his flesh, melting in the orange of the flames.
Black.
He startled up, sweating, cold, naked. His teeth clattered together. He looked around at his surroundings, confused as to where he was, the pain of his death as fresh as the first time, the time he burned. He was back in the void, back on the same platform. Yes, he thought. Where I am a God once more.
He stood, his legs weak and...strange, somehow. He looked down.
The skin on his legs was flawless. Pale. Smooth. He raised his hands in front of him. Clean. His glove gone. He squeezed his hands into fists, stretched each finger out in front of him. Disbelief. What has happened…
Stop.
Something there, out in the darkness. Moving.
...ah........haha............
Growing. Growing. He edged backwards, away from the noise.
ahahha.......hahhaaahhee.......
Louder, painful. The cold stone grew in his gut as the sound inched forward.
HahaHHHAAHAHA....HHEEEEEE HHHEEE OOOOOOOOHHHH HHHEEEEEEE
A figure in purple skipped gleefully towards him, a white face dancing up and down in the dark.
Kreuger felt his pulse race, sweat forming under his arms and on his forehead. What was it? Where am I? Laughing, laughing, LAUGHING
Silence.
The figure was gone.
Krueger scrambled on the floor, turning in every direction, trying to grow wings, to find his glove, to jump away. Nothing.
He sat and heaved his breath.
Staring.
Waiting.
And then, a whisper.
Behind him.
"Now THAT'S a story."
Krueger turned.
The thing from the dark stroked the deep scars on either side of its mouth with a rusted straight razor. It giggled.
"My turn."
------------------------------------ -
edit - a word