I will never understand why people hate love. I don't know if it'll ever change, no, but maybe that's why I'm alive. To make a difference in a world that kicks you relentlessly when you're down. To maybe give the world a little more love.
It started when I was in chemistry class, and he moved to the school for senior year. I couldn't get him out of my head. His short black hair, ripped clothes. There was something rebellious about him, something wild I never had gotten to experience before. The butterflies, the nervousness, the blood pumping through my body when I was around him. It felt so good, so right, so dangerous and wrong. *Why was it wrong? * I had thought once. *Am I wrong? *
We started out as lab partners, put together by nothing more than chance, and we clicked. There was something about just having him as a friend that made me feel more alive than my dull life that had surrounded me. The last year of school, a nothing year filled with grades to try and get into a university or college. He liked so much of the same things as me, and we started hanging out after school for something to do. It was exhilarating to finally have someone. He was my friend, then, nothing more, but I felt it.
The first time he kissed me, I pushed him away. It confused me. I had spent so many years trapped inside my own world that I had forgotten about the man in front of me. He knew what he wanted, and I barely knew myself. As I looked at the silhouetted houses off in the distance, the bright, amazing, and brilliant sky, casting orange and yellows and purples, I forgot to breathe. My problems then seemed so small, so insignificant next to him. I quietly kissed him back, and I opened myself up for the world to read my small text of a life not yet lived.
Those stolen kisses were nothing sexual. He never tried to advance anything I hadn't wanted. We quietly planned it out. Go to college together. Share a dorm. Rent an apartment. It looked so possible back then, so innocent and normal. For the first time, I actually felt normal. So beautifully, dangerously normal. Until, one day, I fell. My parents went through my phone, our private texts. The brutality I felt that day was nothing compared to the torture I felt when I left the house. I left my mother to my father's drunken fit of rage. I loved my parents, but I knew they no longer felt properly for me. I went to him naturally, like a magnet to metal. Like metal, he felt cold, unmovable when he found out what happened to me. He, too, turned his back with one last hidden kiss.
The question came again to me. *Am I wrong? * How though, could anybody be wrong for feeling love. An emotion that I can't even begin to describe. *How can anybody hate* is such a larger and more important question, yet we ask ourselves about love. Love is created in such ways it fills us with unexplainable joy. It's the rays of sun after a storm. The heat after a long, cold winter. We have so many feelings from this four letter word, and we still choose the other.
I was scared. I dare not go home, to be thrown in church, beaten, pulled out of school. I took the bus to the nearest city, and I thought that maybe I'd find some help there. The thing is, this world is big. A hand can only reach so far, and last so long before moving onto the next need.
I was alone.
I was broke.
I was alive.
So many years of keeping everything in, of holding myself together piece by piece to just have the glue last a little longer. For the first time, I was alive. I was open to the world, no matter how much the world hated me. I was open myself, no matter how much I hated me.
I ate from garbage cans, slept in shelters, begged on the street for any money the rich suited man or woman could spare. Sometimes I was ignored, sometimes I was blessed. You have no idea how much a dollar goes. It was a cycle, I found. Without a place to live, I couldn't obtain a job. Without a job I couldn't afford an apartment. Whatever friends I had when I left were gone, unsupportive of me and sure to turn me into my parents. I was as much of a freak to them as to my own blood. So, I stayed within the city alleyways, keeping careful watch not to go down those run by dealers or gangs or prostitutes.
I made friends out in the streets or railroads. I shared stories, and heard so many more. Alcoholics to drug users to depressed men and women. Kids like me, kids unlike me. Adults like me. And adults unlike me. Those stories kept me alive more than the garbage from the local restaurant. These people were more real than anybody living in suburbia. I had watched more sunrises and sets than I can count. Stared up at the stars long enough to realize how tiny and magnificent we are. The world was starting to feel solid under my feet. I had to worry about eating, and where to go for the winter, but it felt so honest and hard. I will always be grateful for that, the feeling of how real life is. How we're all truly hurtling towards death at a quickening pace. What makes life so meaningful is because of the fact that in the end, we die.
I was stabbed. That's how, to my own discontent, I was discovered. Three times in the stomach for walking down the wrong alley at the wrong time. It was hard, seeing my mother again. She wept, but it felt wrong, so surreal. My father refused to see me, which hadn't surprised me. When they took me home, everything was how it was when I left. Clean, with a smell of heavy alcohol underneath the air freshener. I missed the smell of the city, the freedom. Yet, at the same time I knew now was not the time to leave. I had changed into a different person, and even though my mother wept over my lost cause and my father refused to make eye contact with me, I was finally happy with myself.
I knew the answer. *I am not wrong. *
For a while, I was unsure what to do with myself. I no longer had the need to walk the streets and mark alleyways just to be safe. No longer needed to scavenge for food, or tell the stories to those never ending storytellers. My parents put me in church, and I allowed them. I have nothing wrong with faith, for faith does not hate me. People do. And people can.
They sent me here, to you.
I am not wrong. Do not try to change me.
For although you may not understand me, I will never understand why you choose to hate love.
***
Wasn't that a trip down memory lane...
Links!
/r/TheArchersWriting
www.thearcherswriting.wordpress.com