I giggle at the expression on their faces, all twisted and mangled by anger and despair.
"25 people," I repeat myself. "Just 25."
People glance about nervously, probably calculating the probability of their own survival. No matter how they dice it, it's a simple calculation: They will all die in three weeks if they don't entertain me.
"Save my kid!" someone shouts from the crowd. "I don't care about my own life or anything else. Just my kid! That's all I ask!"
I tilt my head to the side, pretending to consider it. Then I grin. "If your kid passes the interview, sure."
The cries of anguish delights my soul. Here are the world's most powerful men and women on their hands and knees, begging me to save their lives. They offer up money, they offer up social status. But they're not seeing the big picture at all. If I only have 25 cure, then I'm not going to let the richest of the rich buy them from me. How would they survive in a world stripped of their money and power? No, no. Much better to think this through. Pick people who have the potential of survival once the rest of humanity is gone.
"We don't have enough time to sit through an interview!" someone shouts. "We have less than three weeks to live!"
"Then maybe you should live to your fullest before you die!" I tell them brightly.
There's more shouts of dissent and anger, but I ignore it. If they don't like the way I run things, then obviously they won't be chosen. It's not like the 25 people with the cure is guaranteed to survive in a world without other humans anyways. People are such simpletons. They're so obsessed with the idea of living that they can't see the bigger picture.
"Then I'll just kill you!" someone shouts, waving a gun about. "If I kill you, then I'll have the power to save everyone here! And if I kill you, then that's one more antidote for the people!"
"Is that so?" I ask, laughing. "It's cute logic, but there's just one tiny problem. I placed the antidotes in a safe that's only accessible through 12 number combination. After three wrong inputs, the safe goes boom! You sure you want to kill me?"
The look of hatred shines brightly in their eyes. Oh, how precious. They think hating me is going to solve their problems!
"Why bother gathering us and telling us this? You already have people you want to save picked out, don't you?"
My good mood is dashed within seconds at the reminder. The smile falls from my face and I rub the back of my neck. "There's no one else I can save."
It's obvious that they don't believe me, so I smile. Not filled with mirth or glee. Just a stretch of the lips because these poor, pathetic fools still don't understand.
"Even if this disease is cured, it doesn't mean anything else is. Even if I administer the cure for this disease, terminal cancer will kill her in a few days. So why bother? I'd rather die by her side with the rest of humanity. It's a fitting wedding gift, don't you think?"
"You're sick."
I laugh.