"H-hello?" mewls a small voice at my elbow, accompanied by a tug on the leather strap of my handbag. It's a tiny girl, six years old if she's a day, all bushy blonde pigtails straining to burst free of the red hairties.
"I'm *lotht*," she confesses in the charming lisp that signifies missing teeth - and I immediately go into that mothering mode that's instinctive to women in my family, acquired from my deceased mother; bending down to the child's height, concern writ large on my face.
"Oh darling, how did you get lost? Do you know where your parents are?"
She screws up her pink face in concentration, then shakes her head, the jaunty pigtails swishing about,
"Nup," she confesses, poking a toe at the gap under my heels, then, "funny shoeth," she lisps, delighted.
I look her over for clues about her identity or parentage. She's wearing a yellow t-shirt with a frog on it, no shoes and orange shorts that are probably a size too big for her - one hand keeps hitching them up. She doesn't have a backpack or anything else that might give a clue to her identity.
"What's your name, little one?"
She thinks for a moment, then points to my hair, "I want hair like *that*."
Attention span of a gnat, apparently. I take her tiny hand in mine and say, "Do you want to come for a walk and help me find the mall security guard?"
The blond head nods assent and she plunges her grubby hand into mine, twisting a corner of her froggy t-shirt in the other thumb.
We walk for a while past the shops and she seems content enough, skipping slightly and grinning at me; a smile that's half gums and half baby teeth. Her eyes are so brown that they're nearly black, I notice.
"Um," she says, tugging my hand, "Can we go thith way?"
Her look is pleading; the awkward smile of a child out of her depth, but trying hard. She's pulling me gently towards a dead part of the mall; semi-closed down, only a couple of shop lights are on.
"Honey, I don't think that's a great idea, we need to -"
"*Pweaaaaaaathe, *" she begs, pulling my hand with both of hers now.
Oh what the hell. There was bound to be security down there anyway.
As we walk I notice scribbles on her hands and arms, amongst the natural grime of a six year old.
"What's that on your arms little one?"
"Nameth," she lisps laconically.
"Whose names?"
"Um," she pauses to look into a derelict shop, "nameth of peopleth I have to meet today."
How curious.
"Look," she says, pointing to her palm.
On the tiny pink pad of her thumb is scrawled a name - my name.
"Um," she looks at her toes and wiggles them, "We have to go into the shop now."
"What?"
The dark void of the shop frontage yawns in front of me and the girl drags me in. I can't resists and I don't know why.
"Don't worry," she whispers, "my mum and dad are in here - and tho are yourth."
Hand in hand, I walk into the abyss with Death, who grins her gummy smile and skips along, all pigtails and childlike awkwardness.