######[] (#dropcap)
Gary Almond watched the sun set from the basket of a hot air balloon, all while enjoying the *Somewhere Over the Rainbow* on his magical Walkman.
Gifted to Gary by a mysterious hobo for buying him booze, the magical Walkman only played the soundtrack to Gary's life, as if it knew exactly what music he needed.
High above rolling green hills on his hot air balloon, IZ Kamakawiwo'ole's angelic voice melted Gary's worries away. Nothing could ruin this day, except perhaps his lifelong enemy Mortimer Splanket. Fuck that guy.
It is at this point the magical Walkman abruptly cut off the peaceful song and began to play John Williams's *Duel of the Fates*.
Gary was startled into a heightened state of alertness. The Walkman had never failed him. He scanned the horizon. Something was about to happen and Gary couldn't find the source of danger.
In the distance, a yellow biplane sped towards Gary's balloon. Gary knew what this was. "Splanket!" he shook his fist.
Indeed, it was Mortimer Splanket on a stolen crop duster here to kill Gary once and for all. Splanket climbed out of the cockpit seat as he approached the hot air balloon. He had no plan; just rage. "ALMOND!!" He leapt out of the biplane onto the balloon. One of the plane's wings clipped the balloon, tearing a large gash into the fabric. Splanket began to slide down one of the ropes.
The soundtrack on Gary's magical Walkman reached its first peak as Splanket slid into the basket. The two slugged it out to the intense choir of *Duel of the Fates*, both of them ignoring that the fact that they were falling out of the sky.
Punch after brutal punch; neither had the upper hand. The basket began to spin around the wilting balloon, and the centripetal force pushed them to the floor of the basket. Splanket wrapped his elbow around Gary's neck. Gary was about to pass out.
Without warning, the hot air balloon crashed on top of a speeding train. Gary was sent flying into the space between two cars. His face was inches from the blurring tracks when he caught himself on the train joints holding the two cars together. Gary tried to pull himself up with his free arm, but the fall had dislocated his shoulder. Luckily, the headphones were still secure on his head. He didn't want to have a fight to the death without *Duel of the Fates*.
Meanwhile, Splanket was stuck in the basket as it dragged next to the wheels of the train. Bloodied and dazed from the impact, he searched for any decent handhold before the basket was sucked under the wheels. The balloon was tearing and Splanket's ground was slipping from underfoot. He grabbed a corner at the end of one train car and saw Gary in the gap behind it.
"Almond!"
"Splanket!" Still in danger of falling between the cars, Gary used one leg to kick at Splinket to the horns of John Williams's orchestra.
The balloon finally tore to shreds, and both the basket and burner slipped away. Splinket held onto the train with both feet dragging beside the track.
The hot air balloon's burner was crushed by one of the wheels several cars back. The ensuing explosion derailed one car just as *Duel of the Fates* hit another peak. Gary propped himself with his legs and raised the volume on his magical Walkman with his one good arm. He loved how spot-on it was at capturing the moment.
The derailed car behind them began to topple other cars one by one.
Splanket found footing and climbed into the gap. Standing between the two cars, he stomped on Gary's hand.
Gary fell further down and his dislocated arm grazed the track's crossbeams.
Splanket moved down to try to kick Gary completely off. Fortunately for Gary, one of the kicks to his shoulder snapped the dislocated socket back into place.
Now free to use both arms, Gary pulled on Splanket's leg. Splanket slipped and landed on his crotch, ending up with the train joints between his legs.
The derailment finally reached the car to one side of them. It began to twist in place and one its wheels lifted off the rail.
Just as the score was reaching its crescendo, Gary pulled the latch pin on the train joint and used it like brass knuckles to beat on Splanket.
With the trains unhooked, the cars began to separate. Splanket was now too far for Gary to punch. The two men stared at each other as they drifted apart.
Splanket felt a little defeated as the car he was on started to topple. "Punk ass bitch!"
"Tuck and roll, shit stain!" replied Gary.
Tuck and roll he did.
Gary stood at the end of the train, bruised and bleeding. As he looked back at the tumbling cars, *Duel of the Fates* faded back into *Somewhere Over the Rainbow* at the wonderful view. Gary wondered how long until the next time they meet.