Ragnar was tired. He slouched low into his lair and slumped on his, albeit enormous, couch in front of the TV.
He loved his job, all he'd ever wanted to be was a cop, but something was missing. He'd assumed he could break the mold, be different to the other dragons in the force. The first few months were full of optimism and determination, but the last few years...well, the last few years were slowly wearing him down.
It wasn't the rejection from the Intelligence Unit that had disappointed him the most, it was difficult for a dragon to go undercover after all, it was the realization that he really only served one purpose. There was only one reason the Force employed dragons; traffic reports. The eye in the sky. It wasn't why Ragnar had joined up. Dwarves were the rank and file, Orcs the Riot Police, Faeries the under cover detectives, Elves were the Chiefs and Dragons were the air support. That's just the way it was. It's the way it had always been. Ragnar didn't think this was fair. On occasion, he'd voiced this opinion to the other dragons, but they would just laugh.
"We have wings, Raggy! Wings! What else would we do?" they would scoff.
Varyn once suggested crowd control. "Fire breath, lads!" He would say. "Fire breath! One quick huff and the goblins will scatter, we'll be heroes! And the ones that don't get out of the way would make a lovely snack." He'd usually be drooling at this point.
Varyn's opinions weren't usually given much attention.
Ragnar sighed. He heaved himself up and climbed the tunnel that led to the top of the cliff. His cave sat atop a mountain overlooking the city to the south, but if he turned north and crossed to the other side, he could see the stars. Moonlight glinted off the river at the bottom of the valley, it led all the way north to the Plains. One day he'd follow it. One day he'd just keep going and never turn back. One day..... but not today.
There was a loud pop, followed by a high pitched whizzing, followed by another pop. Warlocks. Arching his neck behind him, he could see the faint purple and pink after glow of a firework. The Warlocks in their tower were experimenting again. It wasn't enough that he hated his job, but those damned Warlocks were trying to put him of it by building flying machines!
Ragnar had friends amongst the Faeries however, and faeries had no great love of Warlocks. Nobody was really sure if the Warlocks were a race of being unto themselves, or if it was just a coincidence that all the Warlocks were the same race. Either way, the Faeries were of the opinion that were thieves of magic. It didn't take a lot of effort to convince the Faeries to sabotage a few experiments here and there.
Ragnar sat perched atop the mountain watching the Warlock drift slowly to the ground. They at least, had the sense to invent parachutes first.