"*What do you mean I can't get another refill*?" I muttered in annoyance. The Dr. Jackson's face was stern and he seemed concerned. What was it? Sixth? Ninth time I've gotten an extension on my sleep meds? I guess I'd be concerned too if I was him.
"*Look, Mr. Davis. I can't give you any more of the medication. It was suppose to be a temporary solution for your insomnia, but a permanent one. Perhaps I could refer you to a pscyh*-" I sighed and muttered a curse under my breath as I took my coat and left the room. I didn't want to waste more time with him; I had bigger plans for my evening. I headed out the door of the doctor's office and fumbled for my keys as I walked to my truck.
It was about four in the afternoon now, and it'd take me a good hour to get home through rush hour traffic. I rubbed my eyes as I got in the driver seat, thinking about the dreams again. The sooner I get home, the sooner I can get into bed and the sooner I can get back to it. It'll be faster once I get on the highway.
It started about four months ago after the accident at work. Something fell from the conveyors overhead and I was in the way. Out like a light. The first time I was there, it only felt like a couple hours, but even then it wasn't enough. I relived moments from high school but I was doing better than real life though. My grades were great, and I was way more popular. I even got a date to the prom and we were crowned king and queen. It was great to have control of my life, even if it was just a dream. I just thought it was a lucent dream that I've read about. One of those "once in a blue moon" thing-
"*SHIT! The Blue Moon Cafe! *" The small diner swishes by as my left hand flicks the turn signal immediately and I swerve into the lane next to me and onto the off-ramp. The car behind me brakes hard, pounds the horn, and raises his unappreciative finger to me as I wave an apologetic hand back.
It wasn't all the time at first. Tops maybe two or three times a week, but slowly they became more frequent, and after about two months, it was nightly. It was addictive though, like writing my own story of my own epic life. **I started off by going back to high school and finishing it off. It felt great to see old friends again and to show that I was worth something to the teachers. At first I was kinda worried that this was from the injury, maybe bleeding in my head or something. Eventually though, I stopped worrying about it. I enjoyed the dreams, even more than my real life. I had nothing going for me in the real world. My disability pay was barely enough to keep me going, I lived in a small apartment with no family, no girlfriend. Not even a dog. But in my dream world? I was doing great. I rose up through the business world with my Master's degree and created a company worth billions. I had TWO dogs AND an albino lion for pets. I was popular and partied with celebrities every weekend. On Facebook I had like 837 friends.
"*837*," I said to no one in particular "*and that is my exit*." The traffic had thinned out by now, and I was on the home stretch to getting back to my "good" life. Every day I spent awake seemed to drag on now, like distractions from my fantasy world. The meds really helped to get me to sleep, and to keep me asleep, but I guess I'd have to find another way now.
Not only did they start occurring nightly, but the time I spent in my dream world got longer and longer. They were clearer each time too. At first it all seemed fuzzy, and I couldn't hear much. But eventually all the senses came with them. I could hear things clearly, see things in vibrance, smell and taste delicacies. They only lasted Hour at first, but then days, and then weeks. Last night I went for almost a year, and what a year it was. I was doing great in my dream world. I was on top of the world. I was famous, a great political leader, and my empire was rising. A war had started between another country, and I wasn't about to back down. I gave a grand speech to my men as we headed out to the battlefield. Planes boomed overhead as my men marched forward with me in the vanguard in my tank-
The sound of glass breaking and metal tearing made me wince in pain and my ears throb in protest. The truck flew out of my control as the tanker clipped me. My foot stomped on the brakes as I frantically spun the steering wheel to try to maintain a direction. The tires slipped off the road and I felt weightless as my truck flipped over into the ditch; then the world couldn't stop spinning. Everything was airborne inside the vehicle and my body jolted around without bounds aside from the seat belt. The grinding of metal against the ground, the piercing of glass into my skin, the thundering of the cannon shots and the roar of the fighter jets above. The world was dark and cold.
"*Wake up! *" a voice screamed at me. Eyes adjusting to the light of day again, the wreckage smoldered in the distance. "*Thank god, I thought you'd gone into a coma there*."
"*Dr. Jac*kson?" my trembling voice gasped.
"Sir, I know it is painful, but we need you to get up again."
"W-what? Why? I-i c-" I felt like I had a tube down my throat.
"The enemy marches against us in great numbers, the men need you to guide them."
My eyes widened, and the pain faded a bit, but all my senses came back to me with clarity. I felt alive again.
"I'll lead the charge."
---------------- -
First timer, hope it wasn't too terrible.