"Today, meine students, you will learn how to arouse a subject with a charm spell of Dominis Vinco" said venerated but deeply respected Helga von Taurgum, the mistress of Darkness, while she walked in her tight dark clothes around her subjects in class, the venerated Mistress was well suited for her age of barely passed forty and her hips kept intentionally moving in manner of teasing the barely maturing males and females of the great academy of the Magical Bondage.
"Ah, young Asswulf" she suddenly turned to sixteen year old blonde and a bit chubby teenager, whom quickly dropped his head in shame when he looked into the youngish face of the Mistress and her brown eyes that seemed childish, but felt the joys of life that gave great wisdom to her "why you and miss Titeria do not try a small practice."
Asswulf turned to his comrade in bondage, Titeria, whom wild curly red hair was containable only by the leather strap on her head that kept it in check of bursting wildly.
"Wh.. what if I do something wrong? What if I cause pain or something...worse?" said Asswulf with uncertainty the size a building block.
"Oh, sweet, sweet, Asswulf" said Mistress and like a shadow came elegantly right behind him "I am here for you to keep you and your comrade safe" she said elegantly, while putting her hand with long fingers and black nails onto his shoulder and said in commanding tone "pick up your whip."
Asswulf picked up his whip, just like all the whips that represented the Id of their Maister Kommandant, so was his represented in a manner that symbolized his inner self, a bit short but very fat whip that when used produced the arcane powers dormant inside each wielder that splashed in waves onto the friends and foes alike.
The Mistress stud behind Asswulf and her hand went from his shoulder onto the palm of his hand where he held his fat whip. Asswulf felt her warm breath and her female curves that pressed onto his back, meaty and big curves of maternal heritage that any man would lay with.
Titeria came with commanding step right in front of him, her young and still developing body in black robes of night similar to the Mistress but yet without the curves of maternal beauty.
"I am waiting meine camarade in bondage" said to now utterly confused Asswulf.
"I...I am not ready" said Asswulf while the Mistress gently picked up his palm with whip.
"Fear not meine little student, 'zer is no big bad wolves in dis class" said Mistress, her german accent begun to appear like the SS legions before Poland.
--- to be continued---