I remember the day clearly, even though it was many years ago. It started out so normal, just a regular day of high school.
I remember it happened during our free period. My friends and I were talking, yanking up our sleeves to show our wrists, gossiping about our dreams of when our left mark would finally disappear. My friend sitting next to me gasped and grabbed my wrist, showing me as one of my marks started to fade.
It was the right one.
For the rest of the day I couldn't take my eyes of that mark, it seemed to grow more and more faint until I was sure that it was gone, and then it would come back, gaining strength before it started to fade again.
The school let me go home early, understanding how distressed I must have been as I watched that little mark, wondering what difficulties my soulmate was going through.
My mother stayed up with me that night and watched the mark with me, waiting for the time the little mark went away. It never did.
I stayed home for a few days, not wanting to take my eyes off the mark for a second, desperate to find my soulmate before the mark was gone, but having no idea how to do it. However, after three days the mark gained some strength and stabilized. It was still lighter than the left, though.
It was still fading slowly.
I did everything I could to find my soulmate. I watched the news and searched the internet hoping to find their story. Just hoping to find my soulmate.
I know my friends at school watched my wrist as the mark fades. Some days they agree it looks a little stronger while other days they hug me tight because we all know it looks weaker than usual.
It stayed like that for years, and slowly I got to know my soulmate. The mark always seemed more unsteady in the winter. It seemed to fade faster, stay weaker when the cold weather really started to roll in.
It was always the strongest in spring. Some days the right would seem almost as strong as the left, and I imagined on those days the weather must have been beautiful. The flowers in full bloom, the birds singing, hope and happiness and life.
I graduated college without ever dating anyone. A few of my friends had gotten serious with their partners, but non-soulmate relationships were always just for fun, they were formed with the knowledge that one day it would end when one of them found their soulmate.
I just couldn't get close to anyone though, it would have felt like a betrayal to that little mark that still fought valiantly on my wrist.
The mark disappeared a year after I graduated.
I was always worried when it got so faint I had to squint my eyes to make sure it was still there. It had always come back, so I didn't think too much about it until the day had gone by and when getting ready for bed my little mark still hadn't gained strength.
I woke up at two in the morning with a feeling of dread.
The left mark stood dark and strong against my pale skin.
The right was gone.
I had a hard time with grief after that day.
"It wasn't fair!" I would cry. I was heart broken because the little dot I had come to love was gone. I would never again watch as it gained strength in the spring. I couldn't imagine what the weather there was like as it gave my soulmate hope and strength. I would never again feel the pride and relief as the mark recovered after a long bout of being weak and fading. The left mark; however, was a constant reminder that I had never really had my soulmate to lose. I didn't even know their name, where they lived, I'd never seen their face. They may as well have never existed to me.
It was hard when people would see the missing right mark and look at me with pity. It was even harder when people would ask me "Oh! So you found your soulmate!?" and all I could say was no.
Sometimes they just didn't realise which mark they were looking at. I started making sure my wrist was always covered.
It was three years after my soulmate's death that I met Todd. I was sitting alone at my local coffee shop when he asked if he could sit with me. I told him I would love the company and we ended up talking for hours.
I felt a shock of fear when my sleeve got caught on the edge on the table and he saw my wrist. I dreaded the look of pity that I knew he would give me.
Instead he looked me in the eye and pulled up his own sleeve.
"Me too," he said as he laid his arm on the table. His right mark was missing, too.
We got married in the spring on a day with beautiful weather and blooming flowers. It had been strange building a relationship without the marks to tell us whether it would work or not. But Todd was kind, gentle, and smart. He always seemed to know when he needed to make me laugh when I was feeling down, or if he should just hold me and let me grieve for that little missing mark.
We did everything we could to make each other happy.
We had three wonderful children. Each with both their marks fully intact.
My oldest boy lost his left mark at the age of three when we moved to a new house and met the little girl next door. My middle child, a bright little firecracker of a girl lost her left mark when her soulmate's car slid on ice and rear-ended hers. They were both fine.
My youngest lost his right mark the day he lost his left. His soulmate came into the emergency room with a badge and a gunshot wound, it was the first time he had lost a patient.
We all went on vacation to help him get away. He told me he was sad but he knows he still has hope to find love. Todd and I found each other after all.
It was there on foreign soil I found him. As my husband admired the architecture on the old church I walked among the graves.
"He fought long and hard." One read.
I watched the left mark fade from my wrist.
"We meet at last."