The eyes aren't just the window to the soul. They are the whole house.
Juvenile cataracts, they had told me at 14, when I stopped being able to read. I was legally blind before I even had the chance to write the test for my learner's permit. Colors left first, then solid edges of shapes. Soon, my world became a swirling void of blacks and grays.
I prayed, at first. Then, I prayed harder. Then, I flat-out begged god to let me see once more. Finally, I stopped begging. My heart hardened, and I withdrew.
It took both parents, and my uncle to force open my door. It's not that I was trying to kill myself, just that I didn't care to eat, drink or be seen in public at all. They stuck me in hospice, another infirm, disregarded and shelved before his prime.
It was, no exaggeration, April fool's day, three weeks past my twenty-fifth birthday, when my Mom burst through my door.
"They have a donor! A perfect match!" I could practically hear her tears as she wept with joy. A second chance. A new set of windows for the light to shine though.
Consultations became pre-ops, and I could feel my optimism creeping back in as the sedatives mixed with my blood. Happy dreams of colors, and faces occupied my thoughts as my future was re-written by skilled surgeons.
Of course, it's never like the movies. I wasn't able to remove the bandages for nearly a month. My mom and dad both came with me, and my heart raced. I heard the doctor cross the room, and everyone hushed as he lowered the lights.
When I opened my eyes, I could tell something was wrong. My mom shone like the sun, her eyes blazed with a compassion that caused me physical pain. A lifetime of compassion and dedication to her blind son suddenly filled my mind, and it hurt. It hurt like a sledgehammer to the face.
I grimaced and turned away from this new horror.
"What's wrong?" My father asked.
When I turned to look at him, darker visions poured into my consciousness. Sleeping with women behind my mother's back. Instantly I knew that he would meet his mistresses while we were at appointments and specialists. I felt hurt, not only for me, but for my mother as well.
"I can see you." It was my voice, but flatter, colder than I could have ever produced on my own.
"Oh! That's wonderful!" My mother leapt from her seat across from me. Once again, looking at her caused me great pain.
"I don't think you understand. I. Can. Really. See you." I had returned my gaze to the dark energy seeping out of my father.
Slowly, calmly, I reached toward his face, and tore out his eyes. As he clawed at the new holes in his unrepentant face, I twisted his head around so that it faced the opposite wall.
"He was a great and terrible sinner, your plane is better for having lost him." I never looked at my mother, as I left the doctor's office and my old life forever.
A new house. A new soul. All the souls, of all the sinners. So many eyes to take.