The Moon, a Crack, and Conspiracies
(Critiques and other comments greatly encouraged)
"Aliens. I knew it." Paul said immediately.
It has been at least ten minutes since we saw this giant slit in the moon…
everyone in the town is here, and I would imagine everyone everywhere in the world is looking. Before the moon got a new hole, there was a
massive tear sound echoing through my entire town. We all ran out of our
homes, our stores, our bars… like I said everyone's out here.
"You think the media is gonna report this?" I said to Paul.
"Naw, they ain't doin'shit about this… and if they are, sure as hell not
gonna be the truth."
In the background, you can see cops just coming into town, stopping and
looking straight up at the moon. I look back, and Jones is going back into
Harry's, probably the get his hands on some free liquor. Wendy and her
two young kids have stopped on the side. her three-year old keeps pointing his chubby fingers at the moon. The crack is… unsettling, almost
like a chasm to the abyss.
"In fact," Paul continues, "I bet the government have somethin'to do with
this. Read somewhere that they're harvestin'the power of the sun and
weaponizin'it. Sure as hell they're gonna transfer it over to the moon,
and shoot it outta this crack, destroyin'enemies we have in Korea, Iran,
Taiwan."
"We don't have enemies in Taiwan, Paul." I stop and think… yeah I
should've addressed that last...right after addressing the rest of that
bullshit.
"Don't matter, man. Point is, if we have enemies, they gonna get it now.
Shoot, maybe they'll start with all the enemies at home first."
I stop and look over to the left. Denise and her pretty, flowery white dress
is over starring at the moon with that asshole Jack. Old Viveca has had
too much of all the commotion and is, I can only imagine, walking back to
her house.
I begin to remember something. "Didn't Randy's grandpa go to the moon
once? Long time ago?"
"Sure did, proudest thing that has come out of this town."
"Shouldn't we talk to him? See if he knows something?"
"Don't see why not."
So Paul and I leave the commotion… my mind deciding whether I want to
think about Wendy or Denise tonight when I get home.
We turn to walk through Randy's dirt driveway leading to his farm, and I
knock on his door. Randy's face peaks out…. I can tell he's visibly shaken.
"Randy," I said. "You saw the moon didn't you?"
"What do you think? Whole fuckin'town's seen it, Vince."
"Well, we figured your grandpa went to the moon once… figured you
might know a little bit more about it than us?"
"My bet's Aliens… or government weapons." Paul says.
"My grandpa and his team went to burry something in the moon… never
said what… but all he said was it's bad… like real bad… like deep shit bad."
"Tell us all you know, Randy." I say. "We're interested."
"Won't do much good… all I can say is, the entire world is in some deep shit."
Randy opens to the door more, we step in and talk for a few hours….. turns out… maybe everybody's time on earth is about to get real shorter…