"The M.Modification files were destroyed for a reason, I understand that and I agreed with purging all information. However, I didn't ask to be chased and shot at. I've checked the news and half of our employees have died in car crashes over the past three days. If you think that we can't put two and two together, you are seriously mistaken." Doctor Zed said.
The time on the video camera read 2:03am. His hair was ruffled with pieces of plants in it and his white professor coat was torn in several places.
Zed cradled his head in his hands. "Whatever you think it is that I have. I promise you, I do not have it!"
He picked up a small desk fan and flung it violently at the wall next to him. An explosion sounded from above and Zed ducked. The ceiling light wobbled from side to side, causing one half of the room to become lighter than the other.
Zed leaned back in his chair and sighed loudly.
"I am recording this for those of you out there, who will wonder what happened to me." He pointed at the screen, "When you see I died in a car crash, you that see this, will know the truth!"
"The M.Modification project was not a failure, it was a success of pure genius. The boy 'Martin' figured it out on the first day. But guess what, he played us. He knew about the cameras, the tests, the environment and he pretended not to know."
Zed began laughing hysterically. "Then something happened, that we never thought would occur. He started becoming like them. Even though he knew! he began acting like the other children. But his brain couldn't take it. He couldn't change -it's impossible!"
He cleared his throat. "On the seventh day, the kid snapped. He killed them one by one. And when we sent in the soldiers, he killed them too!"
He laughed manically, rocking back and forward in his chair.
A loud boom sounded from above.
Zed ducked, "Shit...They've found me this time."
He looked back into the camera. "Know this, Martin is still on the run. So they're trying to silence us, but they can't, they never will. Something happened to the kid and they want to re-create it and control it. Imagine that kind of power in the hands of a government."
The second loud thud sounded.
Zed grabbed the can of sleeping gas next to his desk and inhaled deeply.
"Remember me." He whispered.
The hatch to the basement exploded downwards. A grenade was thrown in and the room flashed white. Two soldiers jumped into the room and grabbed Professor Zed.
They passed him up above.
The last soldier to leave turned and aimed his pistol at the camera.
*Crack! *
Error: