The first couple weeks after assignment day were kind of a blur of change and chaos. The first day not much happened, people were just trying to figure out what happened to them. Who did this? What does yours say? What does it mean? These questions were asked about a million times that day.
They were quickly forgotten once people realized that they also now had powers with their assigned roles. The roles were not random, doctors became healers or clerics, chemist were alchemist or potion brewers, farmers tended to be herbalist, gymnast were ninjas or acrobats. If you spent a lot of time hiking you would probably become a ranger or a druid. American football players mostly became berserkers or barbarians.
At first the government encouraged us to stay at homes, then they declared martial law, then there was no government. People quickly revolted once they found out most politicians were thieves or illusionists. People started forming militias and guilds, it is incredible how quickly people started using words from RPGs.
Most governments around the world fell in the first few weeks. Those that didn't started invading and conquering other lands. At first they used the old world weapons: guns and missiles. They worked at first but soon they became obsolete. Most classes had some sort of power against bullets. Magicians would cast ‘ barrier ’, warriors would ‘ protect'or ‘ defend ’, martial artists and ninjas could ‘ evade'and ‘ dodge ’.
New governments rose, there was a complete overhaul of the education system. Below the age of 14 everyone was a youngling. Then you would get your role and you were sent to that school to learn how to use your powers. Science had to be rewritten because most natural laws of the old world were no longer valid. The whole world changed in one night.
I know all this and more because when I woke up that morning the word on my arm was GOD. At first I couldn't do much. People didn't believe me much at first. Then they started following me and worshiping me. That is when I started having real power. The more they prayed to me the stronger I would become. Offering gave me tingles, sacrifices were a rush of power and strength. There were limits to my power but I was stronger than all the other classes. Except for the other Gods.