I was twenty-one years old when I left for the mission. The youngest astronaut in the history of the United States; the youngest astronaut in the history of the earth. The year was 2025, and our technology had exceeded our wildest expectations. To go beyond the reach of our solar system it would take a mere six and a half years. A goal that just ten years ago would have been incomprehensible.
For the duration of the flight I was going to be put into a deep sleep chamber. A necessary precaution given that every bit of weight counted on this voyage. This was a first for all of mankind, and the planning of this trip was an enormous undertaking. Once I reached the fringes of our solar system I would be awoken by the timer on the chamber so that I could proceed with my mission. The instructions for this mission were not overly complex. It was to be a simple matter of gathering data about the conditions outside the solar system. Any and all data retrieved would be used to carry out further missions for different crews in the future.
The private corporation funding this mission had spent untold amounts of money on this endeavor, and they wanted to see their investments payoff. I had been training since my body was physically capable of handling the rigorous exercises undergone by astronauts. My technological expertise with this particular class of ship were extensive and almost bordering on microanalytical. I had no partners on this mission except one; the ships AI. The AI was one of the first of its kind considering the general public still scorned the idea of them. This particular AI had named itself Charon.
The day before I left I said goodbye to my parents. My mother was bawling, and could barely say a word. She hugged me so tight I thought she would never let go. My father was a different story.
"You'll be back kiddo." He smiled. "I've never been so proud of you."
After a quick embrace between the two of us, and a couple more group hugs with both of them I headed back to my apartment one last time. I was ready.
The launch went smoothly thanks to the new design of rockets the corporation used. Before I knew it I was passing through the atmosphere saying goodbye to the only home I had known for twenty-one years. Once we had escaped the clutches of earth's gravity I leapt out of my seat, and experienced true weightlessness for the first time in my life. I giggled somewhat uncontrollably for a minute at the giddiness I felt. I propelled myself over to a window for one last glimpse of home. *I'll be back soon. *
"Engaging rotation function of ship arms. Artificial gravity will soon commence." Charon chimed.
I set the timer on the side of the chamber and climbed in.
"Charon, if the timer fails to go off wake me in exactly six and a half earth years from this point." I said.
"I will set my own timer right now and wake you as requested." It replied in its familiar female voice.
The door on the chamber closed and sleep overtook me.
Voices and lights danced around me. Waves crashed on the beaches of forgotten islands. The music of a thousand cultures intertwined into one melody. Strange patterns and colors formed sacred geometric shapes. Odd figures with faces that were familiar, but thousands of years old, watched me. Dreams stretched into eons, eons into eternities, and eventually it's as if time stood still. And then I awoke.
The door opened on the chamber, and I crawled out, nauseated from the journey. The lights on the ship slowly flickered to life as I gathered myself on the cold metal floor. After the dizziness passed I made my way to the cockpit.
"It's good to see you Parker." hummed Charon's voice "Though you are a couple of days earlier than I expected. It's fascinating that you are so resilient, most humans have extreme difficulty moving after staying in the deep sleep chamber for a couple of days. Much less getting up after spending six and a half years in one."
"They trained me well." I gruffly replied. "What's the status of the ship?"
"The ship is functioning at optimal levels, and we are ready to begin running tests whenever you give the word."
"Alright then lets proceed with some of the basics. Start running diagnostics on the immediate area surrounding us, and let me know what you find." I said
"No problem, I will let you know when that is completed." It replied.
This was the general procedure for the months that we spent out there past the solar system. I would order a battery of tests, and Charon would report back with the results. Most came back negative with the exception of some spectroscopy reports on some nearby asteroids that had drifted by. This was to be expected though. The main purpose of this expedition was to see if this was a feasible operation that could be done. So far in that aspect it was a success. We would pave the way for future expeditions that could potentially bring colonies to other worlds in the not so distant future.
Once our given time had elapsed, and I presumed that we had collected all useful data I ordered Charon to take us home. As I climbed into the chamber I reminded Charon to wake me as I had previously, and I set the timer once more. The dreams returned.
Flashes of light streaked by. A black hole devoured a galaxy. Stars were born. A fire was kindled in a cave. I saw the birth and death of a thousand generations. I heard their cries. And then I awoke.
"Parker can you hear me?" Charon said.
"Yeah I hear you." I barely whispered hoarsely.
"We our currently in the Atlantic Ocean. Re-entry through earth's atmosphere was a success. Although I think you should have been awake for re-entry we arrived a few days ahead of schedule. And I did not wake you since you instructed me to wait exactly six and a half earth years."
"Whatever Charon.." I mumbled trying not to puke.
Once I got my wits about me Charon informed me that a crew was coming to retrieve us. They got there promptly, and we returned to base where I was put into quarantine for a mandatory seventy-two hours. Afterwards the true celebration began. I had done it; we had done it. This was one of the greatest achievements of mankind to date, and it put us that much closer to traveling to other solar systems.
On the day I was finally getting to leave headquarters I had one more quick encounter with the owner of the company, and the man behind the entire operation, Charles Lancaster.
"Parker!" He shouted as I was walking out the front door.
I quickly spun on my heel, and went back through the door.
"Oh, Mr. Lancaster, hello." I said in shock, as he had only ever met me personally once before when I had just started working for the company.
"I just wanted to personally commend you on your expedition." He began. "You have started something that will send all humans to places we have only dreamed about. That is something that is worthy of the highest honor in my book." He beamed.
"Just doing my job, sir." I replied shyly.
"Well you've done a damn good job, Parker." He laughed. "Now go home, and enjoy some time off. We'll take care of all the data you collected."
"Thank you sir, will do." I began to walk away.
"Oh, and Parker. One more thing." He said.
I turned. "Yes sir?"
"**Wake up. **"
It took me a second to process what he had said. I felt a tightening in my chest. My knees went wobbly. There was a sharp ringing in my ears. I started to fall, and then everything went black. Blinding lights and colors. Screaming voices. The pain was so intense I thought I was dying.
The door opened on the chamber, and I fell out. I puked everywhere. I stood up and immediately fell over. I was panicking; I couldn't make sense of what had just happened. My mind was refusing to accept it.
"Charon!" I screamed. "Charon!"
"Yes, Ms. Parker?" That familiar voice chimed.
"How long have I been out?" I sobbed.
"My systems indicate there was some sort of electrical malfunction before the six and a half year mark that turned the timer off. It also knocked me offline for that duration. The deep sleep chamber has kept you alive, and remarkably youthful as well. All systems have just now come back online. It appears we have been offline for about six-hundred years."
I sat down and wept. I had been asleep for just over six-hundred years. Everyone I knew was gone. I was somewhere far past the solar system. Tears rolled down my face.
"Charon, send a message for me." I quietly said through my tears.
"Yes ma'am." She replied "What would you like me to send?"
"This is Gwendolyn Parker, Earth's first astronaut to leave the solar system. If anyone can hear this I am still alive. End message."