There are few that can compete with my father's business.
Sure, there are dream shops on nearly every corner, the peddlers within shouting out their wares and latest trends.
"*Become famous, with thousands of glowing fans, all wishing to spend time with you! *"
"*Riches, riches beyond your imagination! You'll be wading in gold, your hands to heavy to pick up from the rings! *"
"*Marry the most beautiful woman in the world, and spend a night with her! *"
There were thousands of adaptations, all slightly different from each other. But each bore the same flare- momentary pleasures, excitements that lasted throughout the night but dissipated in the morning, once the waking world took over again.
But our dreams are different - we do not focus upon passing pleasures, and as such the emotions and experiences of our dreams last long beyond the night they're used.
We sell the father's pride in watching his son become a man greater that he. We sell the wive's satisfaction of spending her life with a husband that loves her with his entire heart. We imbue our dream capsules with the slow burning emotions, such as the revelation of first timid love, or the feeling that, no matter the circumstance, *everything* is going to be all right.
When my father died, and left me his shop, he left his expertise behind as well - his secrets in creating these dreams, dreams so rare and powerful that no other shop could replicate them. And I strove to improve upon his life's work- to make the perfect dream, one that could be surpassed by no other. One filled to the brim with the deeper happinesses of life, one that would be considered perfection.
For ten years I labored, mixing my concoctions, boiling them down to the capsules to be sold, knowing by sight and smell alone if they would work. Adding ingredient's such as fresh baked apple pie, my mother's own recipe, a freshly written love note between a couple just married, or the bottled smell of salt air off the ocean coast.
And finally, finally, I found the recipe, consisting of one hundred and forty four special ingredients. But just as I finished, the door of my shop opened, and a man entered- a man whose face was so wrinkled he had to be older than my dead father, and whose grey hair curled down his back. He turned his sunken eyes towards me as I removed the capsule, and spoke, his voice low and defeated.
"How much?"
"It's not yet for sale," I answered, setting in on the counter.
"Name your price, and I'll pay it." He said, approaching me at my workstation, and leaning against the counter.
So I did.
And he did.
And taking the capsule, he dropped it to the floor of my shop, grinding it into the stone with his heel as I shouted.
"Wait! What a waste! That pill, it bore happiness incarnate, it bore the full meaning of living! It was the perfect dream!"
"Yes," Answered the old man, turning to leave, "Yes it was. A happiness so great that it can never be attained in reality, one that will forever cast the rest of your life in shadow, knowing that it is false, yet the most real thing you can imagine."
"And how would you know that?"
"Because when your father made one, thirty years ago, I took it. And ever since, I've had to live with the nightmare."
***
Like my writing? [Get my novel for free on kindle today/tomorrow only!] (https: //www.reddit.com/r/leoduhvinci/comments/4xyd9a/my_novel_til_death_do_us_part_is_free_right_now/)
By Leo