*27th of December 2020, Heathrow Airport*
Matt had never worked on the cabin crew of a private jet before. Although, he couldn't call it 'work', or a 'crew': the only people on the plane were himself, those in the cockpit and the two passengers themselves, whom had asked for absolute privacy. They had no luggage, no requests, no need for interaction. He may have been a passenger himself.
"Listen, son, what I tell you today you must never tell anybody else."
Matt stopped in his tracks. The voice was evidently coming from beyond the curtain, the passengers that had explicitly declined food and services in exchange for privacy. After a brief moment of uncertainty, he hesitantly turned his head towards the curtain, until the coarse fabric brushed against his ear.
"Eventually, I won't be here for you. But our family, you see, was given a very important task."
"What task, papa?" A child's voice.
"You see this? It's the amendment machine. Even I don't know why it works - but I'm going to tell you exactly what my father told me, and his father before him."
Matt squinted, attempting to clarify faces behind the blurred vision provided by the fabric. All he could make out however, was what looked to be a mini universe of blue lights.
"He told me: we are the justice. I was given one job which, in time, I pass onto you. Do you remember the history I taught you? Wars, disasters, famines, plagues, depressions. That was us: our ancestors. Egypt, Rome, London, USSR, it was us. People are all the same: they hold power, and suddenly they want to hold everything else, too. So we create a lesser of two evils, ensure that nobody rules the world long enough."
"What does the machine do?"
"It amends. Time, that is. We don't know how we got it, but we did. And it can do anything: as long as you're within a hundred clicks of your target. You'll see soon enough."
The engines suddenly roared to life. Matt, caught off-guard, felt his legs give way under him. Falling, he looked up at the cabin, enough to catch a glimpse of a hand brushing through the blue lights.
"Are we the good guys, papa?
Matt was gone - it was as if he had never been on the plane in the first place. A gust of air blew towards the curtain, as if filling an empty space. The child snapped his head around, expecting someone, but nobody was there. Of course: the only people on this flight other than his father, were the pilots in the cockpit. How stupid of the child to think that somebody could be there.
"Yes, we are. Come on, lets sleep: we've got a ways to go until we reach New York."