"I'd imagine most of them have given up."
Mark shifted in his fading seat. The follow-up question was obvious – eleven years on the circuit had honed his natural curiosity into a powerful journalistic weapon – but for the first time, the words stuck in his throat. He coughed nervously.
"Have *you*?"
Katherine smirked at him from across the table, her hazel stare burrowing into his forehead. "Would you be here if I had?"
"Now that's not a fair—"
"Oh please, Mark," Katherine said, cutting him off. "Let's not pretend this is something it isn't. I know the difference, remember?"
The reporter turned to the window, stifling the violent urge to say so many things he would inevitably regret. Outside, the sun headed for the horizon, a blanched version of its once-radiant self. He watched the sky, its azure glory reduced to a pale shade. It was almost indistinguishable from the clouds that billowed off into the distance; soon, only motion would differentiate between the heavens and the haze.
"Look," Katherine started, breaking the tension, "you're just following a story and that's fine by me. I'll be your story. But for you to come back, after ten silent years, and expect me to believe this is anything but a professional obligation is—"
"You stopped."
"Sorry?"
"You stopped initiating," Mark continued, still gazing at the fading landscape. "I let it slide for a while, but when it didn't get better with time…" His voice trailed off, swallowed up by the cavernous space between them.
"You know I've always been terrible with keeping in touch—"
"I was hoping this would be different."
Gold-white sunlight filtered through the window, casting shadows on the washed-out wallpaper. Mark turned back and peered at the artist.
"You look good."
"You don't."
The reporter chuckled. "Still honest as ever."
"And you're still the eternal optimist," Katherine quipped. "One of us has to be, I guess, and it's certainly not me."
"That's not true! Remember Billy and Carol's wedding? You kept pushing me to learn the waltz, no matter how many times I said I had two left feet."
"Well you learned it, didn't you?"
Mark took one look at Katherine's silly grin and burst out laughing. "After stepping on your toes about a million times, of course!" He tapped his temple. "It's still up there somewhere, I imagine."
The artist stood and held out her hand, nudging her head toward the open space in the middle of the room.
"Oh no, I couldn't—" Mark began, but before he knew it Katherine had dragged him from the fading armchair.
"Come on! Arms out, elbows up, back straight… There! Now then, how does it go? *One-two-three, one-two-three*…"
The reporter and the artist spun around the room, a blur of joyous color on a dull background. The smell of Katherine's paint clothes – a strong mixture of fresh acrylics and turpentine – filled Mark's nostrils, familiar and intoxicating.
As they swept past the window, Mark slowed the waltz down. "Isn't it beautiful?" he said, gazing out at the pale sunset.
Suddenly, he felt Katherine's arms go limp. Mark saw the tears in her hazel eyes just before she buried her head in his shoulder, body wracked by grief. He wrapped his arms around her, doing his best to hold the breakdown at bay and cursing himself for being so thoughtless.
"What am I going to do, Mark?" Katherine sobbed, her voice shaky and broken. "When it's all gone, what am I going to do?"
"Shhh, it'll be okay," the reporter lied, holding the artist close. "It'll all be okay…"
-044