Shrouded in black robes, Death slowly raised his hand, beckoning Jack toward him. Jack looked at this dark being, then turned his gaze to the hills and valleys stretching miles below them. "So, this is the afterworld", Jack spoke out loud. Death, his harm held forward pulled his dark cloak back revealing the face of a wise elderly man with dark eyes and flowing white hair. "I take you for your judgment, you must follow me." Jack looked around once more in the dim autumn-like light. He held his hand out, to touch this being that called himself death and realized he held an envelope in his hand. Seeing this strange envelope, death's eyebrows raised and Death spoke again, slowly.
"Is that a letter?" Death asked. Jack turned the envelope and looked at it. It was sealed and addressed to:
Angel of Death
c/o Jack Tatum
The Gray World
Jack held it out again, waiting for Death to take it. Slowly, Death reached out again and took it from Jack, his eyebrows still raised. Jack watched this being open the envelope and then unfold the letter. The envelope fell to the ground and Death took no notice of this. "Wonderful, the Angel of Death litters." Jack muttered to himself and waited. The Angel of Death turned his gaze to Jack and held out the letter, shaking it once, and mumbled, "take it"
The style of the letter read, "Dear Archangel of Death," Jack held the letter closer as his eyes adjusted. "We are sorry to inform you that the 90,000 day trial period has ended and we will not retain you as a full time employee in the Bureau of Souls and Collection. Please return to our office immediately and see Jenny, Secretary to the Underworld, who will have your severance packet waiting. In the packet you will find the usual policies which includes a two thousand year Angel Compensation and Benefit Plan. Thank you for your attention to this matter." Underneath the signature was something else written, "p.s. Please deliver Jack Tatum directly to our office, he will be the new Angel of Death".
Confused and shaken, Jack looked to the Angel of Death standing before him and spoke the only thought he could formulate, "They don't have email in the afterlife?"