Julia woke, wincing in the harsh light, to see the doctor inspecting his instruments. He hummed a jolly tune to himself while laying the glittering tools out in front of him. She was lying upright on an operating table, her whole body at a forty-five degree angle. Her head felt thick with wool, from whatever he'd injected her with, and his voice sounded as if coming from another room.
"Had a nice nap did we?" he said, studying a sharp scalpel.
As her dizziness faded, the realisation of what was happening came to her with slow, horrible pulses of clarity. The light from all around her pressed in, oppressive and unyielding. In spite of it, she could just make out the room she was in; an operating theatre, white, clean, smelling the same as a combination of any ordinary hospital or dental surgery she'd ever been in. Opposite her was a large, metal door, that looked like the sort used in the hidden bank vaults she'd seen in films.
"I must say you led me on quite a merry chase," he said, letting out a sharp, loud breath that ruffled his blue surgical mask. "Yes. Quite a merry. Chase."
He whistled to himself now, waltzing over to the sink and washing his hands, ignoring her struggles to break free from the thick, white leather bonds that bound her. Julia tried to piece together the preceding scenes. She had been walking in the woods, as her father had instructed her not to. She could see his wrinkled, reproachful face that had made her want to do it even more. She'd cut her knee when she spotted the house amidst the bracken, and now felt it throb. *So strange for a house to be out here*, she'd thought, and such a strange house too, all big, boxy and white. It made her think of a cartoon, though she wasn't sure which. It had looked abandoned and she'd ignored the warning voice in her head because it spoke like her father. Always sensible. Always safe. Always dull. She'd peeked in a window and saw red paint, splattered crazily on the walls and the floor of the white living room. *Someone must've danced around with a whole can of it*. That was what she thought at first. Until she saw the body propped up against a sofa, the skin torn to ribbons. Even then her brain worked to explain around it. *A film prop, like a dummy*. But it was too real. Much too real. As she turned to run, finally heeding her father's increasingly panicked voice, the front door slammed open, and a tall, rake thin man in blood-spattered doctor's attire burst out, chasing after her at once.
"Get back here you bitch," he'd called in a high, petulant voice. "Fucking useless little shit,"
She ran. And ran and ran. Dodging trees and bounding over rocks, until her chest felt set to explode. And still he came, yelling and cursing, getting closer and closer. She didn't know what tripped her, but he was on her in an instant. She'd kicked and thrashed but he was so strong, and then there was a stinging in her neck. As her world turned to black, she thought, *the Powerpuff Girls'house. *
And now, he stood over her again, his clothes pristine. His eyes were filled with nothing remotely close to sanity, and she could do nothing but scream.
"No point in that," he said, in the tones of a friendly school teacher. "Even if these walls weren't soundproof, there isn't anybody about for miles. Well...apart from nosy, shitty little girls. And what're the chances of there being another one of those. Actually, quite likely, if you ask me."
He laughed in a manner that suggested it wasn't something he did often.
"Please," Julia said, her throat, for some reason, dry and cracked. "I don't...”
He was right up against her face before she could finish, holding a scalpel to her left eye. She smelled his hot, sterile breath as he yelled at her in his shrill, childish voice.
"Don't you *fucking* whine like that, you baby. Don't you ever *fucking* do that again. You hear me, you fucking stupid little whore. *Pleeeeease, oooo pleeeeeeeease*."
"I'm sorry, I'm sorry, just...” she almost said it again, "don't hurt me, don't pl-"
She felt the blade push up against her lower eyelid. Felt the tiny marble of blood that welled up against it, and stopped speaking, holding her trembling lips closed as best she could. The doctor sighed and stepped away.
"Don't take this personally," he said, calm now as he wheeled his tray of tools over to her, "But it's just a matter of bad luck, really. For you, I mean. For me this is somewhat of a privilege. This is my passion, you see. My art. And the only way to truly master your art is...” he picked up what looked like a silver corkscrew, brandishing it like a paintbrush, "Practice."
Julia stared with wide, panicked eyes at the other instruments, hating her mind for the assumptions it made as to their usage. The doctor leaned towards her. She got the hideous sense that he had licked his lips behind his mask. She bucked and writhed as best she could, but the straps may as well've been wrought of iron. She screamed through her hoarse throat.
"Yes." he cooed, "Scream. There'll be plenty more of that to come."
And then, a mighty crash as one of the walls erupted in a shower of dust and concrete, accompanied by a roar like the blaring of a titanic hell-train. Julia coughed and spluttered, and the doctor stumbled, shielding his eyes. The ground shook with the steady rhythm of an ancient god's drums and, striding forth from the rubble, emerging from the haze with awesome, primal splendour, came the tyrannosaurus.
"Curses!" the doctor yelled. "My secret genetic-engineering project that I keep in my basement. Oh, why didn't I use a stronger lock?"
The great beast regarded him with one cold yellow eye as he ran to the door, hopping cartoonishly on his feet, fiddling in vain with the lock, tittering nonsense to himself. Yawning it's tremendous maw, the t-rex brought it's teeth down upon the doctor and lifted him, wailing and flailing, into the air. Julia heard his bones crunch as it shook him around, like a dog with a toy, and then he was gone. The rex stamped his great, scaly foot, and roared again sending tremors throughout the room, and causing the table Julia was strapped on to come crashing down, and the bonds holding her to come loose. Her ears were ringing, and her body ached terribly from the fall, but she was alive. She rose awkwardly to her feet, dusted herself off, and stood face to face with the king of the dinosaurs. Well, more like face to knee. It looked down at her, moving it's jaw in a thoughtful way. Julia thought she saw approval in those amber eyes. With a low growl, the tyrannosaurus lowered it's head, just enough so Julia could climb up it, and over the horny scales of his brow.
And so, with her legs dangling either side of his mighty neck, the t-rex crashed through the house and out into the forest, and together, they rode off into the sunset.