I open my eyes, and my gaze sweeps across the Broadway billboards, the huge flickering video screens, the store signs (*Walgreens*, they scream, *H & M*), the glassy windows that reflect the cloudless blue sky. My eyes settle on a street sign, its letters white on fading green: *Times Square*.
The wave of noise crests over me: ten thousand people laughing with their friends, yelling into their smartphones in frustration, snapping away with their fancy cameras, shooting dirty looks and muttered curses at the crowded streets.
My right foot takes a step of its own accord. My left follows. Soon, I am walking at a brisk pace towards 7th Avenue, oblivious to the people who stumble out of my way.
As I stop at the intersection, I realize that there is nobody there. I cast my eyes around me, but the bustling crowds have vanished, replaced by a suffocating silence. Or perhaps they were never there.
But when I turn back around to cross the street, horns are blaring and cars and trucks and taxis are racing up and down the street. The traffic light changes, and the single pedestrian waiting to cross on the other side starts walking towards me.
She does not see what I see.
She does not see the van, colored an olive green that has faded with the years. She does not see the small pits and scratches that adorn its side mirrors, its windshield, the paint job. She does not see the lettering on its side, outlined in white and blue: *Iomhain Plumbing and Electrical, since 1984*. She does not see the empty driver's seat, nor the steering wheel jerking back and forth of its own volition.
She does not see the van, although it is hurtling at something like sixty miles per hour straight towards her.
I stretch out my hand towards her, as if I could somehow reach far enough to touch her, to grab her and drag her to safety. But it is as if the air has become corn syrup and time has become ice, and I can only watch, horrified, as I struggle to lift my arm. I scream a warning, but as my voice tears from my throat, it simply stops dead in a still bubble coming from my lips.
All I can do is see.
I see the woman's hair, brown at the roots and pulled up in a blotchy blonde ponytail. I see the lines that crease her forehead, the dark circles beneath her eyes that show even through a layer of concealer. I see the wrinkles in her patterned dress, the sky blue nail polish that has chipped away, the dark mark on her finger where a ring had once taken residence.
And the scant moment when her gaze meets mine, the moment before she turns to see her imminent death, I see the sadness, the defeat in her eyes.
*****
I open my eyes, and this time, I see a white ceiling. I am surrounded by soft beeps and the murmur of conversation in low voices. There are salty tears on my cheeks, and I wipe them away as I fumble at the bedside table with clumsy hands.
When I finally manage to pick up the small white bottle of sleeping pills, I read the label once more. *Deep, dreamless sleep*, it advertises, *guaranteed for six to eight hours*.
It didn't stop the dream. Nothing stops the dream.
*****
The nurse is telling me about the cancer, but her words mean nothing to me. All that I hear is the blare of car horns. When she gives me the papers to sign for the next surgery, the words are just *Plumbing and Electrical* over and over again.
I sign with a shaking hand, and thank the nurse.
*****
I hobble down the hall of the hospital. *You have to walk more*, the doctor said during the check-up. *The surgeries take a toll, and if you don't exercise regularly, they will harm more than help*. But when I see the other patients leaning on their spouses, their children, the pain in my chest makes it seem that everything I do will harm more then help.
"Dad?"
I don't believe it. Every call she returns is cold, abrupt. She says she is busy with university, with her new job at the publishing company, with her boyfriend. She says she will try to find some time to visit, but I know she won't.
I turn around, and it really is her. She is as beautiful as ever, but I can see the anger, the frustration, the nights spent crying.
"Hey, Dad."
"Hey, Mel." It is the only thing I can say right now.
She steps toward me and there is something you can barely call a hug, just enough contact to acknowledge how close we once were.
"I thought you were busy," I say.
"I was. I am."
"I'm glad you took the time to visit, then." Maybe she has finally taken a step towards forgiveness, but that hope is a notion I will not choose to entertain just yet.
"It wasn't for you."
Even though I expected as much, I feel a wrenching in my heart. Tears spring to my eyes, but I fight them back. She doesn't care if she hurts me any more, not after I've hurt her the way I did. But that doesn't matter now.
"I'm glad you stopped by anyway," I respond. Even when things are like this, I will always be happy to see her.
There is a short silence between us. Mel fidgets with her necklace, not meeting my gaze.
Finally, she looks up. "You should come see something, Dad," she says. "Someone."
"A friend of yours?"
"You'll see."
I follow her along the hall, into the elevator. As we descend to the tenth floor, my stomach suddenly becomes a bit nauseous. At first, I think it's just the elevator motion, but it persists as we walk through the ward. The uneasiness grows, and suddenly it's full-on dread.
"These are the coma patients," I say.
Mel nods, and I see a tear trickle down her face.
She stops in front of a room. I glance at the patient label next to the doorway, and in an instant, I know.
"No," I whisper.
"Yes," she whispers back, and I see that the single tear has turned into two steady rivulets.
I take a step past the doorway. Another.
I take hold of the curtain shielding the bed from view. My hand trembles even more badly than before, but I have to do this. I fling the curtain aside, and see her.
The woman.
Mel speaks up. "It was a traffic accident."
"I know."
I know, and all too well.
She is cleaned up now, and her hair has settled into a bright cloud around her head. The wrinkles and lines have disappeared from her sleeping face, and she is the breathtaking young beauty that I knew years before. The one I married, and the one I left.