The Sky is a deep, emerald green. Not that you could look at it with the naked eye, mind you. The copper sulphate emulsion in the atmosphere would do strange things to your body. I've seen it before, right after the bomb fell.
Moscow, now that was a mess. I mean, we watched the cloud expand over the city, expanding from the blast sight. And yeah it was horrible but we all told ourselves it was the only way. The death of over 6 million people in return for peace seemed like an okay deal. We waited for the world to come together in the wake of such a tragedy.
And then the reaction didn't stop. That green cloud ate everything up. The streets of Moscow became the streets of Paris, then Beijing, then New York. We watched from underground, us fortunate few. Thousands survived in bunkers and sealed facilities. Hundreds died of starvation and asphyxiation in the first months. Clean air became as precious a commodity as water. It was a special kind of hell that only the living could ever suffer. Those months were the hardest.
Maybe a year on, things settled down. People got used to living under a poison sky. A lot of ‘ em got used to the feel of a survival suit. Some of em got used to the feel of a gun barrel in their mouth. I was one of the latter party. Shrinks said it was survivor guilt, that I shouldn't feel bad for having survived where so many had died.
Of course I know better. I know why I feel like shit. Why I can't ever not feel like this.
I trudge down the corridor of the Cheyenne mountain complex. I was stationed here when shit went down. Lucky me. The survival suit is heavy. It reminds me of a space suit a lot. The entire thing is designed to protect from extreme environmental hazards. You can barely move your head in the helmet so i keep it off when i don't need it.
I make my way to the surface access tunnel. A heavy set of steel doors have been permanently sealed. I won't ever need to get a bus to pass through them again. To the left they've set up a vacuum sealed chamber for entering and exiting the safety of the bunker.
I know the deal by now. No need for them to run through the safety procedure but they do anyway. The same guy as the last dozen times runs me through the capabilities of my gear, all the while he gives me a dead eyed look. I recognise him, as always. He was on base, in the command centre, when it happened. He knows the truth.
He lets me go and I step into the chamber. When the yellow lights start flashing I reluctantly attach the helmet. The world is rendered into a dim orange blur by the tinted glass of the view screen. What a miserable colour to see then world in.
After a few minutes I hear the exterior door crack open. The light rush of toxic air rumbles around my suit. I wait for a moment and then step outside.
Nobody ever cleared up the bodies. Not even outside the bunker. Nobody has the time or the patience to clear up the biggest crime scene in history. I walk through it all, stumbling and feeling my way forward because all I can see is the orange interior of my own face plate. I bounce against something and I fall flat on my ass.
I cry, much like I cried when the world ended. Except then it was understandable. I remember the stunned silence as the bomb fell. I remember the pats on my back when the bomb hit the target dead centre. General Murry made a big deal out of me. He called me "The man who fired the last shot." I only wish he hadn't been so right.
Murry is dead now. He didn't have the balls to face up to what we did. He disappeared right after the cloud hit the east coast. Nobody was really bothered with finding him. I may very well have stumbled over his corpse.
Alone, without the reassurances of the shrinks or the other survivors it sinks in. I killed the world. It was my drone, my payload, my decision that ended all wars.
I lay on my back and look up. I try to make out the sky. All I see is orange. Before it ends, I really, really want to see the sky. I raise my hands to the seals on my helmet.
It hurts, a lot. My lungs burn. It feels like I've swallowed hot coals. My skin begins to tingle. No doubt it's blooming into an array of strange colours. My vital processes shut down quickly. My breathing stops, rendered irrelevant by the complete destruction of my lungs. Without air to fill my blood, my heart slows and stops.
But the sky, the sky is the most beautiful shade of green.