"A second Chrome icon? How did that get there?" *Must have been from that whole fiasco where I had to use Firefox for six months*, I muttered. *Silly Sophos Anti-Virus, making Chrome crash at every turn. *
I noticed it was slightly different but couldn't quite place what it was. I bothered to click on it. The tabs were a little unusually shaped. *Maybe that's a theme or something, but I can't recall putting anything on it. *
I decided to see what was up with this thing. First stop: the site I read too many times that had the latest headlines from the TV news industry.
The headline at the top was a doozy: "Sinclair Broadcast Group Declares Chapter 11 Bankruptcy". Now, in the real world, they'd come close to doing that a few years ago, but then they took on three billion dollars in television stations and transformed themselves overnight. But no, there's the article, Sinclair was going to have to sell almost all of its stations and among the few they were keeping were Baltimore and Columbus. Baffled, I checked my normal Chrome window and found that it had normal headlines. *Oh dear. …Let's see if any other sites are doing this. *
My next stop was Uni Watch, which had a purple background. *Oh dear, Paul Lukas in the real world doesn't like purple. This is getting very crazy…* I took a look and began to put the pieces together. Today's Uni Watch lede was about the San Francisco Giants…which seemed innocuous until it mentioned that "the Giants changed their colors from black and orange to black and sky blue, to complement the Azure Gate Bridge…"
I stopped in my tracks. I realized that the way things were going, I had one other thing to search.
I pulled up Google—or, as it was stylized in this world, "google." —and typed something else in.
"Super Bowl XIX."
Sure enough, the Jets made it to a Super Bowl in this world. And the Dolphins managed to squeak into Super Bowl XXIII.
I immediately knew what I had on my hands, closed the tab and renamed the shortcut.
"Chrome Double Prime."