"God damn it....
This is the worst."
Dracula stood there in front of the automatic paper towel dispenser with a hint of hopelessness in his eyes.
He turned back to look at the hallway behind him, lined with bathroom stalls.
Only one was closed.
Great.
He looked back at the dispenser with a lips-curled-in-grim smile on his face. His hands were still dripping with water. He knew he had to wait.
"Of course there'd be no hand dryer. But???"
He scoffed.
"There's always a damn hand dryer. What is happening to the world?!"
The sound of a flushing toilet interrupted his complaints.
His head jolted up in relief.
He looked back down to see a small puddle in front of his feet. He felt a little frantic as he tried kicking the water toward the wall.
Finally the door swung open as a young man exited.
Dracula stopped kicking immediately and awaited eagerly for help.
He looked back as the man walked toward him and flashed a friendly smile. The man nodded to him and then proceeded to the door.
Dracula's eyes widened, fearing what he thought was happening was actually happening.
"UH HEY!" Dracula blurted out right as the man approached the door.
The man stopped and looked at him.
"Aren't you going to wash your hands..?" Dracula stuttered.
The man's eyebrows lowered as he glared at Dracula.
"How about you mind your own business buddy. I don't judge you for creepily standing in front of the towel dispenser." And then he reached for the door.
"But dude!" He blurted again.
"You totally just took a dump in there. Don't you think about all the poop particles that are probably all over your hands??"
The man rolled his eyes.
"Whatever dude."
He reached for the door again.
"OKAY WAIT" Dracula couldn't hide the desperation in his voice.
"I actually need your help."
The man's eyes were judgy as he scanned Dracula up and down, and then back down to the water on the floor. And then Dracula's hands. It all made sense now.
"Let me guess." The man began.
"You're a vampire. And you can't dry your hands because the sensors don't read your hands."
Dracula shrugged and let out a nervous laugh.
"Well then." The man stood there for a second, thinking. Then he took a few steps toward Dracula. Dracula's body naturally huddled around itself feeling uncomfortable about his personal space bubble being threatened. He was nervous.
The man's eyes twinkled with a devious proposal brewing.
"For being such a tool about me not washing my hands. I give you this offer." The man's teeth shined bright as his smile grew larger.
Dracula's stomach sank.
"I will swipe my hand under the sensor, and help you dry your hands. IF. And only if.
You.....
Lick.
My.
Hand."
The horror that struck Dracula was overwhelming as he lowered his eyes to the very hands this man spoke of.
The silence was filled with a laugh more disgusting than the look of this man's poopie hands as Dracula's eyes went back and forth between the hands and the puddle on the floor.
"Why the fuck is there no hand dryer.."