The men in hard hats swarmed around me, laying down their equipment. But I wasn't moving. I've stood here twenty three years now and will continue to do so long as I can.
I heard the high pitched twang a a string being pulled, then the put put put of an engine waking from its slumber. The blades spun as it attempted to rip me apart. But I was stubborn; I would not move. The workers pushed but my tough hide dulled their saws. Their flabbergasted faces made me laugh. I shook my leaves in the wind with delight.
My laughs turned to a gasp of horror when they brought out a tanker. They unscrewed the cap and I could smell horrid stench of gasoline despite me having no nose. They poured it around my beautiful roots, my limbs that took so many years of hard work to stretch and grow, littered with this foul liquid. I saw the foreman's uncaring face as he dropped the match.
It burned! I screamed, my body aching and creaking. The fire seared into my flesh, evaporating away my water reserves. I burst into flames and crumbled into ashes.
I could no longer stop them. They built their facility over me. I hate it. The constant smell of French fries, the neverending drive throughs, the disgusting sound of people chewing.
But they didn't know my secret. My pine cones which protected my babies from the heat, began to wake now that the soil is rich with my decaying, charcoal body. My children, all in my likeness, began to grow. The sprouted in the back of a dark room filled with toilet paper and cleaning supplies, where no one paid any mind. A tiny window gave them the smiles of the sun and a leaky pipe no one bothered to fix provided the embrace of the rivers. Yes my children, grow, grow!
Months passed until a janitor decided for some reason to clean our room. He opened our door and we greeted him with our delightful scent that so many car fresheners attempt to mimic but fail. Days later, I heard the sound of screeching metal once again. But they would not penetrate my darlings! By the time the manager realized my family had taken root, it was too late. He didn't want to risk burning down his precious establishment. We were here to stay.