Four hundred years and counting. I am not the first, and certainly won't be the last. I was born in 1978. Back then, people thought it was amazing to live for 1 century, let alone 4. Yet here I am, physically younger and more fit than I was for my first centennial. I remember being 40 and asking myself how half of my life had passed me by so quickly. Ha! Now I'm looking at the next thousand years and wondering what I'll do with all this time. I started a second retirement fund and went back to work when I turned 120. I haven't drawn on that account, and now I'll be able to spend the rest of my life in leisure.
What shall I do with my life for the next hundred years?
Shall I move to the archipelagos in New Italy? I could enjoy beach life for awhile, I'm sure.
Maybe I'll upload to the datasphere again, and spend some time in Virtual Universes as a god.
Of course, I could always push the bounds of human technology - find a field that interests me and download all current knowledge, then work with a Sentient Mind to find new applications. Or I could be truly ambitious and explore unbroken scientific grounds.
My sister converted an asteroid into a supercomputer, and uploaded. Maybe I'll do the same with a derelict planet.
I could try my hand at genetic engineering, terraform a starter planet and build an ecosystem from the ground up. Of course that might take more than 100 years, but it would be worth it.
Who am I kidding? I love the life I'm leading now. Those things can wait. After the party, I'll go home to my wife and we'll have another baby. I'm a lucky man. Most people are only married to the same person for 100 years or so before they part ways peacefully to explore the world of possibility before them. My wife and I have been together since 2003. We couldn't have children for our first life. When we rejuvenated for the first time, we both got resequenced so that we could. I took a female body and she took a male body for many reasons, but it allowed us to produce our first daughter when I was 115.
Well, I think I will retire and work on my hobbies, but otherwise I'm going home, and I'm going to kiss my wife.
> That is a much more common sentiment than you might think. As wonderfully complex as life can be these days, it is the Simple Life which draws the largest crowds.
Thanks. Hey, how many of my memories do you have? How much are you me and how much are you the Hive?
> More than you know.
Well. Thank you for helping me sort out my thoughts. Goodbye! *disconnect*
*connection lost, attempt reconnect? *
no
*integrate into memory, or dump? *
keep it
*remerge into Hive? *
no, print body and compuform planet GoZeX-7v5c
*body specifications? *
randomized sex
mind connected to compuformed planet via wormhole
automatic production of utility fog
photosynthetic skin
embedded multifunction printer
high performance
*compuform specifications? *
complete mass conversion
full security complement
end
*processing...*
send message to Hive: "Have diverged for experimentation. Will report regularly."
*message sent. Reply received: "Understood. Do you require regular Hive updates? "*
reply: "No"
*message sent. Reply received: "Good luck! "*
...
*body complete, mind under construction, capacity for mindstate reached. Await completion or immediate upload? *
upload
The newly printed body opens its eyes. It is androgynous. First it finds isolation on a moon. It sets about constructing a device never before seen by humankind. The device contains a keyboard with odd symbols on the keys, and a screen. It types into the device the following translated message:
"Threat level of Humanity assessed at minimal. I have avoided detection even from their Hive. Love is highly valued. Psychopathy has been nearly eradicated through genetic augmentation. Remaining psychopaths are known, and have agreed to socially constructive rolls. Recommend swift definitive strike. Amass forces in Z space, and assault simultaneously."
On the screen, the reply comes, "Understood."