I don't want to cut off his head, but I don't really have a choice. I close my eyes and just wait for it to be over. My insides turn as I feel the swing connect.
*Quit being so weak! You've done this before. *
The jock's girlfriend screams on cue, looks like she is going to faint. She has blonde hair and a blue dress patterned with diamonds. I see how scared she is, and I feel ashamed. I'm not the bad guy.
*Do I have to remind you? Remind you how they came here--to OUR home--and ransacked OUR things? They are trespassing! *
The door to the bedroom bursts open, and another girl storms in. I think her name was Whitney. She is holding a shovel. She surveys the scene, and I am impressed by how calm she seems. I decide to back off, but she takes that as a sign to attack. The shovel strikes me in the face, knocking my mask off. Before I can recover, I am hit again. Then a third time. The fourth strike sends me flying out the window. We are currently three stories high.
*How could you let her do that? *
I like the feeling of being weightless. Bits of shattered glass encompass me, sparkling with moonlight. I feel like I'm floating in space, surrounded by stars. Then I hit the ground and I think I feel a rib break. I shift to make sure.
*Mother fucker! *
Yeah...it broke.
I landed in a pile of bushes, which cushioned my fall at least somewhat. Through the thick tangle of branches, I look up toward the broken window. Whitney is nervously peering out of it, scanning the grounds.
"He's gone." she shouts before disappearing back into the house.
*You need to get up. They are getting away. If they get away, they will tell others. More people will come. Not just the shitty teenagers, either. For fuck's sake, GET UP! *
I know I have some time, so I take a moment to collect my thoughts. I don't like doing this: hurting people. It's better now that I'm numb to it. It's not my fault they keep coming here. It's not my fault he makes me hurt them. I'm not the bad guy.
From the other side of the house, I hear the front door open, followed by the shuffle of feet against gravel.
"Keep it together, Cindy. I need you to keep it together" Whitney's voice is stern but supportive.
Though she doesn't speak, Cindy's breathing begins to steady.
I know they are heading to the car even before I hear the doors open. In the next few seconds, they will drive off, and I can go back to being alone.
*Except their car won't start. You saw to that. *
The engine begins to hang, and I hear the girls swearing. They keep trying, but it's no use.
He makes me stand up and grab my machete even though I don't want to. He makes me run despite the pain in my side. The girls scream as soon as I round the corner. They throw open their car doors and begin to flee. He tries to make me chase them, but I refuse.
*If you can't do what needs doing, fine. I'll do it! *
I am too weak to fight him. He takes control of me, one limb at a time, and everything fades.
When I wake up, I am in the woods. It is almost pitch black, but I can make out a tiny cabin in the distance. I start walking toward it, but my foot catches on something, almost knocking me over. I look down to see a limp figure curled into a ball beneath me. She has blonde hair and a blue dress patterned with diamonds. Some of the diamonds are red now. I try not to think about her again as I continue walking.
As I approach the cabin door, something triggers in the back of my mind. I feel isolated, safe. The door creaks as I push it open and walk inside.
There are pictures covering the walls, drawings of spaceships and planets and stars. I look closer and find that each picture has something in common: a drawing of a boy with a space helmet. He looks happy. I find something else, too: a photograph.
This one is of also of a boy, a real one. He is sitting in a wagon with a cardboard box on his head, cut up to look like the same space helmet in the drawings. He isn't alone, though; there is a man standing behind him. His face has been drawn over in a furious series of pen marks. Though I can't see his face, the man terrifies me. He fills me with the same kind of dread I feel every time I hear--
A scream comes from behind me, followed by another blow to the head. I stumble around to see Whitney, this time holding a metal baseball bat. She swings at me again, but I catch it in my left hand. Before I can stop it, my right arm shoots forward and strikes her across the face. She flies backward onto an old table, which breaks underneath her.
*She's on the ground. It's time to finish it. *
I don't want to.
*I don't care what you want, just do what I tell you. *
No.
*Do it, you piece of shit. Do it or I will! *
NO!
I throw my machete toward the ground as his shouts fill the room. The force of it brings me to my knees. Even as I resist, I begin to feel him taking control. My right hand stiffens and begins making its way toward the weapon. Before he can grab it, I kick it away. It skids to a halt right next to Whitney. She picks it up without hesitation and lunges forward.
It surprises me that I don't feel pain when the blade enters my chest. Then a scream pierces through my skull and I know it has hurt him instead. I feel my body begin to go limp again, though nothing steps in to take control.
"Die!" Whitney shouts at me, but I don't blame her.
I don't mind that she doesn't understand. I don't even care if he does. It's only important that I know it, that I feel it in my bones even as my vision starts to fade.
I'm not the bad guy.