"Why can't you be a café maiden, like your older brother?"
I found myself screaming at my daughter. She stood before me, bold as brass, right smack in the middle of our family business dressed as a magical girl. The one thing I promised her mother would never happen.
"The world is in peril," she said. Stating the too obvious.
"The world is always in peril!" I said, "When are you going to get it through your head there is always going to be a giant monster, or werewolves, or vampires, or some giant rampaging transgendered jabberwocky roaming the world somewhere, but it is not for you to save us from it."
"I was chosen father!" she said.
She raised a staff above her head and transformed right there, into her battle form, with the whole café watching. Magical girl outfits were always on the unmodest side but this outfit was deliberately pushing it to the extremes. It made it extremely obvious, Maaya was not a little girl anymore. Ever since she had grown much taller than me, her father, she had been getting increasingly rebellious. Looking up at this enchanted Titania reminded me of her mother, which was not helping with my mood.
"Magical girls always lead to a bad end," I pleaded with her.
Then I pointed to my eldest son, Yukio, serving drinks at the far end, trying his best in vain to draw attention away from us.
"Look at your brother! A handsomer man in a maid outfit you will never find, and proud of it! He'll be graduating from business college just a few years and I will hand over the café to you two and retire. I can't handle my children spending their lives fighting evil. Always in danger!"
"Mother was a magical girl, father!" screamed Maaya, "She protected us from danger. You have no idea what you're talking about."
That was the last straw. I pulled small baton from my maid apron showed this little upstart how one properly transforms into a magical girl. A bright sprinkling pink dress with the cat ears of a warrior I had not worn in over a decade. With panties, garters, and fishnets, not this g-string and tattoo nonsense they tarted around in these days.
Maaya was of course stunned.
"You...you were Kamaya Catboy? The great defender of the city?"
My baton transformed into a great staff which I thumped upon the floor to emphasize I was putting my foot down. Magical thunder shook the city with my might.
"Now you know I do know what I'm talking about."
I gripped my staff with both hands as I fought to find the courage to retell the most painful memory of my life.
"Your mother and I fought together to send Queen Athaliah, back to the netherworld, that battle cost your mother her life. As she lay dying in my arms I promised I would do everything I could to keep you and your brother safe. The both of you were just babies at the time. I had to raise you alone. I did everything I could to keep you two away from magical questing so you would not pick up your mother's curse. That's what it means to be a magical girl. You will fight until you die or you see you loved ones killed! You're too young to understand what it can cost you."
"I understand that if you refuse to defend this city as Kamaya Catboy, someone has to take your place," said Maaya.
She pointed her staff at my own and fired a magical beam of lighting, causing me to drop it. Just like her mother, she was much more powerful than I, and far more stubborn. If she wanted to fight evil, I couldn't stop her. In the distance there was another rumble. Some great Kaiju or some other damn thing was rising from the sea to have a bit of a snit at the city. Maaya took to the air, like an avenging angel.
"I'm going, father," she said, "Please don't banish me from home for disobeying you."
I couldn't stop myself from crying.
"No. Your mother would never forgive me."
As Maaya flew off I picked up my staff. Something I swore to never pick up again. As I watched Maaya fly into battle through teary eyes, my son Yukio approached me. It was obvious he knew the whole time his younger sister was a magical girl.
"I don't suppose you have some great secret to share with me?" I asked, stupidly.
Yukio transformed into a black mage. At least the outfit was tasteful, especially compared to his sister.
"She can use a little help, she's a beginner you know," he said.
He had a point. Together we took to the air like a team of superheroes, defending the city. If I could not keep my children from danger, the least I could do was train them at my best to gain victory.