Climate Change.
Both natural and un-natural are the source of my pain.
I am PVT. Joe Snuffy, a "general-issue" soldier trained for one purpose and one purpose only; To save the last remnants of the human race from itself.
Why the fuck am I here?
The end of the 20th Century saw much progress in areas of environmental pollution and cleanup.
From the 1970's, till the 2000's the progress that men had made was noticeable. But only to a few.
Gone were the smog and clouds of noxious fumes that polluted the atmosphere around our major cities in the 70's.
There was one problem.
Ignorance.
Even with 5 other major problems to deal with in the 21st Century, the mob, the masses...so focused on pup culture, never noticed the improvement.
By the time the left and right had gotten on the Band Wagon of environmental responsibility, it was too late.
When they noticed the other issues? it was too late to alter the path they had chosen. It took 30 years to get most of our ancestors on board the environmental bandwagon...they didn't have another 30 years to change the direction of the mob, the faceless masses. Inertia.
The masses, like lemmings, continued to push for tighter controls, wasting energy on the last 5% of improvement when there were more important issues to deal with.
Pop culture was the root cause. And cracking down on companies polluting was more important than the actual cleanup of the environment.
By middle of the 21st Century, our "revered" ancestors found themselves in a pickle worse than ever.
* Diseases, not seen in the northern hemisphere began to proliferate farther north than ever before, as if fleeing from something.
Mosquitoes began reproducing as far north as New Jersey and Delaware.
Black Mold formerly controlled by the low humidity of southern deserts then exploded to life in the humidity of the north.
These diseases burst upon the weakened immune systems of those in the north who had never been exposed. Thousands died.
* Famine, the result of ignoring water conservation as they depleted the aquifers.. pulling more water out than could be absorbed naturally.
Rising Food costs, shortages.
* petroleum shortage: the loss of pertroleum based fertilizers...the lower crop yields...the lack of fresh water.... these conditions only worsened the famine.
* Warfare: hungry people fight. with the changes in modern warfare numerous conflicts burst out upon the face of the earth like zits on a teenager.
We were so busy playing the game, making money, and protecting the environment from humans that we didn't protect ourselves.
By the end of the 21st century our enemy had begun to appear.
You see, something WAS driving the insects, the diseases, and the immigrants from the far south.
We had no clue.
When the ecology changed, so did the life forms.
Intense algae blooms in the Sargasso sea killed of fish and ecosystems by the thousands.
Temperature (from the environment), Sunlight for energy, and food, food from the fertilizers we washed into the ocean.
This chemical soup killed off the natural prey of some creatures.
These creatures would have to eat, would they not?
It was a tiny creature back then. no bigger than the palm of your hand.
People used to call them Star-Fish.
We call them "Scourge".
They began swarming out of the seas around 2058 and began consuming all life as if they were a swarm of locusts brought down on Egypt by the wrath of god.
We were clueless. Our ancestors were clueless.
An here I sit. In a bunker designed to protect me from artillery fire and surrounded by any enemy who needs none.
I sit in the darkness waiting.
I can hear the creak of the re bar and concrete groaning in pain as if clenched in some enormous fist.
Imagine this: me, Joe Snuffy, the pearl in the oyster.
There is a 30 foot starfish outside my bunker.
it's suckers pierce the cracks, and like a thousand tenticles, they reach out, touching and tasting me.
It's arms encircle my bunker like a lovers embrace.
It won't be long now.
I wonder if I will die screaming?
...