"Drop the weapon! Drop it!" The armed policeman's bark was shockingly loud, causing the man with the handgun to flip around. Dan stared into the barrel of an assault rifle, and felt his pants get a little bit heavier.
"Put down the weapon!" Spittle flew from under the policeman's visor and he made abrupt movements with his gun, jabbing towards Dan.
Shit. Dan's plan hadn't gone this far. He had never imagined he would actually be caught. Yet here he was flanked by cops in a room with one exit. The facility must have had cameras Dan didn't know about. Shit! How could he have been so careless! The bark of the policeman brought him back into the present and he quickly dropped his gun. He hadn't planned on getting shot either, so he didn't seem to have a choice in the matter. The police around him closed in, tightening the circle around him. Dan felt the guns all aimed at his chest and panicked. Why hadn't he brought another gun?
It was in that moment of panic and madness that Dan's mind broke. He felt like he had a gun, even though his eyes told him that couldn't be true. He raised his hand at the man in front of him, and with a deadly serious look on his face, Dan pushed his thumb down and said "POW".
The tip of his index finger was so hot. The burning sensation drew his eyes to his hand, where Dan struggled to comprehend what was going on. There was a muzzle flair. From his hand. A bullet seemed to appear from nowhere and sped towards the policeman's helmet.
As the man dropped and blood shot out from the hole in the man's face, there was a second of silence. A moment where noone could understand what had just happened. Then the heavily trained armed police did what had been drilled into them from years of experience.
The officer to Dan's left sprinted for cover behind a pillar. To Dan's right the woman barked into her radio and opened fire. He could hear movement behind him, and the mechanical noises of a firearm. There was no time to think, no time to try and understand. Dan raised his hand and spun to his right, spamming his thumb up and down. A storm of bullets exploded towards the policewoman, and Dan dropped into a roll. He came up to the side of the pillar and burst off a few shots, taking out the man crouched in front of him. Then he took cover himself and drew a deep breath. What the hell was going on? Five years of robbery, never once caught. Then in one night he'd killed three officers. With his hands. There was no choice - he'd get life for this. The only way out was to leave no witnesses. Noone alive. On that horrific thought, he peeked around the pillar facing the two that were left. They looked scared. They didn't want to be here. Nothing could have prepared them for Dan's hands. One tried to say something, probably pleading for his life. Dan didn't let him finish the thought. He brought up both hands and watched as the bullets landed deep in the two policemen's skulls.
There was a second moment of silence, the only noise the echo of gunshot. Dan stared at his fingers, and as a terrified look came over his face he did all he knew how to. Dan turned and ran.