Ugh! Some prick in an RV slammed the breaks right next to me while I was walking along the sidewalk. I'm coated with mud. What a total wad. Wait, is he getting out? His rear end is still sticking into the middle of the street. God, what an a-hole. Wait...crap, is he coming over to me?
"Ahhhh, You! Yes, you, yes, Thomas, correct, right, yes, of course. You're on the schedule. Come along now".
The hell is this guy doing? I'd keep walking but really, I've got nothing to do today, and I really wanna give this guy a piece of my mind. I walk towards the door to his RV. God, what is that? Man, I can smell the drugs from here; I'm just on the curb of the sidewalk. Holy hell, this guy needs help. And some verbal abuse.
I step in. I don't know if you've seen Doctor Who, or are familiar with the concept of "bigger on the inside", but it applies here. This thing looks like some 70s Playboy mansion. This dude's probably got a whole stash of Playboys. Wait, where is he?
I step in a little further, and I hear scuffling above. I look up, and maybe 30 feet above- in this 10 foot RV? - is a little metal platform. I see 4 people up there, including the same guy who led me in. I shout at him, with a string of profanity I'd feel better not typing, and then they all look down.
The door slams shut behind me, and the lighting fades until it's like a movie theater. I fall back into my seat; I have a leather seat, it appears. I hear a voice, not quite Morgan Freeman but not far off. It narrates a light show blasting out. The dark room Burt's into white, and then chunks of all this GS and everything are flying by. I can feel the air they displace towards me. But slowly. It's like I'm just sitting in space. Slowly, a huge orb forms beneath until it's recognizable. It's earth. It starts off slow and with mostly oceans for a long time, and now I see humans. I blinked, and some Catholic knight turns into a US Marine. What?
I think this is one of those things in museums that simulates space. I can gather my thoughts now. I see ships launching away from Earth now. Then I fall into Earth, deep into a forest in what I thought was an ocean.
Uhm. The hell's going on? There's a cabin up ahead a little ways away. Holy hell, it's truly freezing. I stumble through the snow, and I'm here now. There's no door handle. I brush the door with my hand, and it moves anyways. It's a log cabin, but there's a white desk sitting I the middle. The top glows bright blue with a hologram, showing the area around the cabin. Suddenly, an alarm blares, and the hologram turns red. Red arrows flood the hologram and head towards the cabin. 4 arrows, one on each side, all massive. The white sides fold down, unveiling two large machines on each side. They look like guns of some sort. I don't think they're a thing yet, but the term laser cannon should fit them adequately. I pick up one and it takes 2 hands; I hang onto it while the 4 arrows begin penetrating the walls. They all break down, and the roof falls into me. I fall unconscious.
I awaken back in the RV, and it's lighter now. The same guy from earlier brings me a glass of water. Looking into his face now, he seems familiar. I remember his face was there when the walls of the cabin fell. But there's something more. I don't know. He takes off his glasses, and tucks them into my pocket. I'm too tired to do anything at this point. He carries me to the door and I feel better now. Before he lets me go, he asks my name, some sort of test if I'm okay I guess.
"Thomas" I respond, "What's yours?".
"Thomas".