My phone rang. 555-657-9807. I didn't know the number. Had to be a Network call.
In the space of three rings I had my Network PDA out and the database dialed up.
*Candice Reynolds*
*Wife of Ben Reynolds*
*That* old dog?
"This is Costa," I said.
"Hello?" The voice was shrill. Tired. A detective worn out on chasing down leads that weren't panning out. "Who is this?"
"You called me," I said. "Do you not know?"
"No. Well yes. Can you just...just confirm who you are, okay?"
"That's unwise. And unsafe. Tell me who you are first. I never mind talking to what I assume is a beautiful woman, but not when I'm at such a grave disadvantage."
She hemmed a bit, flustered. "This is Candice Reynolds."
"Oh, Ben's wife? Well, it's a pleasure to meet you, in a manner. How is old Ben? Still recovering?"
"Recovering? So you..."
"From the other night," I said, hedging my bets. Reynolds hadn't updated his file, the idiot. I was making a tactical assumption based on past behavior. "I had him out all night. My girlfriend left me. Afraid I dragged Ben down into my troubles. Made him follow me, shot for shot. He wanted to call you, of course, but his phone was dead and I was being selfish. Couldn't be left alone, you understand. He *is* alright, isn't he?"
There was a good deal of silence and distant breathing then. "Yes. He's fine. I just...I'm sorry to bother you."
"No bother! I should have apologized to you straight away. He's good man, your Ben. He was really there for me. Give him my best, alright?"
"Yes. Fine." The call clicked dead. Apparently, I'd guessed close enough to the truth. I did put a mark in Reynolds' file, however. That kind of laziness exposed us all to unnecessary risk. As far as I have always been concerned, if you aren't willing to put in the effort, there is simply no place for you in the Network.
Because if you *are* invested, being a good citizen of the Network is an enormous amount of work. There is always some project or mission, some major, most minor. It does not end when you achieve *your* goals. In fact, that's the point when it all begins. Because there is no security in a life built on lies and favors. There is no "coasting".
I joined the Network to help advance my career, and I immediately reaped the benefits. I jumped lines. I gained references from strangers I'd never met, degrees and certificates from schools I'd never heard of. I cheated the system - in an almost grotesquely obvious way - and no one said anything. Everyone just kept waving me through. Waving me through doors. Waving me up flights of stairs. Until one day I had a corner office on the top floor and a seven figure salary.
Of course, once you *have* those things, you do everything in your power to keep them. And in the Network, that means helping others get what they want.
Some of it's fun. It all ranges from corporate collusion to seducing college professors to digging ditches in the twilight. You never know what kind of call you'll get next.
You may even be asked to help someone cheat death.
Not five minutes after I'd hung up with Candice Reynolds, my phone buzzed. This time it was a Network sub-group text. The other recipients were hidden, so I didn't know who else had received the message.
*NEEDED. THREE. ST. AUGUSTINE. TONIGHT. 12. *
There's an unspoken rule in the Network - no one remembers the last time you volunteered, but everyone remembers all the times you didn't. There are no mandatory tasks. You don't *have* to help anyone. But if you don't give back, things have a way of falling apart. We're all living in a house of cards, after all. It wouldn't take much to knock the whole pile over.
I have a yacht. I make it a priority to give back as often as possible.
St. Augustine's is a historical site, but not an active church. It can't be torn down, but no one wants to pay to keep it up, so it lives in this middle state - neither life nor death. A zombie estate. I'm not a religious man, but it's sad to see.
I arrived just before midnight and let myself into the church. Some of the pews had been stolen and the place reeked of piss, but the interior, at least, still gave off a godly vibe. There was a man standing near the altar and another sitting in the front row.
The man at the altar was pacing. "Good. One more and I'm out of here. They only need three and this place is creeping me out."
The doors opened once more and an old woman let herself in. "Oh! Three exactly! Wonderful. Thank you for coming."
The man at the altar sighed audibly.
"You kill your husband or something?" asked the man in the front row. "Cheating the law, maybe?"
"No, no," said the old woman. "Something different. I'm interested in cheating death."
"So you're..." I shook my head. "I guess I'm gonna need to wait for you to explain that one."
"Oh, it's not much of a story," said the old woman, walking purposefully towards the altar. "I don't want to die. Not yet. Not for some time. And yet death is always chasing me. It chases all of us. It's nearly caught up to me, you see."
"Are you sick?" said the man in the front row. "I know some good doctors. Plenty of favors to cash in. Would that help?"
"No, I'm not sick," said the old woman. "I've just run out of time. You can't hide from death forever, understand? But...but if you're clever enough, you *can* trick him..."
With a quickness that is unsettling to see in someone so stooped and withered, the old woman grabbed the man at the altar by the throat. He cried out, slapping at her weakly. I dashed forward, but it was over in an instant. The old woman fell down, and so did the man. I went to help the man up.
"So kind of you," he said, and there was something not quite right about the way he spoke. The voice was right, but not the way it was being used. The old woman screamed.
"What did you do?" she screamed, looking at her hands, eyes wide and white. "What did you do!?!"
"You tried to kill him!" shouted the man from the front row, darting forward and slapping the woman across the face. She shrieked and shrunk away from the blow.
"Now, now," said the other man as I helped him to his feet. "Don't be so cruel. Like she said, death is coming for her. And I suspect it will be here soon."
Again, the *way* the man spoke caused a chill to go down my spine. He seemed like forgery of a man. The more I looked at him the more the irregularities shown through.
"You're her," I said. "You're the old woman."
"I can do terrible things," the man said, speaking lowly, denying nothing, not looking me in the eye. "Terrible, terrible things. Consider your next move wisely."
I could not answer, because just then there was another presence in the church. It could not be seen, but all of us were immediately aware of it.
The old woman, or more precisely *her shell*, was lifted off the floor.
*finally i have found you once more*
"No!" she screamed. "Not me! It's that one! She stole my body!"
There was a moment of quiet.
*is this true*
The man from the front row shook his head. "I don't know what she's talking about."
The golem shook his head. "She's the one you're looking for. She told us not minutes ago that she was being hunted by you."
There was silence. It was my turn. The truth. A lie. Those concepts are meaningless in the Network.
"She's the one," I said, pointing at the old woman hovering just above the floor. "Take her."
The old woman's eyes flared, then dulled, then closed. The body floated gently down to the ground. The presence disappeared.
"What the fuck was that!?!" said the man from the front row.
"Very strange," said the golem, before adding in a voice only I could hear, "You're a credit to the community."
Even today, those words fill me with pride.