"Oh but why can't we take our memories with me? I don't want to forget you again. I remembered you the moment I saw you again here, but if I have to go back I don't want to forget you."
"My darling, our brain can't handle the the strain of such vast experiences on the physical plane. Our bodies are much more delicate than our souls. That is why we begin and end at infancy. So that our brain simplifies.
Infants don't have the cognitive abilities to retain as adults do."
"But I lost you so many years ago. When you died, a part of me died with you. I wish I had known I'd see you again and I would have died too, just so I might have more time with you."
"And that, my dear, is exactly why we must forget. Life is too beautiful and much too precious to waste. For we still do not know what awaits us after this. I tell you what, tomorrow is your
deathday, and you shall turn 10. Let us celebrate with a grand party and icecream!"
Nine years and twelve months later.
As I hold my lover in my arms, I coo her to sleep and watch her breathe. I know that she will not remember me, but I watch her delicate body nestle into my arms, her breath slows and her mouth slowly twitches into a quiet dreamy smile. This is how I will remember my wife for the
next 12 years that I am here. My infant, my angel, my soulmate. I cared for her in sickness and in health in life, and in death, I hold her in my arms and father her. There is an innocence, a purity in our love now, a love that I never knew in mortal life. She will never know that she taught me how to nurture. I will always be by her side, as long as I can be. And in our next life, I only pray that she finds happiness and peace. Only thirty seconds to go until her last breath. My heart quickens and I realize that she
must have experienced this for me that day in the hospital when I died. The thought of her pain and suffering brought me to tears. I ferociously mourned into her soft, peach fuzz hair. I rocked forward and backward, not to comfort but for myself. I kissed her forehead and held her close to my chest, and cradled her until she took her last breath.
"I will see you again, my darling. I will meet you on earth as I have in the heavens. Happy birthday."