I wasn't really the type of kid who stood out, always sitting in the back of the class, shooting spitballs at other kids, getting told off by the teacher, but not being the giant bully you always run from. I was more of a class clown. But one time, I had accidentally hit that big bully in the back of the head with one of my spitballs. He whipped around and stared me down, and his eyes just screamed "You're dead." I squeaked and slouched back in my seat. "Never doing that again." I thought. The rest of the day went on normally, and I thought he was all talk.
I got to my house safely, and tossed my bag on the couch. I went into the bathroom, and took a quick glance in the mirror before starting to move to the toilet. "Wait a second." Something was off, so I moved back to the mirror. I looked closely, thinking maybe I had just imagined it, but then I looked again, making eye contact with myself. "Are my eyes...green?" My eyes are normally blue, why would they look green? I shook my head and went to the bathroom, but when I was washing my hands, I looked in the mirror again. Something was definitely up. I concentrated on my eyes, and jumped back as they slowly changed back to blue. "It must be a trick of the light, my eyes wouldn't just change color like that." I went and did my homework, nothing out of the usual.
However, when I woke up, I looked in the mirror in my bedroom, where I normally do my makeup. My eyes were hazel now. "What the hell is going on?" I stared myself down again until they turned back to blue. "Am I doing that? Can I change my eye color?" It was the weekend, so I didn't have any school to worry about. I looked at my eyes again, thinking about brown eyes. Sure enough, my eyes turned brown. "What the hell?" I thought maybe I could try some other things. Could I possibly change my hair color too? Just as I thought that, my hair changed color, to a light blonde. Cool. I jokingly thought of if I could become a boy, and suddenly before me in the mirror stood a skinny-looking guy, with the same blonde hair and brown eyes I had given myself.
I heard a knock on the door and jumped a little bit. Do I need to change back in the same order I changed to begin with? The door started to open, and the first thing I did was change my hair color back to its brown color, then quickly changed back to a girl. My eyes were still brown, but I didn't care because I was looking in the mirror, whoever entered wouldn't see my eyes. My mom walked in the door, telling me breakfast was ready. "Ok, just a sec, mom. I think I got an eyelash in my eye." I immediately mentally smacked myself in the head, now she was going to look me in the eyes. I quickly changed them back to blue. "What's for breakfast, anyway?" My mom didn't look too closely, thanks to the diversion.
"Oh, it's just some pancakes. You look kind of different, did you eat a Thanksgiving dinner in your sleep?" What? I looked down at myself. Whoops, I guess the mirror makes me lose ten pounds. I was so focused on changing back that I must not have thought about what shape to give my body.
"I guess so? I'm not skipping breakfast though!" I really sounded suspicious, my mom was bound to find out. "Hey mom, actually-"
"Honey, did something happen at school yesterday? I already know you're a shapeshifter, the whole family is. Usually you first change as a defense mechanism. Then, if you're like me, you stand in front of the mirror for hours seeing what you can do." That was definitely what I was just doing.
"Like mother, like daughter, eh?" I pulled out my phone. "So does that mean I can look like Megan Fox if I want to?" My mom laughed. All the tensions melted and I went down to breakfast, changing back to my skinnier old self first. We both just pretended that nothing happened. I glanced over at my big brother, then looked at my mom with questioning eyes. She shook her head and we continued eating. Most of my days were pretty normal after that, though.