"Assembled ladies and gentlemen, students and faculty members, please refrain from delivering any pointless verbal interactions. Any essential communications shall be emitted only by my computational device." Dr Mehmed smoothed his snowy white laboratory coat, pristine mustache perched on his upper lip.
Displayed on the interactive whiteboard was various live feeds of the upper atmosphere of planet Earth, transmitted live from an observational satellite developed as part of an ambitious engineering project.
> Predicted intersection of Voyager probe route, Upper Atmosphere Surveillance Net: 1 minute
The crowd of students in the classroom peered intently at the screen, some in interest, most in search for ridiculing material. Sure, Dr Mehmed was...inhumanly smart, the best teacher they'd ever had, but this...this was too far. Maybe his brilliant mind had finally cracked under the pressure of marking incorrect test papers.
One minute later, jaws dropped. A great flash of light had just flitted across the screen, the computer generated recordings played back at a snail's pace. There! A little worse for wear, perhaps caused by so many years of operation, perhaps by the sudden acceleration forced upon it by an unsolicited command signal transmitted to it by a school far far away.
"Visual evidence now confirms it. Did I not inform you, Timothy, that it was quite within my mental capabilities to be able to complete your challenge?" asked Dr Mehmed, peering at one particularly amazed student in the front row.
"That's well cool sir. We should, like, do truth or dare more often for our form time activity." came the reply, Tim's eyes bulging.
A vociferous tinkling of broken glass shattered the moment. A swarm of soldiers charged in, weaponry loaded on their black combat dress. Faceless forces, masked by their purple visor clad helmets, circled Dr Mehmed, guns aimed unforgivingly at him. Squawks of radio communication filled the air, the clatter of a hundred pairs of combat boots thundering over the floorboards.
Red dots played across the doctor's chest and forehead, bathing him in unnatural light. Yet more soldiers filed in, each as well armed as the last.
The buzzing of multiple helicopters hovering overhead, the shouts of officers, directing their men into the threat inside the room.
"MEHMED!" roared the headmaster, charging into the room. "WHAT HAVE YOU DONE‽ "