*****
The intercom crackles on.
"Kids, this is an experiment. We are going to test your survival skills with each other. It is impossible to leave until the observers are satisfied, and your devices have also been disabled. Think of it like the Hunger Games, but more than one person is capable of winning. Some will die, some will kill, others will go insane. May you be the one to survive. Let the experiment begin."
I turn to the desk behind me and tell Sam.
"We are so winning."
I run up to the front of the room, ever the outgoing type.
"If this is real, then we will be the ones to survive. I propose we go all in. We need some sort of government, jobs, a sizable area, and everything else. We will win."
A wily-haired kid name Lawson steps up.
"Who put you in charge."
I look around the room.
"Who here is willing to do whatever it takes?"
Half the room raises their hand. The other half think I am an idiot.
"Come with me if you wa-"
A scream breaks out down the hall. The class rushes to the hall, and sees a girl lying in her own blood in the middle of the hall. The class returns to the room and locks the door.
"Who here is willing to do whatever it takes?"
Everyone raised their hand this time. Lawson nodded at me and sat down.
"You are probably the best one to lead us anyway."
"Thanks, man. Now, we need to assign roles. I am thinking," as I pick up an Expo marker, "Sam, you head up diplomacy. You are easily the most-liked person in the room. It could get crazy in here. Jovanna will work with you. Jas, you will lead our "military". Gabe, Porco, and Jonathan, do whatever Jas says. Lawson, you are with me. Everyone else, I don't really know yet. Something will come up. Now we need a name."
Everyone chatters for a few seconds, before the fat Jewish boy Gabe points out the sign on the wall.
"I think we already have a name. And a flag."
The class burst out in agreement and laughter.
"Well, it looks like we are Mrs. Roberts' Rough-Riding Rednecks."
"Or 4R, for short."
"And we could be called the 4 R-my."
The class let out a nervous laugh. This was getting real. They were like their own nation, up against who knows how many others. It very well could be do or die.
"Now that we have that settled, it is time to establish power past Room 245."
"How about we meet up with the classes on this end of the Math Hall? Our six classes could definitely withstand all comers."
"I had the same idea, Adam. You take some people and start setting up a wall halfway between this room and Room 243."
"Can do. Uhhhh, can I have Omar, Olivia, and Tyler for the crew?"
The students in question all agreed.
"It appears we have a Building Crew. Great. Time to head out into the open."
*****
Expect more.