God stopped walking in the middle of his garden and took a long drag.
"Gabriel - you want some?"
Gabriel, nearly half the size of God, looked up and shook him head.
"Oh crap man - I'm sorry," God sputtered through his exhaling of smoke. "I know, I know, I know. You gave me the feedback that you don't like to feel so much smaller, ya-da-ya-da, power struggle, etc."
Gabriel rolled his eyes as God shrunk to look him eye-to-eye. "Alright, give me a hit."
God bashfully looked side to side and handed him what remained. "Dude I'm sorry - you said you didn't want any! I'll get another one." He clicked his fingers and the joint expanded and overflowed with greens.
Gabriel took a long drag and sat down against a massive oak tree. "You gonna sit or what?"
God came over to him and plopped beside him. He looked out into the vast horizon and smiled at the untouched beauty of his personal arboretum. "Man this is beautiful."
Gabriel smiled and passed the joint. "Yeah, you did alright I guess. It seems to be lacking something though."
"Pshhhh," God exclaimed as he moved in for another hit. He pulled dramatically until the joint was no more.
"You know - you gave the angels nerves in their throats. That's not exactly possible."
"Sucks," God chucked. A long pause fell over the two of them as they continued to watch the horizon. The sun was going to set in about thirty minutes or so, and they never missed a sunset together.
"I have a question for you," Gabriel mumbled.
"Yeah, what's up?"
"Have you ever thought about what's next?" Gabriel continued to look out into the distance while his fingers threaded through the grass beside him. "We have spent the last God-knows how many years building this place -"
"Psh, I don't know how many," God interjected with a chuckle.
Gabriel sighed as he acknowledge he gave God a verbal alley-oop into his favorite joke. "Okay whatever. We have spent a shit ton of time building this stupid place. And sure, it's awesome and beautiful. But we have literally gotten high for the past 93,301 sunsets together -"
"Is that bad? Are you not enjoying yourself?" God stammered in a defensive tone. He turned to look at Gabriel in the eyes and said in a serious tone, "You know you can tell me when you want something different."
"No, no - it's not that I don't enjoy this. I could do this forever. But..." Gabriel looked at the ground and softened his tone. "I just wonder if there is something more...something we are missing."
God paused for a while and thought. "You are right. You are totally right. There should be something else...but I'm not sure what. I will build us something...or someone...that will provide us purpose. A never ending stream of problems and adventures, hopefully with a great sense of humor."
"Could you, get me another?" Gabriel said as he pointed to the extinguished roach. God snapped his fingers in reply and Gabriel took another hit. "Thanks man. This is probably my favorite green thing you have made so far."
God laughed. "Really? I thought you liked the trees that explode into flowers for about two weeks and then shed everywhere."
"Well yeah - those things are beautiful. But you can't smoke it!"
They both laughed together as the sun slipped under the horizon.
"Alright its settled. You have given me a new project Gabriel," God exclaimed with purpose. "I have made the earth, the sun, the stars, and the grass we sit upon. I have perfected my garden, and I have sprinkled creatures across the seas. Let us make these new creatures in our image, in our likeness, so that they may rule over the fish in the sea and the birds in the sky, over the livestock and all the wild animals, and over all the creatures that move along the ground."
Gabriel smiled. "I think I would like that."
"Good." God said with a smirk. "But I didn't tell you the best part."
"What?"
"We are going to make some creatures who appreciate getting super baked."
The two of them laughed as the sky turned into a burning red which illuminated the flame fading from the joint resting between Gabriel's fingers.