I wrote this in just a couple of minutes. I thought it'd be cool to just describe what happens to the witch every night during the witching hour and how she changes. I hope you like it:)
Tick...tick...tick...tick
If I wasn't the only one in this office, I'd be racking my mind for some way out of working late, tonight. Sharlett went home a half hour ago and the janitors have already made their rounds for the night. All I'm doing is paper work for next week's board meeting but I need the hours. That's what I get for drinking Vuhla's soup 3 weeks after the full moon; 2 sick days and a lot of time that needs to be made up.
Tick...tick...tick...tick
My back starts itching and it's enough to drive any normal person crazy, but I'm not normal. I'm faaaaar from normal. Now, my tongue is itching and I know exactly how long before that clock strikes twelve. If I can just finish this last report quickly, then I can probably start my stumble to the car before things begin to go blurry...literally.
Tick...tick...tick...tick
I hit save on my document and can feel my eyes swelling with blackness as I reach for my scarf and purse on my desk. Great, just great!
DONG! DONG! DONG!
My vision goes completely black and I can feel my body tingling. An orgasmic surge of energy washes over me as I feel for my belongings and place my hand against the wall to find the exit. I breathe heavily as my fingers wrap around the door's handle and swing it open. Now to walk down 6 flights of stairs without dying. Greaaaat. I start to place a foot on the first step but feel my heel wobble beneath me. Instead of descending the stairs of death, I sit on the ground and wait out the five minutes of shaking and nausea.
Finally, I sense what feels like a bubble making its way up my stomach, through my throat, and up to my mouth. Long story short, I leave a nice little puddle of puke in the staircase for the janitors to clean up tomorrow. It may seem shitty of me but I have no other option. Opening my wet eyes, I can finally see, but more than see. Everything is heightened. God, no human could ever understand this feeling of warmth. It's like I can see every microscopic organism, smell every tiny scent, and feel every object 10 times greater than before.
I steady myself upon my pumps and hoist my purse onto my shoulder. The stairs will be no problem, now. My body rises, leaving about an inch between me and the ground as I glide over each step and make it down to the parking deck in mere seconds. My car door is opened without the need to press a button and I start it without ever pulling out my key. As I start to back out of the space, I chuckle to myself thinking how funny it is that I could simply fly home, right now, if I wanted to. Then again, I wouldn't want the humans to wonder why my car was still here over night.