"There he is again. He's always looking at the clock. I swear he hasn't blinked in the last five minutes."
"So what Jeannette, let the freak stare all he wants. Rather he look at the clock then those two tissue stuffed lumps on your chest wouldn't ya?"
"What the hell Sarah! You said you wouldn't mention it! At least I didn't get drunk last Saturday night and make out with Jake when I have a boyfriend"
"Shhhhhh! Shut up Jen someone could hear you. That's not fair and besides, me and Frank have an on and off again relationship so I can make out with however I want."
"Does Frank know about this?"
"You're just jealous I can get with the boys and you can't."
"At least when I get a boy he'll be more into to me than in my pants okay."
"Get your good Christian parent talk out of my face okay."
"Whatever. Just forget it. Just...help me watch him over there. He's up to something."
"Look, I know you like him, while he's off watching the clock, you're getting off watching him"
"I can't even begin to believe you would even assume, even think for a second, that I would ever give someone like him the…"
"Oh I think he heard you. He's looking over here now. Nice one Jen. You always were so smooth with the guys weren't you?"
"You don't think he actually heard me do you?"
"Oh yeah he did. Why's it even matter, I thought you didn't care…"
"It's just that, every day at this hour he stares at the clock and doesn't look away for a few minutes. Every day Sarah. I know it's weird but don't you want to know why?"
"I don't care what that freak does alright. As long as he's not staring at me, it's none of my business. Why don't you just ask him why he does it? I'm sure he would like such a pretty girl to go and talk to him. I mean it would be the best part of his day if...oh he just sneezed. What a dork. There ya go, clean it all up. Get your face all nice and clean for your girlfriend Jen over here"
"Wait a minute. Sarah! Did you just see it? Sarah do you see them?"
"What, he's just wiping his nose right now. What's so wired about that?"
"Yeah, but with my tissues!"
"What?"
"MY BRA…Sarah my bra, the tissues I used to stuff it, they're all gone."
"Oh my god! How'd he do that? Wait someone's calling me."
"Who is it?"
"That's weird. It's Frank. Hello? Hey baby I miss…oh…wait baby listen…no I was drunk and he was there…but I didn't mean anything and…Frank don't do this to me…babe…. He hung up."
"What just happened?"
"He said he got a text from you saying I hooked up with Jake at the party. What the Hell Jen!"
"Wait I didn't send a text."
"Let me see your phone. See right there! 11:59! Why would you do that to me. I thought you were my friend."
"I didn't send that. Sarah believe me. I didn't send that."
"How can I!"
"Just look at the clock. Its 12:02 right now. I haven't touched my phone this whole time we have been talking. I've just been staring at him over there."
"Then how did it send?"
"It couldn't of been."
"Oh look he's waving over here and smiling at us. Jen your boyfriend is a freak."