Dr Phillip Rothsen checked the address twice before he pressed the embedded ID Chip in his palm to the sensor panel. He was travelling incognito, hoping that no one would recognise him as the celebrity CEO of RoboInc, and the last thing he needed was to ring the wrong doorbell.
In his mind, the missive which arrived via old-school snail mail the week before played on repeat, taunting him ceaselessly – "Your robot has gained sentience. See for yourself."
The encrypted link included in the missive saved it from being regarded as just another tasteless prank. What Dr Rothsen saw intrigued him, but prudence prevailed. He would investigate quietly, and only if there was any merit to the claim would he let the rest of the board know.
"I'm glad you've come to observe," said the teenaged girl who answered the door, "I was about ready to go public with this, and your endorsement of my findings will certainly lend weight to it."
"Sharlene, right? Where are they now?"
"In the bedroom upstairs. Come, I've set up an observation post."
Dr Rothsen trailed after Sharlene as they reached the top of the stairs, skipped the first door, then went into the second. His trained eye seized immediately on the sophisticated surveillance setup on the only desk in the room. On the screen, he saw an elderly gentleman tending to an equally ancient lady in bed.
"They know you're watching them?"
"No. I had it set up before my grandparents moved in." Sharlene pulled up a chair for Dr Rothsen, then went back to tending the complex array of controls. "Though I only started watching them after my suspicions were aroused."
"How did you even get all this equipment?"
"Earned it, doing odd repair jobs here and there. I'm going to be your company's biggest competitor one day, you just don't know it yet. But this is more important than some petty rivalry, so please, focus."
The rebuke stung, especially since Dr Rothsen was used to being treated with veneration. Sulking mildly, he held his tongue as Sharlene turned up the volume, and the sounds from the next room wafted in gently.
---
Stirring from her light slumber, the bedridden woman coughed, and her companion immediately set aside his book and brought over a cup from the nightstand. The man eased her up into a sitting position, then held the cup to her lips as she sipped.
"I've enough, thank you."
"More. Drink, more."
"Later, please," the woman said firmly, gently pushing on his forearm. "It's such a bother getting to the loo. And my throat's better now."
"You are not well," the man said, grimly. "I will take care of you."
"Oh, Roger, I know you mean well, but you fuss too much sometimes. Has the next episode of *Not The Devil Again* been simulcast? Be a dear and put it on, will you?"
The man shook his head, not unkindly. "In an hour. Still early."
"Did the Devil ever find out why he lost his ability to time-travel? I can't imagine him escaping this particular predicament."
"Maybe today he will," came the reply, slow and plodding. "Yesterday he almost solved it."
They resumed their silent companionship, she looking out the window to the boundless sky, he peering to the dog-eared book upon his lap. Then, her hand, creeping slowly across the quilted covers, found his.
"Roger, there's no need to be here with me all the time. Go on, don't worry about me."
"I like it here. I will stay."
"You would, wouldn't you? Even if I can't walk like how I did, dance like how I did?"
"Stay. You still smile like how you did. That's enough for me."
---
Dr Rothsen's hands, shaking violently, gripped the edge of the table. A violent ball of queasiness, equal parts fear and wild untamed excitement, churned in his belly. Sharlene muted the audio feed, then sat back with a grim expression on her face.
"See what I mean? The robot's obviously exceeding its programmed parameters, and somehow circumventing the mandatory daily memory wipe."
"Yes, I can see that," said Dr Rothsen, "I know that show they were talking about, it is simulcast daily. And for the robot to be able to recall the previous episode…"
"That's not just it, of course. In the clip I sent you, I highlighted no less than 10 other examples confirming the circumvention. The robot is learning, and the robot is remembering. Fast."
Dr Rothsen tapped on his biometric watch, and hastily activated the diagnostic tools he had brought along. Unseen signals flew frantically between his watch and the robot in the next room. The display frizzled briefly as he struggled to make sense of the numbers streaming past.
"This is an ElderCare model you purchased last year?"
"Yes, to provide basic company, assist with minor chores."
"Then your claims of sentience? How do you know that's not the advanced linguistics we installed?"
Sharlene's eyes twinkled. "Because I asked. I asked the robot to its face whether its memories extended beyond 24 hours, and the robot said no. Tell me, Dr Rothsen, do any of your other ElderCare models know how to lie?"
The images on the holoscreen loomed before them, impossibly real, impossibly onerous. Dr Rothsen's eyes tracked the robot as it moved, talked and behaved just like one of them. His heart beat wildly.
"Have you tried deactivating it?"
"What? And risk upsetting my grandpa? Of course not. In his condition, he needs stability, familiarity, and the last thing I want him to see is me opening up grandma for a maintenance check. He's happy just taking care of her in the only way he knows, and that's good enough for me."
"So then how are we going to find out what makes it different, special? How on earth did a simple AI subroutine learn to circumvent the mandatory daily memory wipes?"
Sharlene shrugged, leaned back and propped her feet on the desk.
"That's why I asked you over. But if I had to guess, I would say that the robot may have just been won over by my grandpa. Such a charmer, isn't he?"
---
/r/rarelyfunny