Deep under the underground levels of Archive Prime, in a room shielded by a meter thick wall of solid steel, the latest findings of the Machine Intelligence Program were to be revealed in a meeting so clasified even the two participants would not be allowed to remember it, and would need to imbibe some secretitive formula to prevent long term memories thereof.
The high ranking agents, wearing such expensive black suits and such authentic designer sunglasses that they could have been casted in any espionage movie straight away, examined each other in silence for about ten minutes, their emotionless faces betraying nothing.
Finally the younger man was content to begin: "Sir, we are certain, a corpus never lies". The subtlest brow raise by the authority figure invited him to continue. "Sir, we trained the machine up on a collection of Star Wars novels and fan fiction. As you know the Rebel Alliance did the Empire in from the shadow with terrorist attacks and a campaign of propaganda and deception".
Another pregnant pause filled the room with foreshadowing tension before the operative continued. "Sir, we then asked the machine to analyze all the writings we have from the Roman era, so as to locate what brought down that mighty empire. The result terrified us, but we thought it must be a mistake. We tried again with other bodies of data from different historic periods, but correlation is at 100% percent. "
"Sir, it is the Christians. This sect was involved in every single collapse of empire in recorded history. Their rise coincides with the Romans' downfall, their machinations bring about the 30 years war, they cause enormous trouble in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republic, widely recorded in all manner of official documents, they even are involved with the sabotage and violent overthrow of the Empire of Japan, though there are hardly any Christians there. "
The older agent sighed and took off his glasses. "It's worse than you think. They got into this room. "The two exchanged a knowing look, then he went on. "We must let the president know. "
"We can't risk the official channels, sir. Our analysis puts Christian infiltration of even secure organizations at above 60%. "
"Right. This is a Code Red operation". He pushed a hidden button in his desk. "Sally, please come in". "Yes sir, Mr. Smith". a pleasant voice retorted over the intercom.
The secretary made her entrance to the sound of massive steel doors rolling open in perfect silence. "Sally, how would you deliver a secret message to the president if you couldn't trust anyone?"
"Why sir, I'd do it myself, my boyfriend is on the president's staff and we get together in the presidential apartment all the time. In fact, I pretty much deliver a message for you every week. "
"Hush, that's extremely classified. You aren't allowed to know that, in fact we aren't allowed to know that, but that's OK since we'll forget it soon enough. "He took out a post-it stack and wrote the message down then handed it to the girl. As she left the older man took out a non-descript bottle and two small glasses and poured. The two started to drink in silence.
Later that day, a casual post-it note would stick casually on a certain fridge door patiently waiting for President Obama's attention. "Sir, it is the Christians, do not believe their lies".