Like every other morning I got woken up by my dog, Max. He certainly knew what to do when he wanted food. I got out of bed and could hear the coffee machine already buzzing as it created my coffee. I went to the bathroom, closely followed by Max, who, obviously as a dog, wanted food. I finished my personal chores and gave Max his breakfast, a nice piece of beef. I was drinking my coffee and walking to the door.
"Hmm, lots of mail today" I said to myself.
One of the letters caught my attention, it had golden lining and the paper was more like parchment, on the front, my address and a wax stamp saying 'Salve', no idea what that mean however. I opened the letter and started reading.
*Dear Archie*
*He survived*
The handwriting was peculiar, messy, *unclear* is a beautiful sort of way, it was flowing. "He survived" I whispered under my breath. I looked at the back of the paper and no return address was there, no send address, just mine, the recipient. I had no clue who survived, or who sent the message. I haven't lost anyone in my family, nobody was in the hospital, I was living a happy life...But I never met my biological father, he had left my brothers, my mom and I on the house and dissapeared when I was born.
After quietly thinking by myself I headed to the post office. I gave them the letter, which had a stamp, no clue if I mentioned that, it had a stamp dating 1796, quite old, I am unsure how it was even sent on todays post. The person on the counter said that letter was left on a letterbox, therefore they dont know who sent the letter.
"Thanks!" I said and left, the post office once again prooved useless.
I walked back home, the rain had started pouring fast now and I had to protect the parchment paper. I sat on my couch and read the letter again and again, the handwritting was becoming more and more recognisable, the letters more vibrant and so much clearer, "He survived" said the voice in my head, "He survived", the voices inside my head kept repeating those two words.
It must've been an hour now and the letters were now imbedded in my head, I put the letter down, closed it, and walked off. I did nothing about the letter for the rest of the day.
I went to sleep and the dream fullfilled my question. I was there, reading the letter, as the words were getting clearer, an image appeared on the parchment and I had seen this image before. It was my dad.
--
Check some of my other writing in /r/Cookiez_Fort