*Honor your liege. Protect the faith. Shield the innocent. * Words became just words to a starving man, or a man dying of thirst. Kings and Lords and Emperors mean nothing to a man so far from home. Even God just becomes sour grapes and baked bread. It is easy to pull out your sword and fight for the sake of the man beside you, but to fight for a man thousands of miles away? Nay, when my liege-lord died, my will to fight for him die with it.
"My lord, a message. Sir Wilhelm and his men have deserted the army."
Blinking sweat from my eyes, I turned to look at my page. He was either my brothers third bastard or...a third cousin on my wife's side? Damned if I can even remember it anymore these days. "Water, boy. And did we manage to *catch* any of these knaves before they escaped?"
While I drank heavily from the warm water jug, my page explained how the men stole away in the night, leaving the corpses of those who tried to stop them. "And sir: Phillip has called for a council."
*This day just keeps getting better*. French born bastard, what the hell does he want? Grabbing my broadsword, I went out to the main camp, where most of the remaining nobles had gathered. Phillip stood at the center of a host of them, mostly the mixed Franco-German lords. The sun beat down on us all, and I felt the small twinge in the back of my head that reminded me I had once taken a mace to the back of the head. Temples throbbing, I moved to face Phillip directly. "Phillip, what the hell is the meaning of this?"
"Alonzo, our cause is *lost*. We have sinned greatly, and God has taken from us our great leader. We must leave this God-forsaken land while we still can."
"You pledged your life, your lands, and your honor on finishing this war."
"Surely God does not wish us to die here. Surely he must have better plans."
"I know not of any plans," I replied, pulling my longsword out from my back. "But I know you made an oath to die before letting the Holy Land fall to the heathens. Now, draw your sword and let us see what God's plan truly is."
Phillip looked aghast. "You cannot be true. There is no need for this, we mean you now harm."
"Out there," I replied, pointing my sword into the distance, "is a Muslim army waiting to descend upon us. Including the men we lost last night, our army has less than five-thousand good men, only eight hundred mounted. They don't know that. If they did, we'd be dead men. If you take another thousand, they'll notice. And you condemn us to death. So, draw your sword if you mean to forsake your oath. Let us see if God's plan involves the death of this army."
Phillip looked around uncomfortably, but drew his own blade. Opting for a shield, once he donned his battle armor he became much less rattled. "I do not want to kill you, but I will do what I must Alonzo." Holding my sword level, I waited for his strike. A feint, and it came low and lateral.
Although I had the advantage of length, he was able to strike faster and change direction more quickly. Still, his form left much to be desired. He swung his sword in a high arc, forgetting the while his shield existed. I sidestepped his blow and launched one of my own; seconds later his shield was clattering on the ground. Clenching his wounded hand into a fist, he tried to strike with his sword again.
I caught the blow low on my sword and threw my weight behind it. Unbalanced, Phillip was unable to rise in time to block my next blow. His sword flew uselessly out of his hands. As he stared at his empty hands, I brought the blunt end of my sword to his chin and bloodied his face as he fell to the ground. I pressed the tip of my sword to his neck and prepared to rid myself of his weak-faithed presence.
"What is the meaning of this?" The crowd turned to see an older man dressed in simple black robes approaching. Beside him stood several other similarly clad men wielding quarterstaffs. Aged lines of a long and brutal life of service ran across their faces.
"No concern of yours, monk." My short retort did little to deter him.
"You will find yourself amiss, m'lord, should you kill him. Every sword will soon be required."
"A faithless sword is no sword," I replied angrily. I had little enough patience for these warrior monks as it was, less so when they interrupt so.
"There is no time for this. A muslim army fast approaches. They will be upon us within the hour. Kill him, and you weaken our cause that much more." I took one look at Phillip, another at the monk, and stepped off him.
Whatever else the man may be, there was a fight coming. My liege lord may have died, but I can at least fulfill his dying wish: free the Holy Land. Christendom can ride to its own defense. I do this for my liege. One last request. One last cause.
*For Frederick*