"You hit me in the leg, you git!" I turned the corner to the sound of Ron shouting, and the sight of him hopping around on one leg while the other flailed around uselessly like an empty sock. "If that's how we're going to play it..." he leveled his wand at Harry and shouted "Animata!," a spell that would make Harry dance around like a madman.... if aimed properly. Instead, the flash of blue light arced over Harry's shoulder and hit me straight in the chest.
"RON!" I screamed. Static electricity filled the air, causing my hair to poof up even more than usual.
"Blimey, Hermione!" Ron shouted, victorious grin changing to a look of horror. "Hey, why aren't you dancing around?" He looked at his wand, still covered in Spell-o-tape from when they'd hit the Whomping Willow. "Ruddy piece of junk!"
It wasn't the wand, though. Energy was pulsing from the device in my pocket that had absorbed the blow. The Time Turner, that Dumbledore had made me *swear* not to tell anyone about. "I've got to go!" I shouted, ducking out of the room.
"That was weird," I heard Ron mutter as the door slammed shut.
I reached into my pocket to check on the hourglass that I'd been using to get to all of my classes on time this year. Electricity coursed through my veins, and the glass actually shattered. "I'd better clean up all this sand," I thought just as my vision went black and I passed out on the hallway floor.
----
The sun was in my eyes. *What time was it? Why was I asleep already? *
I bolted upright. *Oh god! I missed Runes class! All because of Ron and that stupid spell! *
Hogwarts, however, was gone. I was in the right *place*: I recognized the lake, the Forbidden Forest, everything. But where the castle should have been, there was a herd of cattle grazing in an empty field. A lone shepard sat nearby, enjoying a picnic and very surprised to see me.
"Pardon me," I asked him, "But where..."
He interrupted me, in Latin. "I'm sorry, young lady, but I can't understand you."
*Latin? * Thank god that Mum and Dad had sent me to that Catholic school back when I was living as a Muggle!
I tried my best to respond. "Can you please tell me where we are?"
"Eburacum," he said. "Where did *you* come from, though?"
I ignored his question. *Eburacum? * that had been the *Roman* name for this area!
With a sudden realization of horror, I pulled out the shattered remains of the Time Turner. Ron's Animate spell had caused it to go haywire, and apparently sent me all the way back to Ancient Rome. And repairing such an object...I'd need to find the wizarding community in this time. I thought back to my History of Magic notes, which I'd memorized for the final.
"Who is Emperor, sir?" I asked the shepard.
He held up a shiny coin. "Emperor Marcus Aurelius, of course. Are you all right, girl?"
"Y...yes," I answered slowly. *Marcus Aurelius*! He had been the only Wizard Emperor of Rome, and a powerful alchemist to bat! If I was going to find a new time turner, I might as well start there!
"You've been very helpful, sir," I told the shepard. "Could you please direct me to the nearest village?"
He pointed down toward where Hogsmeade was in my time. I bowed and took off down the hill. Somewhere down there, I'd be able to find civilization, and maybe even some wizards. And if I was *really* lucky, wizards with a broom that could take me to Rome.