"Well, can't you just send someone out? An exterminator or something?" I could hardly believe what a hassle this had become.
"Sorry, sir. Those services are not provided by the city or the HOA. You'll have to dispose of it yourself by Monday, or you'll be charged a fee." The way this woman's voice sounded through the phone made me want to find her and slap her across the face; simply for insulting my eardrums with the screech that came from her throat.
I rubbed my temples, feeling the pain spread into the back of my head. "Okay, fine. I'll figure something out. Thanks for nothing." I hung up the phone before she had a chance to respond. I couldn't take another second of that whine.
I gazed out the window at the bee's nest that had caused so much commotion on this wretched day. *Get rid of it now, * they demanded. *Assholes. * I knew moving into an HOA area was a bad idea, and yet here I was. All the exterminators in the area were booked up, and now I had to deal with this damn colony of stupid angry bastard flies. I wished they could understand English; I bet they *hate* being called flies.
No matter. I went out to my garage to see what kind of supplies I had to work with. I eyed my work bench, and spotted a bottle of round-up weed killer underneath it. I scooped that up, and trotted out into the front yard to take care of business.
"Okay, you little douchebags, let's see how you like weed killer." I muttered as I raised the wand and sprayed away.
It did not go well.
They swarmed around me, and I retreated quickly back into the garage. *Now what the hell am I supposed to do? * I surveyed the room once more, cursing under my breath at the situation. I couldn't believe the round-up just made them angry. And then I had the greatest idea any man has ever had; I unscrewed the round-up bottle, and poured the weed killer out. I grabbed a can of gasoline, and filled the sprayer. Then I scooped up my blowtorch, and headed back outside.
"You really shouldn't have pissed me off," I said, ignoring the absurdity of a man talking to a bee's nest. I raised the want once more, and sprayed away. I soaked the nest, and sprayed a trail down the tree and onto the ground. As the fiery little beasts emerged from their hive, I sprayed a trail of gasoline all the way back to the garage, and pointed the torch towards it. I looked up at the hive one last time, and muttered, "See you in Hell, you sons of bitches."
And then I lit the trail.
It was glorious. It took only a second for the fire to reach the hive, and it erupted into a fiery cloud. I swore, just for a moment, that I could hear them screaming. The hive quickly burned away from the tree, falling to the ground. A few of the creatures crawled out onto the grass, but did not make it far before the fire consumed them. Of course my tree was on fire; but I didn't care. *Let it burn, * I thought.
As I sat there, watching the hive turn to ash, grinning like a crazy man, I heard a car pull into the driveway behind me. I turned to see Hank Jackson, the head of the home owner's association.
"Jesus, what's happening here?!" he exclaimed, as he grabbed a fire extinguisher and ran towards the tree. *What kind of a jackass carries a fire extinguisher in their car? * I wondered.
I approached him as he put out the fire; I was quite surprised that extinguisher had enough for the tree. Without making eye contact, I began, "Your secretary said I needed to get rid of the hive. So I did. Maybe you guys should rethink this policy."
He looked at me in disbelief. "You're insane, Frank," he said, clearly in shock. "And, for the record, we were talking about the wasp nest next to your gutter." He motioned towards the house, where a remarkably large wasp nest and formed.
"Oh," I said, with a sinking feeling in my stomach. "My bad."