Day one:
Purgatory is different than I pictured when I heard about it on earth. Hills, mountains, and endless forests is all I see. There are broken buildings scattered and the residents are not polite. I have resorted to just sleeping on a makeshift bed of leaves and moss. Not off to a good start.
Day two:
I was rudely awakened by a middle aged man pulling me to my feet, telling me that it's time to begin. Whatever that meant, I wondered. I wasn't walking long before the endless forests around me vanished, throwing me into an arena type place. The arena was surrounded by cheering people screaming someone's name. The Vanquisher. Whoever that is. But my confusion was replaced by fear when a tall, muscular man who looked to be about 30 walked into the arena with a smirk. He had a shaved buzz cut and stubble lining his chin and jaw. He just looked like your average douche until his eyes went pure black. "I am your first, mortal, and will soon be your last." The demon man spat as he lunged toward me.
Day seven:
I don't know how I survived on my second day but I did, he was too big and strong for his own good. I was fast, agile, and cleaver. Since when? I don't know either. But after he hit the floor and blood began to flow, he vanished, even his blood. There were other memories since I got here, but they quickly leave me, there is one thing I have and must keep. My sanity.
Day 23:
I have fought over 12 demons and other lost human souls since I've arrived. All with the same result. Success. The crowd cheers for me now, not them, and that's the way it should be. Wait, no it's not, I must leave, I must survive, that is all.
Day 117:
I have fought more souls and creatures than I can count. Not once have I lost, and it will stay that way… Defeat is no longer an option. I will win. I will survive.
Day 385:
There is no turning back now, this place, this doom, I rule. People bow to me, not Him. They cry to me for mercy, but mercy is not how I lasted this long. Mercy, maybe, but not from me, those who grant mercy are weak and don't deserve to have a chance of true Life.
Day 2458:
This is it. My time has come, I am leaving this place, no longer will my soul be trapped. The endless forests are burned. The hills and mountains are leveled. This is what this damned place deserves. No mercy. The residents continue to leave. Barely. So many have been killed. Sent to hell. Because of me and who follow. I am the ruler. I am the Vanquisher.