I had been in an minor earthquake in Japan a few years ago during a business trip. I remember the disorienting feeling being the most overwhelming aspect for me. To experience that as an adult for the first time...it felt like a revelation. I started considering things I had simply never bothered with before. Reading about such events in science books simply does not do it justice. You can't grasp the true power of something like that until you're in the middle of it. That disorientation is what I felt when the planet spoke to us. Not in words, not in any language we could even imitate. It spoke in earthquakes, but we understood it perfectly. We ALL did. All 9 billion of us.
The first rumble was so subtle, the few of us who heard it clearly (I was one of those) didn't understand what it was. We didn't understand what it had said. By the time the next rumble came, only minutes later, some had already gone mad. It was just too much to absorb for some. I was paralyzed with fear, standing in the middle of a park as my dog ran away from me, with three other dogs following him. We now know they were being called. At the same time it informed us of our true nature, and of our imminent doom, it spoke to the others a whole other message.
The third rumble came an hour after the second, but we didn't feel it beneath our feet, that time. We felt it in our minds. Our memories bounced around. Our individual knowledge changed. Our collective knowledge was unlocked. We begun seeing more and more, understanding more and more. More of us went mad. The suicides began. No more rumbles after that. The message had been sent...
It has been a week since that day, and somehow, despite all our new found knowledge, most of us refuse to accept the facts. We're still debating, still depending on politicians to make their secret plans, and speak among themselves. Still weak. No one really knows what to do. As a species, we are in denial. But we all know what it said to us. All of us heard it in different ways, but we all know what it was telling us. Death. You are sentenced to death. But was it "death"? No. There was something about the...tone. It wasn't a tone, since it wasn't a voice. But something about the resonance, perhaps, had implied it didn't mean death. The closest word the English language has to it is...reset. That is what I feel in my heart. My sister agrees with me. She heard it much the same way I did.
I felt like I had been let in on a secret, as had everyone else at the time. Scientists couldn't explain the phenomena. There were no detectable emission of any frequencies, no soundwaves, whatever scientific bullshit terms you wanna pin to it. It had none of that. It just was. It told us all what was going to happen. It gave us time to prepare, mentally. Like it cares for us to some extent.
Now I'm hearing about some religious group gaining a massive following. They call the planet "Mother" and are committing mass suicides across the globe to try and save the rest of us. Saying that if we bring our numbers down enough, maybe the rest of us can be spared. Nonsense. There was no room for negotiations. It said what needed to be said. It gave us a farewell.
The collective consciousness has been growing. We're getting new bits of information every day, but it seems to come in slow dribbles. As if not everyone's participating. We know that the planet let us evolve for one reason only. We were to be the repellent. We were to be its defensive system against whatever threats may have come its way. We are a failed experiment.
We know we are not the first. The octopus was the dominant sentient species for a while, but they were more like a rough draft. A first attempt that just didn't pan out. But now we know they're gone from the seas. No one's fished any of them in days. Same with honeybees. They're all gone. Cats, dogs, horses, cows, all gone or going. Some owners have already been killed trying to keep their pets indoors. Dolphins in captivity have been acting near-suicidal, trying to find sea-water. They jump from their tanks and try to crawl away. Chickens are still around, and so are most reptilians, though not many have bothered checking more closely. Either way, no one knows where they've all disappeared to. But we all know we are not going wherever they did.