"Don't think of it as dying," he said, "think of it as starting over in a new place. It's a lot less dreary than you'd imagine."
His hand swept out as light blinded me. Gone was the char and smoke from what was once my lab, instead I could smell - grass? Dropping to my knees, I felt the ground as my eyes adjusted. Soft, damp grass. The air was cool and clean, like no other breath I had taken in my life.
I looked up from the grass, out into the distance from the cliff on which I stood. The lands and seas I could see stretched farther than I ever imagined. Glacier covered mountains gave way to forested rolling hills and grasslands on one side. Pristine and untouched desert dunes dusted in the wind on the other. The farther I looked, the more I realized it, the lack of horizon was unsettling, but not disturbingly so. "Who are you," I asked, turning to him, "the grim reaper, leading me to heaven?"
He gave a soft chuckle, like a man who no longer found much humor in life, but knew when to be polite. "I am Hestaphian. I am not a grim reaper, but I have led you to an afterlife, of sorts."
It was my turn to chuckle, "So I'm dead?" I ran my hand through my hair. "I don't feel dead."
"You did die, but you are not dead. Like many others, you've been given a second chance to live here on this infinite world." He pointed down to a river below the cliff, where someone thrashed in the water. Another figure had been waiting nearby, and waded into the river, pulling them out and helping them to shore. Hestaphian turned to me, "He died of thirst, but now he has a chance to live again. I wouldn't be surprised if he was given command over water someday."
I followed the river to a city in the middle of the plains below. My mind wandered, and I sighed, "How did I die?"
"Your AI turned against you, destroyed your lab, and murdered you. Your life's work stabbed you in the back. Typical robot."
I laughed, I hadn't been expecting that from this stoic. "So what do I do now? I have a life ahead of me, where do I start?"
"That's why I was there to meet you. I am the god of spacetime, and you are my new apprentice, the one-day god of robotics."
Gods? This wasn't real, right? I suddenly pieced things together. "A man dies of thirst and might be granted dominion over water. I am murdered by a robot and so I will be god of robotics, whatever that means. Is this all based on irony?"
He stroked his chin and said, "The god of strife was a notable peacekeeper whose pacifism started a war. Irony is practically how things work, it seems." He laughed, this time it felt like he enjoyed it. I couldn't help but join in.
I wiped a tear from my eye, "So how did you become god of spacetime? Accidentally blew up a universe while you were still in it?"
"Pretty much."
"Oh."