Blackness engulfs my vision, and my temples are throbbing indicating the start of a headache. I can feel the warm rays of the sun beating down on me, giving me a small sense of comfort as the scent of dry grass fills my nostrils. I feel groggy, lethargic, slow...vulnera-
I can't feel my legs.
My heart starts to race. A sense of dread settles into the pit of my stomach. My blood pumps, races, and boils, increasing the pressure that's already nestled in my head. My leg...I can't help but to pant, trying to get air into my lungs to calm down. But it's of little use.
It all happens at once: I stand up, only to find no support offered by my legs, causing me to fall back down to the earth. My eyes shoot wide open, blinded by the sun; I close them and roar my defiance at the ungodly brightness, only to realize my throat is parched.
I crumble back to the earth. The throbbing in my temples intensifies.
Why does my head hurt? Why is my throat so dry? I remember...I remember...
I shake my head as though this action alone will dislodge the memories free.
I remember walking through the tall grass in the late afternoon sun. It was a hot day, so the family and I spent it by the pool to stay cool. That's right...I was by the pool, playing chase when that unearthly noise bombarded us from the heavens...
It wasn't simply loud; it was a cacophony. You could feel the vibrations throughout your being the same way you could feel the trumpet call of an elephant. It. Was. Loud. And the smell...It was difficult to describe the stench that accompanied the noise. It wasn't the smell of death. It was more like the absence of death, the absence of life. As inert as the rocks, but less...earthy, and more...unnatural?
My nose wrinkles and my ears twitch as my memories unfold. I can feel my pulse racing, so I force myself to calm down with some deep breaths. I wait until I can move my legs.
Mindful of the light, I cautiously open my eyes to survey my environment, looking for a familiar landmark. The feeling of dread returns to my stomach.
I don't recognize *anything*.
Where am I???
There's a cliff face, eerily smooth, not even 50 feet away. I follow its curve, turning to trace its line all around me. Behind me is a cave; it serves a source for more of that unnatural stench. I'm trapped in a tiny valley. I cannot see a way out.
I head towards the cliff face. Maybe there's a spot I can climb it, som-
I freeze in my tracks, suddenly aware I am not alone. I am being watched. A lifetime of hunting has honed my instincts, and I know I am being watched. My eyes dart along the cliff tops, looking to see what stalks me. I find...oh no...it's *them*.
It's an odd juxtaposition; standing in the gentle warm sun, almost like it's trying to wrap my golden fur in a comforting embrace; and those...*creatures* up in the shadows. On the cliffs. Watching me. Watching them.
And I know. I've heard the stories, the tales, the myths. I know. I'm their prisoner.
Suddenly, the thoughts and memories of seeing my pride...my cubs...my family...the open savannah...it's nothing but a distant dream. It was only yesterday, but it might as well be a different life.
I roar my defiance. Damn those neurotic hairless monkeys.