The night air formed ice to my face as puffs of smoke bellowed out from my mouth. The snow fell around me making a hushing sound, a quiet and breeze. The night sky glowed in the light of the cars and buildings that littered the city that was accompanied by the constant hum of the traffic buzzing from all directions. I walked down the street towards the city's park with the sounds of crunching under my feet. This is where I came to relaxed myself when things got tense, when life got hard, and I needed to do something, anything to distract myself. Making my way over to the park's bench, the movement of something on it caught my attention. I walked a bit closer, examining the dark brown fabric as it moved up and down slowly. It was a person.
"Hello?" I whispered, as to not startle him.
He groaned while he pushed himself up to face me, leaning on his right shoulder. The face of the man was that of an old man grafted onto the body of someone younger. He looked worn before his days.
"Please don't report me." He spoke quietly, he sat up wrapping the small blanket around him even tighter than I thought was possible. Pushing my hair behind my ear, I unzipped my coat placed it around my shoulders and sitting down beside him.
"I won't." We sat and watch the snow fall collecting itself and growing more than an inch higher than it had been when I arrived. Our breaths slowly fell into rhythm with the sounds that echoed throughout the city A paced sound that grew and shrank with the passing of each car.
"Come back to my place." I said breaking the silence between us, his ears face had started to redden and his body looked stiff. He only stared back. "It's warm, and I have a spare bedroom you could use. If you don't like it, you don't have to stay." There was something in eyes. Something of a look of wonder, or hope, or sadness. He nodded, and stood, all without saying a word.
The trip seemed far shorter than the trip there, passing screaming vendors and flashing lights until we arrived at my house. The inside of the house fiercely juxtaposed the outside, dim and quiet and greeted us with a heat that felt unnatural as we entered.
"There's a washroom down there." I said pointing down the hallway then taking my coat back from him. "Living room is there, make yourself at home. I'll make some tea."
The man sat himself down on the couch as I walked into the kitchen.
Minutes later I walked in the room to be greeted with the man almost asleep.
"So" I began "What's your name?"
"Chris." He spoke, his voice as soft as the falling snow. I looked down. I wasn't sure what to say.
"That's…A nice name." I chuckled to myself and took a sip of the tea.
"Why?" his voice cutting in sharp in the night.
"Hm?"
"Why are you doing this? You invite a stranger into your home. For all you know, I could be a murderer or a thief or a- “
"Well, are you?" I cut in.
"Well, uh," He looked down "no."
"Well that's good that's established." The silence stretched on a while more.
"I know what its like." I said, "I know what it's like to be lost, and lonely and to have nowhere to go. All I wanted when I was out on that bench was someone to take me in, to give me a nice hot cup of tea. No questions asked. So, that's what I did." He turned to me, with his eyes, his sad eyes, a shimmering grey. "I ask nothing in return."
With that we talked, and talked until morning, until one of us had fallen asleep in the quiet company of the other. I awoke to the lights shining in through the window, casting beautiful reds and yellows onto the wall. Where the man had sat earlier in the night was now an empty indent in the couch, containing a note.
"Thank you."