Ryder sighed as he appeared in a familiar ivory white kitchen. He sighed once more when he saw the reason he was there, standing on her tiptoes, trying to reach for a new packet of flour in the too cabinet. "Got you," he heard her whisper as she barely held the item. "There is such thing as a chair, Karen," he spoke up, giving the petite girl a fright and dropping the flour on top of her head. Ryder pressed his lips together, trying his best to stifle his laugh. "You! This is all your fault!" Karen said exasperatedly, as she shook flour out of her hair. Ryder picked up a kitchen towel on his way towards her and gently wiped her face clean, "it's been years, Karen. You should be used to it by now. I don't have any control over it remember." Karen held his wrist, stopping him from helping any further, "i'm sorry. Always am. I couldnt help but unconsciously wished you were here." She turned around and started to clean the mess. Before he could say anything else, Karen had asked, "what were you doing this time around?" "With Lana." Karen stopped her cleaning, her body tensed up at his girlfriend's name. She quickly stood up, heading towards her room, "sorry again. You can leave and do whatever I interrupted. I'm just going to clean up first." "Karen..." Ryder called out but she had already dashed into her room. He sighed for the 3rd time that hour.
They dated, they broke up, dated again before finally breaking up once more. But even then, they remained best friends thanks to Aphrodite's little trick. No mattwr how much they tried to stay away from each other, Karen would unconsciously end up needing him, making him appear right before her. This continued to happen even after they had their own partners.
However, Michael, who has been with Karen for almost 1 year, could not take it anymore when Ryder had arrived at the hospital before him during ing Karen's accident a month back. It was not that critical, but to see another guy holding your unconscious girlfriend's hand was just the last straw for Michael. 2 weeks later he broke it off.
Ryder closes his eyes as he felt his body being transported once more. Hearing the quiet sobs made his heart wrenched. He opened his eyes to see Karen with her head down, knees hugged tightly against herself. He kneeled down beside the bathtub, and places a comforting hand to Karen's head. "you missed a spot," he whispered. Her head came up, eyes brimming with unshed tears as she looked at him, "I'm sorry. I didn't mean to." Ryder gave a small smile as he moved his hand to her cheek, wiping any visible tear stain, "I broke up with Lana." Karen fel her breath stop as she tried to grasp his meaning. Ryder continued to smile softly, "Lana, Jenny, Rachael..or whoever comes before and after...no one can be compared with you, Karen. There's just something about them, that you have and they don't. ""and what is that?" Karen asked quietly, as fresh tears started to fall.
"My heart," he whispered as he leaned in for her lips.