There is a visceral majesty to some things that no art can quite capture. It's a poor attempt at replicating the awe inspired by the universe's grandest undertakings when we supplement one art with another. A play might have an accompanying score to impress upon the audience just how struck those beholding a spectacle are. A painting of a splendid natural scene, gorgeous and accurate as can be, will never be a replacement for seeing that same scene with one's own eyes. Drinking in whatever strange magics there are that make our senses so much *more* when we're there.
It was precisely this sort of wonder that washed over my crew and I six weeks after we'd left the map. Even now, having had ample time to collect my thoughts, I cannot describe how beautiful it was. I can try.
An ocean of difference separates a view of a middling pond from a vista overlooking a lake. Vaster still is the staggering difference of both physical and experiential scale between such a lake and the sea, stretching off into the horizon and beyond. Given infinite time, I doubt any work of men could ever outstrip the splendor of the heavens on a clear night.
What we saw towers over any of this. Over anything I or my crew have ever seen, conceived, or dared to dream. Where some thought the Earth might curve and never terminate, others claimed to know our world as finite, guessing at a waterfall of sorts. None could explain where the water would go, or for that matter where it would come from, but that did not deter them - nor did it deter Mother Nature.
At the end of the world a waterfall rushes with all the fury of the entire salted sea, cascading away with reckless abandon. No longer trusting any assumption, I can only say that it *seems* to stretch on without end, but regardless that is not what impresses.
The waterfall at the edge of the world flows upward.
It flows upward and the water shimmers and ripples and shines, and it becomes the heavens and tells me what true beauty is even as it destroys. Destroys the water. Destroys what we thought we knew about the world. Destroys what we thought we knew about gravity. Destroys *us* as we ride the current up into the stars.
I will cast this journal back down to the Earth with all the strength I can muster in the hopes that man might learn and understand something of the truth. It is my sincere hope that the prospect of death does not deter any man, woman, or child from undertaking this voyage, for knowing now the face of God I cannot in good conscience condone rejecting Him out of some petty fear.