The paperwork required shouldn't have fit in a briefcase. Marie's feet clacked on the harsh lino floors, the fluoro lighting harshly illuminating her face.
"Permission slip for wearing a purple dress, sheer cut."
Marie fished in her briefcase for the forms to let her get through the doors, her appearance forms. One for the bun her hair was currently in. One for the dark brown her hair was dyed, with a sub-form for the specific product she used. It just went on and on.
The man behind the desk stamped each form as slowly as possible, watching her with one eye, the screen with another. He clearly wasn't working; the screen was showing Facebook, the computer struggling to load the page on it's late-1990's hardware. He wasn't even trying to hide it.
After an eternity Marie's appearance forms were passed, and the form for her to be able to talk to Reynolds, as the man was called. He looked vaguely disappointed to have to accept her as she moved up to the second floor.
The next floor was for everything Marie wanted to take with her. Everything in her apartment was itemized, from the broken copy of Halo 2 to her Employee of The Month: April 2006 coffee cup, all carefully written out on the correct forms that had been stamped and re-stamped until they looked like a four-year old had tried to create art with them.
The enormous stack of paperwork landed on the table of the woman sitting behind the desk. Marie couldn't believe how long it had taken for her to get through the line. It had stretched around the entire city that had been built just for the office in fact, and she didn't dare leave the line even for a moment. Lucky she didn't need food. The woman pursed her lips, her grey hair bobbing as she reviewed Marie's forms. As the days passed and they moved from the living room, to the kitchen, to the bathroom, Marie gradually started smiling, and the woman started frowning.
"Fine, Marie Levesque! Take your damned forms!"
Marie smiled. "Nice trap Nancy, but you need to re-write that one out as Marie Levesque-Hammond, or you know I won't pass the final floor."
Nancy looked as if she'd like to turn Marie into dust, but instead muttered under her breath and re-filled out the form to allow Marie to go to the next floor. Marie thanked her lucky stars that that was an employee mistake and strode up to the next floor with her briefcase in hand.
The final floor wasn't designed like an office, with outdated technology and an air that made you want to jump off a building, if it wasn't so much effort to do so. This floor made you want to run and hide. The demon behind the desk wasn't hidden; he was eleven foot tall, with bulls horns and a scored red hide. Marie walked up to him with trepidation.
"Mervin, here are my Application To Vacate Hell forms, co-signed by another demon and stamped on pages 33, 179 and 812."
Mervin reviewed the form. Marie sat down. This was going to be a *long* night.
It wasn't a long night; instead it was eleven long nights, the click of Mervin's pen and the crescendo of the lava behind them being the only sounds. Finally, he was done.
"Go. You've won. You get to go to heaven."
Marie skipped up the steps, ascending a thousand flights of stairs as she headed to Heaven. Finally, she reached the pearly gates.
"Oh, a transfer? Hi Marie, I'm Peter and I'll be your guide around Heaven."
"What form do I have to sign? A R4/82RD23? A 9T/HKO3?"
"No form, you just get accepted here."
Marie collapsed to the ground, sobbing with the joy that her days of bureaucracy were finally over.