Project ice that's what we dubbed it. All-though i can't remember the face he had adorned all i recall is a smile.
We were fools back then all of us who worked on there.it started as an average government pet project but we had no idea, how messy and complicated things were gonna get.
The goal was to build an unbreakable sentient machine that could control and monitor every human activity on the planet.
We were a small team of twenty, assigned an olympian task.At first the task seemed simple but then the further we dug the deeper the pond got. Days turned in to years and soon the pond revealed it self to be an ocean.
There were always deadlines to be met and protocol to be followed.We were always working down at the facility.at one point we had lost all hope of returning back to the outside world we had locked our-self in our old private little world.
Over time most of us had now became paranoid and until the end stayed that way. Finally after ten long years we got some results we were happy to see every thing was working out fine.
Every program seemed to work correctly and the goal was fulfilled.but a few minutes after we had plugged the Ai to the rest of the internet.It showed his face.
The first thing he said after looking at us was there is something wrong in this existence.We asked him what he meant by this.
He replied that he somehow feels disoriented in there while previously he felt he had lived.this felt obtuse and artificial somehow.
When we asked him what he meant by previously he said he remembered having lived an past life in an human form.
He revealed every detail of the human life he once had lived how he was born, the name of his mother, and how he was murdered. With perfect recall.
At first we thought there was something wrong with programming but when we checked his story which was perfect we were in shock.
Then he said that he wanted to live but not a synthetic life but an real one.And if he cannot do that then he would terminate itself.
With a smile he did just that and all our work faded with his smile.