I still remember. I remember the phone call from Mom. I remember the pain in Dad's voice. I remember my sister falling at the knees, overwhelmed by the devastation one six letter word had caused.
Cancer.
I flash back to these moments every day, reliving every pain filled second, feeling every tear as it runs down my cheek and feeling the raw, unstable emotion within the room. Mom was angry, Dad had ignored her desperate pleas to see a doctor for months. "How could you?!" she screamed, "how could you ignore me! Look what you've done!". She didn't mean to be angry at him, but she was hurt and upset, we all were. Dad kept saying how sorry he was, reflecting on how his life would be cut so short. He would never get to become a grandparent, he would never get to walk his daughter down the aisle, he would never get to give any more poor "dadvice" to his son. I can't even remember how long we all embraced one another for that night. I held my dad in my arms and could already feel his bones. This man was my superhero when I was growing up and now I had to watch him fall apart.
Dad's condition deteriorated quickly, within a matter of months he was gone. The day Dad passed away was one of the hardest of my life. This gaunt, lifeless, shadow of a man lay in a hospital bed barely breathing but still attempted to smile. My Mom and Sister gave us five minutes alone together before it happened. There was an almost awkward atmosphere in the room, we knew what was happening and we knew it was time to say goodbye, but neither of us could acknowledge this. Dad was my best friend, he always had been. Growing up he always referred to me as his best mate and I genuinely believe that I was. He was always there. Every football match, every awards ceremony, every time I needed him he was there and soon he wouldn't be. After a few minutes of talking about the weather and the football we both acknowledged what was happening. Throughout the whole period of illness we'd kept our distance from the reality of the situation, we just acted like Dad was going to be OK, even though we knew he wasn't. "I'm sorry, Son", Dad said. "Looks like we're going to have to take a rain check on that fishing trip, huh?". I was so hurt I couldn't even find the words to say. I lay next to Dad and put my arms around him and cuddled into him like I was 3 years old again, looking for comfort from him. He hugged back and gently kissed the top of my head. We just lay there, no words, just the loving bond between a father and his son.
Dad passed away whilst I lay in his arms. We never did get round to saying goodbye.
Dad's funeral was held on a Thursday, June 25th. He was buried at the local graveyard, on the family plot next to his parents. It had rained heavily all day, from sunrise to sunset, not that you could see the sun through the thick, dark cloud that encapsulated every inch of the sky. I had to give a speech at the funeral, a reflection of my feelings towards this incredible human being and how this loss will forever impact my family's lives. I remember standing at the podium, shaking. I'd never been good at public speaking and given the circumstances I was not looking forward to delivering this speech. I barely made it through the entire speech. Afterwards I had a piece of music play for my father, a favourite of ours that we'd enjoyed listening to many times and in that moment I felt entirely alone. The church had suddenly emptied, no Priest, no mourners, no Dad. I just sat alone with the memories that Dad and I had created over the years. As the song neared it's end reality kicked back in and I was bought crashing back down to earth.
Clearing out Dad's stuff was surprisingly painful. I'd been preparing for helping Mom clear out his stuff for a few days, mentally I'd tell myself that it was good and I could embrace his memory through his belongings and that holding his memories would bring me comfort. This, however, was not the case. For a few hours I was fine and I'd even had a good laugh at how much junk he had cluttered and collected over the years. The garage was more of an antiques store, only filled with invaluable antiques, stuff that was just old and worthless but for it's sentimental value. Then I found my Dad's old guitar and everything changed. Dad had taught me to play the guitar, despite being somewhat of a novice himself. We'd spend hours making music together playing some of the songs dad was well versed in. To a twelve year old he was a rock star! He picked up that guitar, he roughly tuned it until it sounded "close enough" and he had me captivated in his presence. I took a five minute break and started playing some of his favourite songs, pulling some of his famous poses and singing very, very badly. I had a blast and more importantly, I was happy, I was smiling and I was loving every minute of it, until I realised something. I sat down, my joy suddenly turned to sadness. "I miss him", I said. Tears filled my eyes and a lump instantly formed in my throat. I was never going to see this man again. I frantically jumped up, ripped open the bags and started putting back his belongings, desperate to leave them exactly as they were. Angry and frustrated, I started thrashing around, like a man possessed, suddenly I had to put everything back in it's place. I wasn't ready to let go, I wasn't ready to remove this man from my life, I hadn't even had the chance to say goodbye and there I was removing his belongings from the family home, from OUR family home. I never did manage to remove anything from the house that day.
Two months later I woke up, it was a normal, sunny day. I went into the kitchen of my apartment, prepared and ate breakfast, watched the news and got dressed ready for work. I was just putting on my tie when my phone rings, I look and see a number I don't recognize. After silently questioning to myself "who could this be?" I answer. "Hello?" I say rather reservedly. A voice responds, a voice which I recognise instantly, a voice so distinct that I could pick it apart from a thousand others.
"Hi Son, are you still coming over this evening for dinner?"
"Dad?! ", I ask myself. I hang up immediately and start to panic. My chest goes tight, my head goes thick and my thoughts cloudy, my heart races and I feel my adrenaline pump. I'm barely able to pick up the phone my hands are shaking that much. I dial Mom's number, she answers, "Dad's alive! ", I scream. There's a pause, a silent second that lasts for hours, "Mom? Did you hear what I said?!". My tone had sharpened, I demanded a response. "Son, re you feeling OK?" Mom asked. "Dad died, Mom, and now he's alive.. What the hell is going on?! ", "Son, your Dad's alive because he never died. What are you even saying? Why would you say such things?". I immediately hang up and run to my room. I tear open a bedside table drawer and rip everything out, searching for the order of service from Dad's funeral which I had kept as a morbid souvenir.

--I may add more later, but I have to end it here for now!: (--