I've told hundreds of people the same story. 'My father came at my mum with a knife in a fit of rage and I, ever the unflinching hero, got between he and she. The knife cut across my face before finding its way into her and then later into him.' I'd say 'Took me seven years to find where he was hiding, all that time holding onto the same blade. I wanted to see if he'd recognize it, if he'd even remember what he did to her. What he did to me.' I'd say- ever so carefully allowing a tear to well up in my eye while never falling. That's the key, you see. Get those pretty jewels in your face watery and everyone thinks you're strong for hiding so much emotion, and if you can keep it from falling they'll think you that much stronger.
I'd continue after a short pause, for dramatic tension of course, 'I found him and showed him the knife, the very blade that had freed my mother's lifeblood from her veins, and when I was sure he understood why this was happening I dug it into his neck.' On and on I've gone with story. It's a good story, I think, one of my best inventions. But you're sitting there with that same blade and so I think you know my tale goes no farther toward the truth than that name you gave to get in here.
Truth is my father did give me this scar, but not in hate, not in rage or in some moment of fury that overtook him and forced him to- no, he gave me this scar to remind me of what I'd done. Of what I always do: profit from the misery and hard work of others.
The first time I'd ever met my father was when I was five. My mother and he had had a falling out, and she kept me for her own without even telling him he had a son. She made money, you see, more than enough for her to feed and care for a son better than a some drunken tramp riding from town to town looking for an open bottle he could suckle on until the next train came in.
So when he left, like he always did, and she found out she was pregnant she let it be. Raised me and told me my father was dead. But he, being my father and I suppose yours as well, came back one day. In place of a bottle he carried a bible, convinced that the Lord above had granted him a second chance and that if he cared for his immortal soul he'd have to make up for everything he'd done wrong. Said he needed to make amends, make peace with the people he'd done wrong by.
But when he arrived at his former lover's house and found a child he didn't know what to do. Suddenly begging for forgiveness was begging for her to make amends. Said he realized he'd been a bad man and that he wanted another chance. Said he wanted to be a father for his son. For me. But my mother was not so forgiving, her memory long and unyielding. She told him that once I turned 18 it would be my choice, if he'd managed to stay sober that long, and that until then it'd be a visit every month. A letter for every holiday.
And that was really the last I saw of him for years. I got the letters, got a chance to hug him and be reminded that he wasn't ever really going to be there for me. He showed me pictures sometimes, of his darling family. Of his wife, my stepmother I suppose, and all my wonderful half-siblings. But still my mother would not budge. She claimed that living in that po-dunk town in a fancy house was better for me than having a father.
For five years I put up with it, until on the day of my 12th birthday I got a card from him rather than the usual visit (moments in time that had become rarer and rarer as my mother and Frank- a man who insisted on being called dad for the seven years I knew him- cemented their life with me as an only child). The card was a picture of him and you and all the other wonderful members of his real family having wonderful fun on a cruise.
So I snapped. Frank died first, and with his death came the first of my grand stories which would define my life to anyone that'd listen. 'He'd fallen off of a tall ladder but landed still alive, calling for help while bleeding' was how it went 'I went to get help, but by the time I got back he was gone.' My father actually showed up for the funeral, or around that time at least. Gave me a hug and said it'd all be okay. I remember being so happy that he'd come, and I felt that the affection he was showing me was because of that one story I'd told. That one elaborate tale.
On my 16th birthday I decided I'd had enough of living with my mother. I thought of many different ways to do it, all involving a story or another, but those stories would be hard to prove. My mother would be able to contradict any one of them. So after my birthday party, feeling sad and dejected because my father hadn't shown up, I grabbed a knife and sank it into her back.
Father, as it turned out, had missed his flight and been forced to wait for the next day. He walked in the door as my mother died. I was still holding the blade, shaking like a leaf. He saw me and I dropped it, I had no idea what to say, what to do, how to make it seem I was the victim, but I could see it in his eyes. He knew I'd done it, and I have to wonder if somewhere deep down he thought back to Frank, and knew I'd killed him too.
He rushed to my mother's side and, to my horror, she was still breathing. He tried to plug the wounds, but they were deep. Being young and not well versed in anatomy I'd missed the major arteries though, so there was a chance. He ran to get the phone, and I tried to figure out how to finish the job. Father ran back into the room to see me peeling off the crude bandages he made. He kicked me back, and as I lunged forward to try again he became enraged.
For the first time I saw a glimmer of what he must of been before finding Jesus. An anger dwelled within him that I'd never imagined, genuine rage that I'd only seen imitated in movies. He screamed at me, tears welling in his eyes, and pushed me back farther. Said he couldn't believe what I'd done, said I was a mistake that he should never have returned to. This, of course, just made me angry as well, and I grabbed the knife from off the ground and swung it at him as hard as I could, cutting open his arm.
He tackled me after that, and for a moment we wrestled. But I was a young man who'd never been in a real fight, while my father had spent a good portion of his life fighting just to survive. He wrangled away the knife and brought it down on my head, cutting open my face and leaving me on the ground screaming in pain. Through the blood and tears and sweat I could see him standing there, shaking with either rage or fear of himself. If I close my eyes I can still see him, tears in his eyes, but none of his cheeks.
Years later I hunted him down, convinced that if I could close that chapter of my life, the last vestige of the me that was real, I'd be able to forge my world anew. I imagined I could leave behind the real me, and live the rest of my days in my tales. Killing your father brought be no joy, just a shallow story made up of empty words. I don't know why I never thought that my brothers would have that same rage. That same fire that lived within me and my father for so long.
But here you are. Chasing after stories I've told. Stories from a man with a scar that sits for days in a pub, living vicariously through tales he can only wish were true. I'm not old, and I'm not ready to die, despite all my regrets. So think on this: if you come at me with that knife, you better kill me, because I could use another scar to explain.