The younglings had run at the sight of his lightsaber. Someone had warned them of the coming purge, and it had given them time to prepare. They had caught him off-guard originally. He had not foreseen that they would freeze ice on the staircase. When he had forcefully placed his foot on the sixteenth step, he immediately lost his balance and had fallen. That earned a few bruises. Closer, careful inspection had revealed ice that was generated by some hodgepodge device hooked to the thermo-systems.
"Very clever younglings, but it will take more than that."
He simply leapt up the staircase, easily avoiding the icy patch. He smirked and landed on the top floor – immediately falling through the weakened boards and crashing into the maintenance room under the stairs with a large crash.
The maintenance room was dingy, and… sticky? He had landed in some strange, black mud. He struggled out of the substance, but it clung to his robes making him feel sluggish and hindering his movement.
"Well, at least it isn't sand."
Was this just poor janitorial work or something more sinister? The droids had never malfunctioned like this before. He received his answer once he opened the door of the maintenance room. A long string had been attached to the bottom of the swish-door and hooked up to a large fan. When the door swooshed upwards, the string was pulled, simultaneously turning on the fan and slicing open a large space-sack open with a plasma-cutter. Endorian chicken feathers were blown in at him in a huge wave. The force of them pushed him straight back through the doorway and into the black sludge, knocking a repulsorbroom to the side.
He stumbled back out of the room, now covered in feather and sludge. Cute. Very cute.
"Younglings!" he screamed, "Give up!"
"Hey Master! Up here!" a squeaky voice from above replied. At the sound of the youngling, Anakin instinctively looked up. An iron-droid clattered from above and landed straight onto his face. It sizzled and burned through the layer of feathers and scorched his face. Anakin screamed loudly, and wrenched it free from his face. He tingled with pain and rage. The little bastards!
He was losing himself to his hatred and fear. He needed to reflect and regroup.
Leaving the central chamber swiftly, he approached the meditation hall. Though his vision was obscured by feathers, he could see clearly that the corridor had been strewn with mini-groundcars: the type that younglings loved to play with. He cautiously approached them, but couldn't see any way that the younglings had sabotaged them. He picked his way through the corridor and entered the meditation hall.
There he could wash the sludge from himself and treat his burned face in the meditation pool. At the first sight of water, he fell to his knees and pushed his face down into the pool. Grateful for the brief respite, Anakin thought on his situation. How could the younglings pose such a thre- Zzzzap! Someone had electrified the meditation chamber using a thermal slicer. Anakin was pushed straight out of the water, his spine snapping into an upright position. He stumbled backwards into the corridor of the mini-groundcars. His foot landed on one of the wheeled toys and he slipped backwards, his legs dashing up into the air and his head cracking on the hard floor. This entire place had been booby-trapped, and the time for meditation was over.
Anakin had lost his patience and was now operating under a bestial rage. Nothing could compare to his powers in the force – nothing, except, for the plucky courage of some younglings apparently. This rage was making him sloppy. When his feet were stuck in hydro-glue he merely ripped his boots off and strode on. He clattered through the shards of glass on the floor. He deflected the BB-gun aimed at his crotch. He didn't care anymore, he was sick of these capers. He endured every little prank the younglings threw at him – including the hidden blow-torch and the resulting bursts of flame that emerged when he had sought to extinguish his burning hair and feathers in the waters of the refresher.
This place was a death trap. Anakin could barely see; one side of his face was covered in sludge and feathers, and the other half was puffed up and burnt from the iron-droid. He ached all over and could barely feel his cut feet. Finally, however, he was able to glimpse the silhouettes of figures in the distance. The younglings! Screaming with rage, he began to sprint after the obfuscated creatures. He ran faster than he ever had before. He almost giggled with glee as he reached a figure and – SLAM!
His face smashed into a wall and he fell on his behind. Someone had manipulated the light of the lumen globe with a shade, creating little shadow puppets. It no longer felt regrettable to slaughter these younglings, but Anakin wasn't even sure where he was anymore, whether he was even in the Jedi Temple or what room. The last hour was a blur of hijinks and pain. He rubbed his head and looked around. Where was he? It looked like he had ended up in the underground catacombs of the Temple.
"Hey, Master! Get a load of this!" Anakin stared dumbly as the younglings hammer blow struck a supporting column of the ceiling.
The ceiling gave way above his head. Looking up, he saw its occupant – sand. Sand everywhere. Anakin screamed in rage and fear, bringing his hands up to cover his face from the intrusive substance. He had lost access to reason; his anger had made him strong in the darkside, but weak in his ability to withstand plucky underdogs. It fell down upon him, like a rough and irritating blanket. As the coarse sand filled his lungs, he had only one thought; "it's getting
everywhere!"
---------------
Macally Kuo Khan, the eldest youngling, looked at the mound of sand in triumph. The plan had been a success, but there could be more bandits on their way. He and the others would have to reset the traps and prepare.
---------------------------
Hi, I don't write much at all, and I'm not good at all, but I loved the concept of merging Star Wars and Home Alone so I just took a crack at it.