The thing jabbed me roughly in the arm. This had to be a dream.
"What's wrong with you, why are YOU here?" I looked around, confused. There was nothing, no trees, no clouds, it was a gray landscape and a gray sky.
The only things on this plane, were myself and this weird robot that seemed to be made of bones and dripping blood. I would have been concerned about it bleeding to death but none of its parts were connected and all just seemed for show, piloted like some creepy graveyard puppet. Yep definitely a dream.
"Answer me dammit I don't have time for this." It poked me again, harder this time and I recoiled from its skeletal probe.
"OW! And I have no idea friend. I don't even have a clue where I am right now."
The thing looked around. seemingly in disbelief, it was hard to read the pits that functioned as the eyes for the creepy little machine.
"It's hell you moron. Are you dim? Is that why you are here for repair?"
"Re-repair?" This was new. Since when was hell a shop for dysfunctional souls....wait, since when was I a dysfunctional soul?!
"UH yes. That's my job, to repair souls, and then send them back. Then rinse and repeat until they stop coming back. Any questions now?" Wow, hell's minions were sassy.
"So, then what's wrong with me?" The little bone bag squealed in frustration and what it had for appendages twitched violently.
"I DON'T KNOW! THAT'S THE PROBLEM!" It started to whir in circles in its tiny wheels made of what looked like little sternums. "Usually I can figure out the issue and have a soul sent back before it wakes up. I SPENT HOURS DISSECTING YOU AND I CAN'T FIND THE PROBLEM!" The child size machine was screaming at me now, the small protrusions now spurting blood.
"WHOA WHOA! YOU DISSECTED ME?!" My hands were searching my body for wounds and found none.
"Uh yes, how else would i FIX you, idiot. That must be the issue, let me see your head again, I must have missed something." It reached its creepy little feelers towards me and I swatted them away.
"No, no more dissecting me, just send me back now."
"I can't do that, you are a defective product." It reached for me again and I narrowly avoided contact.
"But you said yourself you can't find whats wrong with me. What if I was sent here by accident, shouldn't you just return me?" The thing seemed to think to itself.
"Yes but...you must have been sent here for a reason..." It was trying to reason with me, I just wanted to leave, I was getting bored.
"Look, what's the worst that could happen if you send me back? I mean, you don't know why I'm here, and that is your job, and I don't know why I'm here, and I know myself. So, whatever is wrong with me, can't be that bad." It shifted uncomfortably but stayed silent, so I pressed on.
"I bet the worst thing that would happen would be that when I die next time, I would have maybe a better understanding of my flaws. Maybe then i could be more helpful to you." The little bone bot seemed to like the idea of this and it began to whir happily.
"Yes yes human, and it would be our secret of course!"
"Yes of course my little friend." I smiled at it as it extended a long bone feeler tipped with a heavy black stamp. With a *thunk* it tapped me on the forehead and I was off to be reborn somewhere in Japan.
---
An hour later the little bone mechanic was still pondering its previous project. Never before had there been a mistake like that, but mistakes were possible maybe. It decided it was best to not think so much on such things and it began to prepare the room for the next soul.
An opening appeared in the ground and another, much larger, bone robot rose from the hole.
"Where is the soul I placed in here for cleansing?"
"Cleansing? There was nothing wrong with it. A fluke. I sent it back."
"YOU DID WHAT?!" The smaller creature recoiled.
"That soul is EXTREMELY dangerous. Manipulative in the first degree, you know, like HITLER, or JIM JONES. I EVEN MARKED IT WITH M.A.N. #1!!!" The larger bone puppet was livid, and blood was spattering the gray landscape crimson.
"Oh....I thought that meant like...Man, like A man, and that it was just the first soul of the day." What could only be a nervous chuckle erupted from the small robot.
"It should be fine. How much trouble can one human cause anyway? Am I right?" The ground opened up and the big skeletal mechanic dragged its companion into the depths for a hardware reset, clearly the human had infected it with his reasoning. He was more dangerous than they had thought.
----
Thanks for reading! Any feedback is greatly appreciated!