The only thing that I could remember every day like it happened yesterday was my death. My last death that is, the cold metal sinking into my brain, then everything shutting down. Like the light-switch of my life had been turned off, and then flickered back on again in my new world. Where I'm only a child, but a very mature and silent child. Because reincarnation isn't supposed to happen, and nobody would believe me if I told them my past. To them, I'm mental. Traumatized by fantasy worlds, and now they've taken it a step forward, by sending me to a psychiatrist.
He asked to be alone with me. I only said alright to get my clingy new father's hand off my shoulder. That was a mistake, because now I see it. The way his eyes narrowed as the heavy wooden door closed, and how his hands seemed agitated. They had the same life as the man a decade ago, with a few new scars and wrinkles. His skin now, in the light, was sickly pale, and he looked like someone who held a superior mindset. He looked like Chase Helterin.
Chase Helterin the killer. My killer.
I was already at a psychiatrist, so I decided to play a risky card.
"Chase, why were you drinking a daquiri on September seventeenth at a nightclub in 1985? That's not a good example."
He seemed taken back. Good, I wasn't even started.
"Sienna, it-"
"Call me Kat, like the girl you killed. The bullet didn't work though, did it?"
I was hurt, and I wanted him to know it.
His eyes crinkled in confusion, and then alarm as it struck him. "You're her?"
Clearly he knew about reincarnation. But what about karma?
I clasped my hands in front of me, placing on the innocent child look. "I'm just a kid, with mental issues and a bullet scar."
Testing his limits.
"Why did you come back? Is this a joke to you, because I will kill you again!"
He never did have a very good temper.
"Child abuse." Was my flat reply.
I heard the drawer in front of him click open, and a heavy weight be lifted as the slider groaned in relief.
"I wanted you dead."
"Why?"
I never got a reply.