*Wow, it really is a beautiful day*, Joseph reflected while the birds twittered around him and the sunlight shimmered prettily on the blue surface of the lake. The sky was completely devoid of clouds; dogs and their masters played in the manicured grass; children swung and climbed around on the playground; the air hinted at the mild autumn night to come.
The only problem was that he couldn't find his bookmark.
Joseph liked to keep a simple index card in the book to keep his place. For some reason, it was missing from his copy of *Gone Girl*. It was really a trivial matter, hardly a problem at all, so he just grabbed one of the red index cards he kept at a pile at his desk, grabbed a jacket, and headed out to the park to enjoy one of last snow-free days of the years.
Joseph was sitting on a bench engrossed in the book. It was pretty good; it wasn't really his genre of choice but Jennifer recommended it, so he was reading it anyways. As he read, he tapped the index card against his cheek; a simple tick that he developed when he was a child.
The sun was bright but a shadow fell upon the book. Joseph looked up. A man in a dark suit with a red tie stood in front of him, dark sunglasses wrapped around his pale face, giving him the appearance of a rich vampire-investor. The man was also holding a black leather briefcase in one gnarled hand.
"You are?" the man asked with a slight Eastern European accent, sliding into the seat next to Joseph.
"I'm sorry?" asked Joseph, sure he misheard.
"You are," the man repeated, making it sound more like a statement than a question.
"I am what?" Joseph closed the book, but realized that he still held the red index card in his hand. *Shit*, Joseph thought, and than *Page 127, Page 127, Page 127*, as he thumbed through the book to find his place.
"The thrall of Rzidhal, no?"
"The what?" Joseph asked, thoroughly perplexed.
"The thrall of Rzidhal." the man repeated patiently, unlocking his briefcase.
*This guy is insane* Joseph realized. *Truly insane*. "Uhh...no. I am not the thrall of Riz-uh-dell. Joseph stood and gestured towards the exit of the park. "I have to go, so..."
"The red card." the man said, pulling a red card from his briefcase. "You have one."
Joseph pulled the card from the book, leaving his finger in its place. "This?"
"Yes," the man said, nodding. "The card. Are you buying or selling?" he asked suddenly.
"I really have to go..." Joseph said, backing away slowly.
The man stood up and grabbed Joseph's arm, pulling towards him. His hands were impossibly warm, like he had a very high fever. As the man opened his mouth to speak, Joseph saw to his horror that the man's canines were sharpened.
Like fangs.
"You cannot get there yourself. So Zivella will take you." The man pulled Joseph closer.
Joseph tried to free himself from the man's grip, but the man's grip was as tight as steel. "Why are you frightened? Zivella has never harmed a customer. All you need to do is calm down, calm down, calm down..." The man's voice was slowly fading, like a radio being turned down. The previously bright sunlight was also fading, turning into two bright pinpricks in the center of Joseph's vision. But most of all, Joseph felt the queer sensation of sliding...
Joseph woke up slowly; his consciousness running up flights of stairs in his mind. A dull headache throbbed beneath his temples; pounding and pounding in beat with his heart. Darkness lay in front of him; ominous chanting was drifting from an unseen chamber in front of him.
*What? Where am I? * A thousand thoughts raced through Joseph's mind, each one of them crossing each other so his mind was in a paradoxical state of chaos and emptiness. Joseph feverently thought of the man in the sunglasses...*and the red card*.
A door squeaked open in front of Joseph, filling the stone room with dull candle-light. Three hooded men entered, clothed in black robes. "Novice, come with us." one of the men said, his voice as flat as the floor Joseph lay on.
"Wh-wh-where am I?" Joseph asked, failing to control the tremor in his voice.
"The Temple," the man replied, sweeping out of the room.
The hooded men left Joseph alone in the room again. Joseph looked at the walls surrounding him, but found no other entrances or exits.
The only way out was through the stone door.
Joseph steeled up his nerves, got up, and walked out of the room.
Scones were bolted into the golden brick walls, torches sending wicked light in all directions. The hooded men stood at the end of the golden tunnel, apparently waiting for Joseph. Joseph surveyed the tunnel; the way opposite the men was shrouded in darkness, and Joseph had no wish to be lost in the darkness down here in the "Temple". The hooded men beckoned to him, so he followed.
Joseph walked behind the men; the golden tunnel seemed to stretch on for miles and miles. After about ten minutes of walking, the hooded men stopped at an arch sealed with golden bricks. One of the hooded men produced a dagger from his robes. "You, novice. Use your blood."
"My blood?"
"Yes, your blood. Why must you ask so many questions? Do as I say, or you will not make sacrifice to Rzidhal."
Writing part 2 now.