Gary settled himself into his office chair and logged into the prayer inbox. He sighed with an air of trepidation as he opened the spam folder, ready to sort the few genuine prayers out from the mindless drivel that had somehow made its way in. He'd been asking God for a better spam filter for years, but apparently (Gary rolled his eyes) His Lord Almighty had other, more pressing issues to deal with.
Gary clicked impatiently through the junk mail.
*Praying for a great holiday break? Look no further! *
Delete.
*This man prayed for a solution to his male pattern baldness - you won't believe what he looked like three weeks later! *
Delete.
*DickTator, the simple pill guaranteed to answer your prayers for a larger manhood! *
Gary shuddered. *Definitely* delete.
Moving onto the main inbox, Gary settled in for a long day's work. He cracked his knuckles, staring at the extensive list of mail, and took a gulp from the polystyrene cup of vending machine coffee that sat next to his keyboard. Slowly, methodically, he began to work his way through the list of prayers.
Cathy, 29, who had prayed for the strength to finish a presentation for her boss, found herself imbued with a new sense of purpose as she discovered her most attractive colleague would be sitting in on the meeting. Meanwhile, Logan, 58, was granted the morning off work to watch his kid's school play, and Alfred, 84, stumbled upon his lost pen behind the sofa.
Of course, there were harder prayers too, ones Gary had to spend a little longer mapping out. He couldn't save the dying partner of Lucy, 33, from leukaemia - it was simply his time to go - but he could give him an extra moment of lucidity, and the strength to grab Lucy's hand and tell her how much he loved her. And when Andrew, 17, begged him to stop his best friend from considering suicide, Gary couldn't change the thoughts in the head of someone who hadn't prayed to him directly, but he could lift the cloud of panic from Andrew's vision just enough to let him support his friend and look for other sources of help himself.
Gary spent the last hour before lunch engineering a complex plan to allow a young teacher to discover the abuse that Leo, 6, was subjected to at home. He collapsed back, exhausted and emotionally drained, as a freak rain storm emerged over a road in Connecticut, which he hoped would delay the teacher's journey just enough for her to arrive in the school car park at the same time as Leo and his mother. The radio would be playing Leo's parents' song as they pulled into the school drive, which would make his mother cry, and that in turn would make her apologise repeatedly to Leo, betraying her true feelings in a way she rarely did when sober. And if the heat in Leo's mother's car was turned up just enough, the window would be open at the very moment that Miss Rodriguez happened to be hurrying by, close enough to overhear even a whispered confession...Gary tapped a few keys, checking that the child safeguarding policy had fluttered to the top of the teacher's desk, and nodded to himself.
Gary treated himself to a hot chocolate at lunch, although it tasted bitter against the nausea that had risen in his throat on reading Leo's prayer.
When he returned to his desk, he was worn out and not in the highest of spirits. So when he clicked a new piece of mail and was greeted by the message, "Error 404: Prayer not found", it was practically​ a divine miracle that he managed to limit himself to muttering his most blasphemous curses at the computer screen. He tried to navigate back to the inbox, but the message simply blinked on the screen. As many times as he reloaded the page and turned the computer off and on again, the error message stayed stubbornly put.
Gary swore bitterly enough to make most angels blush, and picked up his desk phone to dial tech support. He tapped his fingers on the edge of his desk, growing steadily more frustrated, until a young angel with a scraggly beard and a T-shirt that read, "Byte me" strolled in through the door, whistling so cheerfully that Gary instantaneously hated him.
The angel tapped a few keys, opening up programmes that, frankly, Gary didn't even know existed, before he announced, smiling, "Looks like you've got yourself a virus".
"What?"
"A computer virus. Opened any odd attachments recently? Emails from unknown senders?"
"I have to open emails from unknown senders, it's my goddamn-" (the angel winced) "-job."
"Well this isn't one I've seen before, I'm going to have to get my supervisor in here to sort it out." The angel beamed. "She's pretty booked up, but I can probably slot you in around Thursday."
"Thursday's not gonna cut it!"
"Sorry, dude, other people have emergencies too..." Faced by Gary's look of withering disgust, the angel's happy glow seemed to dim a little, but it wasn't long before he'd recovered his grin and waved Gary a cheery goodbye.
Gary kicked the side of his desk, hard, and instantly regretted it as pain shot through his foot. Hopping up and down, he cursed again, before letting himself flop into his chair. He glared at the error message, still shining out from the computer screen. He couldn't answer any prayers. It would take time for things to get better for Leo, and if the boy had to resort to prayer again, Gary wouldn't even be able to read it. It would go unheeded and unanswered.
How many times had he said they ought to have a back-up system? Gary gritted his teeth, anger flashing in his eyes. Whichever asshole had sent him a virus…
Actually, that was a point. Who was capable of sending him a virus? An uneasy feeling began to coil in the pit of Gary's stomach. Most humans didn't even have the capacity to pray consciously - their thoughts were simply translated automatically into mail form. To understand the system, to send a virus, you'd have to be a supernatural being, something from heaven- or hell.
And why break the prayer operating system at all, unless you had a reason you didn't want them answered - unless you wanted the people of Earth to have to fend for themselves?
Ice flooded Gary's veins. In an instant, he had leapt from his chair, stubbing his still throbbing toe on the desk for a second time. Mingled gasps and curses spilling from his lips, he raced out of his office and into reception. He slammed his palm down on the desk.
"I need God. The Big Man. His Holiness."
"Have you made an appointment?"
"No! This is an emergency!"
Gary could feel a vein popping out of his neck. He was on the verge of leaping over the desk and breaking into God's office himself, when a holy, eternal aura seemed to descend over the room.
"Gary." God's voice was calm. "What seems to be the problem."
Gary was out of breath, and he could feel sweat beading on his skin. "I need your advice."