"Ladies and gentlemen, we have begun our descent onto Trappist 1e," a video recording of a pilot said on the seatback television screen. "You may open your windowshades at this time."
Max peered excitedly through his porthole. His first glimpse of another planet up close. Expansive. The red surface shone against the deep black of space. How many people lived there now? Hundreds at least. And one of them—one of them would be the future leader of the galactic drug trade.
"Welcome to the trap," a flight attendant laughed while handing out beers.
Max cracked his beer open, and sipped slowly as the planet got bigger in his window.
When Max was a kid, everyone thought it was the scientists or military generals who would be first to live on new planets. That was before the Robots took power. In 2084, the AI came to power and decided that scientific knowledge was too dangerous to be held in human hands. The AI fired all human faculty from the world's universities and destroyed all textbooks. Few people protested, after all the AI provided everything for people. Free food, automated transportation, automated healthcare, automated education. There hadn't been a single shot fired in the Robot Revolution. Humans didn't need armies anymore. Life was good.
But there were stories. The Elders sometimes whispered of a plant—a magical plant that could help men to see the world from a new perspective, to think for themselves, to free their minds.
The robots had long since eradicated this plant from Earth. They said it was evil, but the Elders said that was a lie. The Elders wanted a return to the human-dominated order. Max's education—at the hands of the robots—warned against the evils of human self-aggrandizement.
Lately, he had found himself questioning that teaching more and more. There had been many years of successful human rule. Of course, there were wars and crimes and all sorts of horrible things. It was probably just a crazy idea. But the Elders had spoken to him about the Age of Man and they had noticed his interest.
"Go to 1e," a wizened old man in a blue robe had said to him. "Go to 1e and find the plant. Bring us back the seeds and we will open our minds again. We will seize back the power that was taken."
The robots were trying to eradicate the plant on 1e, of course. But it would take them years to scour the entire surface. Years. Max knew he only had to find one plant and smuggle a single seed back to earth. Finding the plant would be the easy part. Smuggling it back—that was the real test. Dozens of men had been executed for trying, just in the last month. The robots were difficult to fool.
That was the problem, the elders said. They sent many young men to 1e, but few ever came back. You had to want to come back. Why take the risk, when you could just stay where you were, living in the red wavy sands, enjoying the plant? The AI's power was weak on 1e—it was almost like living free.
In a haze, Max landed, was processed, outfitted, and set off on his expedition. He found the plant within weeks, on a hillbank overlooking a river. The smoke enveloped him. He lay back, as if falling upon a cloud. His gaze wandered upward, to the tiny blue speck known as Earth.
He wouldn't be going back. He loved the trap.