It took three months of saving a few cents a day before I was able to make sure I had a cake. Chocolate-flavored ones with ice cream filling was always my favorite when I was younger. I live alone, since the rest of the money was used to both survive and send the rest of my family overseas. The regime has tightened its hold on who was allowed in and out, so we all decided that it would be best to get out as fast as we could. I would be the last one to leave, and I'm honestly content with that. As long as they made it through, all would be well.
I invited the last of my friends over to celebrate with me. Although I was a recluse, I still managed to scrape up some connections when I was at school. Many of them also decided to jump ship after the border patrols first started shooting at humanitarian aid convoys, but a few decided to stay for the sake of keeping what we could together. With everyone leaving, it was getting harder to keep up with getting things to run smoothly at the rec center and the soup kitchen. All hands would be needed to make sure this small panic didn't ruin it all.
Knocking at the door interrupts the usual quiet at my flat. I slowly open the door and find them lined up and ready with the balloons. A popular tradition, these balloons have always brought people together with the revelations inside them, ranging from past embarrassing experiences with your old uncle Ivan to prophecies of wealth and prosperity. My small circle is always at the ready to play this strange game of roulette, as the banter makes for some of the more interesting experiences we've had.
I've never been an extravagant person. I never really liked splurging money on festivities, even though everyone had some sort of karaoke machine that would keep neighbors up until dawn. If you were to ask me, a quiet evening with the people closest to me is the best gift you could give. I do miss the birthday cards, though. An acknowledgment of my existence from my scattered kin has always helped me take a cheery perspective on life, at least for the one day meant for me. At least I won't be alone, something which I was afraid about when I first sent my sisters away.
We started off by watching a newly released movie in my mess of a room. There are rumors circulating around that the bigots who run the country are going to also start clamping down on media, so we thought it best to watch it while we could. After the two hours of watching the protagonist complete his life-long dream of securing a purple banana, I aggravated my relationship with my friends by siphoning them of cash in Monopoly. It's not like we're going to be here for much longer, so a last game in our homeland is something we're surely going to remember once we head off.
Finally, we move to the kitchen for the cake ceremony. It usually consists of a few variations of a "Happy Birthday" song before we consume the dessert. We then pop the balloons. My friends were only able to find one for me this year, but that's one more than I was expecting. I take a seat around the table, made of wood of a pine tree my great-grandfather had cut down nearly eighty-five years earlier. They soon follow my lead, leaving one seat empty since there weren't enough of us to completely fill the table. Having every seat filled is a custom invented by my own family, but this will have to do. The songs are sung in awful off-key tones, but we don't respect each other for our potentials to make it into a professional choir. I pick one to cut the cake for me, serving me the first slice. I take a bite before the others are allowed to.
Now the balloons. The poor birthday lad has to pop them himself, bringing about his own ridicule or congratulations. I take the fork in one hand, still dripping with melted filling, and set the balloon in the middle of the table with the other. I didn't want to dent the wood, so I had to slowly puncture that blue, deflating air bag so it would pop before the fork made contact with the table. The others, riddled with anticipation, started surrounding the balloon so they could read what had happened, or possibly would happen, after I did. I slowly applied pressure, and soon enough a loud pop emerged from where the balloon used to be. A slip of paper, which was trapped inside, was right there ready to read. I took it, and almost immediately I lost my grip on it. I took a step back, paper slowly swaying down to the carpet in the living room. My friends noticed that my face immediately turned pale, and they rushed to pick it up to see why I was so spooked.
* "You will not live to see the end of the war." *
The chilling sound of the air sirens followed.