"Say it. Out loud." I'm clutching my shopping bags to my chest as I scramble to rack my brain for answers. I don't want to say the wrong thing, I mean this is Satan here, speaking of which I don't know exactly how I'm aware of this, I'm just going off that sharp, chilling feeling up my spine and the heavy atmosphere you only feel when you read something by Poe in English class. It's disorienting in the same way. You're somewhere mundane, somewhere you frequent fairly often, but its not until you're presented with these dark themes that the place seems surreal and you're left existentially mortified by your own mortality. He laughs. Satan laughs, and it takes me aback a bit, considering he has such a jolly, hearty tone.
"I'm fucking with you." I breathe a sigh of relief.
"So I'm not ‘ interesting ’? Not peculiar in any way?"
"Oh, no, no you are. I was quoting Twilight back there. No, you're still interesting." Shit. "So you don't know then?"
"I haven't been made aware, no." I lower my bags slightly, adjusting to the situation, deciding that perhaps I've been holding my breath too long and biting the inside of my lip too hard. I'm lightheaded and I taste blood. "Is it bad?"
"Oh, its terrible. Truly horrible. Ghastly, really. You don't want to know." Is he messing with me again? I can't tell, but that seems to be common with him. I mean, look at Eve, biting into the forbidden fruit. I've bitten in a similar way, chomping onto the bait he's offering, desperate to find out what's interesting about me, what's peculiar, what's wrong. But that's just my nature, really. Satan grins in one of those malicious ways that says ‘ I'm going to drive you to your wit's end before I reveal the answer ’.
"Walk with me, talk with me. Come on." We begin to walk and I find it hard to keep up with his steady gait. "What else did you need to pick up here?"
"…A suit?"
"Do you not own one?"
"I've grown out of it. I don't go to many occasions." Satan snaps.
"Bam. Suit. Looks sharp." I look down at myself and I'm head to toe in maroon and black fabric. Fits like a glove, or well, a suit.
"…Not to punch a gift horse in the mouth…"
"But?"
"I need more of a funeral vibe. For a funeral. You know. A dead relative suit."
"Oh, I see, I see, my condolences."
"Its fine."
"May I ask whom?"
"My aunt."
"Were you two close?"
"…I guess. We saw each other often."
"…But?"
"Well I mean, she was kind of a bitch." I wouldn't admit it to anyone else, but I mean, its Satan, I'm sure he understands badmouthing a dead relative.
"How so?"
"In every way imaginable."
"And you're attending her funeral because…?" He tilts his head a bit as he looks at me.
"I'm obligated to, aren't I? It'd make me look bad if I didn't. My mom would have a fit. Etc."
"Ah. Always thinking about the well being of others, right?" I groan.
"You have no damn idea."
"Which brings me to what I had mentioned before. You're…pure. Like the virgin saint Mary. Near godly and what not." I stop in place to shoot him an incredulous look. "Which also aids in you being a doormat, and not on of those nice ones, either. The ones with the scratchy material that people rub their shit-soiled shoes into so they don't track it into the house." Well he's not wrong about that bit. "Tell me. You happy leading the life you do?"
"I'm about halfway between melancholy and miserable, so no, not particularly."
"Tell you what. Keep the suit. I'll make arrangements so that you can skip out on this funeral without ruffling anyone's feathers. Now, you don't have to swear to anything right now, but let me ease up your situation, help you live a little bit. Then we can discuss any benefits further, and the payment according. Consider this your free trial, alright?" I get a free trial to see if I want to sell my soul to the Dark Lord Satan. An interesting offer for an ‘ interesting'individual such as myself. I've got this twisting, sickening feeling in the pit of my stomach, the feeling you get as a kid when you sneak a book of your dad's matches to play with fire. I know I shouldn't, I know the harm, but…The temptation here is unreal. Again, seems to be Satan's MO.
"…Why me?"
"Reaping the souls of the innocent is what I do. The more innocent, the more valuable, the more I'm willing to meet you halfway, if not more." His words make sense but I'm still left in a daze. "I'll give you six days of whatever the Hell you want. Pun fully intended. We'll chat about details at a later date." He's gone and I feel sick. I lug my bags to the food court, needing to sit down, needing a drink, maybe a ginger ale to settle my stomach. I pull a chair out to sit, and a large ginger ale appears in front of me. Nothing extravagant, nothing I'd sell my soul over, but highly convenient. I'm left wondering how I could go about these next six days. Do every drug imaginable without having to worry about dying or permanent damage? Enslave the people who have hurt me most? Kill a man? I find my mind going to very dark places, the product of being presented with such an opportunity. I'm deep in thought, sipping on a value size ginger ale in a suave suit in a mall on the sketchier side of town. I look out of place but it feels so right.
"Thanks, Satan."
EDIT: How do format