"MY MEAT CUBES ARE COMPLETED!"
Mario was going to be a genius. He had spent 20 years planning on getting bunches of meat into large cubes. Geometrically perfect. Full of seasoning, seconds away from being perfectly cooked.
He was on his way to the Italian government to show the result of his research. His years of sweet, meaty research. He had nearly doubled his cholesterol with this project.
Mario strolled across his lab to the window, letting in sunlight for the first times in forever, the sun nearly cooking his eyes from lack of prior exposure.
"Hey everybody look! Mario's back!"
Once his eyes had cleared and his vision returned, he saw his friends Luigi and Bluigi outside on their lawn. They were playing bocce, as they usually did on Saturday.
Mario opened the window, the warm wind hit his face. He forgot what the outside world felt like, it felt almost as good as a perfectly measured meat cube.
"I've found a..."
"Yeah yeah yeah, we heard you scream earlier about a meat cube. Great. Come play some bocce!"
Mario missed bocce so much. He tore through his house, looking for his precious bocce set. He tore up his kitchen, his living room, his bedroom, only to find that he didn't have a bocce set, and he was super dehydrated.
He went back to his window, Luigi was in locked in form, literally ready to roll.
"I don't have a set."
"Well I guess you're going to miss out, Bella's coming by to watch."
Oh Bella, Bella was the most beautiful girl the entire world. Bronze, tall, great credit, she was everything a man in Italy could want. But she was definitely married.
"Bella is married isn't she?"
"You really have been in there forever. Bollario was a Juventus fan and found out that Bella liked Torino. The marriage was over a long while ago."
Mario realized he had to play. He had to bocce his way into Bella's heart.
But how? How could he roll something pretty heavy down a grass lawn?
Now, the heart works faster than the brain sometimes. Such was the case with Mario. He moved swiftly towards his meat cubes, and balled each of them into a large ball, putting them in the freezer.
His moment of regret washed over with visions of Mario, winning bocce, Bella jumping up and down in celebration, totally remembering who he was.
"Mario, she's here! We're going!" Luigi yelled from the yard.
"I'll be down there right on time!" Mario said, taking his ice cold, weighty meat balls out of the freezer, and arriving to the bocce ball game 15 minutes later.
If any of you have seen a meatball before, you know that it's not going to roll like other balls. However, because there was no meatball before this moment, nobody realized that. You could hear Mario's heart shatter as his meat bocce ball stopped dead in front of him. Bella yawned.
Wrecked with shame, not helped with the zealous laughter of Luigi. Mario returned to his home, never to leave again. Meanwhile, Luigi had a nice dinner with Bella and even had the foresight to put Mario's now thawed out meatballs onto some spaghetti. They of course, died of salmonella shortly after, because uncooked meat that has sat in the sun for two long gets infected very quickly.
Listen, nobody knows how the meatball was invented, just enjoy it ok.