"You see detective; that wasn't the scary part. The scary part wasn't realizing that I was the monster everyone thought I was. The scary part was realizing I didn't mind being that monster."
He did not face me when he spoke, back rapt in the dimness of the table lamp's umbra.
"Evil men do the things that good men dream of doing. Think of it. Think of the infinite lives saved by everything we've done here. Humanity--human kind--will survive. Countless generations born and raised by mechanical parents on worlds thousands of years away. For the first time, perhaps since the inception of our race, we are safe from destruction."
He turned, staring into my eyes as they welled. The concussive pulse of my racing heart was enough to knock rivulets of water down my face. My sinuses throbbed in time with my pulse. I choked out between gasping breaths, "Four hundred thousand embryos. Six hundred ships. A million generations of orphans born to a heritage they will never know."
"I wish I could have found a different way. We don't have the technology to freeze and thaw people. Anyone making the journey to the farthest stars would perish on the trip. Embryos, however, we've had the technology to freeze them for decades. The technology to raise them outside wombs for longer. The last piece to insure our survival was a machine smart enough to raise them."
The shaking had moved to my hands and chest. I screamed with empty lungs and pivoted my upper body as best I could, my lumbering arms stealing momentum and limply deflecting off my chest. I sucked air through my teeth and squeezed my hands around anything I could find. A crystal glass. I pitched it at the wall. "They can't even talk to us. They'll never know us. They'll never know who we are. Our history. Our games. Our traditions. It all dies with us."
"I did what was necessary. Yes. We are all serfs to the universe, subject to its unyielding laws. Perhaps if we'd discovered superluminal travel this entire mess might not have been necessary, but as it stands, they are well beyond our..."
"Reach?"
"Our capacity for harm."
"Lets say they get there. They make this billion fucking million mile trip and they get there," I snarled, "what then? Find some cushy fucking planet and settle down?"
He went back to staring at the launch site, the support towers still fallen and unreclaimed. "More or less. The ships are intelligent enough to analyze the atmospheres and decide which locations are ideal for seeding. They will jump from system to system, working through candidates before rooting. Local materials will be harvested. Crops planted and tested. After a few hundred years, the first children of the new world will be born, and it will raise them."
Everything hurt and I wasn't sure how long it would be before my legs collapsed beneath me. I reached out and brought myself into a chair. "They won't know anything about us."
"We've included as much of our history and technology as was feasible."
"They'll be empty."
"They will be without our sins."
"No hope."
"Without the sins of this world."