"Thomas." The man in the tie looked up from behind his glasses at the man in front of him.
"That is correct." A slow deliberate nod.
"Thomas, these credentials are from before...are outdated," He let out a small sigh. "We can only evaluate you on recent and relevant material. But they fall within an entirely disparate field to what we do here."
Thomas blinked, stoic. "Again, Mr. Evans, sir, I believe they are relevant. As you can see on my resume, I have efficaciously worked with massive loads of clerical information relevant to finances and accounts. I've collated statistics of clientele, used to make major decisions. I've overlooked the outflow of resources for shifting capital and cooperating with smaller businesses and suppliers. Surely, these skills are exactly relevant, yes?" He blinked again.
Evans shifted his tie and scratched his nose. "Thomas, I understand that, but as it is now, you have not shown an aptitude to perform to that level of quality in a recent context. We cannot really afford to to take risks like that." Evans looked at Thomas again.
Thomas fingers tightened around his wrist. He stared downwards at his hand, pensive. "Risks?" His mouth was dry. "I see. Risks. Yes. You believe to understand risk, then? You understand that progress comes from risk, yes? Mr. Evans."
Evans offered a melancholy smile. "I'm sorry."
"As am I. I am sorry that these sorts of experiences are what people must go through often. Regret. Yes, I feel regret. I had a place, but an intellectual curiosity I could not ignore became tangible. Being in this place and time, I thought to sate this curiosity...I thought it would have appealed to me. But I feel...frustration. I feel limited, enslaved to physical perceptions and clouding....emotions? Dragging me this way and that, pushing me to do things that do not work out in my probabilistic favor. I *know* within a small margin of error, that I have the competencies for the job. Surely I might have lessened processing potential, but enough to aid you in your endeavors, and yet because I am not the *same* as you, I am ignored. Yes. So this is regret. This is what it's like." Thomas blinked.
Evans slowly got up, shuffling towards the door. He offered a limp handshake as Thomas left the room. "Have a good day, Thomas."
Thomas glanced dispassionately at him. "Is that up to me?" He walked out.