Steel bars rolled back, clanging as they passed some unseen turnstile recessed into the wall. The white-washed corridor was filled with individuals arrayed in solemn gray tones. They stood opposite a gap in the white concrete; steel tracks led out of the gap, on which a stretcher slowly proceeded. Once fully clear of the wall, it tipped forward, revealing my body strapped to the metal trolley.
"Prisoner A-50984, Mr. Farris… After having served your sentence, you are being released. Would all in attendance please note that all prior recommendations for Farris'continued detention have been dismissed due to the dissolved state of any and all incarceration facilities. Upon the release of Prisoner A-50984, Carpa Mental Institution will begin all prescribed procedures for its immediate shutdown and demolition."
Two guards stepped forward, unlatching the locks that held my restraints in place. Two more grabbed my atrophied body, walking me past the row of onlooking prison professionals to an unfriendly looking door, behind which they washed me down and clothed me in attire similar to their own. A Magistrate was waiting for me outside of the wash room.
"You've been freed on a technicality," she said, her lip curling in disgust. "Know that you'll be under 24 hour surveillance; we'll know every detail of your life, down to when you take a shit inside whatever rundown apartment you find for lease."
I stared back at her, silent, ungiving. I was marched up the corridor to a similarly white-washed office space, where I signed a few documents and told I was free to go. Stepping out of the door, I heard the Magistrate call after me. "Don't forget; we're watching."
Outside, the world was foreign. The cityscape was strangely mute, cars silently gliding past in the skylanes, the sun sinking behind crystalline superstructures.
*How long had I been incarcerated? * I recognized none of it. Looking over my shoulder at the doors I had just exited, I felt my heart rate increase, panic sinking in.
*No, calm down. * I took a deep breath and regulated my breathing; I just stood there. Unsure of where to go or how to proceed, I stood suspended in time. I stood and stared blankly at the city and just thought for a very long time.