* "Tonight: The war on Judaism intensify as radical extremists claim to be the new representatives for humanity, sent by God. Their leader, Jesus Christ, who claims to be the physical embodiment of God was arrested last week and found guilty of charges of treason and terrorism. We have the exclusive interview with Judas, the man who capture the known terrorist." *
"You are about to enter the ‘ No Spin Zone.'The Factor begins, now!"
*Intro*
"Welcome to the "O'Reilly Factor," I am your host, Bill O'Reilly. Indoctrination, that is the topic of this evening's Talking Points. As many Jewish-Americans know, Judaism has come under a lot of attack recently. The most notable example of this the new terrorist group led by a man who claims to be the ‘ physical embodiment of God. ’. As any faithful Jewish-American knows, God will tell us when he sends his messiah to save us. Despite this, many young people are being indoctrinated into believing this man's ideology. It is the opinion of Talking Points that a serious cultural shift is happening in this country. In the recent decade, we have seen the transition from a conservative middle class to a lazy and entitled youth. Talking points believes these kids have lost their moral ground, turning away from Moses and Abraham's message. The result? The blind devotion by some youths for a criminal living continents away, preaching anti-Jewish messages. America was founded on Jewish values; our Founding Fathers intentionally worded our founding documents as to imply Judaism principles as the moral and ethical groundwork for this country. This group is a real and serious threat, and Talking Points applauds the Israeli Government for their quick action in preventing this from getting out of hand. That is it for this evening's talking points."
"With me now is Judas, the man who turned over the terrorist."
"Judas, thank you for coming."
"Thanks for having me Bill"
‘ Now, I understand you were once a follower of this terrorist. What was it about this radical man that finally convinced you to turn him in?"
"While my lawyer has advised me refrain from releasing any sensitive information pertinent to the case, I will say that this man was a possible threat to the Israeli people and the United States, but I also believe— “
"Now Judas, as I am sure you have heard, this terrorist has been sentenced to a very public execution to be taken place on Friday, in the form of crucifixion. Do you believe this to be a successful accomplishment of the judicial system? Being able to so quickly try and execute this terrorist? “
"While I believe that Jesus has broken the law, he has never harmed anyo— “
"So the judicial system was a success. This man was a terrorist, bent on destroying the West and American culture. He is filth that must be dealt with. If President Obama really wanted to solve the problem of violence in the Middle East, he would have already sent in ground and air forces to take care of this situation. Instead, he waited too long and now our children have been exposed and indoctrinated into this loon's ideology. “
"Thank you for being on Judas. Next on the O'Reilly Factor: Are terrorists crossing the US-Mexico border and adulterating our culture? Find out when we return."