"Don't take my fuckin' alcohol yet asshole"
Angelo downed the last bit of warmed swill in the bottom of his flask and tucked it into his neon shirt collar
"The trolley is coming man, they gonna catch you if you don't put that shit away...what kinda kid smells like old tequila?"
Angelo stared at Celina The Magnificent with bloodshot eyes. He reached up to his head, slowly pressing the ill fitting Mickey Mouse eat hat on his head. Celina could hear the squeak of the stretching plastic on what little hair Angelo had left. She cringed.
"You tellin' me that I am gonna get in trouble? I am for and a half feet tall you fucker, those assholes don't look at the kids, I think they gonna be paying attention to the six foot fuckin' drag queen"
Celia rocked back on her red pumps.
"you payed ME to sneak you in for the day, the drag is the last thing they gonna pay attention to when the ticket taker sees your mustache."
"It's natural for a growin' kid, tell em' I drink a lot of milk. Now shut up the trolley is here...there's a lot of mother fuckers going to disney land today this shit is gonna be easy."
Angelo wiped his hands on the sides of his shirt and settled into an innocent childlike smile. The trolley meandered slowly past the parking deck up the perfectly paved road towards the pair. Goofy's voice sang a hauntingly sweet melody that echoed off of the massive concrete structures covering the outlying areas of the park. A heavy set older man dressed in a striped blue conductors uniform sat in the driver's seat. He adjusted his microphone headset towards his mouth and clutched his Donald Duck name tag. The song cut out and there was a large crackle.
"Welcome to Disneyland, my name is Don."
His voice echoed for a few seconds in every direction.
"I believe this is the trolley you have been waiting for to take YOU into the magical world of disney. Hop in, only two seats left with your names on it."
Don gave a wide square toothed grin.
"I don't like this guy's tooth to gum ratio, it gives me the creeps." Celia whispered.
"Not everyone can get their mug fixed like you did....get in the trolley."
Angelo walked forward and smiled at Don, getting ready to speak in the highest voice he could muster.
"Thanks Mr. Don, I can't wait!"
Celia rolled her eyes and walked back towards the empty seats in purple cart B. Angelo raced after her, keeping in perfect disguise.
The automatic trolley cart door swung open. Angelo and Celia climbed in, making sure to not bump the kid wearing a goofy baseball cap next to them in the third seat.
The kid. Angelo realized there was something odd about the kids legs. They seemed awfully hairy.
"Sorry you guys, just scoot in."
Don let out an unnerving chuckle through his mic as the doors slowly shut and locked.
The trolley lurched forward and began moving down the road. Goofy's familiar voice started again, this time explaining proper safety while riding the trolley. Angelo turned towards Celia.
"This shit was easier then I thought....it gave me such a rush...I need a fucking cigarette.
Angelo then heard rustling behind him.
"Here bro, keep it a secret."
The kid next to him flicked a Pall Mall onto his lap. Angelo forgot himself for a second and let out an angry whisper.
"What the fuck kid, a ten year old ain't supposed to be smokin!"
Celia leaned over to look at the boy who shifted back in his seat.
"I am forty-five numbnuts, you think you are the only one with bright ideas? Economy is tough. You think you are the only one who had some brilliant plans to get a discount?"
Without responding, Angelo looked around and realized that almost all of the children on the trolley were unaccompanied. He slowly saw that all of them had hairy arms, hairy backs, and the "little girls" adorned in Minnie mouse bows had something extra.
"Jesus Christ they have tits."
The boy grinned.
"Told ya."
Angelo's surprise was short lived when a shadow enveloped the entire trolley. He realized that they had just passed into a concrete tunnel.
Celia shivered.
"This isn't an entrance, what's going on?"
Don was indistinguishable in the poor light, but almost everyone jumped when the crackle of his microphone broke through Goofy's repetitive singing.
"Don't be alarmed boys girls and parent's, this is just a special entrance for special kids like you."
The man sitting next to Angelo began to panic.
"What the fuck man I am getting out of here!"
He began rattling the trolley door but it was locked by a mechanism he couldn't control.
Don's sickly sweet voice rang out once again.
"Keep your arms and legs inside the trolley at all times, we are about to pull in to Mickey Station."
Angelo felt a bead of sweat drop down his face as the trolley came to a halt. Before he could process what was going on, he was blinded by high intensity flashlights in the darkness. Celia groaned and both of them held up their hands.
"Get out of the vehicle, all of you."
Black gloved hands wretched open the trolley doors and black clad figures ushered them all onto a concrete platform. They stood huddled together in the cold damp. Angelo noticed one of the people with a flashlight opening a large brown office door at the back of the tunnel.
"Everyone through here."
Angelo could hear Goofy's voice fading away back down the tunnel. Celia turned back towards Angelo as they entered the large office.
"You owe me a lot more money than this motherfucker, cash."
They stood in the center of the room in front of a large mahogany desk. The room was covered in photo's of park mascots and happy children. The back wall behind the desk held a large number of clocks, with names of countries etched in silver plate on the top.
A small man sat behind the desk in a brown tall back office chair, his veiny boned hands clutched in front of his searsucker suit. Angelo and Celia saw that the black clad figures had closed in the room. All they could hear was the steady rhythmic ticking of the clocks.
"I extend my welcome to you all, how have you enjoyed my park so far?"
Angelo was the very first to speak out of the crowd.
"Who are you and what the hell is going on?"
This was followed by a sea of agitated murmurs.
"I am Walt Disney."
Celia and a few other people gasped.
"I may not look 113, but I was frozen a while back in the 60's you see, and here I am, still maintaining my empire all these years later."
He stood and exited from behind his desk to face the crowd.
"The true reason I have brought you all here is that I need you to maintain myself and the park."
The crowd began to get agitated.
"Everyday you people posing as children to save money make up for 98% of both visitors to my parks, but every once and a while I bring one trolley of you down here to appease the spirits of my parks. While I cannot punish you all as a whole, I can certainly offer a group of you as proper sacrifice."
"Sacrifice?! What the hell are you on about you crazy old man?"
The man sitting next to Angelo was restrained by a black figure as he tried to move towards the dapper old man.
"Sacrifices like you make us who we are today. You think every iconic figure in every ride is a robot? You are sadly mistaken dear boy."
The man ran his fingers over the glass portrait of The Country Bears.
"They are our ancient spirits, and they need your brains. It is how they feed, how they perform these never ending tasks all day long to please the children, poor dears. How do you think it makes them feel when none of the people they dance and sing for are really children? Quite cross I am afraid."
Celia began to pray, and Angelo thought of doing the same.
"You will not truly loose consciousness when we use your brain, rather, you will understand what they go through just to please people like you. The joy our spirits will feel when they have a companion for possibly the next 200 years...such joy.....to feed off of your sacrificial misery."
Walt disney pulled a handkerchief out of his front suit pocket and dabbed his eyes.
"We will begin the transplant process shortly, please remove their clothing and possessions, I must go and write checks for their relatives out of court settlements"
Angelo and Celia watched the people around them praying and crying, removing Disney hats and clothing to reveal bald spots and mature bodies. Angelo pulled his flask from his shirt.
"I guess I really should have drank all this tequila huh?"
He put his lips to it and tipped it all the way up.