I have to take someone with me when I go, that's the rule. Whenever I stop time, I need a companion. It's a weird rule, and one I don't really see that much of a point in, but it makes for an interesting time.
I tried taking people I knew first, friends, family, classmates, girlfriends, but the trouble was their brains just couldn't process it. During the time freeze they would either run off and do their own thing which they'd always wanted to do, or they'd go catatonic with shock and not do anything the whole freeze. That might've been alright, after repeated trips they would probably get the hang of things and we could have some proper fun, but the trouble was after the freeze they convinced themselves it didn't happen.
Some of them would claim they had been drugged by someone. Others would tell me it was all just a lucid dream. When I asked how I remembered the events the same as they did if it was just a dream they told me that they must have already talked to me about the dream and got so excited by it that I had one of my own. It's amazing how far people will go to maintain their perceptions of reality.
I had a problem then. If I couldn't take anyone I knew, who could go with me? There was no way I was letting this power go to waste, so who should I take along? After family I tried starting the freeze out with someone then ditching them. That didn't work, as soon as they were out of sight time resumed as normal.
Next I tried random people from the gym or the coffee shop, but most of those people either fainted or called the cops on me. Or called the cops and then fainted. I don't think the police had a complete description of me yet, so I stopped trying random people from shops.
This was really beginning to irritate me. I needed someone who I didn't know, but who had seen enough weird stuff that a little magical time freezing wouldn't completely weird them out.
That's when it hit me. I didn't think it would work. I mean, how could this not end badly? But I was running out of options, so I gave it a try.
"Hey man, I don't have any money, but I'd love to take a walk around the city with you."
"I appreciate the offer friend, but you don't want to walk with me. People give the homeless weird stares."
"Well you know, I might have just the thing to fix that."