"Hey, man. Did you see that new movie out?" said Alex in a chatroom with about a dozen other regular prompt-readers and responders.
She awaited a response, tapping at the edge of her keyboard awaiting an answer. The chat was and had been dead for the past hour, so the girl decided to go ahead and make some tea while she waited.
Eventually, her aunt came by to visit and point out just how fat that the online-writer had gotten, before proceeding to eat the rest of the cookies in the pantry, leaving behind a bag of cuckoo clocks, and leaving with her new muscle-headed biker fuckbuddy.
Alex, thinking nothing of this in particular, returned to the IRC chatroom to see a varying amount of greeting messages done in the usually unique styles.
"HI ALEX!"
"Yo."
"Hello, Ally."
*Something about a cellar. *
Etc.
Eventually, the conversation shifted gears over the course of an hour, from the story of a guy's trip to the grocery store, a new puppy, and a wordsprint or two. Finally, they arrived back on the topic of the movie that Alex had brought up about four hours ago.
Yes, it was a certain movie, based off a certain prompt, that was totally and completely original in every single way. Absolutely. Completely and utterly unheard of. Because that's what the internet is known for. Original content.
Yes.
"Which one, Alex?" came the words of a fellow writer who was awaiting their daily pizza.
Alex tapped at the keys, "The one about the odd, paranormal video tape that made people lose it-"
"That's been made a movie before.
"Err. What about the one where a bunch of cops decide to infiltrate a gang only to find out that everyone in it is a cop?"
"Been done before."
"Crazy president goes dogshit on the USA?"
"I think Trump just won the election, actually."
Alex sighed, resigned herself to the idea that every idea ever made had already existed before, only with a few alterations in noun, adjective, and maybe tone. So what that her prompt response had been turned into a movie without her making any money off of it?
It wasn't like it could JUST BE A FUCKING COINCIDENCE, COULD IT?!
No, it definitely was.
It wasn't like she even had a lawyer to sue if that were the case anyway. Why bother trying to throw at fit anyway?
Was she just supposed to gather up the rest of the writers and go and brigade movie studios and story houses?
No, screw that. Half of them don't give a shit and just lurk, a quarter of them are too busy with their dayjobs, the other ninety-nine percent of the quarter weren't really all that bothered with it anyway at all.
So what did that leave the one percent out of the quarter?
Worrying about absolutely nothing. That's what. It's not like they could've found their own film studio to do the movie for them. Geez.
Thus, Alex decided to ignore what was definitely not her dilemma at all, called up the rest of the crew, and decided to go watch that new movie that bore an odd resemblance to her Batman-Hitler romcom (directed by none other than Quentin Tarantino).
Not only did the girl enjoy the movie in normal, realistic happiness, she also further went on to...recommend the movie to a friend.
And that was just another realistic day in the life of Alex.