Poseidon watched the coverage of the 2020 Tokyo Olympics from his underwater throne. Swimmers were warming up in preparation for the first medaled event, the 400 meter freestyle. The god kicked back in his seat, beckoning for his octopus-servant to bring him a pina colada.
"Make it snappy!" he yelled, as the octopus tripped over his tentacles in haste.
On screen, Greek reporters were introducing the athletes. Poseidon drummed his fingers; he didn't really care about the identity of each human. He was more interested in the event itself—in the exertion, the sweat, the calories expended—all of which he lapped up as a sacrifice in his name. *It's not the same as when they slaughtered cattle for me, * he thought, *but for this age, it'll do. * Some of the less established gods, in fact, had all but withered into a wisps of their former selves. It was a fate Poseidon did not like to contemplate. He glanced at his sacrificial chalice, a massive, copper goblet with a long stem that was planted in the sand several feet to the right of his throne. Empty—for now.
As his octopus-servant brought him his drink, Poseidon returned his attention to the television. The reporters were introducing the final competitor, a chubby, middle-aged woman in the lane furthest from the cameras. Poseidon paused in mid-slurp.
"From the United States of America, we have Trisha Greene," the curly-haired reporter announced. "Ms. Greene is the ‘ average athlete'for the women's 400 meter championships. She was selected by the Olympic Committee among several hundred applicants for this position. Ms. Greene describes herself as ‘ a mother of two who likes to lap swim at the Y.'She is also a big fan of Michael Phelps."
Trisha waved at the dozens of cameras trained on the competitors. She blew a kiss, and launched into a vigorous stretching routine.
Poseidon spat out his pineapple rind at the monitor. As the half-eaten fruit drifted away (and the octopus scurried to mop it up), he stood up in outrage.
"What is the meaning of this?!" he demanded of the monitor. He swam over to his magical chalice, stared into its pitifully empty bottom. Clenched his teeth, balled his fists. He pointed a finger in the direction of his weapons room, addressing his servant but without bothering to make eye contact. "Fetch me my trident. I remind the humans the true meaning of the Olympic Games."
///
In Tokyo, Trisha readied herself at the edge of the pool. She knew she stood out like a sore thumb from the actual competitors, with their well-built, youthful bodies. But she didn't feel embarrassed; she was doing this for her husband and two daughters, who were watching the broadcast back home in Newark. The Olympics was a family tradition, as the Greenes were an athletic family. After all, when Trisha had demonstrated her strokes in front of the Olympic Committee, they praised her solid technique, feeling that she would be the perfect example of the "average swimmer" to juxtapose against the elite athletes.
"On your marks—" The referee raised his gun. Trisha braced herself; the roaring of the crowd dimmed in her ears.
BANG!
At the sound of the gunshot, all twelve competitors leapt into the water. Trisha focused on putting one arm in front of another, breathing bilaterally, but already from the corner of her goggles she could see the others overtaking her with torpedolike speed. There was no time for regret. Her mind went to that wonderful blank place, when the body becomes machinic in its execution of rehearsed movements. Up, under, breathe—
"In the lead we have…" The curly-haired news anchor paused mid-sentence, squinting at the water from her position several meters from the side of the pool. As her jaw dropped in astonishment, her cameraman nearly lost his grip on his equipment, tripping over his own feet as he, too, strove to get a better view of the event.
The Greenes were watching the event back at home. Mr. Greene opened his mouth, and a few half-chewed kernels of popcorn spilled out and bounced off his younger daughter's head. She didn't notice.
"Is that… Mom?" asked the older daughter, incredulous.
///
"Trisha Greene, in lane one, is, uh, in the lead…" the anchorwoman stammered from the television screen. Indeed, Trisha was out-swimming the other athletes by a solid third of the lane.
Poseidon brandished his trident, waving it in front of the screen, following Trisha's direction and trying to get her to move faster. "Piece of sh—" In his frustration, he even tried breaking the glorified fork in half, but, though rusty and impotent, the trident retained its form. Nonetheless, the trident didn't exert the kind of power it used to. No, he'd need to get closer…
"Prepare the Vortex," Poseidon ordered his servant, who slinked away. The god grabbed his comb from the side of his throne. He brushed his beard, and swam over to the Vortex pad: a raised stone platform, encrusted with seashells and fossils, several meters from his television set.
The octopus lowered the lever. His boss shot up, through an opening in the palace, propelled by the massive force of the Vortex. As Poseidon disappeared, Steve the octopus let out a yelp of joy. He raised a victorious tentacle, and the other servants of the palace—seahorses, sharks, crabs, eels, mermaids and mermen—emerged from the shadows, joining him in jubilation.
Meanwhile, the Vortex carried Poseidon all the way to Tokyo harbor. He emerged, bedraggled but still magnificent, from the surface of the ocean. He grinned, revealing impeccable teeth.