Left is the sinister, the underhand, the genetic exception. Left is the exterminated to the point of advantage. It is the other side of magic. Dark or misunderstood, maybe.
Left is progress. Left is populist. Left is inclusion. Left is equality--health care for all, universal education, the end of barriers. Left is the end of exceptionalism, a dead weight on the best people, mediocrity. Left is the proletariat, dignity in work and the dignity of the Worker. Left is all promises and nothing to pay for them. Left is the tyranny of the masses. Feel the Bern.
To the left is the cat. She yawns lazily, stretches her paw, and looks back at you with a curled smile. Her whiskers twitch in a breeze. She catches the smell of food, yours and hers, detergents, dust in the heating vent, the smell of a thinking ape. Her indifference is a mask for intense fascination.
A left is three rights. It is illegal to cross double lines. It is illegal to make on red. It is the wrong way, a white line bisecting a red circle. It is oncoming. Exotic and accepted in Ireland, the UK, Tanzania, India, and Japan.
To the left. Everything you own in the box to the left. I can get another you in a minute. Don't you get to thinking that you're irreplaceable.
Left is the remainder. We always ask for it. What's left? The question is exceedingly popular. The answer...Roaches and fleas, radioactively degenerated leather subversive biker gangs, underground vaults, the terse loner anti-hero with a heart of gold, a pig with lipstick.
Left is the special relief. A point six five ERA. A LOOGY's curve breaks right. It is more common than a ROOGY, doesn't get to brag about sidearms or submarines. A left handed catchers mitt is net jargon for something you think is there, but is not.
Left is all that is not right. Left is better than right. Left is hung, sometimes with Louie. It is a lurch. It is between Elvis and the building. Left are the compliments that hurt. Left are the things better unsaid. Woe be upon those who wonder what's left.