She stood on the platform. Behind her was the image of plenty, the lush island, singing out silently to the 49 pairs of eyes trained on it. The hologram shimmered as it swooped over the sea, dotted with coral reefs, the white-sanded beaches, people walking along the neatly groomed paths. An image of promise. Somehow this paradise existed. Was it an island of heaven? Was it an illusion?
It was really there, though. They could see it on maps of the world and satellite images. If you were lucky, you could see it from the window of an airplane. The 49 had whizzed under it in a submarine. No one knew its name. They referred to it simply as "the island". Its name was a privilege.
The video shifted, and a spotlight was trained on the woman with the blue-black hair and the violet eyes who stood before an ivory podium studded with jewels. She came from the island. You could tell by her clothes, her bearing, and, if you looked closely, a tattoo depicting a constellation on her collarbone. Orion, the hunter. 13 people knew this constellation by name.
"You, 49 champions, chosen from 49 cities across the land. Consider yourself privileged. This opportunity is priceless. You, of course, know this, or you wouldn't be here."
People swallowed and shifted in their seats. The memories of cheating and defeating friends, family members, enemies were still fresh.
"Call me Glory. This is not my real name, of course. You will learn this, and the name of the island 7 of you will call home, when you make it through Lechoix. Lechoix is the real name of this city, by the way." She allowed herself a small smile. "It is designed to filter those who deserve the island from those who do not. How? There are so many ways. Most of you will not make it out. Know that this is what you really deserve. The island is incomprehensible to those who have not come out of this trial successfully. To let you through would kill you."
How? they asked in their minds.
"Initially, the teams, 7 teams of 7, were referred to by colors. It began to be difficult to distinguish islanders from different years. So every year, we have assigned a different theme. My year was constellations. I was part of Orion. And I passed."
Her violet eyes shone with pride. The faces of the 49 were reflected in her embroidered sheath dress, which glittered with opportunity.
"Your year is gemstones. Each of you has been assigned to a team based on your specific ability shown in your initial placement tests. Each team is well-rounded. At first, teamwork will be essential. But later, as teams dissolve, you may form new ones. Protocol for this will be explained while you are in Lechoix. The seven teams of this year are Sapphire, Tourmaline, Ruby, Opal, Lapis Lazuli, Iolite, and Emerald. Here are the team formations."
The names and faces of each of the 49 appeared under headers.
They eyed up their competition, the ones who inspired envy from their appearances and their reputation. Iris Loughty, Opal, the girl whose face betrayed nothing. Penn Martin, Lapis Lazuli, the man with the fairytale good looks. Anshul Smith, with the weird name and weirder lime green eyes, Tourmaline. And the pink-haired one they were all curious about. It was probably Hanna something, most of them reasoned. Anyway, she was Iolite.
The four of them had remarkably similar mindsets. Iris was still, but her mind was spinning. Hanna imagined getting to the other side, no matter what she had to do.
Seven doors opened up, pictures of the gemstones shimmering on the screens above them.
"You will all be given currency to shop for supplies initially. Dressing rooms will be provided. When time is up, you will be released into the city. I would say good luck, but you create your own luck. I will be checking up on each team. Thank you."
The room went dark, and the borders of the doors glowed white. Music pumped through hidden speakers. It was downbeat electronica. Was it to intimidate them?