NSFW LANGUAGE. Like. Lots of it.
"Hey assholes." I say, stepping up to the podium. Half of the crowd is staring at me in shock. They've never heard me talk, much less heard me say anything other than "yes sir" or "no ma'am."
I glare out into the crowd and zero in on one group in particular.
"To start with," I begin, "are all of you theatre kids. Yes, I'm talking to you. I did four years of drama with you and never heard a single nice thing come out of your mouths. You are the ones who asked my best friend when he was bringing a gun to school and why he was such a faggot even though several members of your group were gay. My friends and I, the people that you outcasted?, we decided that if we were ever going to bring guns to school, you all would be the first to go. You call each other fat and you make our freshmen develop eating disorders when they are already skinny and you have NO. FUCKING. IDEA. What it was like to have to sit next to you day after fucking day and listen to you make fun of everyone who wasn't like you."
I take a deep breath. "So. Fuck you.
"On to the rest of you bastards. You soccer bitches who think it's okay to bully someone off the team. You soccer coach, right there in the third row, LOOK AT ME WHEN I'M FUCKING TALKING TO YOU."
The coach blinks up at me, confused out of his wits. He had me in his physics class for a single semester and I'm pretty sure the only thing he remembers is my sitting in the back and reading.
"You let my best friend be bullied by his own teammates. Even worse, you sat there and you let it happen. You fucking let it happen. And you know what's even worse? You laughed along with them. So fuck you, and I really hope that some parent in the crowd is recording this right now, because you kind of deserve to lose your job over it."
I lean forward and rest my elbows on the podium, pulling off my graduation cap. My hair, long already, tumbles down over my shoulders. For four years these people ignored me and treated me like shit because I hid in the library and only talked to a select few. For four god-damned years I was a nobody. In this moment, I am not.
I sigh.
"I was never one to seriously think about bringing a gun to school. Yea, most of you probably deserve to die, but I've got better things to do. Karma is gonna kick your ass later, and I really hope I'm there to see it."
I glance to my left and my principal is sitting there open-mouthed. It's not like the man had never spoken to me before. He and I had a long conversation about the Ivy League school that I'm going to, and he even put me in touch with a few of his old friends from there.
"Sorry, Mr. Yikers," I say. "And I'm sorry to the few good teachers that I actually had. To the rest of you, students and teachers..."
Both of my hands flick up in a rude gesture. I am flipping off every single person in this god-damned auditorium and I do not have any fucks left to give.
"Later ya'll. Have a good summer."
I give one last winning smile to the cameras and skip offstage, leaving my graduation cap hanging from the mic.