**Prolgue: Landfall**
"Damn this fog and damn this weather!" I cursed, My "ship", or what so passed laughably as my ship floated on the soft waters of the Atlantic, I checked my wristwatch and sighed, it was already midday but the fog made it harder to see if it was actually midday,
When I went to the nearest Volunteer Workers Outpost and presented them a plan to go west, they did not even bother to look at my file before sending me away. I wasn't that type of person to give up easily you know, so I tried again with The Exploratory Corps, The Navy and even The Government. but the more I pestered them, The more I was rejected. I've tried every different organization and I was rejected,
Not until I was approached by a eccentric and somewhat weird guy named Frederick Magnusson, He had heard about my proposals and wanted to support me in my plan and would supply me with weapons, supplies and a sailboat, a crappy one that was, The damn thing was fourth generation and looked like it was going to sink at the slightest touch. But getting rejected again was not part of my bucket list so I accepted his offer. There were many instances that the sailboat would capsize on it's own weight but thankfully, that did not happen
But it was still areal surprise that I managed to survive the long journey from the United States of Africa to the desolate wasteland that is the former United States of America, It has been a long time since "The Day", ever since the dead started to rise, the world was never the same again. Pakistan had a panic attack and started detonating their nukes. Thailand became a absolute monarchy, China renamed itself into Cathay for some reason, Israel and Gaza, surprisingly united into one state, I hear the Islamic and Jewish People's Party won a landslide victory against the Zionist Union, and Italy fractured into two states. The progressive and large "Second Roman Empire" and the theocratic "Democratic People's Republic of Sicily", crazy right?
But hey, at least it isn't as crazy as Nazara and the Quisling Movement, Nazara was this creepy political organization that supported the idea of a one world government. Their ideas may be attractive but their organization isn't, I mean they attend meetings in giant marble fortifications named "Watchtowers". They dress in military esque uniforms and always speak like it's the 18th century, The Quisling Movement however is a different thing entirely.
It's a religious movement started by some guy named Simone Harald, The Quisling Movement aimed to 'unite' the human genome with the zombie genome, they also added that this would be the only way to enter Heaven, their argument was that the your souls would be so pitiful that God would take pity on your soul that he'd open the pearly gates so they could enter en masse. something as crazy as this would be branded as 'ship to nearest mental asylum' right? WRONG! They manged to fetch a LOT of followers, especially in area that took worst of the undead storm. They ain't only crazies, they are also committed terrorists, they bombed a lot of places and committed random acts of violence to spread "The Word", But with all the violence and all, trying to shut The Q Movement down would be useless, they were far too organized and had a lot of popularity points with Third World oil-rich nations.
My thoughts drifted away as the squawking of sea gulls ripped through the quiet fog-infested ocean, it may not be so bad after all, if there were seagulls then the coast would be near, I grabbed a pair of binoculars that was laying on a table and dashed towards the front of the boat. I waited as the fog started to die down, I then lifted the binoculars to my eyes and gazed at the distance......
It was then I saw it, I saw the unmistakable stretch of land, the long vast stretch of green, the unmistakable skyline, I swear a tear fell from my eye as I lowered the binoculars and took out a small video camera. I activated it and directed it towards the dark coast,
"Ladies and Gentlemen, I am delighted to say this, America has been rediscovered, I repeat, America has been rediscovered"