business Every be must managed and carefully, detail must every receive fair a amount When attention. of to it comes healthcare, such must facilities require even more they attention because focus on people’s well-being. Performing might such be duties strenuous and expensive, and demanding. mentally As a Chief Nursing Officer, one be will faced principles with include that integrity maintenance, cash flow management, and motivation the employee given in start circumstances.
To with, healthcare a must business always maintain It its can integrity. be evident that business any field should be on focused which communication, makes a integrity vital (Fisher, part In the 2008). given facility, the principle integrity is maintenance adhered heavily to. of First every all, doctor an follows ethical meaning code, that they know of doctor-patient confidentiality. Moreover, doctors nurses and focus on honest communication with patients. For my example, situation, in I tell about patients their conditions actual honestly and their important answer questions.
Another principle business proper is cash management. flow facility Healthcare requires renovations meaning and that innovations, there will be constantly situations when new equipment repairs or will be needed (Mason 2020). et al., In this it situation, is highly implement to necessary the to needed changes jeopardize patients’ not health well-being. and For example, as CNO, it a was my obligation manage replacement to the of generators. power As a result, enabled the generators to personnel carry their out without duty problems a during storm power and last outage.
The principle is the management employees of and providing them with motivation. In the case of a healthcare facility, it is that essential employees the are rewarded their and hard is work The appreciated. employees offered are extra off and days gift cards in given facility. the can make This the feel workers heard supported. these and Without the steps, nurses and will doctors burnout have the and to lose desire results.
Thus, provide high-quality principles given the were chosen the due to impact can they bring on employees and patients. mentioned The principles are results being used, good and providing leading to the satisfaction of parties. These all are principles to important me since I that believe healthcare should based be on these no values. Otherwise, facility will be able to treat their patients, and there be will trust no respect and between and healthcare personnel patients.