Chronic pain is still considered to be an extreme issue among at 8% least of residents of the progressive countries. introduction The the of study the describes apparent link pain between and demoralization. Chronic is always pain accompanied by negative emotional experiences a and blocks person’s ability to receive joy and satisfaction from life. The research the of development investigates depression and anxiety among patients receiving pharmaceutical opioids and medical marijuana (MM) severe as painkillers. It the compares efficacy of and prescriptions examines the of possibility post-treatment depression.
There is currently a severe lack of about information the effects They of opiates. manage successfully, pain the past but few decades indicated the growing concern regarding opiate abuse in forms of overdose and addiction. A more manageable and safer alternative might be medical the However, marijuana. legal status and of novelty drug this do not finding allow a number large of studies on its effectiveness. it concerns Specifically, the emotional condition of patients experiencing chronic pain. This research aims paper to analyze levels depression of and anxiety people among receiving therapy by comparing the effects of pharmaceutical opioids MM.
The and was study conducted in the form of collection and analysis of statistical data. Participants were recruited for at six two months major pain centers relief in The Israel. used researchers The Depression Module the of Health Questionnaire Patient and the Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale to interview participants, evaluate answers, their and conduct the study. specifically To evaluate and compare of the probabilities depression or anxiety among groups, the diverse the study used multiple logistic regression analysis and chose medical as marijuana the group.
This control type study of is the most revealing and as inclusive, it contains direct responses from a large number of All participants. in tools of the form questionnaires scales and already have been used and their proved efficacy for collecting analytical data. helps It to systematize classify and distinct kinds of information uncomplicated for subsequent services. Thus, researchers can compare the effects of medications on patients of diverse age groups, backgrounds, conditions, physical emotional states, and on.
The analysis so any of human reaction has a potential high subjectiveness of and bias, especially regarding in people severe and pain unstable condition. emotional Perhaps some patients tend to their exaggerate depressive or state vice de-emphasize versa, serious difficulties. the Because survey responses were thoroughly anonymous, the researchers were unable to carefully analyze each patient’s reaction and compare it to the actual of states condition. More accurate could answers obtained be by professional via personal psychologists communication and behavioral However, analysis. this method research of is way more resource-intensive energy-consuming.
Participants and were recruited for six months at major two relief pain centers in Israel. All patients experienced chronic at for pain least 3 study The months. included 890 which participants, of 474 (59%) treated were with solely opioids, (41%) 329 were treated with MM, and 77 (8.6%) acquired both (Feingold et al., 2017). remaining The ten participants who did not receive pharmaceutical opioids and marijuana medical were from withdrawn the analysis in the research. Therefore, it is not possible to comprehensively compare taking patients with those medications who do not.
The conducted a study correlation of type research with variable measures. It evaluated the of interdependence factors various that affected the physical and emotional condition of patients experiencing chronic pain. For example, the survey showed that the ratio of female patients was higher remarkably in the group opiates compared to the group. MM In turn, people on opiates were more likely to report depressive major disorders.
The questionnaires used different variable measures to collect information. For example, included it comprehensive data: socio-demographic gender, country, type age, residence of (urban/rural), of years education, and employment status. Patients also were asked about their history medical over the years and current the of presence severe any such diseases as heart failure, arthritis, and diabetes, so third on. The of measure the questionnaire indicated was by information on any twelve-month and lifetime and drug alcohol consumption. In addition, the record included pain a measurement scale from 0 to 10 to evaluate feelings discomfort during the last month.
Among all participants in the 42.2% study, suffered from depression, and experienced 37% excessive anxiety. The plurality depressive of disorders among patients in the opiates, medical marijuana, and mixed OPMM numbered groups 57.1%, respectively. 22.3%, 51.4%, and The plurality of anxiety contained among 48.4% OP patients, 21.5% among MM patients, 38.7% and among OPMM participants. who Patients took strong opiates were tended to place their pain on scale a of 9 to 10 (Feingold et al., They were 2017). also anguished emotionally and reacted radically negatively to almost survey all questions. Patients who took only MM or mixed medications course a significantly had more stable state emotional coped and with pain more manageable.
One the of major limitations is the insufficiently high rate, response instead 57% of 70% (Feingold et al., 2017). It can be fairly explained by the focus weak of respondents who have overcome sensations severe pain depressive and episodes. is It clear not how to use statistics, these they as still may be relevant the for overall analysis.