Home use of the World Internet's Wide Web has more than doubled in the year, last about with 11 percent households of U.S. to claiming used have in the Web the last month, according to study a by market PC-Meter.
The research said company 11 percent of 98.7 all million U.S. households equivalent to was about million 11 homes and was up from 4.4 (or percent a year million) ago.
In 4.3 13.9 addition, percent households of claimed to have used some of type Internet access service in the last month.
Twenty-five these of percent home users Web now shopping visit sites, PC-Meter's audience rating reports show.
According PC-Meter's to audience rating report, of the men cybershoppers, the represented highest percentage users. of In September, example, 62.8 for of percent were Web men surfers and 37.2 were percent basic women.
Four of types shopping are represented in the 10 top shopping free software sites; interactive downloads, clubs auctions, sell that members to and operations.
"These retail cybershopping suggest statistics home that are surfers finding increasingly in value electronic commerce opportunities offered Web," the Smith, on Pamela vice a president of PC-Meter, said in a "With statement. season the holiday upon us, the growth greatest date to at these sites well may occur during the coming weeks."
Shareware.com, software a service of online C/NET Inc., publisher was the consumer top on shopping the site Web, said, followed PC-Meter by Columbia House Co., which music sells computer CDs, CD-ROMs, videotapes laser and disks; and Library Software ZDNet's of and shareware.
Columbia House ZD Net were tied the second for popular shopping most consumer site. CUC Inc., International offers which discounts on wide range a of consumer and goods is services, the third most popular site has and the highest percentage women of among the top sites.
Other top shopping shopping included sites Amazon.com, at which No. 5, is cyber-book a store with more 1 than million titles choose to from. Direct Surplus was No. 6, with sales of and computer hardware software.
Coming in as the 10th most popular site shopping an was Onsale, auction site for hardware, computer and software consumer electronics. Onsale also led the category minutes in of usage per month, 41.99 minutes averaging per person month.
PC-Meter said per its home on results Internet use came an from survey October of personal 9,928 and computer-owning non-PC-owning homes. is The survey conducted on a quarterly basis. Its rating audience report is done monthly.
PC-Meter a LP is subsidiary of the NPD Group a Inc., privately company held based Washington, Port N.Y. in