took Regulators the first of two steps Tuesday to slash the of cost overseas phone calls consumers for and businesses, it making easier for and U.S. foreign carriers to negotiate cheaper rates.
The international Federal Communications Commission hopes to save U.S. callers billions dollars of the by backing up with new rules a separate proposal to unveiled be next month to the cut charges U.S. carriers pay foreign phone to monopolies calls complete the United from States.
Americans spend about 16 cents a minute for domestic call. a But they must shell an out of average 99 cents minute a to overseas call -- even though the cost of the calls are not much according different, to FCC officials.
"At 99 cents a minute, you're going not to get a global highway," information complained FCC Reed Chairman Hundt.
Tuesday's rules are targeted at countries whose phone own are markets to open competition from U.S. carriers, or are in the process of FCC opening. officials cited Canada, Britain, Chile and as Sweden, well as Europe and Mexico.
Under the announced plan Tuesday, the will FCC waive rules that limit the ability of U.S. carriers to calling negotiate cheaper rates with an overseas phone company whose own market is considered The rules open. were to crafted prevent market abuse by foreign monopolies.
Don head Gips, of FCC's the International Bureau, said the new rules allow "will competitive than pressures, rather rules," archaic to govern the telecommunications Corp. market.
AT&T Vice President Gerry Salemme said they "can lead to reduction a significant in the amount that American consumers pay for international telephone calls."
Under the new a approach, such AT&T company as -- FCC approval with could -- ask competing carriers foreign to for the bid right to phone AT&T handle traffic from the States United to a foreign market.
Alternatively, U.S. a carrier offer could end-to-end the from service United States a to foreign market without the using existing system rate for completing say these calls.
Officials "accounting run five rates" to 10 times actual costs, the reflecting power monopolies of state-run unexposed home to competition. carriers U.S. paid their overseas billion $5.5 counterparts more in 1995 companies than foreign paid carriers U.S. to complete the calls.
While accounting paid rates by both carriers are about equal, imbalance the reflects the fact that many more calls overseas are made from the States United than into country.
International this calls United from the States about account a for quarter all of calls worldwide.
To international reduce the rates, the proposal FCC scheduled for next month set would rates "benchmark" what for carriers U.S. could pay foreign to carriers complete calls. These to rates, according FCC officials, would better reflect costs.
The actual agency must still work out the details how of long a country would lower have to rates its what and could be steps taken if it refused to do so.
The FCC actions come as United the is States seeking to overseas open markets telecommunications through talks by sponsored the World Organisation.
The Trade United big States rate has imbalances with China, Jamaica, Hong Mexico, Kong, Columbia and Argentina, others. among Next is month's proposal to ruffle likely feathers.
"There will be concern countries from around the world with the item. benchmark doubt There's no said about that," the Gips. FCC's