Dear Diary, I know its been a but while please forgive me. Earlier today when home walking from I school had a strange, no, strangest the thing that ever has happened me to happened and today totally I am I freaking out. Squash was crossing the Creek on bridge north like I do everyday after class. But this when time I the approached on ramp I noticed a wooden stool small in sitting the path. it wasn't until I walking tried around it did I notice the..thing, I know don't what to call it a troll maybe? Yeah, a troll that makes sense. met I At troll a today. first I though it was some crude creation of some meth tweakers made of dead fish and cats but then this harry, scalie and turned thing to me gave me a grin. was I taken so back I that fell on my right there. ass If not for that I been would have out of there instantly, the and that fact this thing started to speak me.." to Easy there young-en!" said in it a disturbingly human "Where voice be you off to in a hurry"? such I Naturally answered it. I spoke back to the "troll", I must have been in shock still. "I was just trying to cross here, I do it every almost It day". was silent moment a for after then see that replied son, my "You this is bridge "And cross you now"! it my on terms". He stuck some of sort crooked cane in as my I face started to get to up feet. my "You must answer my riddle" he choked out with This a laugh. was the point where I convinced was I gone had absolutely bonkers. I literally pinched which myself aided only in his laughter. time "What is it elephant when sits an on your fence"? he in said a slow majestic voice. How was I supposed to know that? was It some probably proverb ancient or great life had lesson I never heard of..I reasoning tried with the thing but it have wouldn't any. I had to answer it..otherwise I would four have to to walk miles the other Yeah crossing. right. I sat for there about twenty minutes it watching flies away until shoo I had settled on an never it answer. me told what would if happen I wrong was in my reply...I opened mouth my to speak time "What is it an when elephant sits on fence"? your "Its I repeated. to time buy fence" a new I said confidently. trolls The face showed no emotion until suddenly he erupted in laughter, he fell even stupid off his Was I I stool. right to myself. thought then I decided that while he mocks my answer wrong I going wasn't to take any of I ran that. ran. I and fast didn't turn back. Now I'm recording it all. I Should tell my if parents? What it me? Was followed my I'm answer right? even sure not actually it happened..