television The and industries entertainment vowed Thursday to use only system their for rating TV programmes promised and to reject legal -- means, if by necessary any -- government-imposed months of plan.
Following work, a of group TV and Hollywood executives next scheduled to are week unveil plans for system a to rate shows on based their for kids different ages, suitability of especially those under years 14 of will age.
It be to similar the system 28-year-old of letters and numbers used the by motion-picture and industry which includes the ratings G, PG, PG-13, R and NC-17.
"We will not any other use rating TV guidelines than other ones we the are going to announce week," next said Jack Valenti, executive chief the of Association Motion Picture of America and head of the "implementation group" the developing ratings.
But parental children's groups, advocates, educators and key some -- lawmakers including Representative Markey, a Edward Massachusetts Democrat -- demanded have that the group include a content-based system the specifying level of sex, violence and have bad not language.
Lawmakers ruled a out fix.
"It legislative is clear that the has industry so far failed adequately to respond to fundamental of the parents interest in knowing the specific content of TV shows in advance," Markey said a at conference news by accompanied other and lawmakers pushing groups a for content-based like system the one now used by HBO the cable channel.
At a press responding to Markey, conference Valenti lashed He back. accused Markey of trying to use government a as "big brother" to impose his scheme. own Valenti And vowed not to bend under pressure and alter his group's not system.
"We're going to change word it. of a We're not going to redot 'i' an or recross a 't,'" Valenti said. "If there is any intervention government, by we're going to be court in in nanosecond."
The a Federal Communications Commission also must approve reject or the ratings system. it were If reject to it, the agency could call development for an of alternative plan -- one that Valenti said the industry would the ignore.
Once ratings are in implemented Valenti January, did say industry the would revisit the after system year a to about determine whether it should be changed or "tweaked."
"Is it perfect? course Of not. All subjective systems are So is flawed. ours," said.
The Valenti ratings -- expected include to six broad categories will -- not apply to news, news shows such magazine as "60 Minutes" or TV sports. networks and syndicators will issue the ratings, with the categories "mingling" age and to content, according Valenti.
Proposed guidelines leaked to media the two include children: "TV-K" for for and kids suitable for ages; all and "TV-K7" for children older seven.
The than other four are: for "TV-G" general parental audiences; "TV-PG," guidance "TV-14" suggested; parents for strongly cautioned; for and "TV-M" mature only.
The rating are audiences to used be in conjunction with a "V-chip" installed TV in sets that parents allow to out shows block they too violent consider or racy.
The HBO developed system, in the mid-80s, offers such ratings as "MV" violence," for "mild "SC" "strong for sexual content" "AL" for and "adult language."
But said system Valenti that is unworkable is and to too complicated appear TV in listings in the newspaper.
He said also a 19-member and monitoring oversight will group be created to oversee the ratings. new It include will a chairman and representives the from creative side of TV the industry, broadcasters cable-TV and the industry.