"Who can replace Death? He most was the of feared us Without all. there be Death can no upon reckoning the mortals."
War scratched sinful his thinning He beard. was running out options. of others No had dared to take such up a heavy burden. War While was no stranger to the of, horrors he shuddered think to about atrocities the that Death had committed. Was any being there in the 7 realms to up take and the Cloak there Scythe?
"But is someone." hissed Famine.
"Brothers aware are you that all the atrocities we committed have were by dealt Man. War, death, and famine These conquest. Man's all were undoing. Who else better don to the burden of Death then man a ragged himself?"
Famine's hood covered his face, only showing decaying his mouth twisted sick in smile.
Conquest a was quick challenge.
"Man, to very donning the bane of his existence? Brother, imprudence your will end be of the us all. A man mortal is He hideous creature. is selfish greedy, and cruel. Giving one this much power will only result abuse."
"Conquest, in you are as foolish as you learnt ever. Have nothing Death? was from He the wisest of us was all, he-"
"If Death wise, so explain his abrupt Why departure. did leave he duties We his the behind? are horsemen the of apocalypse; both terrible and glorious. When the Horn the of Heavens sounds we will charge and the strike fear into hearts of It sinners. is who are. we was Death for fool leaving."
"ENOUGH!"
War a into Conquest, slammed knocking him to the down He brimstone. unleashed an onslaught of blows onto golden his until armor was dented recognition. it beyond War Breathless, towering stood over up foe his and boomed.
"I will take not insolence. this Death was best the of us. loved him I as a brother and a stone face mentor."
War's softened for a second.
"Should you be enough stupid to brother our blaspheme again, I end will you."
Conquest nodded in shame. He was not used to the taste bitter silently He of vowed defeat. would that War pay the humiliation he suffered.
"Famine. for say You a that mortal can Death. replace Bring him me."
"As to you wish brother."