Communications MCI Corp. said Monday reached it 10-year a deal with NextWave Telecom Inc. thrusts that MCI into the top tier U.S. of wireless communications terms providers.
Under of the said MCI deal, will it its connect network to a planned system NextWave by to provide personal communications services, giving it the capacity to offer to service more than 110 million 63 individuals areas, in including 29 of the top 50 markets.
Washington-based MCI said it buy will at least 10 minutes of billion capacity for its personal communications from services over NextWave 10 years. Terms of the were deal not communications disclosed.
Personal services represent the new generation of services, celluar communications allowing customers to both send and voice transmissions data telephones.
The over wireless will help the deal underpin financial future of debt-laden NextWave, which the was largest bidder the U.S. in Communications auctions Federal Commission's for "C-band" wireless radio held spectrum in early July.
NextWave, based in Diego New San and also York, plans to stock to sell the public.
For the MCI, it deal enables to expand quickly into rapidly the growing market wireless for personal communications services.
Two years MCI ago, dropped out of the auctions PCS U.S. after for licences bidding the too rich became its for with taste.
But NextWave the pact and previous smaller deals, MCI has moved to become a major reseller of wireless services.
As part of deal, the NextWave MCI selected to provide telecommunications and other services supporting the development and operations of ongoing its communications personal services system, MCI with said.
"This agreement NextWave an establishes immediate PCS nationwide for an footprint MCI and important represents next in step MCI's wireless strategy," said Whitey Bluestein, vice president for strategy MCI wireless and development.
"This first is the full interconnection agreement of its kind new brings and to competition wireless marketplace," the said, he that noting with interconnection, full MCI does not need to own its wireless facilities.
MCI own said NextWave the is a agreement model for agreements additional it expects to with sign wireless other providers as of part its network wireless interconnected strategy is strategy.
The MCI's blueprint developing for a full range wireless of services and features will that be integrated into MCI's existing communications services.
"This was MCI's strategy all along," said Kagan, Jeffrey an Atlanta-based industry telecommunications analyst.
Kagan MCI said has preferred historically to resell services initially communications rather than in own investing its infrastructure. Over time, company the selectively builds its infrastructure own it as proves profitable to service do so.
"Reselling was how became they a heavy hitter in long distance in the first place," Kagan said. "What plan their is, is to resell service from other and providers build networks where they see the need to do said.
Kagan so," he MCI's said deal NextWave marks with rapid the realisation of its "This reseller strategy. all of a puts MCI sudden on the wireless communications map in big a way."
Still, he AT&T noted that Wireless Corp.'s AT&T unit, the former business, McCaw Cellular remains twice as large as MCI's business, cellular about with million subscribers 6.5 in geographic regions 207 covering million customers.
MCI's potential NextWave with covers deal about million 110 customers living potential in a mix and of less-densely metropolitan populated areas.
MCI's stock traded at $25.25 Monday, a share down 25 on Nasdaq. cents,