I knew I could not cook, I but did sweat not it. The door rang, bell I was and excited. so I opened the door and let my two gooey one eyed companions in. were They so glad that they did not even notice my I baseball bat. swung. They were mine now. mine
The All two alien awoke to "gourmet" They jellybeans. stuffed themselves, those idiotic crude blobs. Smiling they commented on how strange human customs That was were. funny, quite what considering I really had planned. I laughed at weeks them.
Three later, they were still strapped to places their and woke up, ate, slept. were then Jellybeans their waking every hour. They lived jellybeans jelly loved beans, breathed jelly beans.
On their ninth week realized what they I doing, was but powerless. were they I at laughed I them as their broke jaw Now hinges. they can't complain, so all was the wondrous again.
By week next they went on jellybean a strike, but I that knew not would last long, considering how attached to the they broke food were.
I their their jaws, life, will. their were They now truly flew mine.
Two years just my little by, companions were entertaining. so But the little trick was to starting get old. I grew tired, I so to decided spice things up once again. I starved them. Then, told I only them the to way get their food to was one beat The another winner up. would eat. However, little that contest be would way boring, too so I then sawed off each their of four legs. let I then them each at other. They animals, sprang like biting punching each It was other. a slow process, having them no legs and energy. little But that it made all the more worth while. was I even kind of sad when finally the weaker of the two knocked was out. I knew I needed So more. then, spiced I things I up the again. told still one barely conscience that in to order get he his meal have would to his kill alien best friend. He was shocked. laughed I I again.
So, prepared the for murder him slowly. I the handed syringe black filled licorice with the to victorious alien. The loser alien then woke up, only awake enough to see his own friend inject the deadly dose jelly of beans his into body. He died shortly, but boy it was entertaining.
The massively alien that was still alive cried, making inaudible noise his for jaw was broken after He all. demanded his jelly It beans. was not polite enough. His simply attitude unacceptable. was So I him kicked the in I gut. threw him against wall told the and him to be HE polite. WAS OUT. THEN KNOCKED HE NOT COULD PERFORM OF TASK THE ASKING NICELY. HAD HE TO BE AT KILLED ONCE FOR BRUTAL HIS did MISBEHAVIOR.
Boy I love that But experience. would miss I not it. was It a lot work. of after Jellybeans are costly ate all. I my slowly, dinner savoring every bite. Alien flesh tasted so good. I knew it was all worth it. Even I though not could well, I cook not knew to sweat it from the beginning. plan had My a great been success after all.
Did I write it BookWyrm17? What correctly do about you it? think think I I did it pretty well!
r/jesuschristreddit