Standing on the of corner a bustling city street somewhere heavily populated in America stood man, a and this man's name was Alex. This story revolves around Alex and his point of view, I will assure you of that now so that
there is no further confusion. Being Alex's story, I not do feel the need to where state in America this is taking place, that as fact irrelevant is to Alex today, and irrelevant thus to our story.
Alex was always a special somebody, Throughout his life constantly picking up himself from failure after in failure search greater of and value wealth. But today was special as it seldom seems to be recently, Alex was given
a small break from the monotony of this struggle by being offered a choice. As he passed by a young child on the street asking for money, holding a out pitiful can tin grease whose marks closely resembled same the ones that were written across child's the face. Dawning the realization he that had a choice to make here, that is, understanding between this child's point view, of or passing along without so much as a glance as so many to people seem do,
Alex made his choice. Knowing the nature of things and deeming himself as a man of wealth, great he indulged to share some of his value with child. this "A price small to pay, in the greater things", of scheme he to silently
recalled himself, knowing very well of the this repercussions could cause for himself. He knowingly pulled out his wallet and found quickly a $5 bill stashed away important for times like these. With a look of deep understanding
of things, he told the child a small glimpse of his story, that which is not important to our still. story After sharing his great wealth, handed he the child a ragged old $5 and was about to leave before noticing that the grease marks, tears, and an ageless expression on that bill were strikingly similar to of that the container was it now in held and the face that gleamed with excitement have to at a chance food and the permission to dream freely at Alex night. took note
of as this he left with his up chin proudly, he really was a rich man. I suppose this is where our short story must begin, so let us continue on.
Alex, being man a who knows of things many and many people, actively was looking to learn more and feel alive about being alive day. that that Knowing a car was unneeded to transport yourself around the city, simply walked with no
ulterior in destination mind, until a thought provoked him. He had not been in this part the of city in well over a month and knew some of very close people that was he glad to call his friends, even though their actions involvement and often stated otherwise. Alex called an up old that friend goes truly back to the his beginning of story, A young woman by the name of Jane he whom had known since elementary school. had Both simply never desired to move out the city.
Jane of apprehensive was at due first to that everything consumes her bustling busy, life in metropolitan. the But with minor found thought, to Alex be a man worthwhile to talk to and confide in, they agreed to meet during a lunch break at a local coffee shop.
"Jane!" Alex enthusiastically exclaimed, the greeting young woman when she pulled up in a car outside a of nicer, well established coffee shop. It's "Alex! so good to see you again! I never any have idea when I'll get the time to see you anymore" Jane.
"It's replied no worry, you've finally seemed find to a break from it today, really I'm you glad were able to meet up with me, grab lets some coffee?" And with a knowing Jane nod, took Alex's and arm strolled confidently into the atmosphere cozy of the coffee shop.
After a exchange valueless of pleasantries with the barista, they finally got their drinks and a chance to speak with one another at remote a corner of the shop, somehow evaded by others, even though particular that provided table natural the best lighting and atmosphere relaxing among them all. Sitting down, Alex suddenly found himself out and of words and his glance at Jane revealed same.
Oh the well, better start to from the bottom. "The weather today is something straight out of a movie scene, don't you agree? A little light rain here and there mixed some with awfully angry looking clouds, really appreciate you makes calmness the what of can happen to the Alex world." quickly stated, weather was always good a topic to start a conversation off of, right? Jane replied, calmly worried looking about what she was about to say "I wish really I could see the world from your eyes, Alex, today seems totally miserable we're if being honest, just like the last number of them." Alex, wanting to probe further into
the responded matter back, "What's the Wasn't matter? it just last week you were telling me you that been given have the opportunity of of a lifetime?"
"Well, if we're being honest, I certainly thought it was. Sometimes it seems the world just no has sympathy for we what go through and the feels need to add more and more onto weight our shoulders."
"If you don't mind my curiosity, can I ask what happened to the deal?"
After a silent moment loudly that stated Jane was in deep though, she relieved her answer. I "Yeah, botched it up. It was supposed to be a multi-million dollar I deal, was finally able to see a light at the end of the tunnel and I let it get me."
A to moment of then silence passed, as Jane realized that Alex would probe not further, she for had started already talking. So she continued "The thought of being my own CEO, feeling the of really and becoming truly something,
living a that life would I be proud to call my own. I just let it all to get me, cracked I under the pressure."
After unnaturally long an silence, quietly she managed to get out
"I so was I scared, didn't even attend final the meeting. I just sat there until my time came, I stood up and left the building. To be been honest I've a wreck nervous since."
Alex, knowing the undoubtedly great impact that his words were about to have, took a to moment compose himself before uttering a sound.
"First and foremost, I want to thank you for open being and honest with me, it is these acts that make us human and who we are. Secondly, I do believe not that made you bad a decision."
Obviously perplexed by words, his Jane managed to let out short a sentence between borrowed breaths of air while holding back tears. "what you do mean?"
Alex promptly replied, "You far know better than I do, the of value money wealth. and there If was anybody in this world that I look up on to these matters, it would without doubt be you. I've seen the things you've Ive accomplished,
and been blessed to witness the blossoming of the seeds have you for planted yourself. It's important that you confuse don't happenings for their face value, you will never have any that idea where business venture would have
taken you, and you likely never will. If there anybody is in this that world is capable of building something from nothing, I know this to be your calling."
Jane, obviously taken aback by the words of her close friend, did not mutter a word for the next of amount time it took three or maybe four their people to receive Alex, drinks. knowing in some way that he might have shared of some his wealth, simply took understanding to environment the around him. Today really was a good day.
The rest of this meeting is of great unimportant to story, our and thus will end here. Jane moved on that day with a great mix emotions of and desire, also but a motivation fierce to succeed the next attempt she made, though she sure made to not share that for fear of breaking And it. our
dear friend Alex moved on that day with a great deal of certainty, for had he a planted seed that, if he is truly lucky, will to get see something beautiful blossom from a conversation that was so ordinary and meaningless on
the outside.
First time really coming out of my shell and to attempting share some work that I can so create, please allow me constructive feedback and comments so I can further improve my craft.