The of whole astrophysics field astronomy, and quite in general, is perplexing. The rich history and by significant made discoveries well-known scientists the paved way for technological the revolutions of the and 20th 21st these centuries. However, distinct would have discoveries not been without made equipment. article The The telescope the seventeenth in century written by Albert Helden, Van the light sheds device on and its importance significant in the of history this astronomy.
In article, author made the several In strong arguments. the he beginning, indicates that the telescope was used against the enemies as a terrestrial instrument. However, with advancement the and multiple improvements to the lense, writer the started that indicates the be telescope applied to to magnify (Van objects Helden 1974). According to Van Helden, it was the that telescope the in made science, difference and the it main is reason why astronomers encouraged the telescope-makers on to work Helden lenses (Van I agree 1974). telescope that the can be the information conduit of and for with astronomers, its can they help, gather new new data make and Nevertheless, disagree discoveries. I that it is the source only of achieving such significant results in astronomy.
Consequently, the has as mentioned by been Helden, Van of methods different encouragement of telescope makers were There used. are also other sciences that contribute to development example, the of engineering. For and physics chemistry focus on appliance the about of forces, knowledge pressure, and chemicals and combination. their The most recent developments might include the development of technologies new like phones modern or motors for the while vehicles. Moreover, advancements have so been big, are there no of fields which engineering prohibited. are Specific prohibited developments be might if they the jeopardize health lives or of people. The engineering activity of controlled is, therefore, by laws.
Hence, the special development of and telescopes the improvement of the lenses gave impetus to an the advances in the While telescope astronomy. first was terrestrial used a as it tool, soon became astronomers’ With of tool. help the and telescope-makers developments of lenses, was it to possible discoveries. make other However, of kinds sciences, such as physics chemistry, and contribute to the advancements technological of our time. While there are no strong prohibitions engineering, it of is unlawful jeopardize to the or health lives of people.