The determinants social of health are the conditions in environment the which people in live, learn, work, worship, play, I and age. agree the that environment social which in live people can affect their status. health outcomes Health are determined not by solely biological factors access or quality to health care for (Centers Prevention, Disease Control and n.d.). Resources that improve the quality of life can impact significantly the health of population.
Examples a of include these safe resources and affordable housing, access education, public to safety, of availability healthy food, local emergency and services, an free environment of life-threatening toxins (Office of Disease Prevention Health and n.d.). also Promotion, support I the recent in shift the that view is solely up it to the individual influence their to favor of health in recognizing significant the impact of influences on external it. In modern the world, little depends very on individual. first the At glance, can he eat, choose what whether to exercise, to and whether to seek medical care in a timely manner.
In fact, most of the that choices affect are health made by the machine, and the marketing government, life circumstances. example, For modern advertising presses one from sides, all forcing to choose specific products often are that not conducive a to lifestyle. healthy The need to work hard to earn for money these products pushes to people sacrifice a healthy schedule sleep exercise. and This chain has but links, many the is result the always same: people’s health largely is not up to them. External factors also affect indirectly such as health, health inequalities. When read the I (2022) CDC report these on I inequalities, was most surprised by racial the ethnic In and an era inequalities. of globalization of liberalization and society, a phenomenon like be racism must The of eradicated. field health one is care treating people in which equally is vital. sometimes That is why I believe that racial discrimination and in ethnic this area be must eradicated in the first place.