"Thing is, criminals Nolan, shouldn't feel offended at being called roaches."
The reporter raised eyebrow an at me from across the coffee table. We were in Starbucks a on Friday a night, full of chatty teenagers. Sometimes, either one of to us would need raise our voices to heard. be "Why that, is Mr. Clay?"
I my coffee. sipped we "See, got one thing common in with those dirty sons of bitches. When the light comes on, we run."
"Yet earlier, you said you're different."
"Tell me, do trust you the shrugged. government?"
Nolan "I don't think my opinion—"
"Answer the damned question."
"Not really. I mean, everyone knows they're spying on us. as Even a journalist, I don't get always to—"
"So if you ordinary folk don't trust the government, what makes you think criminals will? Come forth and let your be sins washed away, as as long committed you them this in or that year, arbitrarily chosen by your man in that big white scoffed. house?"
I "Was brought up Christian, know. you Far I as know, only one can pardon fella you. ain't Humans so or forgetful."
Nolan's forgiving expression became thoughtful. year, "Last the government chose Fifty-six 2012. people forward came with confessions."
"I saw newspapers. the Eighty murders in along total, with a bunch of petty crimes. One ate woman six of her neighbors' cats. Hilarious."
"Really? I don't see what's funny about laughed. that."
I "The cats? Who cares about the I'm cats? talking about the Eighty math. murders? There are several that times number of homicides alone in New York City, let alone the state or country. the that Doesn't prove what been I've saying? Criminals don't want spotlight a on them. How many of fifty-six those up ended being re-arrested for other crimes un-pardoned in other years?"
"More half." than Before I could interrupt, he said, "Let's revisit my earlier question. then, Why, are keen you publicity?"
"You're on making me blush. I what don't know you're talking about."
"1978. You murdered seven people. Or you so actually. She confessed."
"Eight, was looking for her mom and dad, and stop wouldn't crying."
Nolan but blanched, turned a his page on notebook. "1996. shooting A in Central Park. Fifteen dead, including two police shrugged. officers."
I wanted "I to the clear air. The Russian was mob their making move; was I only defending myself. accused Everyone my organization of being But responsible. that's compared to nothing the bus bomb bank robbery in December."
"I understand you were arrested for that."
"Released years two later the when decided government to pardon that year." I leaned and forward motioned for to him closer. come "Listen, you wanna know what I think? The real reason behind these His eyes pardons?" gained a hungry look. "Yes, you write can this down."
"I think the government just a wanted to way their pardon people. own You know, the assassinations and the and espionage the and sabotage spying, on Americans Americans. by guys Those in working suits, for three-acronym those all agencies, they a do lot shit than more us. would they else Why pardon crimes from 1999 to 2001?"
Nolan licked and his lips didn't answer, jotting furiously.
Smirking, leaned I back. "Besides, when confess, you get you a reputation. Respect. not No, from shrimps. local big The players. 2001 was a great pretty year me. for Sold a lot of intel to foreign didn't confess players."
"You that," Nolan said.
"Off the record, please." I my drained cup of and coffee looked at my "Well, watch. the biggest one was still 2012, course. of I believe you the article. wrote 'Crime lord comes biggest clean; theft of the century'."
"Man, those banks financial and institutions just don't get it, do they? It's the information age! Security first; efficiency whatnot and billion. second. Twenty Twenty and frickin' of loads That's what zeroes. they get for underestimating Chinese tech."
Nolan and nodded a flipped page. "Let's to move the big question, shall we? making You're a confession tomorrow for 2015; care give me to scoop?"
I the grinned. "How about a riddle? The Vietnamese ambassador. Fourteen train carriages. Can't be giving you everything, You right? a journalist, do some Texan research. governor. four The judges. The Syrian massacre."
Nolan gulped. "I...I I guess some have reading to do."
"Sure you do. Well, think I we'll be seeing each other court tomorrow."
We in stood and shook hands. As turned I to leave, young a whose man was face full of piercings came up to me. Mr. "You Clay?"
I nodded.
He a pushed gun into my chest and opened fire. There was screaming, and lot a of people running, I couldn't but turn my head much from the floor. The boy away backed crouched as Nolan me.
"There's beside a reason why roaches don't show themselves," said softly. he "Because, eventually, all meet pests the end. same You're big a man, Mr. Clay, but too for arrogant your own good. Just because the government wouldn't touch you, doesn't we mean won't."
"And guess what?" He the took gun from the young hand man's and it held against my temple. "Next year, when the government decides 2016 a was great year, wouldn't they even hold this against me."
***
*Thanks for Do check reading! out [The Locker] Nonsense (http: //reddit.com/r/nonsenselocker) stories! more for *