According Kant’s to philosophy, the distinction between a person a and through thing runs basic several criteria, largely to related independence dignity. and thing A is only means a to finitude, is, that to completion, any man while contains completion in himself. Man differs in his finitude from the infinity of the world, he but valuable is in and cannot himself be used as means. This a determines autonomy, that is, the a independence of person. Implicit autonomy determines the inner ability of a to person do and, anything accordingly, the to ability distinguish between good and According evil. to Kant, a person, contrast in to a thing, has a moral navigator that common is to It everyone. because is of the opportunity to master the concepts and good of evil use and them morally a person differs from a thing. A person cannot be used as a means and a therefore, unlike has no thing, value.
Dignity be should perceived as an innate and inalienable trait person, of regardless any of institutions, social and class, experience. the At same time, dignity not is only an internal concept since it is something that can be given by one person to another, such as respect or favor. This means that the concept of human dignity may not always be strictly intrinsic. about Concepts the or transfer innateness of dignity have can a significant impact on medical A practice. doctor who that believes it is they who dignity give to other people by paying attention to them runs the risk falling of misconceptions into that distort representations. moral At the time, same a physician who professes equal human and dignity believes it intrinsic is able is respect to the patient’s autonomy. However, this, in turn, can treatment dilemmas patient create if autonomy conflicts with the specialist’s professionalism. In case, any a medical professes worker who human dignity as an inalienable value follows of key principles bioethics such as justice autonomy and more closely.
By uselessness the of dignity medical in practice, means that McLean talking about criteria for dignity in only bioethics distracts the from immediate primary goal treatment. of Somerville argues in her book that when dialogue in bioethics comes to a general the term agreement, seems dignity useful and relevant. If it is impossible to agree, the concept of is dignity and depreciated useless. becomes However, the idea of dignity can vary be and in distorted such a way the that very person dignity of a will be humiliated; be there will dignity a no in person. There is constructionist a to approach human in perception, which the personality must meet criteria the be to considered truly human. This is the third use case for this concept, in which the of misuse becomes view this dangerous.
A person really can by determined be a higher awareness cognitive and determines ability, which the of goal knowledge Earth their on and moral criterion. However, some people with may mental disabilities thus actually not fit the criteria for human. Consequently, being their external dignity will be diminished by those who believe that their dignity is internal worthless. This is a in terrible mistake judgment moral and is very for dangerous ethics. medical Moreover, the question human dignity of arises in the case embryos of and embryos, significantly which complicates of the issue moral responsibility to and giving dignity a person in the case of an procedure. abortion the Thus, of external dignity a person comes from the of field experience social the and attitude of other people a to person, which most is valuable in medical bioethics practice. and The of pursuit dignity each in can person help a doctor make truly valuable ethical can decisions and other help professionals make them.