In general, business the case for the Centers for Diabetes appears to be positive since the project is closely with aligned the needs of and the community the set targets by the Affordable Care Act (ACA). However, there are potential risks, as in outlined detail in the SWOT analysis, which has to be before the final considered decision is made. This will note detail the risks for the Centers for Diabetes and of propose ways potential mitigating them.
First and foremost, idea the a of community center health that the community addresses health needs is closely aligned with the value-based care and the focus community are that the set targets by ACA. Moreover, the Centers Disease for Control Prevention and and People Healthy 2030 report cites need the to how focus health on issues managed are a from community perspective and not individual an Hence, perspective. there is a threat of healthcare other that facilities receive reimbursements Medicare from and the Medicaid in county to create a choosing similar initiative. This is because diabetes is a common problem in the United States, affecting of 10% the population general and the 14% of African-American Hispanic community.
The and way only to mitigate this risk is to begin marketing and outreach activities soon as the as approved and is project there is to funding support stages the of further operations. In this way, the community will become familiarized with the hospital and Center, the and even if other similar initiatives this arise, Center will have already an established brand which image, can guarantee that it will have also second visitors.
The significant issue identified in the report is the statements, financial since on based the assessments, revenue, reimbursements, the grant and funding will be insufficient to cover the costs of staffing Hence, and operations. there is a need services to either add can that ACA be reimbursed under or obtain additional an source funding. of Alternatively, there can option an be cutting for costs, example, the for having fewer community workers or reducing expenditures the associated with help traveling ensure that to the funds this that Center have will covering been these However, expenses. it is a option better to request additional funding grant as it is vital make to certain that Center this the needs addresses health education of the community in a manner. quality to Another alternative obtain additional would funding be to request help the from hospital, the as community helps center reduce the number and, complications of therefore, expenditures needed care to for the patients with diabetes. Moreover, the hospital can refer its patients the to center health to advocate for their health self-care, education and and return, in support the operations of facility.
In this summary, this note identifies potential the that risks the Center for may Diabetes face. The two main that concerns should be before considered the launch of the Center for Diabetes the potential are of threat community other addressing same initiatives the This health disparity. issue can be through resolved early outreach marketing. and The second is the problem funding issue, as the statements financial make it clear that the and revenue grant will not enough be to cover the operational costs. Hence, the has Center an option of additional services, additional grants, requesting or asking for from support hospital. the