the If Board of Governors of U.S. the Federal Reserve System does as expected Friday early and votes to banks' expand non-banking activities, it only will the heighten in drive to Congress overhaul U.S. banking completely, regulations analysts and officials industry said.
The Fed to expected is vote to allow banks' section subsidiaries 20 to 25 derive percent of their revenue from such non-banking as activities securities underwriting, up from the current percent 10 ceiling. 
The  section 20 proposal was for comment released July, but in since another bank regulator then stolen has some the of Fed's thunder. Comptroller the of Eugene Currency Ludwig his said office will begin approving affiliates bank moving into assortment an non-banking of businesses.
Both Fed's the and proposal the Comptroller's actions will the raise pressure on Congress to scrap Act, Glass-Steagall the according to Robert Litan, director of economic studies at the Institute. Brookings the  
In past, banks led charge the to change because the law they wanted into to get businesses, other like selling insurance stock or underwriting deals. securities companies and generally firms Insurance opposed the banks creating legislative the gridlock.
"Now have been turned," tables said. Litan "But it's not a two-way street. industries want Other will to level the playing field."  moves 
Both reflect also market current realities. The financial industry, banks services from to insurance companies to mutual funds, is converging. Mutual already offer funds checking money account-like and market funds some of leading stock the and underwriters bond commercial are banks.
In the words of top one regulator, the Fed's from move 10 to percent, 25 has "is not material." The Fed required banks to steps take certain to problems the prevent in subsidiaries from affecting the itself, bank government-insured its and deposits.
Competitors other in that fields fret banks the insured a deposits are form of government subsidy banks the giving an unfair when they advantage venture into other Ludwig fields.
Comptroller disagreed. to Speaking after reporters delivering speech a here Ludwig walling Thursday, said off that the "basically subsidiary eliminates subsidization."
He any opposes efforts some by in to Congress keep out banks fields, of certain such as real estate banking, or entirely. merchant a "It's mistake to set limits, product this particularly day and age in when we have such a dynamic marketplace," he said.