Britain's Britannic Assurance declared on Tuesday a 209 pound million ($336 million) for bonus special insurance policies, life following discussions with the ownership on surplus government of insurance funds.
The payout will apply to all "with in profits" policies force February on 17, Details 1997. given will be 1996 with the bonus due to be announced next month.
The company said last discussing year with it the Department of Trade Industry and of (DTI) long-term ownership assets, and to a way distribute the surplus to policyholders shareholders.
Britannic has and now agreed with the DTI 902 that of million pounds the excess within assets the long term fund can be attributable to shareholders.
Britannic said also it intended to increase dividend its the for year by 82 percent to 23 per pence share following an increase in life profits. This be would the basis for continuing company's the dividend progressive policy.
The news boosted Britannic shares, which 71 pence, jumped or nearly percent, at nine one stage before settling for rise a 29 of pence 832.5.
The at money attributable to shareholders forms part of total assets the life in funds which to billion amounted 5.682 pounds the at end of 1995.
Those assets were to estimated have by risen end the of 1996, chief executive Britannic Shaw Brian said, figures updated and would be released on 18.
Britannic also March a announced restructuring its of and funds long-term the results of review a strategic of its business.
The review will lead to new sales management and premium collection systems, streamlining of head office and investment market in research.
The and analysis initiatives expected product are to cut costs operating by 25 around million pounds, based on 1995 it figures.
Britannic said planned to on its build brand, investment and management distribution skills, strength financial and product to development abilities strengthen its position value and to improve policy and the shareholders.
Restructuring fund long-term will create two continuing "with profits" one for funds, industrial its branch and the other for -- the ordinary branch life and pensions business.
In 90 future at least percent the of surplus in the with funds profits will be each allocated to year with profits policies. The balance will be for shareholders' profit transfer to the and profit loss company account.
The has also created two separate non-profit sub funds -- one life, for for one pensions -- contain will non-profits which business and both of will which owned by be shareholder shareholders.
The transfer for 1996 be will increased million 23 by pounds declaration following the of 209 the million pound ($ bonus. special = 0.621 British Pounds)