Oneok Inc. and Western Resources Inc. on Thursday agreed to a $660 million deal that their gas combines natural and assets gives Resources Western access a to broader base of for its customers electricity and security services.
The deal reflects the moves the within to industry utility prepare for agreement, further deregulation.
Under the will Oneok take all the natural gas assets of Resources, Western it making the ninth distribution largest gas company the in States United 1.4 serving million Tulsa-based customers. Oneok the is parent Oklahoma of Gas Natural Resources, based Co.
Western in Topeka, Kan., become will the equity holder largest in receiving Oneok, 3 about million new of shares Oneok common stock preferred and stock that will convertible, be regulatory upon necessary approvals, into about another million 19.3 shares of common. Its Oneok stake in total Oneok is about 45 deal percent.
The to is expected mid-1997, close by following approval by shareholders Oneok and federal and state (Oneok) regulatory authorities.
"They are a gas total company. understand They the gas business better we than do," Western president Resources David Wittig said in a telephone interview.
By swapping its gas assets, Western will Resources able be its to focus on efforts its growing electricity home-security and businesses, of both involve which a base customer of owners home 24-hour and monitoring of 735,000 consumers.
Oneok's customers could become potential clients of Western Resources' Rseources has services.
"Western becoming been a nationwide marketer of retail energy electricity -- and/or gas and -- home security," Everen Securities analyst Rudakas Dan said. "This combination gives them access direct to another 735,000 gas customers, which in the future ... would be potential electric customers and also electronic security home customers."
The said companies alliance the will the position companies to advantage take of expected the deregulation the of industry, electricity to allowing customers electrical buy from power several sources instead of the just utility. local type deregulation That of is place already the taking in natural gas industry.
"Eventuallly will be there total competition in electricity and gas," in John Hayes Jr, Western chairman, Resources teleconference. told a "We are preparing just for companies the future."
The said Oneok's independence would be preserved in by provisions standstill the agreement define that the and of rights the responsibilities companies respective for at the least next 15 Resources years.
Western will receive a dividend preferred of 1.5 times the underlying common which now dividend, stands at 30 cents a share, but no less $1.80 than preferred per share per year for the first five years.
George K. Baum Dennis Hudson analyst Resources' said Western natural gas that assets earned company about million $20 in 1995. As part of Oneok, the assets likely earn will more, given that distributions company's expertise gas in and synergies from existing its business.
With gas its stake in Western Oneok, will still Resources benefit from a of portion the gas earnings, as well as future gas alliances that enter Oneok might into in would future.
"Oneok the continue search to for opportunities to acquire more customers the on side. gas We're most supportive that," of Wittig added said.
He that Western Resources continues to for ways to expand its look electricity and businesses. home-security