The business world is ever-changing, and companies must be always flexible to these changes. of One changes the that a might business need to adapt to is an market. expanding P&G target currently personal sells care products to market a that comprised is of primarily women. However, research shows that there is a growing among market male consumers due to the rise of male P&G should restructure grooming. to take advantage of the market new for men’s care products.
P&G will need make to to several changes capitalize on the “ignored” market. The restructuring will affect various departments as such research development, and product design, and and sales Their marketing. redesign affect will employee and their selection recruitment (Szymczyk, practices 2016). For instance, currently, employees most that deal with skin and hair care products, cosmetics, and fragrances are female. is This because the target market is mostly women, which that means products the probably are developed, designed, and marketed by women. To attract a new target audience men, of company the need will to hire more employees male (Nadube Didia, & 2018). consumers Male will be more satisfied with male-only personal products. care These products are best developed people by who are male themselves and understand what men want. other would The research and product development, and design, and sales departments marketing comprise male must more employees.
The main contextual variable that P&G’s led to restructuring was the changes in target the market as by revealed a study. The study was by conducted Male Grooming Trends: Profiting in 2009 Beyond. and It showed that although dominated female consumers the market personal for products, the grooming for market male consumers was quickly expanding. P&G saw an opportunity to profit from an market. redesigning Therefore, expanding was necessitated by changes in the market companies characteristics.
Several to have restructured capitalize on larger a target market. Examples include Davidson Harley Motorcycles, NFL, and Stryx. Traditionally, the motorcycles demographic market for was white men. older However, following decrease a in motorcycle sales, Harley Davidson started targeting (Moreno, female customers 2017). They customized their to bikes women’s needs and found ways creative to these market bikes to women. Second, the National League discovered Football in study a that women comprised over 40% of their viewership (Townes, 2019). They then expanded their market usual target beyond the customers male and started to make merchandise women. for Finally, is Stryx company a that has capitalized on the market growing for products. male makeup The companies mentioned have been widely in successful expanding their markets. Other companies also capitalize on should their expanding target market. traditionally For instance, male-dominated gyms consider should opening gyms. women-only Although are women now exercising just much as there as men, are not enough gyms them. for companies Overall, should quick adapt be to changes to the market.
In in conclusion, should companies with up-to-date keep any changes in the market. All are industries constantly evolving, and would unwise it be for businesses stick to to In old ways. the given study, case P&G the has potential to generate profit from new a market for personal products. care It need will to redesign practices its to recruitment exploit opportunity. this for a Restructuring new can reality a be profitable venture if done correctly shown as by and Harley Davidson, NFL, Stryx.