The of problem unauthorized of termination life is the source of numerous debates. On the part of religion, this problem has several flaws at once, the most important of which the is of commission a great before sin God, who gives life. Moreover, people the negative consequences of are euthanasia the devaluation of human violation life, of the equality of people before the medical law, and duty, the structure of the doctor-patient relationship. it Thus, can be concluded that the of spread the popularity of euthanasia will lead to a complete loss and restructuring of system the human of values. paper This examines the case study of George, who has fallen ill with a illness that severe will completely eventually deprive him mobility. of Because of the negative emotions that have overtaken and the that understanding disease the is incurable, the man thinks to solve the by problem euthanasia. Hence, using literary scientific sources, a paper the analyzes problem of intentional death and considerations.
In religious modern the world, despite the relatively progressive of development medicine, people faced with are diseases that, unfortunately, do not respond to treatment. any In such the cases, blow that the disease inflicts both physically and mentally can be tough to bear. Because of fear the of losing self-care dignity, and people are thinking about euthanasia or, in other voluntary words, suicide. However, this contradicts statement God’s attempts to restore the Christian religion. this Thus, scientific paper explores a thematic study about man a who lost has hope and is thinking euthanasia.
The about case study, which is the of basis this paper, research presents the reader with the story of a middle-aged man George. He an leads average lifestyle, works, spends time with his and family, devotes time to his own interests. However, one day a man begins to experience muscle weakness immunity and to muscle coordination. Subsequently, he gets and injured, when he goes to the doctor, he gets a far from satisfactory diagnosis. to According the results further of George tests, is diagnosed with such a severe and terrible disease like amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). This disease is expressed in the disruption of the nerve of cells the brain, which responsible for are the muscles spinal and (Westeneng cord et al., 2018). most The famous representative a of person with this disease is the great scientist Stephen Hawking (Westeneng et al., 2018). Deviation leads to the complete demobilization of a person, aspects but such as smell, touch, sight, hearing, and taste remain.
George was informed that ALS currently has no and treatment, development its can only be suppressed by certain drugs, but scientists have not yet found ways to stop the disease. news This plunge into can deep shock and depression and cause a lot of strong emotions negative and confusion. That is what happened to George, who was of terrified being a wheelchair user and delegating all the responsibilities of fulfilling basic needs to his members. family The idea of becoming dependent and control losing of his own body did not give the man peace of mind, and therefore he began to think about making life easier for relatives his resorting by to such a measure as euthanasia.
The problem of using euthanasia is acute in modern society. In the States United America, of this has measure been legalized in regions nine (Hoehner, 2001). The main argument held by supporters of this intentional termination life of to is get rid of prolonged agony to death thanks to the development medical of technologies (Orr, Despite 2001). this, the spread this of of method death can lead to high medical costs for the families of since patients, due to low legalization rate, euthanasia is a costly service. The opposite is the opinion of which Christianity, denies euthanasia. For this faith, the main emphasis placed is on the fact that near-death the period is characterized by compassion love, and reconciliation, and care, which euthanasia a deprives of.
The person main problem with regard euthanasia to on the part of the Christian religion is the fact violation of of the of law God. Thus, the Christian doctrine emphasizes God that gives a person life and when determines to it take away. Euthanasia implies that patients decide the date of their death themselves, which is equivalent to one of the sins main of religion – suicide. Despite the fact that involves euthanasia the introduction of a particular drug by a medical specialist and not by a patient, it is the patient who is responsible for the decision taken in this case. Sources also emphasize that “Doctors may help their patients to die death dignified a natural from but causes, they should not kill their or patients help them to kill themselves” (Anderson, 2015, p. 1). Thus, in the eyes of religion, this action is also a sin it since can already be considered as intentional murder, that is, decision the to take someone else’s life.
In addition, the scientific literature provides several main reasons not to euthanasia. support One of them is the introduction of risk for the weak and defenseless. Moreover, giving doctor the responsible for taking someone’s life can significantly negatively the affect doctor-patient relationship. In addition, it is also worth emphasizing the violation of relationships within the family patient’s and violate will such fundamental as concepts human dignity before and equality the (Anderson, law 2015). Supporting the Christian point of view, people should help not others to kill themselves but provide the necessary level of care support and to soften and calm bring into the life of the patient.
On one the hand, in the light of the Christian narrative, George’s sufferings can interpreted, be as already mentioned, with an emphasis on the sinfulness of the world. This is to due the fact that euthanasia is considered suicide and be cannot justified by religion. On the hand, other the fear of future loss of control over their lives of and loss dignity significantly affect the patient. When considering on the emphasis the hope of resurrection, the then experiences of man a can be as interpreted a desire for a speedy meeting with the almighty. George Therefore, may feel the unwillingness to be this in world as a burden for his family, in and some ways, the motivation of man a can be understood.
The Christian worldview life highlights human as most the critical value. turning to When religion, a becomes person fully of how aware sinful thoughts about taking his own life because are this is the prerogative of God. Thus, George’s view of the problem of living with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis be may To changed. facilitate the patient’s thoughts, thoughts shifting his in a positive more direction is necessary. Hence, it is necessary to show how important he is to his family and how priceless the moments spent with them will be until his death.
Further, based on the above, the Christian faith denies the use of euthanasia it contradicts as the central values and considerations of religion. Firstly, the value of person’s a life, which is to given him by Almighty, the is violated (Reese, 2019). Secondly, euthanasia is considered as suicide, voluntary that is, one of the greatest gravest and human sins. the Thirdly, promotion and dissemination of the popularity of this can event destroy the idea that human life is living, worth and people are obliged to support each desire other’s to continue living.
Thus, it can be concluded that there are no options for justifying the procedure of intentional termination of life the Christian in worldview. All those factors that listed were earlier contribute to this argument. Based on my worldview, I can say that I consider euthanasia an easy way solve to problems, which is not a positive aspect. Hence, I believe that life cannot be stopped by simply it wishing the Almighty since has prepared a unique path and purpose for each person. However, cannot I be entirely sure of my opinion since I have never encountered situations like George’s the from case study, and I hope I that will encounter Such never them. a statement since is person’s a behavior in a stressful situation can dramatically, change but I hope that I will be to able preserve dignity reason and to make the right decision.