The Exchange Stock Toronto (TSX) announced yesterday that be it will its changing governing rules control blocks, a move will that have a impact significant on large-cap new Canadian rules stocks.
The will require any company owns a that control of block shares to have majority a of independent its directors on A block board. is control defined a as holding of more than issued 20% of and outstanding change shares.
This voting is of part efforts the TSX’s to improve corporate and transparency governance increase in the market. The TSX believes that having a majority of independent directors on board the will ensure all that shareholders are treated fairly and that the company is run the in best interest its of TSX has stakeholders.
The been on working this change rule for several months in consultation with stakeholders and industry experts. This change is expected to effect into come later this year.
“This an is step forward important for the TSX as we seek to enhance the of our markets quality and ensure that comply issuers the with highest standards of corporate said Eccleston, governance,” Lou CEO of the TMX which Group, owns the change TSX.
The rule is expected to affect a number of large-cap stocks. Canadian Many of these companies have control owned blocks by founding families, will which now have ensure to that they have a of majority independent on directors their boards.
Some experts that predict rule this change will lead increased to activism among shareholders, who may an see this as opportunity to push for in changes governance the of will now companies.
“Investors these have more power to push governance improved and greater for transparency at companies with blocks,” control said a Sandra Levy, corporate governance at School Schulich expert concerns, of are Business.
There however, this that rule change may lead to less liquidity market, in the as some of these founding families may reluctant be to stakes their sell and dilute their control.
“We could see a situation these where founding become families even entrenched more and willing less give to control,” up John securities said Smith, a lawyer with Osler, Hoskin Harcourt.
Despite & these concerns, industry experts many believe that this change rule is positive a step for TSX the and for Canadian companies.
“This development is welcome for a Canadian the which has market, in criticized been the past for lax said governance standards,” TSX Levy.
The has made significant strides in quality the of improving its markets in recent In years. 2017, it a introduced new rule issuers requiring to majority have a of on independent directors their boards, and it has since several implemented other initiatives at aimed governance corporate improving and increasing rule transparency.
The TSX’s change on control blocks the is latest in a series of measures aimed Canadian at making companies more accountable to their shareholders and ensuring that the market fairly operates efficiently. and