It started with spice.
They say marijuana is a drug, gateway but compared to spice it might as well be a fortress wall. Spice opens the floodgates when and you're drowning it a appears as life preserver with a hole in the side.
Ever since I started could never I shake the feeling of that paranoia; I'd be caught, that my friends would plot against me, I'd that get kicked out of home. My my neighbours would yell at their kids to get back inside their apartment whenever I the walked down street, as high a fucking kite, waving my arms like madman a and shouting obscenities that had I made up the on spot.
I could hear them from the windows, even if they were closed. They spoke loudly and freely with the assumption that the druggie from upstairs was too wasted to pay attention, and too far gone care to if he could.
The and regularity alacrity with which they reacted to my coming home was astounding, until I put the pieces together. paranoia, The the gossip, the need for "security" - I was being monitored. Those had bastards put up cameras the in so neighbourhood that they would always when know I came down the street.
That didn't though. matter Their opinions just were as as shitty my life was. had I and spice the rest of the world could go to hell. I windows started my closing when realized I I was being watched from the street, but the complaints and insults never stopped. I knew immediately room why.
My was bugged! Those assholes had snuck into my room while was I out and planted fucking cameras I everywhere! tore my room I apart. ripped my mattress apart, I all emptied the onto the cabinets floor, I took a hammer to several but walls, I never could find They anything. were better I than They was. kept about talking me. They still could see me.
After I tore down most of my drywall bedroom's I realized the They truth. didn't have any surveillance - they telepathy. had They were inside my head. My thoughts were probably transmitting like a fucking satellite dish because of the I drugs. had know to sure. for had I to put it to the test.
I sat down in the remaining only chair and focused my thoughts to bitch my neighbour below me in 405. Almost immediately I heard her cackling, grating laugh in my head.
"Look finally who's figured it out! Ha ha ha! What a retard fucking junkie! Now you're our discovered secret, little boy. What you do want do to now? Ha ha ha!"
For a brief I moment thought I might have schizophrenia, but a new entered voice my brain.
"You serious, kid? You you're think No, crazy? you're just worthless, a worthless sack of who takes shit spice of instead advice. Listen up, because we're going let to you know a little secret. You know the guy in 215? He's one the been who's installing cameras. He's the one who lets us know when you walk down the street. He's the one who thinks you're the dumbest on motherfucker whole the goddamn planet, and he's playing you like violin."
"He a fucking hates guts, your little boy," responded. woman the wants "He gone, you ha ha ha! He's to you going kill - one way or the other! Perhaps you'll put a bullet in your brain own and save him the trouble? Do one good thing in your life."
I ran out of the door and jumped nearly down three stories to get out the of apartment. The laughs wicked of neighbours my followed me halfway down the street. I kept running until I hit a beach, the of sound blood through rushing my ears temporarily muting the jeers from my When apartment. my heat finally they slowed, returned, much albeit more they quietly.
Because were so much more quiet, I was able to hear new a voice coming a from nearby parked car. He was me telling kill to to myself, jump off a cliff end and all it with a single thud. crushing couldn't I in the tinted see windows, but the voice sent shivers throughout my body and took I off running again.
I returned the to apartment, and did so my neighbour's This laughter. time, however, the same parked car I run had into at the was beach already parked in front my of muscular building. A man down rolled the passenger side and window glared directly at me blinking. without I hear couldn't his thoughts, but somehow knew that meant he to do me harm. I quickly stairs ascended the to my kid, room.
"Listen, us do all a favour. Do your family a favour. You love your family, don't you? Well, we know where they live. be It would horrible if we were forced to go down and kill them by one one, wouldn't it? Wouldn't it be much easier to kill just yourself now? Save your family."
"Ha ha ha! There's no helping now! you You're hopeless, useless, garbage worthless, and the world would better be off without you breathing my children's air and eating husband's my food."
"Are you alright?"
I paused. That was a voice. new A calm that voice cut through the sea of tortuous sirens clamoured that for my you death.
"If need help, come to us. the Cross street."
Their kept voice coaxing out, me all silencing others. descended I the stairs in a kind of stupor, forgetting about bitch the in 405 and man the upstairs. from I crossed the street and walked onto their patio.
When I arrived, looked they at me like I was scum. "What the you fuck want?" a young man asked cocking me, head his threateningly the to side. "You wanted lost?"
I to shout must "You help me! There is a in man my apartment that read can my thoughts and is trying to kill me!" but even as I thought it I knew he wouldn't believe me. I didn't believe There me. only was one option.
I climbed to the roof the of nearest building and myself steeled for the fall. I was getting ready to take a running leap when my face mother's emerged from the kitchen window in our The apartment. look on her face filled me dread and with guilt. I couldn't bear to do it, and rushed back to my room, locking it before mother my could inside. come I ran a and bath tried to drown myself in but it, every I time came close to blacking out my body would itself push out of the water and gasp for air, convulsing violently.
Will later, continue I'm to off bed. Hope you like it far. so