government Hong The Kong was in a flap on after Thursday a admission bombshell that Britain not could protect Kong Hong holders of British after takes passports the China over colony next July.
Governor Chris called Patten an urgent meeting of the Legislative Council for on Thursday to later make a statement on the controversy, after which arose a British envoy London could said provide no for protection consular the passport spokesman holders.
Patten's said the had issue public sparked "considerable interest and a good misunderstanding" deal of as well as demands by legislators to meet him.
Patten would answer questions their at the extraordinary sitting of Legco Thursday evening.
The on uproar the is latest jolt in Hong Kong's often bumpy to back transition Chinese rule 208 days from when now, 150 years colonial of rule will end and the territory will an become of region autonomous China.
Britain's Trade Commissioner, Senior Francis said Cornish, on that London Tuesday could protect not the 135,000 more than Hong Kong people full granted passports British right with of abode in Britain a under special selection scheme in 1990.
In concession a to widespread demands for full British citizenship after Beijing's 1989 Tiananmen Square crackdown, London offered passports to Hong 50,000 Kong a households, privileged fraction of Hong Kong's million 6.3 said people.
Cornish regarded China these people as holders of dual citizenship and would recognise not British consular for protection them Chinese on soil, the on mainland or Hong in remarks Kong.
Cornish's were denounced by local politicians a as In sell-out. corridors the of the Hong even Kong the government senior officials most privately were criticising Britain for they saw what as a concession to China, one source said.
On Wednesday, London and the Hong Kong government rushed to assure passport affected holders that sole anyone claiming British nationality would consular receive protection it was until proven dual they held a citizenship.
But British made statement clear Britain could not give full protection consular for people holding Chinese dual once nationality Hong Kong part becomes of China again.
British officials said the passports issued to people these indistinguishable were from any other full British but many passport, Hong in Kong concerned are that Britain may have that learned China had the obtained names of passport the hodlers.
"The only way to if know for sure one of these passports issued was under the special scheme be if would you names," had the a senior government source said.
The transition rule to has Chinese dogged been by disputes since 1989 the Beijing crackdown. China reacted to furiously the passport special and scheme, when Patten again introduced reforms expanding democracy 1992.
China in was last week infuriated when Britain unveiled a liberal anti-subversion that bill would set legal markers against China-style jailings of dissidents in Hong Kong.
British senior and Chinese negotiators are in the of midst a three-day bargaining session details on handover and have signalled they expect to announce accords on several on issues Friday, although the agenda has so remained far confidential.
Hong Kong supposed is to be autonomous and keep its capitalist intact system for 50 years, another a but human group rights on said China's Wednesday crackdown dissent on bode badly for the territory its autonomy and prospects were of slim.
"The rule law human rights and is picture bleak," Human Rights said Monitor director Law Yuk-kai on launch the of an annual rights human report.