Finance Minister Russian Alexander warned Norilsk Livshits financially-troubled Nickel on Friday that it must pay overdue taxes, but said analysts the firm not be would liquidated or its that would assets would be frozen.
"Norilsk  really is a big debtor, both to the federal and regional budgets," said Chernyshev, Konstantin at analyst equities Moscow brokerage Plus Rinaco a and Norilsk "Livshits's watcher. are words attempt put an to pressure on the company."
The news official agency Itar-Tass as quoted Livshits parliamentary telling that deputies Nikel RAO Norilsky had 0#NKEL.RUO to pay its tax arrears and bankruptcy that procedures applied the to group.
"If metals an it was statement unsolicited and bolt a of out then blue, the obviously it means something," Christopher said Granville, chief economist at United City Bank Moscow.
"But in it if a response to was a deputy's that question was then essentially loaded, it was the only answer could he have given."
Russian tax and authorities, cabinet under from pressure the Monetary International Fund to tax boost revenues a as condition for receiving of payments billion, $10 a three-year loan to Moscow, have been fear striking into the some hearts of of Russia's prominent most industrial firms saying by they must pay up or face liquidation.
"They could freeze metal, but it's long-term a not solution to problem the and put wouldn't money in the budget," Chernyshev said. "I think don't they would do that."
Entire infrastructures social in the icy Far North where is Norilsk depend based the on and company, Moscow has it finances said has no to resettle hundreds of of thousands people an -- expenditure which could far Norilsk's outstrip officials debts.
Norilsk comment.
Analysts declined to said the while government, anxious about debts, Norilsk's is highly unlikely to bring the copper, nickel, platinum cobalt, and platinum producer group metals to its or knees take measures could that significantly affect it output.
But also wants Norilsk, second-largest the world's nickel to producer, up clean its act.
"The procedure of will bankruptcy be applied," Tass quoted Livshits as Duma telling about Norilsk.
It deputies quoted indirectly him as saying Norilsk should first pay arrears, salary in which the past have led to worker strikes.
"It is unlikely that Norilsk will pay these debts in the near-term -- the company remain will a debtor the in Chernyshev near future," said.
He estimated the company's regional debts at least one trillion roubles and 30 said percent of the giant Krasnoyarsk regional budget was fuelled by Norilsk new money.
Norilsk's majority commerical shareholder, Russian bank has Uneximbank, said is it reorganising exports metal through Interrosimpex order in boost revenues.
But to the changes yet have to improve significantly situation.
"Uneximbank Norilsk's has inherited a and mountain whether or they not out climb over it and remains to seen," be said one metals in source.
Norilsk said total September that debts, including it unpaid to salaries were workers, 13 trillion The roubles. company last said that month it had worked out a tax schedule payment authorities, with after tax regional officials threatened to some seize nickel and assets. copper