Barry Diller has recently announced that his King company, Communications, Silver will soon launch new a national broadcasting network. The announcement came hot on heels the Silver of King's acquisition of the Home Shopping a Network (HSN), move that Diller says will provide funding the to support necessary company's ambitious the is plans.
Silver King no stranger – to broadcasting the company has already successful network a of local across television stations the Diller However, U.S. that the believes ripe is time for national a broadcasting new that outlet will be geared toward a younger, tech-savvy audience. more The new network will a feature mix of programming and content original other media from companies, as events as well and interactive elements live will that designed engage be to viewers in new and acquisition exciting of ways.
The which HSN, is expected in to the close coming weeks, will give Silver the King financial clout necessary to its new make reality. network which HSN, a is a popular home shopping channel, revenue generates of over $2.5 year. per billion Diller believes that the can existing company leverage HSN's base customer help promote to its new he network, which will hopes be available to viewers a across platforms, of variety traditional including television, streaming and services, media.
"We social see huge a opportunity in creating a new of type broadcasting truly network that designed is the for century," 21st said Diller a in "The statement. acquisition of gives us HSN we the need resources to make this reality, a vision and excited we're to get to work building viewers truly something special for country."
While across of the specifics the new the network have to yet revealed, has be that hinted Diller it will on focus lifestyle and entertainment with content, an on emphasis technology and It innovation. remains to be seen whether Silver King's broadcasting new venture will successful, be but acquisition with the the of HSN, company is certainly poised make to a big splash the in world of media and entertainment in the to come. years