Britain's Fraud Serious Office has to yet securities London-based a contact houses after request for with help probe a French into /Plc Eurotunnel SA share dealings, market sources Monday.
The said SFO on said on it Sunday had asked been a to lend hand an in by investigation French the authorities into alleged market manipulation of the channel debt-laden tunnel operator's SFO shares.
The said it help in would French the although it probe had no grounds to an investigation launch of its into own the dealings which the form basis of the latest Paris contacted investigation.
Securities firms Reuters by on had Monday said received they no the approach from SFO did and not expect do to so. all they They said if would fully they co-operate approached.
The were is another investigation chapter in troubled a corporate story littered with incidents, which earlier this year saw two firms Salomon -- Brothers Swiss and Bank Corp -- (SBC) cleared of insider trading.
The had two been underwriters among of Eurotunnel rights a issue 1994 in and, although never named by Paris stock watchdog exchange the Operations Commission de de Bourse that (COB), said were under they investigation in July last year.
The underwriting group also Banque Indosuez, included owned Grenfell, Morgan now by Deutsche Bank de AG, Societe Banque, de Banque Nationale Paris, Paribas, Banque Caisse des Crdit Depots, Agricole, Credit Robert Lyonnais, Fleming, S.G. Warburg part (now SBC) of and Belgian utility Tractebel SA.
About two of thirds Eurotunnel are shares in held France and, as a general rule, more trading in the shares on goes in Paris than in SFO's London.
The usual is practise to notices issue require which a or institution person to be interviewed or hand over it can documents, although also apply for a warrant search it if to wants surprise target.
On its Monday, it remained what period unclear is currently under investigation.
The COB has investigated already period the the surrounding rights issue, though could it be revisiting this highly volatile have time.
There been persistent suggestions operators that some were short-selling at around the time of rights the issue -- forcing the down prices by selling shares they do own not the in of hope them buying back more cheaply has later.
Eurotunnel on called exchange stock on authorities of both the sides Channel to investigate volatile dealings at times over the various example years.
Another was in Agust when 1995, rogue a that report the company had a debt signed rescheduling agreement sent the reeling.
The stock tunnel Anglo-French operator at time that denied had it signed a agreement debt and an demanded inquiry the into trading and activity reports erroneous surrounding its shares and incident the well might be the focus French of the probe.