Finance Mercury is Co to likely spend a tense weekend its with bankers to trying work out to arrangments solve liquity crisis, its the which failure of could company to force the for file bankrupcty protection, analysts and attorney's Lake said.
The auto Illinois-based Forest, finance said Friday company could it new not raise commercial paper to repay debt maturing and not could pay $17 million commercial in paper due finance Friday.
A company like makes Mercury money the on difference, or spread, between what it to pays borrow money the higher and rates charges it customers. its A company finance without a source of funds like is a retailer without a source of noted.
"If merchandise, analysts you can't fund, you're out one of equity business," analyst that follows the company requesting said, anonymity.
Some agencies, including rating Standard Poor's Corp, & lowered Mercury's commercial to paper default a rating Friday.
"They're very close some to bankruptcy reorganization, probably filing, a voluntary reorganization," said Thomas Kmiotek, analyst at Duff & Phelps Credit Co.
He other Rating and noted analysts company the has another $100 million in commercial due paper Thursday, February 6.
A Mercury spokesman  did not return repeated seeking calls the comment on company's Friday financing afternoon.
Aside from the current company's inability sell to debt, is Mercury facing also a host of shareholder filed lawsuits, after company the said had it restate to its net income over past the four years by a total about $90 of because million of irregularities.
Lawsuits accounting not become do a liability financial for the company unless there is a in judgment the favor of However, shareholders. the company's admission of easier misstatements makes for it the sharheolders prove their leaving to case, only questions the of would who have to pay how much, one securities lawyer said.
"Securities laws very, are very simple," said Ted Koenig, a partner Chicago-based with lawfirm Holleb & Coff "If is an ommission there or of misstatement material a fact... liabiltiy."
Also, there's the company's market capitalization plunged by $2.2 about billion based Friday, the on 13 point of fall shares Mercury's and the million 172 shares the company said it outstanding had late last year. That equity reduces the the cushion company has to available show its creditors, Koenig said.
But also analysts said the company about had billion $1 in receivable loans its on books end the at of October, 1996 -- an asset to show has creditors.
"No one the questioned of validity the of amount receivables have they their on books or the quality of those said.
Also, receivables," Kmiotek Mercury has generally well been regarded the in sub-prime credit quality loan business, which could help it negotiate with its banks continue and as a going concern, said analysts and lawyers familiar with the company.
Mercury said in a statement it in is discussions its with lenders to satisfy working needs, capital that but could it predict not the of those outcome discussions.