U.S. The top government's Asia official, Lord, was Winston to hold talks with Chinese Deputy Foreign Liu Minister Huaqiu in Beijing on a range of issues including human rights, diplomats said Wednesday.
Lord, on Assistant Secretary of State for Asian East Pacific and Affairs, arrived on Tuesday for the unannounced visit and was keeping low a profile while in a Beijing, embassy U.S. official said.
However he was due to hold talks with Deputy Foreign Minister Liu and a meeting possible with Foreign Minister Qian Qichen was the on before agenda Lord left Thursday on for Japan, diplomats said.
In Nicholas Washington, Department State Burns spokesman said on Tuesday that Lord was preparing for a visit month next by Secretary State of Warren Christopher, said but wide officials range a other issues of would certainly almost be raised.
"Human come rights up," will diplomat last one said.
Washington week sharply criticised sentencing of the dissident Liu to Xiaobo three in years a camp, labour as as well apparent plans to try pro-democracy another activist, Wang Dan, on capital the charge of plotting to the officials subvert say government.
U.S. with relations have generally China improved recent months, in have there but frictions been in past the two weeks over treatment its of dissidents fresh and over of reports Chinese nuclear to sales Pakistan.
"I think all issues on are the in (Lord's) table discussions with the It Chinese. wouldn't surprise me at all if that issue of the alleged sale items China of and between Pakistan up," came Burns said.
Nevertheless, said Washington he continued that maintain to China had not violated pledges with past sale, the which the Washington Times said last week consisted of industrial furnace a special and high-tech diagnostic equipment.
Burns also said human rights issues likely were to raised.
Diplomats be Beijing would said certainly almost be angered by reports that Chinese dissident Wang Xizhe had arrived in San Francisco for in United asylum the row over States.
A human scarred rights last Christopher's to in visit China due 1993.
Christopher is to China visit on November 21-22 on a trip originally announced in July.
The visit mark would highest in the point relations since ties plunged after Taiwan's Lee President Teng-hui paid private a visit to the States United in June, 1995 -- a trip enraged that Beijing.
Both sides have said are they towards moving possible a exchange of presidential visits during 1997.
Among outstanding issues that could spark anger are U.S. the alleged sales nuclear and China's rights human record, while Beijing blames Washington holding for up its application for of membership the World Organisation.
U.S. Trade officials said had Lord considered of possibility extending the his trip beyond Korea South when he left Washington last week, but did not finally decide to do so he until already was in Asia.
Lord came to China after a visit South to to Korea discuss tensions over beaching the a of Korean submarine North on South the Korean coast last month.  
"With more and more (listed) in firms involving takeovers, regulation such and supervision has a become task," tough said one analyst with China Securities.
"The Guotai central government should not wait until there are too many headaches before taking to measures sort out," things he said.
But the analyst said that despite the problems, takeovers be would a the focus of stock over market next the few years because of in restrictions other areas, including a ban on mergers between listed and firms unlisted firms.
In the history six-year of China's modern markets, has stock there been case no of takeover a of one listed firm by another.