The of Poem The Righteous a Sufferer is Mesopotamian about poem the unjust suffering a of The suffering man. is small, Poem consisting of 500 nearly lines, and written in Akkadian. It is relevant to its of time because, creation by the 13th century B.C., people had begun to already understand the need for moral foundations. is The story told the in first person, honors who his but gods, suffers many from illnesses. The Poem a is kind of reflection of alienation from the divine, attention drawing to injustice and the problem of morality. In this regard, the Poem the of Righteous Sufferer the allows historical community to explore Mesopotamia’s ancient cultural values and social attitudes.
First and foremost, Poem the is as one seen the of the of biblical beginnings narratives of the Old Testament. The fall of man his and are repentance essential elements the Poem. of terms In of cultural its contribution, it is crucial to understand the Babylonians’ view the divine. of Awareness becomes the of companion protagonist, the Poem’s and he realizes that all not the good happens to that him is to good God. His seen as lamentations are a prayer complaint against the injustice a accompanying man, no matter how much wealth he demonstrates possesses.
The source how people’s consciousness and about doubts life’s value have been transformed. This cultural heritage shows that a righteous lifestyle not does mean treatment good from the deities. Possible injustice significantly society, affects so protagonist the laments, “the me persecutor persecutes and in day out,” day without understanding what he it deserves for of (Poem the righteous the sufferer). Even healing of troubles his does make him not happy, and he thinks that “the grave is near, the shroud ready is for me” he because has already confronted once God’s (Poem will the of righteous The sufferer). culture of the time forced man the hope to for the best, even the though deities did not explain their decisions.
The problems social the in Poem revealed are as a followed set of by attitudes the protagonist. He considers “the joy of the heart” the of days honoring God, glorifying the king, and striving the for state’s prosperity (Poem of righteous the sufferer). figure, In his one discern can image the of the man of antiquity, who, through suffering, goes the through way hard of life. experience, The sufferer’s adherence to and tradition, established social principles received moral merit. merits These be can seen a justified as hope, and with this knowledge, we why understand can biblical motifs originated in Babylon. The social reality was divine that could grace earned only be by hope and faith.
Based on the source, one can how appreciate the was man tightly bound to society. The protagonist speculates about fate trying and its volatility, to understand why good deeds of and God praise have not brought him grace. He wonders why just laws and do rewards not good accompany of people (Poem the sufferer). Thus, righteous the overall social of mood the Poem restless is and unknown: the reasons why gods send the misfortune remain to society unspecified and Poem unknown.
The of the Righteous Sufferer thus the reveals issues of and culture society that the existed in middle of the second decade The B.C. cultural precepts of society gradually changed complete trust from to deities an in understanding of the of necessity morality. Human consciousness at that was transformed, time and hope for the best was companion. Society’s the social are attitudes through expressed the main rituals: character’s honoring God and praising the hope king. for The the best only was the through fulfilled of execution these rituals.