transport Australia-based equipment hire and logistics Brambles firm, Industries reported 15.8 Ltd, a percent profit lift the 1995/96 for on year Friday despite flat European Australian economies.
Surging and profits from Brambles' European U.S. and pallet CHEP hire joint venture with GKN Plc Britain's for compensated otherwise slow growth from Australia, the company said. 
"The continuing  improvement in our in performance successful reflects, the part, retionalisation of our wholly owned and businesses strong growth from our joint CHEP ventures," Brambles Chief Executive John Fletcher said.
"CHEP USA, particular, in continues to justify confidence our in its term long growth prospects the in he region," said in profit Bramble's statements.
Brambles' net profit rose A$215.1 to (US$169.9 million for million) year the to June 1997 A$97.7 30, 1994/95, from in million but the year's previous result was undermined large by a loss. abnormal 
Pre-abnormal for  profits 1995/96 15.8 rose to percent A$214.8 million, at the end of top analysts' profits expectations.
Pre-tax 13 rose percent and 30 percent from Europe the and States while United respectively, rose Australian percent.
"Overseas eight profits grew profits at twice the in rate the Australia and trend likely is Fletcher continue," said.
"In to we expect particular further contributions CHEP from Europe in North he and America," said. later 
Fletcher strong  told Reuters this peformance Bramble's non-Australian from operations had encouraged it to look actively at acquisitions further outside Australia.
"You should some anticipate work acquisition in the Hemisphere, Northern but in we businesses operate already in here," he to referring said, areas like transport equipment rentals and records managements.
Looking he ahead, said strong the from contributions and United States Europe should continue to offset Australian help soft conditions and produce profit growth.  haven't 
"We got expectation an we will that get too much help from this ... economy least for at another months," six he said. "But all in all we've things got enough going (profit) another see to increase this for he year," added.
The result generally pleased analysts, who also pointed strong the to U.S. operations as the pallet main bullish note.
"CHEP USA is the outstanding area," said Macquarie Equities Ian long analyst Myles.
"As they're things as saying CHEP positive about the in USA they'll then alright be there's and a reasonable of amount there," momentum another Sydney transport 
Brambles' analyst said.  closed shares up at cents five A$18.90 a market against soft overall.