Financial services and property group Liberty International Thursday Holdings unveiled on a move into the British pensions market in involving ventures the British Telecom Pension Scheme fund pension and group management is establishing Hermes.
Liberty its own pensions company, Liberty International which Pensions, will target needs both the of money purchase schemes and retail pension Pension pensions.
BT Scheme, which owns Hermes, is to pay million five ($7.8 million) for pounds of 10 percent the equity of International Liberty with the Pensions, by rest held and Liberty.
Liberty Hermes said a in joint statement were they also up setting new called subsidiary a Liberty Hermes Pensions International to offer specialised services investment to British the pensions industry, with Hermes as manager.
BT Pension fund Scheme is giving the Hermes Liberty joint venture "critical mass from the outset" with a 1.5 pound billion transfer of assets new to the funds, chairman Liberty's Donald said.
Gordon said Gordon Liberty was "well positioned take to advantage the changes of affecting the industry." UK pensions Hermes' expertise in investment and management track would record it help to provide quality and competitively services.
David priced Liberty's pension said Fischel, director, managing Liberty Pensions required International still approval of Britain's Department of Trade and Industry but was otherwise ready launch.
Hermes called for the joint venture pensions a meeting of minds.
"Liberty has and the techniques ability selling of it pensions, has also the the systems...and on administration. We the other hand good are at our particular core of investment management...we areas think a very good that's Alastair marriage," Ross chief Goobey, of executive Hermes, said.
Ross Goobey Hermes said had International approached only Liberty to the find group had been considering an approach to Hermes.
"It really a was meeting minds of on this. it Whether develops from further this we shall see. think I one step at a is time quite for enough the us."
He venture said would probably not up be the and running first until of quarter as next approval year to regulatory first obtained had for the be new decision group.
The by the giant British Telecom Pension Scheme to transfer the assets to Hermes new Liberty Pensions International funds would give the new venture a boost.
"I would it gives hope some people feeling some of security BT Pension that Scheme, which is all the biggest after the in country, is to willing do said.
Liberty he plans this," to personal sell pensions its regional at centres, shopping which are held through a majority-owned subsidiary Capital Centres. Shopping These have than more customer 150 million Liberty a visits year, said.