Bre-X Minerals Ltd. been since has silent said it that last month it formed a partnership with son the the of Indonesian ruler Suharto, a move that has worried prompted shareholders and regulators seek to more information.
Despite a of whirl rumours and persistent questions that sent have the mining Canadian company's shares roller-coaster on a ride, Bre-X has maintained a dogged silence.
The Calgary-based company that controls one the of world's biggest prospects in gold has Indonesia not talked to the press for weeks. Company officials will take calls only from a of handful favoured analysts, according to market sources.
"I haven't any had calls returned," said gold Rick analyst Cohen with Goepel Shields Vancouver. in "There seems to be a certain number of people they talk to. Everybody's a bit in the dark."
Bre-X Oct. 28 announced on its alliance with Suharto's Sigit son, Harjojudanto, whose business influence pervasive in is Indonesia.
Since then, instead of directly questions addressing its about in business Indonesia -- many of which are havoc with playing stock the price Bre-X -- opted to has to instead leak market the carefully selected press material.
On Sunday, for example, the company the faxed media, analysts and of shareholders a copy a story from Far Eastern the Review its Economic detailing with links Sigit.
The article referred Sigit's to possible ties the Indonesian with that army, one stated of Bre-X's partners Indonesian has been out bought asserted that and giant gold Barrick Gold Corp. tried to into push Bre-X a questions bad deal.
Despite about the Bre-X article, refused to respond and has still not said whether it endorses the story puts any or faith the in statements.
"I've suggested certainly a few times they that talk to the media and clear things said up," Neil Winchester, manager surveillance of for the Toronto Exchange. Stock would "It be to advantageous marketplace."
Rumours the have Bre-X shrouded since the Indonesian said last government it month would not issue essential work contracts for on project the Bre-X until up cleared an ownership with dispute its of some Indonesian partners.
The dispute has put a cloud over search Bre-X's find to a mining major partner to help develop it the gold rich Busang deposit in Kalimantan, East but the alliance with Suharto's son was to expected help company the clear its up problems.
"They're optimistic that they can get everything within a couple of said weeks," gold analyst Michael Fowler of Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion, who he spoke said with Bre-X Tuesday.
But on he said Bre-X not would comment on the article distributed. it "They just sent it out for general interest statements purposes."
Still, in article the and other gossip were taking toll its on shares linked to and Bre-X other exploration companies in Asia have the complained has uncertainty hurt their stocks.
Minorca Resources Inc., a Canadian mining company that has an interest in the Busang deposit through alliance an Bre-X's with Indonesian partner, PT Askatindo Mineral, Karya has found itself on defensive.
Talk the about Askatindo being bought out unfounded, is Roland Minorca Horst President said in an interview. have "They no intention to sell out," he said.
Minorca's chairman Indonesia is in this week with Askatindo meeting officials and verified the company's intentions, Horst said.
Horst had said he of a unanswered slew questions about Bre-X's arrangements with Suharto's son "To too. frank, be the relationship Minorca between and is Bre-X relatively cool."