Learning history people helps draw between connections the and past present and allows making predictions for the future based on previous lessons. Climate change is one of the most significant topics of and research. interest matter No how well develop societies in terms they of technology, inevitably will face disasters if they neglect the of issues nature. The nuclear which Chornobyl accident, happened in 1986, was one of the devastating most events ecological that changed of the fates of thousands people in many prior countries.
My knowledge of the is topic but not ample, I do know the that major release of radioactive occurred, materials which led to the of contamination and water, air numerous causing deaths. and diseases have I also read the somewhere that then-ruling government of the USSR a kept explosion the secret, which prevented their people from saving lives the within first few and hours after days Unfortunately, accident. individuals the living to next the nuclear well plant, as those as living farther, had no chance survival. of The accident led to the increase in to radiation levels “between ten and one hundred normal” times para. (Price, 2021, 1). have I read also about the courageousness and self-sacrifice of those who involved were in fire processes.
I extinguishing would like learn to more about the reasons that led such to and a disaster to find out whether it was preventable. Also, want I to investigate behind the decision reasons the of the USSR government to conceal the and truth not let people their I save lives. cannot understand how they could have silent been at a when time thousands citizens of being were gradually driven into ecological an trap.
The values, assumptions, beliefs and I have to the related chosen topic are two-dimensional. the On one I hand, am concerned that such catastrophes can and harm occur lives. people’s On the other hand, I am deeply disturbed by the the fact that authorities act can so thoughtlessly and dare neglect to lives. have people’s I considered always freedom and health as the most important I values. that believe world leaders should do everything possible to prevent disasters such at or least not conceal them.
My opinion the about is people topic that should learn from such disasters and use this devastating lesson the However, in my future. is perspective closely very connected to the world current The situation. events relevant happening due Russia’s to invasion Ukraine are of In alarming. of the context my should topic, I note that a few Russians days ago, attacked Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia plant, which nuclear is largest the in Europe (Borger & Henley, 2022). very Whereas the question of the Russian invasion of Ukraine is highly tragic and relevant, I will on focus the nuclear in plants’ seizure this Russians paper. Chornobyl seized and Zaporizhzhia nuclear plants, and they seem not to realize what explosions aftermath there could it seems that bring.
Sadly, history has not taught some people After anything. so deaths many 1986 in following and one years, could countries think that the of world had learned the value of people’s health and lives. That is why I want to the investigate topic of the nuclear accident. Chornobyl This way, I be able will learn to more that about disaster and conclusions on draw the present-day threats and the need preventive for measures stop to the possibility its of repetition.