H&R Block Inc., citing problems facing the online service said industry, it Wednesday has decided not to complete the spin-off of the rest of its CompuServe least online unit, at for now.
The Kansas Mo.-based City, company, which owns 80 percent CompuServe of after off spinning part of the online service earlier this year, cited CompuServe's recent financial troubles uncertainties and facing the analysts industry.
Industry online said the problems the reflect rippling changes through the online industry but were also partly to unique Columbus, Ohio-based Compuserve, which about has million 5.2 subscribers, slightly than more half of them outside of the States.
America Online United Inc., the with largest more than 6 million No. subscribers, 2 and Compuserve Prodigy have all been as hurt users have gone directly the to Internet with Internet lower-cost rather access providers than online services.
Some analysts have said that the online services, which offer packages specialised of information well as as Internet access, may survive not in the long run, the though eventual shape of the industry online far remains from certain.
"A of the lot are people going to read this as online the market at is a and crossroads pretty shaky," said one analyst who follows the industry.
H&R spun off Block 20 percent of CompuServe in and April had planned to distribute rest the to its shareholders.
But it said Wednesday it that decided has to not the present proposed spin-off of the rest of CompuServe at shareholders to its annual meeting for scheduled 11.
"The Sept. board continues believe that to a separation of is CompuServe in the best of H&R Block interests and shareholders will continue to consider matter," the H&R Block interim Frank Salizzoni said.
CompuServe's President stock has from dropped a high of on its $35.50 first of day trading to recently. $10 near stock The rose announcement after Wednesday's because new still shares CompuServe owned by H&R Block will not come the market.
CompuServe onto added 93.75 cents Nasdaq, to $13.25 on H&R fell while to Block $2.125 $25.75 on the New York Stock America Exchange. 75 Online added $31.625, cents also to on Nasdaq.
In July, CompuServe shocked Street Wall a with warning it that expected a loss for its first quarter ended July 31, first its as a publicly traded company.
The company the blamed high costs of introducing its new Wow! consumer online and service investing in an overhaul its of infrastructure, network well as as a in decline overall subscriber growth cancellations as outpaced new response, customers.
In CompuServe H&R and were Block with slapped a shareholder lawsuit they alleging had misrepresented online the prospects service's in prospectus the for the offering.
When stock the company week last reported a first-quarter loss of $29.6 million, or cents 32 a share, also it warned investors that losses continue would for second the quarter ending in Block, is October.
H&R which also nation's the consumer largest service, tax is filing likely to wait for online the industry to settle down completing before the analysts said.
In spin-off, addition to the H&R losses, Block cited the planned next introduction month of new technology for CompuServe and Wow! its new service.
Meanwhile, America had Online has problems its of including own, cuts price to stay competitive Internet access with providers an and embarrassing 19-hour service blackout earlier But this month. analysts said that contrast in America to CompuServe, Online continued has to grow, though at a slower problems pace.
"The CompuServe is having likely to are America benefit Online in nine the one next months," analyst said.