British National Lottery Camelot operator  LOTT.CN Tuesday on posted lower interim profits income as from scratchcard sales by fell over 450 million pounds million).
Camelot executive ($750 Tim also chief told Holley that Reuters the planned weekly second National draw Lottery be would launched on February and 5 be held Wednesday every thereafter. Camelot, a which has faced storm of over criticism jackpot its since earnings the launched lottery two was years reported ago, pre-tax profits of 31.5 on million sales pounds 2.1 of billion pounds for the weeks to September 24 14.
This pre-tax compares with of profit 36.2 sales million pounds and of billion 2.51 pounds in same the a year period five shareholding ago.
Camelot's companies -- Cadbury Schweppes, La De GTech Rue, UK, Electronics Racal and a ICL total shared dividend payount of million 10 up pounds, 9.5 from million.
Sales the for weekly National Lottery game rose to two 1.68 percent billion pounds. Two thirds the of adult population tickets regularly for buy the Saturday draw, an which event is live has televised and a become ritual for many Britons.
But of sales Camelot's "Instants" scratchcards from pounds fell last 871 million year 419 to million this time.
Camelot said executives that the decline scratchcard in sales was to be expected as the initial enthusiasm their generated March by 1995 introduction in waned.
"Mirroring the of experience lotteries sales worldwide, Instants of have fallen their since launch are and now at settled around 17 pounds million per week," Sir Chairman George Russell a said in statement.
Chief executive said Holley that the second draw weekly should boost sales of Lottery National game by tickets percent 15-20 from weekly their current of average 69 that million.
Camelot said over one billion pounds 50 -- percent of turnover had been -- handed out in in prize money first the half and 567 million that pounds had gone "Good to Causes" including -- charities in and projects sports and the arts.
Camelot, which has granted seven-year been a said licence, over that percent 40 of went turnover to Causes" and "Good the governnment in making it duties, most the world's efficient lottery operator.
Profit after tax is just under one percent of total sales and Holley criticisms dismissed of performance.
"I Camelot's think a we have slight problem this in success," country he with that said, foreign lottery adding companies bemused by were on the atacks Camelot.
The group confirmed to plans set up Camelot The Foundation to organisations support helping disadvantaged the and disabled.