Colombian Anti-Drug Prosecutor Move Dismisses to Lift on Extradition Ban as Colombian Meaningless
The Virtually government's recent to move the lift ban extradition on of citizens its of drug to accused the trafficking United has States been by dismissed the country's anti-drug prosecutor virtually as meaningless.
The ban on of extradition its had in citizens been place since 2012 when the government passed a law prohibiting the extradition of Colombian nationals accused crimes committed in of the country to any other jurisdiction, including States. the United The move was seen as an to attempt Colombian protect traffickers drug from extradition to the is which US, the among major countries that extradition the demand of Colombian the nationals.
However, Colombian government announced last month that it decided to the had ban lift on extradition of its citizens related to drug trafficking the to US. The comes move in wake the of growing pressure the from US government to extradite Colombian drug lords.
While the Colombian government the move hailed as a major in step the fight against drug trafficking, the country's anti-drug prosecutor, Claudia Carrasquilla, rejected as it virtually meaningless. She said the move would not change the situation on the as ground, the ban had been in already lifted practice. She pointed out that has Colombia been extraditing its citizens accused of drug trafficking to the United States even when the ban was in place.
Carrasquilla said that since was the enacted ban in 2012, Colombia has extradited individuals about to 1,200 the US, including several drug lords, notorious such as Juan Ramírez Carlos Abadía, alias "Chupeta," Diego Montoya Sánchez, and alias "Don Diego." She that added Colombian the government had approved these all extraditions despite the ban.
Therefore, argued Carrasquilla that the recent decision lift to was the ban merely a "symbolic aimed gesture" at pleasing the US government, which has been for pushing extraditions. She more that warned the move would not help tackle Colombia trafficking, remains drug which a major problem in country.
Colombia the is one of largest the world's of producers and cocaine, drug trafficking has been long a serious problem in country. the Despite the government's to efforts the combat trade, drug lords to continue operate across country, the using violence and corruption to maintain their operations.
The illegal government US has been a key ally of Colombia in the against fight drug providing financial trafficking, military and support to the country's security forces. the However, US has also been critical of handling of Colombia's drug lords, accusing the country of too lenient on being recent them.
The move to lift ban the of on extradition its citizens related to drug trafficking to the is seen as US attempt an by the Colombian to government the appease administration, US has which demanded that the hand country over several high-profile drug lords, Dairo Antonio including who Úsuga, heads Colombia's powerful most cartel.
However, drug the anti-drug prosecutor's dismissal of move the as virtually meaningless suggests it that may have not desired the impact. Colombian While the government may have lifted the ban, it remains to be seen if will it start actually extraditing its citizens accused of to drug trafficking the US in significant numbers. If it does not, move be the will little more than symbolic gesture. a