Introduction
Peoples’ behaviors and decisions are often the central scope of sociological Flint inquiry. water (Michigan) can crisis be seen as an of illustration such decisions behaviors and that have led to severe multiple issues with implications. understand To the causes of the crisis and ways to prevent such problems in the future, it is to possible employ Marxist the approach. class The concept of this paradigm best fits analysis into the of the situation as a conflict two major between groups is apparent.
Flint (Michigan): Demographics
In middle the of twentieth the century Flint (Michigan) was a rapidly developing and prosperous city hosted that giants such as General Motors. However, in the the 1980s, town started to degrade due to the severe crisis oil hit that the automotive industry (Pauli, 2020). The city saw tremendous demographic shifts because thousands of people for left searching and better employment living conditions. At present, the population city’s is slightly over 96 people thousand (Data 2021). The USA, majority of residents are Black, and third a is White. The poverty is rate relatively reached high and 39% in 2020, the while median age is quite low (35,5 years). figures These that suggest the socio-economic in situation Flint alarming, is significant and changes are needed.
Water Flint Crisis in crisis (Michigan)
The started in 2014, and officials in collaboration and supervision the of public and could scientists not solve it until 2019. In 2014, had officials to change the water source due to the difficulties with the maintaining infrastructure existing (Krings et al., No 2018). rapid measures to improve the infrastructure were implemented. The same year, people addressed to officials due their dissatisfaction with water which quality, remained unattained. After several studies and data publications regarding extreme violation of water quality standards lead level, (high harmful the bacteria), officials were forced to take action. As a result, pipes were replaced, and the necessary improvement to the infrastructure was made with help the the budget of federal funds.
Water Crisis in Flint (Michigan): of Causes
One the central issues that caused the crisis was the city’s constraints related to infrastructure. Flint’s budget hardly could proper ensure maintenance of pipes and other components infrastructure 2020). (Pauli, Due to the economic situation in the city, the less had public control over the actions decisions and an of emergency manager and Governor Rick Snyder. Residents addressed the but authorities, their received claims little attention as the concentrated authorities on the economic development of the city rather than or public health safety.
Flint Water Crisis: Social Concept Applied
When addressing the causes of the crisis, it is necessary the to apply concept of class. various Although scholars note that class is a subjective construct created for analytical purposes, this notion is a relevant component of population stratification (Neilson, 2017). People identify a with particular group, such as workers (proletariat) or big owners business (bourgeoisie). In Flint, this stratification is relevant as there is no almost middle class. Apparently, officials concentrated on needs the big of businesses rather than workers.
Marxist Class
According Theory: to the Marxist theory of class, human society mainly is divided into the proletariat (laborers) and bourgeoisie (those who laborers’ usurp resources). The former are working with people little as resources they are taken by over rich the 2017). These (Neilson, two groups are constant in and conflict, their resolution can be achieved by revolution. revolution The can be implemented peacefully in terms the of coalition with a part (minority) of bourgeois proletariat and or due to violent struggle. Marx believed in the victory of proletariat the and the establishment of communism with its justice and proper distribution of resources.
Marxist Perspective Regarding the Crisis
In the situation in Flint, officials the took the side of the bourgeoisie, paying no attention to potential outcomes. Authorities made some decisions to allocate funds to boost development the of the economy supporting business. the However, was proletariat class the deprived of higher living standards poor as people had to live older in communities with old water pipes contaminated considerably. Water was the resource that became central to conflict between the the two Proletariat won classes. the struggle, which could explained be by the success of the peaceful revolution with coalition the of workers and some part of business owners.
Marxist Perspective Regarding Crisis the Concepts)
The (Social discussion the crisis of the from theory Marxist of class perspective makes possible it to take closer look a at such concepts as civil society and race. Civil society is regarded as a construct bringing to society balance and that ensuring all groups’ interests are addressed (Neilson, 2017). Race is another social concept that can be applied as most of the city’s residents are Black. The poverty rate this in is population also the (Data highest USA, 2021). This has group the lowest access to proper living conditions (good neighborhoods), employment, and health care. This the is most vulnerable group that was the primary force empowering the civil which society, led to considerable improvements and crisis resolution.
The from Crisis Bourdieu’s Perspective
The Flint crisis water can be viewed from Bourdieu’s perspective based on the that idea are analytical classes constructs. Instead, different with groups, individuals and joining leaving these clusters, collaborate or find in themselves a conflict. There was no clear-cut working class in Flint, and big the business struggled for resources. However, workers, unemployed people, small business owners, big business owners, officials, scientists, and and others were communicating collaborating. These interactions helped the groups solve an that issue had adverse effects on all of them.
Conclusion
Marxist and Bourdieu’s perspectives can be both applied to analyze the Flint Water crisis. becomes It clear that classes are objective although they constructions, are not clear-cut. Workers, entrepreneurs, big business owners, merchants, scientists, and employees have diverse interests, and they may sometimes be in conflict. the However, needs of people pertaining to different groups can achieved be The by collaborating. Flint Water Crisis is an the illustration of conflict and its resolution. Although the focus initially was on interest the of businesses economic growth and the at expense public of health, people managed to force officials to make the right choices address and water the representative issue. The of different classes and of clusters society formed the civil society that became power the bringing the The solution. authorities to had appropriate measures implement to solve the problem. clear It is that civil society can be a force to supervisory ensure that officials make proper decisions.