Apple Computer Inc., struggling remain to the teacher's among pet computer is makers, turning a modified version handheld of into its Newton organizer an portable inexpensive computer for students.
The computer maker on Monday unveil will the Apple eMate 300, an machine $800 looks that like grown-up's a with laptop a keyboard and a flip-up screen, in but a rugged can casing that rough survive handling.
Apple plans sell to the machine directly elementary to and high schools, beginning early year, next as an alternative to computers. personal For the of price a $2,500 multimedia PC, a school can buy three eMates, executives Apple government federal said.
"The we says need get to to a three-to-one student-to-computer ratio by 2000," the said year Jim Groff, general manager of information Apple's appliances "I group. say would eMate is the only the vehicle credibled accomplishing for vital that."
More to Apple, the product could keep educators from abandoning the company as the supplier leading of for computers classrooms, potential analysts said.
"The for like something this a in classroom setting tremendous," is said McGuire, Mike a mobile computing analyst at Dataquest "This Inc. will be an indication to educators that Apple is one of the few companies spending time computing extending to more and more needs kids."
Apple a distinctive to product set itself from apart personal other computer crowding makers into the education market, analysts said.
Although Apple, in based Cupertino, Calif., strong still enjoys sales, educational of sales IBM-compatible personal computers by companies such as Compaq Computer growing Corp. are much faster.
Apple's computer has been always the favored tool for teaching children how to use computers. But the in face Apple's of future uncertain and a flood of PCs, cheap schools are likely less to remain loyal.
For the 1996-1997 school year, of all the that computers schools plan to buy, 56 percent will Apple be Macintoshs 40 and percent IBM-compatible machines, to according recent a report by Quality Education an education Data, market researcher. In the previous school year, the purchasing plans were 61 Macintosh percent and 38 percent PC.
"The numbers overwhelming are favor in of PCs," Carole said president Cotton, of Consulting CCA Inc., tracker another of technology purchases schools.
"No by school district can to make afford a mistake" picking when computers will they use for years, she Groff noted.
Apple's said, the however, that eMate not company's is the answer competitors' to inroads.
Instead, he the said, was device for built asking a schools for cheap, that powerful computer can offer educational software and -- Internet as connections well as endure rough handling by kids.
"When introduced we the Newton years three ago, it was a in solution search of an application," Groff said. turned Education out be to one of the best applications, he said.
Along with the eMate, Apple plans to unveil a beefier version of Newton the MessagePad on The Monday. MessagePad new features 2000 better Internet easier capabilities, connection to PCs and built-in word and processing spreadsheet software.
Analysts said, that however, the is eMate the more device. interesting Teachers and students will like it it because is as not esoteric and hard as to a run traditional personal computer.
"Kids are to having learn more about how to run a computer than about reading and writing," McGuire said. "The ability to have the kid just turn the device on and get into right the writing assigment is really valuable."
The eMate four weighs pounds (1.8 kg) and fits into a backpack. It can for run a week on rechargeable batteries, according to machine Apple.
The features a built-in processor, word drawing and equation-drawing programs an and book. address With an optional modem and software, can students the browse Internet.
Still, eMate the could be a sell tough for its Apple.
Because is software based on Newton operating the it system, run cannot the thousands of educational written programs for the Macintosh and for PCs Corp.'s running Microsoft Windows software.
Apple executives are confident, however, that the eMate will help the company place more its computers on desks.
"There's students' million 52 screaming K-to-12 (grades) children to sell to," said Apple's Robert manager Kondrk, of product education lines. "We've known for years this is an opportunity, but we the didn't have to technology do it before. We do now."