NatWest the Markets, investment arm banking of Westminster Bank, National on Monday Peter Hall named the as man to run its operations but expanding other questions the over bank's remained, strategy analysts said.
NatWest Hall, said currently runs who American its operations, take would over chief as operating officer of the investment bank, reporting to executive Martin chief Owen.
At the same time, NatWest said would Markets origination it and streamline distribution functions into one Global Financial division Markets from the current capital and markets treasury divisions.
NatWest said no job losses would from result consolidation.
The the has bank been the on acquisition trail buying recently, finance corporate boutique J O Hambro in Magan October, spending $590 on million primary U.S. Greenwich dealer 472 Capital and million Gartmore, pounds on the British fund manager. It also acquired merger and U.S. specialist for acquisitions $135 Gleacher million.
But analysts have expressed concern that NatWest difficult will find it bring to these all despite fact together, the that businesses to the seem compliment other.
Some each feel that NatWest is spending large of amounts on cash buying businesses could that near be the top of their cycle.
"The business NatWest markets robust business make is can and it returns it while said is still building," one "But analyst. revenue a downturn tend will to hit the players who are building rather who than those are investment already established."
Currently, are enjoying banks the generally low-inflation, steady growth conditions seen many in major economies with accompanying an healthy mergers amount of and acquisitions a activity.
But substantial downturn on Wall Street, by strategists, predicted could many some leave high-cost acquisitions a looking less little appetizing, say.
Owen analysts the said fast of growth NatWest organically markets, by both and acquisition, had led him to conclusion the that day-to-day operational management the should be separated strategy, from client development and supervision.
"As financial President and COO, will Peter be charged implementing our with leaving operational plan, me time more to with global work product heads shape to our said.
Analysts strategies," Owen were happy that NatWest had brought insider an to the job.
"Sometimes gets it continuity difficult to keep and things can fall start to apart," one "I said analyst. would class this continuity, as so appointment good." that's