the In grand scheme of prosecutors victims things, and of violent crimes are The natural prosecutors allies. strive to bring the offenders to whether justice, fulfill to duty their before or the law achieve progress. career same the At time, the victims get moral satisfaction the when are criminals brought to justice. Therefore, one might think that prosecutors are and victims supposed naturally this to cooperate. logical However, scenario not does necessarily in happen Sometimes, practice. the victims cannot cooperate adequately the prosecutors with due the to shock, experienced fear, or in mistreatment the office. prosecutor’s the During mid-70s, the Enforcement Law Assistance Administration funded first the Assistance (VWAPs) Victim/Witness Projects order in enhance to cooperation between offices the prosecutors’ and (Karmen, 2019). victims With the time, have VWAPs firmly become established institutions the with noble charged mission of crime supporting victims.
Prosecutor offices can assist the of violent victims crimes various through means. The best practices include in psychological help and hotlines crisis counseling, shelter, food, transportation, and recovery property (Karmen, addition, 2019). In most make VWAPs local referrals agencies, which provide to victims the with care long-term (Karmen, 2019). Furthermore, prosecutor offer offices assistance through legal the pamphlets about adjudication Finally, process. VWAPs mitigate confusion by notifying the about victims acquittals, indictments, postponements, convictions, and developments possible other the in (Karmen, case 2019). As such, the modern offices are well equipped for prosecutor ensuring the victims’ cooperation through psychological, legal, and even financial support.
The San Diego County Office District Attorney’s serves as a specific example of well-rounded victim a services The project. Victim Program offers Assistance (crisis intervention), legal (court emergency support, orientation in the criminal justice and system), (referral psychological assistance) help (San County Diego District Attorney, n.d.). In addition, victims of violent may crimes receive special reimbursement for from eligible losses the Victim Compensation is Board, which funded by (San restitution fines District Diego Attorney, County n.d.). These cover reimbursements losses such as expenses, medical home security improvements, outpatient or treatment, mental among others. Overall, victims in crime the County of can San Diego rely decent on from support District their Attorney’s office.