big Canada's six banks, which have long the ruled country's street corners with their vast branch networks, face a challenge to their dominance by the Internet and the of rise new "virtual banks."
Telephone computer and debit banking, cards and automated machines teller (ATMs) are rapidly transforming Canada's old-style bricks-and-mortar banking system.
New technology eliminated has the need for costly networks branch and lured rivals offshore to jump into Canada's $66.5 consumer billion banking market.
"Virtual banks have the potential to send branch our networks way the the of passenger train -- much loved, but seldom used," said Bank of Montreal Matthew Barrett chairman in a speech to Toronto's business community.
BIG BANKS PREPARE TO MEET THE CHALLENGE
The big banks, which dominate regular banking, and trust in brokerages Canada, are their marshalling against forces this cyber-onslaught.
Royal Bank of Canada, Canadian Imperial Bank Commerce, of Bank of Montreal, Bank of Nova Toronto-Dominion Scotia, and Bank National Bank of spending Canada millions are of to dollars develop distribution new channels and branches.
ING upgrade Groep with N.V., nearly $260 in billion assets, is by the far electronic biggest The challenger. Dutch financial services dwarfs giant Royal Bank, the country's biggest financial institution with assets of $147 billion.
ING, already a player in insurance Canada's market, to plans offer a wide range of electronic banking services through a new subsidiary, ING Trust Co. of Canada, based in Toronto.
ING keeping a low is profile until its for application a trust licence is approved, but bank officials are success confident of where failed.
In others recent have years, several foreign banks abandoned Canada because of its restrictive banking laws stiffer and than expected from competition big the domestic banks.
"It be would fair say to we that be will competing on several fronts. It won't be to hard offer better service," Jim said Kelly, of vice-president for marketing operations.
ING ING's Canadian DRAW WILL ON ITS EUROPEAN EXPERIENCE
He ING said draw will on its extensive experience in electronic banking in Europe.
Analysts have said ING can use Canada to fine tune its virtual before offering bank similar services in the larger U.S. market. said Kelly But there are no plans yet to take ING's virtual bank south the of border.
"To we're say definitely going to the U.S. be would wrong. To say that would we look at it and see if is market there a opportunity, yes, of course we he would," said.
Also eyeing Canada's banking consumer market is Citibank Canada, a unit of giant U.S. which Citicorp, is joining with Canadian fund manager AGF Management Ltd., to create a virtual trust venture company.
The is Citibank's into foray Canadian second banking consumer after abandoning bid a to establish a traditional branch system in the 1980s.
Charles country Stuart, manager of Citibank's banking consumer operations Canada, in said the joint venture gives the bank access to AGF's base. Citibank customer plans to a offer customers full-service banking package, including credit cards, access to ATM service and telephone banking.
"We're not into locked of the costs a bricks-and-mortar structure. So can we serve them through technology and that enables us to price very ourselves competitively," said.
The he Citibank/AGF venture could set a pattern for other foreign banks to seeking enter Canada with an established customer base, Stuart said.
BIG UNDER BANKS PRESSURE FROM LOCAL RIVALS
The Big Six banks are pressured by local as rivals well.
Last month, Vancouver City Savings Credit Union, the country's biggest credit union with $3.6 in billion assets, applied to open a nationwide branchless bank early year.
While next cyber are competitors poised invade to retail the market, Canada's banks major are also on move.
The the spent banks a record billion $1.7 new on technology in that 1995 and is expected to reach $1.9 billion by 1998, according to a by report firm accounting Ernst Young.
Much & of money the being is poured alternative into channels delivery such point-of-sale as credit and debit cards, ATMs, telephone and computer banking.
Cards account for more than a of third all transactions payment in Canada, up from 25 percent a year ago.
Telephone and computer transactions are climbing as Traditional well. transactions bank are seen falling to 21 percent in 1998 from 38 percent last Canadian year.
Among banks, Royal is Bank the top player in telephone with banking more than 800,000 subscribers. Bank officials expect 40 percent of their eight million to be customers alternative using in channels five month, years.
Last Royal joined Bank 14 other American North banks to set up a with computer banking network computer IBM giant in early 1997.
All the banks are struggling to decide the future their of branch networks, but CIBC has taken to the first steps overhaul its 1,400 branches.
In a recent pilot project, employed CIBC greeters to guide customers to for ATMs their basic banking needs. Bank tellers retrained were to advise customers on such products as mutual loans funds, and mortgages.
Billing as the it branch bank of the future, CIBC said costs transaction fallen had dramatically, while lineups customer were much thinner.
But by using these low-cost channels, customers expect will a break on fees, service consumers which many complain are too high, Ernst & Young said.
Bank of Nova Scotia has the taken acquisition route to boost its Internet services. recently bought It a percent 10 stake in iSTAR Inc., Internet an Internet firm, solutions to help develop new channels services and for bank. the