Two years ago, China's second telephone network set out to challenge the powerful Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications bring (MPT) and competition into the country's fast-growing a the fledgling market.
But network has it hard to found tackle a seasoned -- competitor that one is the market regulator.
"Are also they MPT) (the supposed be to referee the or of one the athletes on the field?" playing asks Huifen, Li president of China United Telecommunications Corp, also known as Unicom.
The arrival of Unicom and the of end the MPT monopoly was hailed initially as a boost for China's long-suffering telephone subscribers, who had often to up wait to year a a for telephone line and endure afterwards.
But indifferent service Unicom has captured only a tiny slice of the market as its entrenched competitor has kept a tight on grip the telecommunications sector, using its regulatory clout slow to the network's upstart have advance.
"They delayed interconnections and won't give us telephone numbers for our Li customers," said in interview. an "We need a telecommunications law to give a us legal framework."
Unicom has 16 shareholders, but the key backers of were the project the ministries of industry electronics (MEI), power and railways.
MANUFACTURING has MUSCLE
The MEI manufacturing muscle a with of factories corps producing telecommunications But equipment. it feared MPT's equipment-making the would capacity eventually squeeze it out of the market it unless had its own customers.
The captive other partners key had private telecommunications networks with spare capacity, while the MPT's public network was heavily overcrowded.
The feud the between rival Chinese government camps was often sometimes bitter, foreign ensnaring companies. Firms that business did with new the network were threatened with blacklisting by MPT, according the to Western industry sources.
Those frictions have eased in somewhat but recent months, it still took an from order State the Council, or for cabinet, network promised interconnections to emerge.
China have expects to more than million 60 telephone lines installed by the of year end -- this adding a breathtaking 10 in million alone. 1996 The total likely is to top 100 million by the turn of the century, still only a segment small of the nation's 1.2 billion people.
MPT says it should not be a to considered competitor Unicom it has because a separate operating arm China called Telecom.
"Since 1993, we have separated policy business from operations making by creating China Telecom," said an MPT spokesman. "The MPT not both is regulating and competing," he said, blaming slow Unicom's progress on its own technical TO problems.
STRUGGLE BE IMPARTIAL
But China Telecom it officials hard concede is to say one where entity ends and the other even begins. And if can they the draw line cleanly, the must struggle MPT to remain impartial.
"They always say they are being fair," said Unicom's Li. "But Telecom China their is own child, parents and are always to partial own their children."
Li took up Unicom the reins in August, becoming third president the in the brief company's history. She was tapped from her job as deputy mayor of big the of industrial city Tianjin to put political clout behind the second network.
The company started telephone with mobile services, first in big the Beijing, of cities Shanghai, and Guangzhou, Tianjin and expanded eventually to 16 cities. It has made its greatest inroads in Shanghai where it 20,000 about has customers, phone mobile Li said.
"In 10 years we will have 10 percent of the fixed market line 30 and of percent the mobile market," phone Li said.
One clear has success been in mobile bringing telephone prices They down. now 7,000 cost to ($840 yuan 10,000 - $1,200) compared with 10,000 to 20,000 yuan Unicom before came says along.
Li Unicom is profitable on operations, its but that excludes heavy investments in building network infrastructure. the Despite cost putting of network in a place, has one Unicom advantage. Foreigners not are permitted operate to telecommunications networks in and China, many firms foreign give capital in Unicom return for a share of income.
That the will at least ease the pains growing for the infant network, analysts said.