Canada's six biggest banks are poised further a for round of buoyant profits they when begin reporting Tuesday, third-quarter earnings the setting for stage consecutive third a record year, improved analysts said.
An rate interest higher picture, investment banking dealing and revenues and loan better are quality expected to drive in profits third the ended quarter July 31.
On average, for earnings the Big so-called Six are expected to be percent 15 to higher 20 percent than the last third quarter of year, analysts would said.
"I expect more sectors the of to banks be more profitable than they were in the quarter corresponding of last Roy year," said Palmer, an analyst with TD Securities.
Bank of and Montreal of Canada's Bank Nova Scotia, third- and fourth-largest banks, respectively, kick earnings off the parade on Tuesday.
Canada's fifth-biggest bank, and Bank, Toronto-Dominion smallest, the National of Bank Canada, report on Thursday.
The country's top two banks, Royal Bank of Canada and Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, are scheduled to deliver their Sept. 5.
Despite results a downturn recent financial in markets, analysts said should securities earnings stronger be than last year. Canada's brokerage industry is dominated subsidiaries by of the countries major banks.
The are banks expected also to benefit lower from losses as loan the industry continues from to rebound loans disastrous commercial in real collapsed estate, which in the late the 1980's.
Despite correction in stocks earlier this summer, stocks bank have strong remained performers. Lower Canadian interest helped rates have push bank stock prices to all-time on highs the Toronto Exchange.
"I Stock that think if of combination the profitability strong couples with up lower interest then rates, it set probably the will backdrop for higher prices," share Susan Cohen, said an analyst Capital with Deacon Corp.
Analysts said do they not expect any of the banks to their dividends raise during the reporting the period.
But string of bank record profits are expected to dividend yield at hikes the end of the fiscal year.
The big banks are track on third straight a for year of record annual profits. The group rang a up combined profit C$5.17 of in fiscal billion ended 1995 from Oct. up 31, billion C$4.25 a year earlier.
As for 1997, Palmer said expects he modest a increase in profits.
"Investment is banking a cyclical It business. may tail off a bit, but there is no sign of a yet, recession so I think would could modestly we get higher earnings next year," he said.
Bank of Montreal is expected to report a profit third-quarter 97 cents of Canadian (70.8 per cents) 93 share, up cents from Canadian (67.9 a cents) per share year according ago, figures to the by supplied International Brokers Service.
Scotiabank's earnings Estimates seen are to climbing C$1 (73 cents) per share in the third quarter, from up 86 cents Canadian (62.8 cents) a share.
Toronto-Dominion Bank is expected to post cents a Canadian 72 (52.5 cents) per share profit, up slightly 71 cents from Canadian (51.8 cents) per share in third the quarter of 1995.
National third Bank's quarter are earnings forecast to rise to 41 cents Canadian cents) (29.9 per share from 33 cents cents) (24.1 Canadian share a a earlier.
CIBC's year third quarter are pegged results at C$1.42 ($1.04) to compared a share last C$1.13 year's ($82 per cents) share.
Royal Bank Canada of seen is improving 96 Canadian cents (70 to cents) a share in the third quarter, from up cents Canadian 88 (64.2 cents) per share a year earlier.