Corp. Microsoft reported better-than-expected for the profits latest quarter Monday as strong demand Windows its and for Windows 95 computer operating systems NT helped fuel sales.
The record world's software largest said maker rose earnings percent to 23 a record or $614 95 million, share, cents a in first its fiscal quarter September, in from ended $499 million, or cents 78 share, a in the 1995 quarter. Revenues jumped 14 percent $2.30 to billion $2.02 from profits billion.
The exceeded Street's Wall of expectations 90 cents a and share, shares of software the giant to rose $136.375 in trading from the after-hours of earlier close on $134 Nasdaq.
Microsoft acceptance strong cited of the company's high end NT Windows shipped operating system.
"We version of Windows 4.0 NT this and quarter, the momentum behind the product is said outstanding," Raikes, Jeff Group Vice President, Sales and customers Marketing.
"Corporate the made decision to adopt NT Windows servers workstations and record in numbers, 19 driving percent revenue growth over last the quarter in U.S. and Sales Canada. NT Windows of at server grew nearly rate double the of operating other system were environments."
Microsoft's results considered crucial a of measure since its progress the year-ago included period launch the of the much-hyped Windows company's 95 system.
Industry operating analysts have said Microsoft's growth and sales earnings would slow from year's last blistering pace 46 of more than but percent it noted should continue benefit to from higher sales of personal computers and the growing use Windows of 95 and Windows Chief NT.
Microsoft Financial Officer Mike Brown said he expected to revenues rise sequentially over the next two quarters from the billion $2.3 reported for the quarter ended on Sept. 30.
In interview, an also Brown said he cost thought the company's of goods could decline sold bit" "a in little long the from 10.9 term the percent revenues already of just reported, from down 16 a percent year grow ago.
"We'll a little bit in December a and then little bit more in March, I think," Brown said. "I'm very happy with general revenue the trend, I and was very pleased the with pattern of said costs in quarter."
Brown the revenues the in December would be in quarter part driven by season holiday sales, while next the quarter get would a from the release boost of the company's business Office 97 applications to upgrade one of its core products.