Introduction
Coordination in healthcare is a critical activity supporting healthcare’s efficient and successful transmission. Healthcare regulations, ethical resource development, and many other essential aspects of healthcare should be considered while coordinating treatment for patients. Care coordination also considers a patient’s psychological requirements, cultural viewpoint, ethics, and other specific features that provide satisfaction throughout the treatment process. A selected patient’s hypertension will be examined, and a tentative care coordination plan prepared to address the patient’s needs. Hypertension is a condition in which blood pressure is greater than it should be. Nearly 50% of the US population from around 54 to 74 years has hypertension (Carey & Whelton, 2018). Thus, a coordinated care plan will benefit the patient and anybody else who may be affected by the condition. The number of instances of hypertension has risen, and the primary reason is people’s lifestyles.
Patient-Centered Health Interventions
Effective interventions should place the patient at the heart of the treatment and clinical endeavors. Patient-centered care entails including the patient in the treatment process and taking an active role. Patients may make a significant difference in the quality of healthcare they get if they are adequately involved (Fowler, 2017). The patient in this study was a 65-year-old woman diagnosed with hypertension in July 2019. The important statistics are BP 141/90, HR 108 bpm, temperature 38 °C, and RR 37 bpm. When the patient learned about her illness, she became interested in care coordination and made the plan better and faster. She stated that she was eager to learn more about the disease and what she could do to maintain a normal life despite having a disability. Her hypertension would cause several health problems; thus, it was critical to point out three of them.
Stroke or Heart Attack
A heart attack can occur because of the hardening and thickening of the arteries caused by hypertension (atherosclerosis). It is common knowledge that a heart attack happens when there is a blockage of blood flow to the heart, resulting in a blood clot formation. A stroke is a similar obstruction of blood flow but affects the brain (Wang et al., 2018). They do, nevertheless, follow a similar pattern, and patients with high blood pressure should be on the lookout for any of these health problems since they are more likely to occur.
The best ways to prevent heart problems for the patient in question include quitting smoking and drinking alcohol, getting enough exercise, managing their blood sugar and cholesterol levels, and losing or maintaining their current weight. With the support of a medical coordination cooperation team, the patient can accomplish this. Another way to improve this is to incorporate a shared resource to provide the patient with more information about their treatment options (Wang et al., 2018). Health Partners Regional Hospital, Mayo Clinic, and University of Minnesota Medical Center are excellent community resources.
Depression
Learning about hypertension might significantly affect a patient’s mental and emotional health. Because this is a long-term ailment, the patient will need to alter her lifestyle and spend a significant amount of money to guarantee that she receives the best possible treatment (Fowler, 2017). All of these things may take a toll on the patient. Depression is a serious problem because its symptoms and indications might be mistaken for those of other medical conditions.
In the treatment of depression, patient-centered interventions include ensuring that the patient maintains her daily activities, uses medication when symptoms appear, educates the patient about depression, and gets the patient’s social circle more involved in her overall health and well-being (Wang et al., 2018). The University of Minnesota Medical Center, Mayo Clinic, psychiatric hospitals, the Minnesota Department of Human Services, and other community services might be consulted if a patient suffers from depression.
Dementia
Blocked arteries cause vascular dementia, and constricted arteries hinder blood flow to the brain. Strokes are thought to be a contributing factor in people developing dementia. Cognitive decline is one of the hallmarks of dementia (decline in memory, problem-solving skills, and language) (Fowler, 2017). Patients with high blood pressure should know that poor health and lifestyle decisions can lead to dementia, a chronic and progressive disease.
Workouts, multisensory stimulation, and medication are all examples of patient-centered therapies (pharmacology). Reminiscence, reassurance, and aromatherapy are some of the methods used to treat those with dementia (Wang et al., 2018). The Minnesota Guardians Pharmacy, the University of Minnesota Medical Center, and the Mayo Clinic are among the local community services that can assist patients in dealing with dementia.
Ethical considerations in patient-centered healthcare interventions
Healthcare has a crucial role in upholding ethical standards and should be performed following moral principles. According to the Institute of Medicine (IOM), patient-centered treatment includes ethical considerations as a core component (Fowler, 2017). This includes making sure that patients are treated with respect and consideration at all times. American Nurses Association’s (ANA) Code of Ethics encourages nurses to guarantee that they adhere to their professional standards. The ethical principles of healthcare delivery, such as benevolence, independence, nonmaleficence, and impartiality, are crucial criteria for ensuring that treatment is provided ethically. Improving care coordination is made possible by ethical and moral healthcare practices.
When it comes to caring coordination, ethical questions arise and are critical, such as whether the patient’s well-being has been considered. Additionally, whether care coordination has improved patient safety and healthcare quality is another matter (Wang et al., 2018). Team members might reflect on what they would have achieved if the problem had been more personal (maybe to a family member or friend). Quality care and patient outcomes may be ensured if concerns are dealt with ethically, and the patient is given the finest treatment available.
Continuity and Coordination of Care in Health Policy
Health policies play a critical role in ensuring that healthcare is ethical and compliant with applicable laws. Health policy should also consider ethical deliberations, a critical part of the care integration strategy. The government and the organizations established to monitor and operationalize healthcare operations set health policies. They are designed to ensure that healthcare goals are met quickly and effectively (Wang et al., 2018). The Affordable Care Act (ACA), commonly known as Obamacare after President Barack Obama, who advocated for its passage, is a major healthcare policy. Regardless of how it is perceived, the law has had a substantial influence on the process of care coordination and continuity.
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) is a regulation that controls patient information privacy and insurance coverage for health care services under its purview. It aims to make healthcare more accessible to more people, regardless of where they live in the country or where the federal government has authority over them at any one moment. A multidisciplinary approach, trust, and privacy in care coordination make it possible for patients to share their private medical information with a wide range of specialists (Hu et al., 2018). HIPAA guarantees that care coordination uses patient data in the most effective manner possible.
Both Obamacare and HIPAA assure patient assistance in times of need. Hypertension may significantly influence patients, and they should obtain the best available care (Hu et al., 2018). Additionally, the Care Continuum and Coordination Act improves patient care by allowing them to continue receiving healthcare services for a given time. Effective health policy provisions are important tools if a patient is nearing the end of their life and cannot pay for treatment.
Priorities a Care Coordinator Would Introduce
Learning sessions are essential to improve care coordination. The best method to implement a care coordination strategy is to provide patients with regular educational opportunities (Liang et al., 2017). These opportunities will assist patients in grasping the need for care coordination better. Many key aspects of the patient’s care coordination plan were emphasized. We effectively coordinated and dealt with the difficulties that developed because of the uncovered concerns, ensuring that the care continuum was done in the manner intended by the appropriate parties.
As a care coordinator and healthcare provider, I learned how to attend to patients’ needs in partnership with them. In addition, I gained insight into the hopes and concerns of patients and the areas where they believed the healthcare continuum might require improvement. The patient made it clear that she was aware of the importance of the continuum of treatment. The coordination strategy allowed her to gather crucial information that she would not have otherwise accessed. However, it was clear that some aspects of the care plan needed improvement.
Close people, such as family members, should be encouraged to attend the sessions by the patient. Consequently, improved care coordination is achieved even in the patient’s own home. Care coordination practices will benefit nutritionists, fitness coaches, and other professionals in physiotherapy and occupational therapy (Liang et al., 2017). Because of such adjustments, the final care plan would be revised and implemented. Increasing the number of learning sessions will benefit everyone, but it would be especially beneficial to hypertension patients. Changes based on evidence-based practice should be intended to ensure that care is delivered quickly and efficiently.
Plan for Patient Care and Healthy People 2030
In the treatment process and the care coordination plan, patient happiness is the most important goal for all parties. The patient in this study expressed her happiness with the treatment process because of the learning sessions, which incorporated patients in the care process. The progress made in achieving Healthy People 2030 is fully documented in the care strategy. According to Healthy People 2030, healthcare conditions such as hypertension are of international importance and should be treated per the organization’s recommendations (Hasbrouck, 2021). The management of respiratory disorders would be incomplete without care coordination.
The adjustments recommended should be incorporated into the final collaborative care plan to ensure patient fulfillment in line with Healthy People 2030. Alternative learning approaches should also be considered to alleviate the stereotypes and dullness sometimes associated with education and make it more enjoyable for all parties involved (Liang et al., 2017). Including all stakeholders in the care process will help raise awareness and address underlying issues. This may be incorporated into a healthcare management plan for various conditions.
Conclusion
Doctors and patients should work together to guarantee long-term success and improve the quality of life. Ingenious alternatives should be offered to bring much-needed diversity to the integrated treatment strategy. Healthy People 2030 principles and ethical behaviors have been suggested as part of a healthcare strategy. Incorporating adjustments and ensuring the patient is an active participant in the treatment process can improve care provision and patient outcomes.