Chapter 9
The two main concepts in chapter 9 of “Women in World History” are gender roles and feminism.
Gender Roles
Gender roles (GR) are societal roles allocated to each sex, regardless of whether they are masculine or feminine. GR is learned early on in a person’s life through a process known as gender socialization. Women have been assigned feminine roles over time, which has limited women’s opportunities in society. The Turkmen women were engaged in nomadic carpet making from the comfort of their own homes (Hughes & Hughes, 1997). While men were transporting products out of the family tents, women were responsible for activities within and around the shelters. Young women who had not yet given birth to their first children wove for twelve hours a day while older women looked after the house. In the twentieth century, carpet weaving became a primary industry in Iran, as it was in high demand in other western societies. Generally, the book outlines how the division of labor made the females handle household chores and males travel and be involved in business transactions.
Feminism
Feminism is a phrase used to describe a western ideology that advocates for women’s rights based on political and socioeconomic equality. However, feminism’s definition and goal have evolved to include and recognize the interests of males as well. According to Hughes and Hughes (1997), feminism emerged alongside Middle Eastern nationalist movements in Western countries, motivated by European ideas of women’s education, gender equality, individualism, and pride and contempt for Islamic societies. As a result of growing international trade pushed by the railway and the Suez Canal, many women experienced life changes. Ultimately, When the Islamic Republic was established, the leadership began amending legislation concerning women’s newly acquired rights.
Chapter 10
Chapter 10 of the book mainly discusses the impact of British rule on Indian women.
Gender Division and Feminism
This part, like Chapter 9, covers gender roles; however, it focuses on Indian women in this context. The British came to India to develop their trade and increase their profits. The British colonial government began an educational program to prepare men to work as clerks in the civil service. Women were in charge of domestic chores and the planning and coordination of family gatherings. Westerners had debated on the treatment of women to rationalize their conquests of Asians and Africans. Some conserved leaders publicly mocked feminism, comparing it to western equitable demands. Ultimately, nationalists responded with a program of liberal reforms for women, which required a feminist perspective to alter the lives of Indian spouses.
Women Seclusion (Purdah)
According to Hughes and Hughes (1997), “purdah” was a term used to refer to seclusion and entailed women being separated from society, especially in Islamic culture. The Indian National Congress, a nationalist organization, argued that women should own land and live in nuclear families rather than isolated dwellings. Women in purdah were forced to come out and participate fully in modern-day public events. Indian women were freed from societal restraints, not British colonial power.
Poverty and Literacy
Dalit women were among the poorest in India, with a high percentage of illiteracy.
Discrimination made it more difficult for them to get above poverty, while the ongoing political discussion aggravated the issue of educational and employment protection. Instead of being considered human beings, males have viewed women as sexual objects. They have been repressed for a long time, making it difficult to make significant life adjustments.