Differences between primary and secondary sources
Primary sources are the ones providing first-hand evidence on the events or phenomena that one is studying. Such sources include diaries, photographs, video and audio recordings, interview transcripts, works of art, statistical data, and others. All of these types of sources give the researcher a possibility to learn about the investigated matter directly by observing it or reading/listening about it from first-hand witnesses. In case of the Chernobyl Nuclear Plant Disaster, the most relevant primary sources include reports, documents, and local newspapers of that time, photographs, and interviews of witnesses. By using such resources, one can obtain the possibility to learn unbiased facts and obtain the most relevant information about the event or phenomenon under investigation. Moreover, when analyzing primary sources, the researcher can become immersed in the atmosphere in which the object of investigation existed and the circumstances under which it developed. For instance, for historians and archeologists, such primary sources as ancient fossils or some tribes’ belongings serve both as sources of information and inspiration. On the other hand, for someone analyzing a political or environmental issue, reports and pertinent news releases will be helpful sources of reliable data.
Meanwhile, secondary sources offer second-hand information and analyses from other researchers. Secondary sources include books, reviews, and scholarly articles investigating the subject of research. By analyzing secondary sources, one can get a deeper understanding of both the analyzed phenomenon and the primary sources. While primary sources offer a first-hand view of the situation, secondary ones enable the researcher to synthesize the material on the topic.
Explain why it is important to consult a variety of sources when conducting historical research
Both types of sources are crucial in research since they complement each other. Whereas primary sources offer credible evidence, secondary sources provide additional information and valuable synthesis. However, even when one possesses a primary and a secondary source, it is not enough for completing a thorough research endeavor. One needs much more than a few sources, however credible they might be. It is of utmost importance to consult a variety of sources when conducting historical research since in each new source, valuable additional evidence can be found. Also, when the same data occurs in several sources, its credibility increases. At the same time, the presence of different pieces of information gives the researcher food for thought and allows posing new questions and seeking new answers. That is why the more sources one has at one’s disposal, the better. It is crucial to consult not only a wide range of sources but also different types of them since authors of articles and books, for instance, have divergent approaches to synthesizing data.