Elephants dance the polonaise, sea lions juggle balls, bears ride bicycles, a tiger jumps through a burning hoop – all these are attractions with four-legged performers that thrill the audience, especially the little ones. Nevertheless, animal rights activists have sounded the alarm because circus tricks are unnatural for wild creatures; they are considered mockery and torture. There should be a thoroughgoing prohibition on the exploitation of animals in circuses, as this issue is contrary to humane treatment and is a direct violation of their rights.
Since the 1970s, numerous nations have been setting up laws to treat creatures and guarantee their essential protection. International agreements were concluded, recognizing that animals are sentient beings whose basic needs must be respected and protected (Marino 148). Significantly, the tricks taught to animals for the public’s entertainment have nothing familiar with their natural behavior. The only way to make them obey is to punish and deprive them of food so that the poor starving creature will do anything for a coveted bite (Arnold-Foster 146). Animals must maintain and express behavior specific to their species, and the concept of circuses contradicts this shepherd.
Furthermore, the phrase “animal performers” often evokes positive emotions because acting is always associated with romance. However, unlike their human counterparts, animals never voluntarily choose the profession of actor. Circus experience means losing freedom forever, spending 95% of the time alone, in a cramped cage where animals cannot stand up to the full height and turn around (Ward 131). They suffer extensively, but there is nothing they can change because humans are more thoughtful and cunningly use force.
It can be concluded that introducing restrictions on the exploitation of animals in the circus is a necessary measure in the current world. Creatures must be permitted to follow their instincts and be in their natural habitat because that is their fundamental freedom. All people must comprehend that the rights of animals must be protected and, therefore, one must refuse to visit performances that have been created through violence and cruelty.