Introduction
Casa Mono, coupled with Bar Jamón, is located on the corner of Irving Place and 17th Street, just east of Union Square. Awarded a Michelin star in 2009, Casa Mono is a tapas bar restaurant inspired by the cuisine of Spain’s Costa Brava ( About – Casa Mono & Bar Jamon , n.d.). Founded in 2003 by Mario Batali and Joe Bastianich, Casa Mono was one of the earliest and most influential restaurants to transform the Spanish tapas paradigm into what New Yorkers call small-plates dining ( About – Casa Mono & Bar Jamon , n.d.). This essay will examine numerous ways this restaurant brings novelty to the world of Spanish cuisine while staying true to its authenticity.
Entrance and Overall Impression
Upon the first entry to the restaurant, one gets greeted by “Welcome to Casa Mono!” from charismatic servers, who approach the guests with elegance and warmth. Every server in the restaurant manages to create an atmosphere of a special evening. However, the service was observed to be scattered and lackluster at times. The wait to be seated stays under five minutes, given that reservations had to be made prior to attending. Due to COVID-19, guests must present proof of vaccination upon entry; however, beyond that and the fact that personnel wore masks, the overall impression was surprisingly authentic.
Cultural Differences
The sensory overload from being in the restaurant is at times overpowering. One can hear loud and energetic music emanating the bustling energy of Spain. Upon sitting at the bar directly in front of the grill, one can smell the smoke of cooked meals. Overall, the smells create a feeling of rural Spain, fresh food cooked directly over the flames. The rich flavor of Spanish cheeses in one’s mouth brings the place’s energy into a perfect symphony.
The intimate space holds just over ten tables and several bar seats. With so little room, one cannot maneuver through the restaurant without accidentally touching others’ shoulders or hands. The perception of personal space and comfort is reminiscent of Spanish rather than American cultural geography – the communication is open, extremely friendly, and physical (Adomaitis, 2022). Looking around, one sees that the space is purposefully designed to create the cultural landscape of Spain. The interior walls are lined with wine bottles, shining in plentiful light from the floor-to-ceiling windows, reminiscent of the Mediterranian sun.
The Menu: Ordered Food
The food menu only consists of 21 entries, with three ‘dulces’ or sweets. Most of the menu is written in Spanish as a homage to the original dishes. Ordering an authentic entry of roasted piquillo peppers stuffed with braised oxtail was a must ( Casa Mono & Bar Jamon , n.d.). Additionally, here one can try the traditional style of serving ‘tapas’ or small portions, the description language reflecting the cultural environment of Spain (Adomaitis, 2022). Casa Mono’s original twist on tapas necessitated an enjoyable order of soft eggs with sea urchins, crunchy walnuts, lime zest, and pungent anchovy oil. Finally, the unaltered and original flavors of imported Manchego cheese and locally adapted ‘Crema Catalana con Buñuelos’ brought the meal to a satisfying end ( Menu – Casa Mono & Bar Jamon , n.d). ‘Crema Catalana’ came with a crunchy, hard coat of burnt sugar atop the custard and deep-fried bay leaves, which one eats by pinching off the stem and separating the coating from the soft leaf. The taste of the ordered dishes provided an insight into the depth and complexity of Spanish taste.
The Menu: Salad, Bread, and Desserts
If none of the described choices seemed appealing, one could start their meal with ‘Pana con Tomate’ or traditional Spanish bread with tomatoes and olive oil. In the simplicity of this dish lies the heart of Mediterranean culture. For a spin on Spanish salads, ‘Ensalada Mono with Manchego and Pimentón Spiced Marcona Almonds’ is recommended, served between pieces of Manchego cheese and topped with almonds ( Menu – Casa Mono & Bar Jamon , n.d.). Lastly, a dessert flavor that Spain is famous for is churros with chocolate sauce, which could be ordered from both Bar Jamón and Casa Mono.
The Menu: Beverages
Casa Mono and Bar Jamón share a wine list of hundreds of beverages, representing a thoughtful selection of Spain’s expansive contribution to the world of wine. To those of drinking age, the help of sommeliers is readily available. Other drinks follow the sweets section, presenting traditional Spanish coffee styles such as ‘Café Cortado’ and ‘Café con Leche’ ( Menu – Casa Mono & Bar Jamon , n.d.). No sodas or juices are offered, with the wine menu being the shining star, distinctly differentiating it from American chain restaurants.
The Menu: Cultural and Economic Geography
Casa Mono treats the Hudson Valley as a local market in Barcelona, Spain, and additionally imports authentic ingredients. Some standard products are a selection of cheeses, numerous pickled ingredients, anchovies, and ‘Jamón Iberico’ (Adomaitis, 2022; Menu – Casa Mono & Bar Jamon , n.d.). Spain’s geographic location near the sea (Picture 1) is reflected in this menu by its seafood and fish selection. Additionally, a section called ‘whole organic animals’ refers to the traditional practice of buying whole animals and cutting them in portions called ‘raciones’ ( Menu – Casa Mono & Bar Jamon , n.d.). Overall, the food in Casa Mono reflects Spanish strive to keep the authentic nutrition closely based on Mediterranean staples resulting from an abundance of sun and sea access.
Picture 1. Español: Relieve de España
The Dress
The personnel wears plain white shirts and black pants, with a white apron for the kitchen staff. Given the open kitchen style at the bar, the staff can be seen and heard around the room and in the cooking area as they chat with the guests, receive orders, and prepare food. Abiding Roach-Higgins & Eiche’s (1992) dress definition, one also notices several tattooed people whose tattoos are semi-visible under tough-looking clothes and soft-to-touch vinyl gloves. The smells of delicious meals seem to be forever embedded in staff aprons.
Food Critic Experience
The overall rating for this experience rounds at B or B+. The food tastes impeccable and authentic; novel approaches do not undermine the overall impression from fresh ingredients. With its glass doors to 17th Street, the dining room is charming, with, if not privacy, at least intimacy in the small room. The mosaic tile floors are so worn that they invoke the echo of thousands of steps taken over them from all those who enjoyed being at Casa Mono. The large crowds in the establishment take away from the experience to a lesser extent than in an American bar, as it feels like the way it should be – loud, lively, and energetic. However, the service suffers slightly due to overcrowding, so one letter is taken away.
Learning Outcomes
The experience of being immersed in the busy, semi-chaotic, yet incredibly welcoming atmosphere of Spanish dining in New York may provide a decent proxy for experiencing Spanish culture. The value of visiting Casa Mono goes beyond tasting delicious meals – it includes the recipes authenticity, approach to ingredients, and the feeling of being transported to another country for just one dinner. Overall, this understanding allows connecting Spanish cultural geography and dining experience through a detailed description of the restaurant atmosphere, an important aspect of the multi-cultural experience.
About—Casa Mono & Bar Jamon . (n.d.). Casa Mono & Bar Jamon. Web.
Adomaitis, A.D. (2022). Fashion Economics [PowerPoint slides]. FM 4339.
Español: Relieve de España . (2005). [Map]. Web.
Menu—Casa Mono & Bar Jamon . (n.d.). Casa Mono & Bar Jamon. Web.
Roach-Higgins, M. E., & Eicher, J. B. (1992). Dress and identity. Clothing and Textiles Research Journal , 10 (4), 1–8. Web.