Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation (NDT) is a scientific and clinical European journal. It is a collection of articles that analyze dialysis, transplantation, and nephrology research. Moreover, the NDT journal is officially approved by the European Renal Association (ERA). Thus, it presents crucial analysis and data for scientists worldwide. Additionally, the other article from StatPearls was selected as the source is included in the National Center for Biotechnological Information (NCBI). Therefore, the center distributes and stores information about scientifically approved research.
The article focuses on the leading causes of chronic inflammation at the time of end-stage renal failure. In addition, the authors describe the impact of disease on clinical outcomes and the role of middle molecules as significant factors in the onset of pathology. The latest breakthroughs and research in dialysis are reviewed to stabilize the situation. The end stage of kidney damage is the stage of the development of chronic renal failure. In this case, the disease enters the final stage and threatens human life and health. Only a decrease in urine excreted (diuresis) is observed at the initial step. At stage 2, other signs appear, and nausea and a large amount of urine appear. At stage 3, the fluid does not leave, and diuresis stops. The kidneys fail, and acute renal failure develops, which leads to a deterioration in well-being. Treatment of end-stage kidney damage in adults involves taking medications.
Chronic renal failure occurs in 200-500 out of one million people. Currently, the population with chronic renal failure is increasing annually by 10-12%. Morbidities with the end-stage renal disease lead to a person’s diuresis being reduced to almost zero. With advanced forms of chronic renal failure, pulmonary edema develops. At the moment, the prevalence rate of the disease includes about 759 people per million population. The incidence rate is not available for all countries globally, so it isn’t easy to analyze the information in detail. However, the average number of newly reported cases is 144 per million. The mortality rate is decreasing and currently stands at approximately 28%. Doctors prescribe a blood test to assess creatinine, potassium, and urea to determine the disease. Moreover, such a procedure as an ultrasound of the kidneys is performed. If necessary, the doctor prescribes catheterization of the renal pelvis and angiography of the kidneys.