In the history of mankind, the computer has become one of the most important inventions. Hardly anyone can imagine a modern home or office without computers. While some people argue that the computer has provided us with additional conveniences, according to others, the computer has made our life more complex and stressful. I believe that computers, in the first place, have enriched our society with several advantages due to faster communication and easier access to information.
The computer provides us with a fast way to communicate. In our time, when modern society is becoming more global, computers play an essential role in communication systems. Previously, communication was limited to means such as mail (Grudin, 2017). If a businessman traveled abroad, the sending of reports and reports, as a rule, was accompanied by significant delays. Since the competitiveness of a business depends on time, this situation was completely unacceptable. The Internet has allowed businesses to send messages instantly. Staff can send emails or instant messages to a manager anywhere in the world (Grudin, 2017). This has added efficiency to businesses and expanded business opportunities.
For me, a computer is a technological necessity that makes my life more enjoyable and interesting. First of all, a computer is an excellent leisure tool. Watching movies and various sci-fi programs through my electronic companion is very convenient and comfortable. Also, my daily work, which brings me the lion’s share of my cash income, is not in the least tied to the computer, so it is not just a means of interactivity and entertainment but also a tool for making money.
Physicians and other healthcare workers use computers for many essential uses. Computer hardware is widely used in making a diagnosis, conducting examinations and preventive examinations are examples of computer devices and methods of treatment and diagnosis (Farinella & Marco, 2018). Computed tomography and nuclear medical diagnostics provide accurate layered images of internal organ structures (Farinella & Marco, 2018). Ultrasound diagnostics and probing, using the effects of the interaction of incident and reflected ultrasonic waves, opens countless possibilities for obtaining images of internal organs and studying their condition. The diagnostics and treatment methods will be much easier with the help of computer intervention.