The Concept Of Colonialism
The term “colonialism” is used to characterize the system of domination of the developed countries of Europe (since the end of the XV century) and the USA (since the XIX century) (Cooper, 2002). It occupied vast areas of Asia, Africa, Latin America, Australia and Oceania until the early 1960s (Diop & Moschovakis, 2020). Colonialism also took place in Japan (in the 1st half of the XX century) over a number of areas of East Asia and Oceania (Diop & Moschovakis, 2020).
The formation of the system of colonialism began in the era of Great Geographical Discoveries. In the XV-XX centuries there were many colonial empires (Diop & Moschovakis, 2020). The British Empire, the German Colonial Empire, the Spanish Colonial Empire, the Dutch Colonial Empire, the Portuguese Colonial Empire, the French Colonial Empire. Belgium, Denmark, Italy, the USA, Sweden, Japan, etc. had extensive colonial possessions. The system of colonialism of the XV-XIX centuries was characterized by the desire to establish a monopoly in trade with conquered territories (Diop & Moschovakis, 2020). The seizure and plundering of entire countries were often accompanied by the destruction of a significant part of their population. The use of harsh forms of exploitation of the indigenous inhabitants of colonies and slave labor were often involved. Colonial policy during this period was carried out in many cases by specially created large privileged companies, such as East India Companies.
From the 2nd half of the XIX century, the exploitation of colonies through unequal trade exchange began to play an important role (Rodney & Davis, 1972). Colonies were turned into agricultural and raw materials appendages of metropolises with a monocultural direction of agricultural development and into markets for industrial products. At the end of the XIX century, the dependent territories and colonies came under the direct state administration of the metropolises (Cooper, 2002). By 1914, colonies and dependent countries accounted for about 66.8% of the territory and 60% of the world’s population (Diop & Moschovakis, 2020). The national liberation movement in the colonies was brutally suppressed by the metropolises. The struggle between the leading powers for the redistribution of colonies was of no small importance for the beginning of the First World War.
Features of Colonialism
The period of colonialism is characterized by some key features: strong states militarily seized undeveloped countries and state entities. The population of the colonies was exploited by feudal lords and slave owners. The metropolises established a monopoly on trade relations with the colonial territories. In fact, the metropolises used the colonized territories only for their enrichment. They accumulated their own capital, thereby further strengthening their positions, becoming world leaders (Diop & Moschovakis, 2020). The largest colonial empire in the history of mankind was Britain: it had colonies on every continent. Among the most famous of them are the USA, Canada, Australia, India. Many African countries were also dependent on Britain.
The center of the colonial empire was the metropolis: domination was expressed either in the form of a dominion, that is, the government was carried out by governor, or in the form of a protectorate. European countries sought not only to own large territories, but also to spread their culture. The Spaniards forcibly carried out Catholicization and Hispanization of the population, the Dutch carried out apartheid and the imprisonment of Africans in reservations (Diop & Moschovakis, 2020). There was a division of the existence of the colonists and the local population, religious communities were formed separately. The colonial administration actively supported local conflicts, for example, the clash of Hindus and Muslims in India (Rodney & Davis, 1972). Decolonization took place after the Second World War; before it, the uprising in Madagascar and the rebellion in Tunisia lasted six years (Rodney & Davis, 1972).
Pursued Goals
The established colonial regime pursued certain goals: dependent countries were used as markets for the sale of their products by Europeans as the profit received was higher there. An important factor was the supply of cheap raw materials to the European part of the continent. Due to the exploitation of colonies, the profit of the colonizers increased. This made it possible to increase the wages of their employees; criminal elements were sent to new territories (Rodney & Davis, 1972). The local population could be used for heavy work; in addition to economic interests, the colonies were used as points for the formation of military bases. This was necessary to maintain the international status and strengthen the security of each empire; the colonialism of territories here was very convenient.
Key Consequences of Colonialism
Positive Consequences
Industrial revolutions affected not only the leading powers, but also the colonial entities, which contributed to their economic and industrial development. A local intelligentsia was formed in the dependent states (Cooper, 2002). Modernization, the growth of culture and economy in the controlled countries took place relatively rapidly. The world economic market was formed and mobilized.
Negative Consequences
The more territories a country captured, the less competitive it became on the world stage. Expansion led to a slowdown in development. The colonies lost their natural resources, ethnic identity and partially lost their own culture. The indigenous population of the occupied territories was rapidly forcibly destroyed to reduce their numbers (Cooper, 2002). If forced extermination was not carried out, then people died due to the appearance of epidemics provoked by imported diseases. There was a complete lack of political development in the colonies, and the major powers could not allow this. Due to this fact, such countries are now going through a difficult period of formation of the political structure, accompanied by wars, repression and devastation.
The metropolises had stable markets for their products, so they practically did not develop their own production, since there was no such need. A crisis of the structure and culture of traditional society has developed (Rodney & Davis, 1972). A large number of local conflicts have arisen. Empires have not solved a lot of problems in their colonies, which is why wars are still being waged in them. The former metropolises continue to try to participate in the management of the previously fully controlled states. This led to a fierce, including military confrontation between the parties for the right to conduct their own policy. The emergence of a large number of refugees and the development of terrorism on a global scale.
Consequences For Metropolises
The metropolises lagged behind other countries in military and economic terms due to the lack of incentives for development, their production growth slowed down (Diop & Moschovakis, 2020). The resources and income received from investments in controlled countries were directed only to the development of the center of the empire.
Consequences For Colonies
Almost all kinds of resources, both natural and human, were looted. There was enslavement of society, a significant and sharp deterioration in the standard of living. Groups of the population who disagreed with the policy of the metropolis were physically destroyed. The population was forcibly moved to other territories to extract resources or perform other work (Rodney & Davis, 1972). However, at the same time, cultural, social and economic foundations were laid for further development as independent States. Local industrial facilities were formed, production gradually developed. However, industrialization was very slow, since all resources and finances were directed to the center.
The World After Colonialism
As the economy and society developed, the colonial system collapsed. It could not resist the conditions of rapid development. The metropolises did not want to introduce liberal changes, which led to the complete collapse of the existing system. To a greater extent, the consequences turned out to be negative, although there are quite a lot of positive aspects. The most negative consequence of this era for the modern world is the threat to security. When the metropolises abandoned their colonies, the latter were left alone with their problems, many of which were created by the colonial regime. The population of former colonies often simply does not realize what to do with their independence. Africa has suffered the most, where civil wars are still going on, groups are fighting for power. Dictatorial regimes were established in Muslim states. In the Middle East, where the British previously ruled, military conflicts regularly flare up.
A national liberation movement was formed in India, which took active actions against Britain. As a result, London had to abandon the method of colonial war, as it could result in millions of victims on both sides. There were cases of military skirmishes between the armies of the metropolises and the liberation troops of the colonies. The latter defended their own strategic resources with all their might. At the moment, almost all former colonies are experiencing serious economic difficulties. Only a few states, such as the USA, Australia and Canada, which achieved high development back in the colonial era, did not face problems. The process of formation of independent States after the fall of the colonial system continues to this day.