Throughout the odyssey, Odysseus encounters several unique characters who have distinct stories and interact with the main character in their specific way. The mythological aspects of the main characters and their significance for Odysseus are essential for understanding the poem. In the epic poem The Odyssey by Homer, Odysseus encounters Athena, Poseidon and Polyphemus are surrounded by unique myths and occupy a distinct place in Odysseus’ journey.
While Athena and Poseidon are gods, Polyphemus is a Cyclops encountered by Odysseus. Considering the contrasting origin of these characters, Athena and Poseidon are well-known for their divine powers; Polyphemus, on the other hand, is known for his leadership over the Cyclops and being the son of Poseidon. Odysseus first meets Athena disguised as a little girl; in contrast, Poseidon’s first encounter with Odysseus occurs when the god attempts to avenge Polyphemus, who was killed by the protagonist on the island of the Cyclopes.
Although Odysseus interacts with several gods throughout his path, the goddess Athena remains particularly important due to her position as the hero’s patron. Athena has always protected the protagonist from danger, ensuring his successful journey. For instance, when talking to Athena, Odysseus says: “Stand by me—furious now as then, my bright-eyed one— / and I would fight three hundred men, great goddess” (Homer 224). From this perspective, the goddess shares a unique relationship with the protagonist and is vital for Odysseus’s path.
Another God whom Odysseus encounters on his journey is Poseidon, the god of the seas. However, Odysseus and Poseidon share a drastically contrasting relationship, with Poseidon demonstrating tremendous wrath towards the protagonist, who blinded the god’s son. As such, Poseidon says to Odysseus: “I’ll give that man his swamping fill of trouble!” and “With that he rammed the clouds together—both hands / clutching his trident—churned the waves into chaos” (Homer 86). By doing so, Poseidon attempted to hinder the hero’s journey, which is one of the numerous examples of the god’s critical role in Odysseus’ path.
Finally, Polyphemus attempted to harm the hero and his companions; however, Odysseus succeeds at tricking the cyclops. Polyphemus said to that “‘Nobody, friends’[…] / ‘Nobody’s killing me now by fraud and not by force’” (Homer 149), which prevented Polyphemus from receiving help from his friends. Thus, the encounter with Polyphemus serves as an example of Odysseus’ wit and is an essential moment in The Odyssey.
Homer. (1997). The Odyssey. Translated By Robert Fagles . Penguin.