Being a knowledgeable and experienced professional in one’s professional sphere is, without a doubt, of great importance. For this reason, many students of medical education facilities seek to acquire as much theoretical and practical expertise as possible before graduation. Although such a strategy is by no means wrong, I have recently discovered that the true success in the work of healthcare providers is explained by the doctor’s ability to build relationships with one’s patients. I fully understood the advantage of this simple but often overlooked truth when observing Dr. Wang’s work.
Dr. Wang is an experienced professional working in the sphere of eye surgery. Yet, it was surprising for me to discover how easily he/she is able to build close relationships with the patients. After analyzing her/his behavior, I realized that there are certain skills that allow Dr. Wang to gain the trust of the people that come to the Eye Surgery Institute. First of all, he/she is an active listener meaning that all of Dr. Wang’s patients are encouraged to fully and openly express their symptoms and feelings without being interrupted. Secondly, Dr. Wang is always polite and patient with people regardless of her/his overall mood. Finally, I noticed that Dr. Wang is friendly with regular patients as she/he is interested in their health and everyday lives. For instance, I heard Dr. Wang asking a woman regarding her daughter’s health because the patient mentioned that the latter was sick during the last session.
As a result of such an attitude towards people, I saw that many treated people could share their problems openly with Dr. Wang as they trusted her/him. In turn, I saw that this allowed the professional to deliver better and more accurate treatment. Moreover, seeing the positive outcome that the ability to build a trustful relationship with the patients has on the healthcare provision, I have become determined to develop this quality. In this regard, I hope that my description of Dr. Wang’s practice will also inspire other current and future medical workers to develop their communication skills.