In many philosophies, some archetypes can be described as the perfect self in terms of the way of living one’s life. In Confucianism, such a man called junzi — a noble person or gentleman — is a common aspiration (Yu-kit 223). The combination of the highest qualities that an ideal human being should possess is an almost unachievable goal, yet the one that is held in high regard by many. This essay will describe the Confucian gentleman and compare this idealistic archetype with Plato’s philosopher-king.
This idea that stems from the traditional Chinese culture continues to hold its importance for society. Such a man stands above evil ideas, recognizes them, and counteracts their effects to the best of their abilities (Yu-kit 225). Moreover, the Confucian gentleman helps others to do so through the transfer of knowledge (Yu-kit 223). Yu-kit writes that a noble person, according to Confucius, must take “a dual role of an exemplar and educator” (224). Virtues are the second nature of this man, and he exhibits them daily. The Confucian gentleman is the one who lives by the highest moral standards and aims to help others achieve the realization of this goal.
Plato’s philosopher-king possesses several similarities to this archetypical role. They both are set to exhibit certain positive moral qualities while addressing negative ones through reason and rationale. He is ultimately humble and stoic and continuously seeks wisdom for the sake of the betterment of society (Mark). Notably, Plato’s archetype is more leaning toward education rather than living life as a role model for others.
In conclusion, both roles possess certain qualities that define a noble person following moral qualities, such as kindness, fairness, selflessness, and the striving for harmony. However, Plato’s version of an ideal person is a stoic leader who puts wisdom at the highest value, while the Confucian gentleman is set to uphold moral values first. They are both set to uplift the personal values of other people through kindness and selflessness.