The organizational strategy involves the expansion of healthcare institutions in sub-Saharan Africa. Unlike the typical medical services in the field, the institutions would comprise medical records management employees and other statistical professionals. The need for this expansion into the open offices of sub-Sahara Africa can be explained by its rising business and investment opportunities for the particular area through the past decade (Omilola & Sanogo, 2020). High demand for a group of employees to relocate to the chosen destination can then be noted. Considering the political and economic value of each country, it would be best to initially arrange the expansion to the most developed and largest countries of the area. Therefore, the targeted countries include Kenya, Nigeria, and South Africa. Moreover, additional countries and locations can be proposed to ensure adequate healthcare development once the business relocation proves successful. The total number of supported relocating employees for all three countries should not exceed thirty per office to allow maximum productivity and financial coverage.
Employees with different levels of experience and expertise will receive varying bonuses and pay changes. However, it is important to establish general policies for all relocating workers. In that way, the move must not compromise the employee’s previous health state and lifestyle (Oyelere & Oyelere, 2021). Commissaries, banking, and currency exchange make up an essential part of the adjustment process and must therefore be provided by the company. The location of the offices would then be close to the leading establishments necessary for domestic purposes. Furthermore, the contrasting climate conditions are to be considered as well, requiring both a medical checkup before the move and setting up urgent-care stations reserved for emergencies. The health of medical professionals and other employees is a particularly principal aspect to plan due to the nature of the business field.
The organization should set an assignment length of one year to gain the necessary data while also building the company’s experience. Research has indicated an increasing number of short-term relocations for problem-solving purposes (Pucik et al., 2017). This statistical finding suggested higher productivity and increased work efficiency in the case of one-year assignments. Consequently, families should consider the disadvantages of traveling in favor of the company’s interests. It is possible that some employees would not choose to relocate with their families for a short period for evident reasons; the move may be inconvenient. Moreover, while a one-year-long assignment is officially recommended, additional work months can be added in specific cases. For instance, in the case of the business goals not being reached or a new project appearing.
As previously mentioned, the decision to relocate along with one’s family would be reviewed by the employees themselves and financed accordingly by the organization. Depending on the structure of each family, including the number and ages of any children, particular arrangements would be necessary. Before organizing the details, each worker must fill out a form indicating the essential information on their moving family members (if any), including any children and their current level of education. One optimal option for incoming school children involves international schools, which would provide an environment of minimal cultural shock and language barriers. One school for all is recommended to ensure an organized arrangement of the employee’s children in the educational field.
Similar to the school grouping, housing the employees would have to be based in its compound of apartments. This decision allows for both safety precautions to be considered and a unified method of financial distribution. Since the planned assignment’s length does not exceed a year, the prospect of the employees selling their housing units is unlikely. Therefore, the suggested plan comprises selecting an apartment block in a safe environment near the school and the workplace. While the organization can compensate for the apartment rent, additional charges, such as water and electricity tariffs, are to be covered by the employees accordingly. The apartments would be similar to each other in terms of furniture and layout, while particular arrangements can be made for larger families. Essentially, communicating the main points and key details of housing plans with the employees before official relocation statements is a vital step to ensure their satisfaction with the level of organization. On the other hand, company managers must be aware of the required conditions to calculate the costs and optimal solutions for the business corporation.
Finally, the organizational strategy must follow the company guidelines while guaranteeing minimal employee stress due to the relocation. Indeed, the main objectives of the business plan must be achieved to improve the healthcare field of several sub-Saharan African countries. In that way, the company’s global impact will also increase in direct proportion to the efficiency of its employees. While funding the workers’ main traveling and family expenses, a safe and shared environment can be offered. Ultimately, the one-year assignment length ensures the mentioned goals are reached while demonstrating the organization’s beneficial mobility.