Sociology considers social strata built according to the criteria of race, age, education, and, above all, socioeconomic status. It is precisely the strata by the socioeconomic situation that are most entrenched in modern sociology. Although, in my opinion, studies on the topic of social strata by race and medical care are the most exciting and responsive to the demands of society. Sociology shows the possible causes of the emergence of social phenomena, including inequality. Due to the correlation of certain events or properties that sociologists record in their studies, people can see these reasons.
These correlations form the basis for creating charts reflecting statistical and demographic studies. Based on the results obtained, it becomes possible at one time to make sociological forecasts, including those related to public health. Having complete information about public health and inequality in this area, it is possible in the future to build a unique way of life, taking into account education and prospective job.
For example, sociologists find a correlation between the level of education received at a young age and possible illnesses in maturity and old age. I would also note the specifics of education itself in correlation with the characteristics of diseases. People who are educated in programming or cybersecurity will not have the same health problems as those educated in music. Even if these people at the age of 20, during their studies, show the same health indicators and (and) have similar complaints, the gap will be noticeable in the future. At the age of 20, the probability of the same hands, specifically for the specialists in question, is negligible since the musical education received by a teenager at school quickly deforms the body.
People can draw similar parallels with specialties such as archeology and accounting, industrial chemistry, and psychology. In their research, Adler and Ostrove (1999) confirm this: “We find effects of education acquired through young adulthood on health problems that emerge many years later, suggesting that educational attainment is determining later health” (p. 8). By choosing one or a specialty, a person decides what role he will play in society, what means he will have at his disposal, and what diseases he will be more susceptible to.
Sociological research also identifies which, for example, forms of cancer are more typical for low socioeconomic strata. Adler and Ostove (1999) describe it this way: “Research in Canada reveals that the association of SES with survival is strongest for cancers of the head and neck region, uterus and cervix, and bladder. These are cancers in which local symptoms often antedate development of metastatic disease and allow early treatment” (p. 9). People with low social status are less likely to see a doctor, self-medicate more often, and seek advice from their neighbors and friends. They rarely get screened, and sometimes the screenings they can afford financially or live in a tiny town are not of good quality.
That is how sociology can draw correlations and parallels and build forecasts. It helps people make smart decisions that affect their entire lives. By analyzing the medical applications of people with high and low social status and creating large databases, modern sociologists can describe current trends in the healthcare sector. However, not only socioeconomic status as such affects health. An important aspect that partially affects socioeconomic status is the ecology of the territory where people live. I want to touch upon this topic separately since environmental issues now occupy one of the first places in socioeconomic research. Suppose people can afford to live in ecologically clean areas while not having a high level of education or having a minimal range of skills for work. In that case, their health, in general, will not deteriorate rapidly. In comparison, people (with high status) living in polluted cities may suffer from diseases that are not typical for their class and environment. Most people with high socioeconomic status have opportunities to travel and move from city to city or country to country. Climate change most often has a positive effect on their stamina and health.