This paper will provide an analysis of the article “COVID-19: Impact on Nurses and Nursing” by Fauteux (2021). The abstract is supposed to be the opening of the article. It is a way to quickly introduce the reader to the results of the research. In this article, the abstract is a brief overview of the topic that will be discussed. However, it contains no information about the methods of the research or its results. On this basis, such an abstract cannot be called comprehensive.
The article’s introduction is already more extensive, offering a general overview of the topic. It provides information that the times of coronavirus pandemic have affected nursing. In addition, the introduction has statistics, which introduce the reader to the subject in a tangible way. From the introduction, I learned about the general factors of COVID’s effect on nursing, including increased mortality, changes in work practices, and increased workload. This introduction can be considered extensive and adequate. The research method of this article is qualitative in that a review of a body of research draws empirical conclusions. These conclusions relate to the significant changes that have occurred in nursing and its nature. The study uses quantitative data that has already been processed and presents an overview of information previously analyzed.
The result of the study is the identification of the main factors of change in nursing. These include the intensification of collaboration and innovation, the removal of practice barriers, the popularization of telemedicine, and the increased risks of burnout (Fauteux, 2021). I learned how much nursing has been affected by the pandemic. I was mostly interested in the increased risk of nurse burnout due to too much workload. I also learned about the popularization of telemedicine due to the pandemic, which was a revelation to me because the attitude of the patients to their health seems to have drastically changed after the virus outbreak. This article is beneficial in understanding how an entire division of medical practice can change under extreme conditions.