A digital engagement policy determines how the organization intends to position itself online. The regulation also covers the company’s brand qualities and its vision and mission objectives. It also directs how employees can communicate digitally, both internally and externally, with suppliers and clients (Brown, 2019). In addition, the above guidelines also target social media interaction practices that may affect the business, either negatively or positively.
Our organization has a digital engagement policy that it utilizes to protect the reputation of its brand. Moreover, the above strategy has enabled the business to increase employees’ commitment while boosting the levels of their obligation. Hence, workers share more about the organization online, thus, contributing to more sales and profit. Additionally, with the above rules in place, the firm’s private information is secure since it is not shared online.
My professional presence online is aligned with the organization because it entails displaying the company’s products and services and connecting with all stakeholders. My existence online builds a good relationship with clients, friends, and followers, which is advantageous to the business since the company image has improved. This has helped the organization become relevant because it has offered its clients a ‘human face.’
I use media platforms to promote my brand by focusing on different social networks. I also create informative and engaging content about the company’s products and ensure all the information is up-to-date and accurate before uploading. It is critical to do regular online marketing while avoiding over-posting not to look desperate. All the updates of accomplishments and newsworthy developments are done 3 to 4 times a week.
The topics that I frequently post on social media to market my brand are about the pricing of the products. I also emphasize the benefits of using our merchandise and services while comparing with others in the market. I always comment more on the developments and accomplishments achieved but avoid posting any negative comments made by an individual or a dissatisfied customer because this could cause a destructive online discussion, which may diminish the brand.
After completing the course, I plan to change how to respond to any negativity, and I will not ignore any undesirable feedback because it enlightens me about the buyer’s experience. In addition, I will also start to market strategically, for instance, to develop a procedure of targeting my audience depending on the social media network, have schedules for my content, and change the communication methods.