Chinas Food Culture and Table Etiquette
China is a country that focuses on courtesy with a deep history in its food culture. In China, it is essential to observe table manners as both guests and natives have a precise placement on the table during meal times. It is admirable that the Chinese stress taking care of the elders and children before others during meals. In a domestic setup, it is the norm to place the main dish, consisting of grain or rice, at the center. Rice is an essential part of the meal since it has some religious value to society. Since China leads in rice cultivation, the people believe it is their source of wealth and show reverence to it by making it the main meal in every dish. Elders sit at the head of the table and serve first. Chinese receive rice bowls with both hands to show respect regardless of the age of the person serving. So, when in China, it is advisable to like rice and teat it religiously during meal times.
Another distinct aspect in Chinese food cultures is with eating chopsticks. I found it interesting that Chines have a unique way of holding chopsticks according to the meal. I find it hard to eat noodles with chopsticks, but the Chinese make it sound and feel easy to eat rice with chopsticks. It is incredible how people rip meat and fish with chopsticks when I do not know how to hold them in the first place. I did find out that chopsticks have cultural value in China, where they are considered lucky charms in a marriage.
Norms And Values In ‘How Family Works’
The author describes family norms and values from a more ritualistic perspective. Ancient communities relied on rituals and ceremonies to showcase their socio-cultural and economic importance. Rites of passage are a norm for people who must pass through all stages from childhood to adulthood. Community members observed all rites of passage through ritualistic ceremonies involving willing participants. Nowadays, families also celebrate rites of passage differently. While the natives held rituals, nowadays, people have celebrations and religious traditions to mark developmental stages such as birthday parties, graduation, and religious events like baptism and matrimony. Elders ensured the passing of traditional knowledge across generations through narratives and observing traditional ceremonies. The people had a central kinship that dictated societal traditions, behaviors, and ceremonial locations.
Significant stages such as marriage ceremonies were held with the utmost respect. It was a norm for the girls’ parents to receive a dowry, which shows the girl’s value and the community. In the marriage ceremony, the couple faces away from their parents to indicate broken ties and the formation of an independent union. The same traditions apply in modern society, where people have a central kinship that dictates their habits through generations. The community also celebrated seasons as a way of thanksgiving and sharing among community members. Generosity was a value that all members upheld, and during festivals, people came together with various items to exchange and give out. People also celebrate significant seasons through festivals and religious meetings such as Christmas and Thanksgiving in today’s communities.
Comparison With How My Family Works
We have central kinship from our grandfather through sharing the same name and upholding the same family traditions. Elders sit at the head of the table during meals and meetings and precede over everything. In my family, we have a traditional recipe for celebrating significant events such as Turkey and Green Bean Casserole during thanksgiving and chocolate cake for birthdays below the age of 10. The community passes family traditions through narratives and books written by community members. We uphold religious values and practices by attending religious ceremonies, being modest, honest, and respectful to everyone. Our family also celebrates developmental stages according to the achievement or step in life. For example, we celebrate birthdays, baptisms, and graduations. People still pay dowry in monetary value before marriage and weddings.