The concepts of domestic violence and abuse refer to psychologically or physically aggressive behavior of one family member towards another. This aggression could take the form of beating, rape, screaming, and humiliation. Unfortunately, in the modern world, these are common phenomena. According to statics provided by Huecker et al. (2021), 10 million Americans per year suffer from violence and abuse. The victims of domestic violence and abuse feel depressed and helpless, and their self-esteem is also extremely low.
Fear of the aggressor might force a victim to keep calm about the experience of being abused. Nonetheless, there are signs via which a provider could suspect domestic violence, child abuse, or elder abuse. If a woman arrives at the emergency room with bruises or fractures that do not as she slipped on the wet floor, a nurse could suspect that her partner beats her. In addition to that, victims are highly likely to be depressed and anxious even though they might try to hide these emotions (Lloyd, 2018). A provider has a reason to be concerned with child abuse if a young patient is underweighted without objective reason and is afraid of other adults. In addition to that, a child might get severely scared with a loud sound or sudden movement.
As for older adults, a nurse could suspect abuse if they have bruises, broken glasses, or walking stick, show signs of depression, and fails to take medications properly. Another warning sign is the refusal of a caregiver to leave an older person alone with a nurse. Undoubtedly, caregivers might not be willing to leave in some cases because they worry about missing information on an older adults health. However, a strict refusal to follow the requests of the medical staff and negotiate is a bad sign.
In every health facility, a nurse who notices the signs of abuse and domestic violence must report them to the relevant authorities. More precisely, in the case of child abuse, medical staff contacts social services via hotlines or a written statement. The fact of elder abuse should be reported to the agencies on adult protective services. Finally, a nurse should inform the local law enforcement of the case of domestic violence. Still, before informing the related agencies, a nurse should discuss the case with a physician or a nurse practitioner and exam the patient without the potential abuser in the room.