Overview
In this research paper, drug addiction will be analyzed as the only type of personal addiction to facilitate the analysis process and give consistent study-level treatment recommendations. Firstly, many scientists define the term drug addiction differently. On the one hand, the term’ drug addiction is specifically defined by NIDA (1) as “characterized by intense and, at times, uncontrollable drug craving, along with compulsive drug seeking and use that persist even in the face of devastating consequences (2020). On the other hand, Liu and Li (1823) define drug addiction as “a complex disorder that involves complicated neural mechanisms and psychological processes; this mental disorder is treatable and may be curable by therapies such as gene modulation in the future” (2018). As a result, one may observe scientists defining the term from different scientific perspectives by emphasizing some of the facets of drug addiction disease. Statistically, the most prevailed drug usage was observed for cannabis (3,8%) among people from 15 to 64 years old, amphetamines (0,77%), opioids (0,37%), and cocaine (0,35%) (Peacock et al., 1909). Based on this information, it is crucial to admit that drug addiction is a widespread and complex disease that might influence different aspects of individuals’ functioning possibilities.
More specifically, drug dependence is an intellectual disease powerfully affected by surroundings and psychosocial factors. The psychosocial environments at which point it has grown provoke numerous debates around the country (Cheron & Kerchove D’Exaerde, 2021). Exposure to analyzed suggestions can be a principal issue in precipitating drug cravings and relapses. Even afterward a successful cure, they should be minimized accordingly. As with many other mental disorders, drug inclination is deeply influenced by fervor, knowledge, and cognition (Cheron & Kerchove D’Exaerde, 2021). Besides medical interferences, behavioral actions are more promising for acting drug addiction. To some extent, non-pharmacological situations grant permission and have greater benefits by way of their limited aftereffects.
Despite the numerous reasons for obtaining drug addiction after drug abuse, there are no specific factors that can conclude if one will enhance compulsive to rugs. Moreover, a blend of determinants influences risk for inclination (Kumar et al., 2019). Changes in the intelligence that support material and emotional reliance on amazing essences are the direct cause of dependence, but those changes do not happen accidentally. As a result, the individual might have a certain factor of influence that becomes dangerous in case of direct contact. For instance, this might be a close person with strictly negative exposure to the cured individual.
When it comes to the main differences between drug addiction and other addiction types, it is critical to understand that they have nearly the same symptoms and short-term effects on the brain but significantly differ in the long-term perspective. More specifically, Lindesmith (4) states that “While alcohol is addicting in approximately, the same sense that heroin is, it will also be referred to only incidentally” (2017). Consequently, cannabis is unlike heroin or morphine addiction, and alcohol is not covered by anti-narcotic legislation, but it shares many features with opiate addiction.
As a result, drug addiction campaigns might unintentionally be not focused on lowering the rate of addicted people in the US. Instead, the substance-addicted become excluded from society, which creates a distinct class of people that are united by the same situation (Cheron & Kerchove D’Exaerde, 2021). Some theoretical applications also provide evidence that drug addiction is usually supported by overall depression, while in other addiction types, such as alcohol or sexual addiction, individuals activate themselves, which may even have some dangerous consequences (Zou et al., 2017). The whole relocation of recreation affecting the mind so as to produce vivid visions entities from people is the pair impractical and hopeless. There has never in record existed a drug-free association, and it is unlikely that skilled always will be individual. In spite of this reality, law enforcement condemning the unenviable task of completing activity restraining relating to sports drug-use policies that stress frugality.
Another important aspect of drug addiction treatment is the correct medication process. In fact, medication might be considered a regular vaccination since it is focused on giving a small dose of the same drug that causes addiction, but in medically calculated amounts so that the body might adapt to the new regime of this drug consumption. For instance, famous psychologist Freud believed that cocaine would manage to help his friend to escape significant addiction to morphine. This attempt was abandoned, and eventually, von Fleischl-Marxov withered from cocaine addiction (Loose, 2018). However, nowadays, most medical professionals in the US are able to correctly calculate the needed dose for a proper medication so that the possibility of receiving the additional drug addiction is extremely low.
Finally, when it comes to treatment possibilities, drug addiction curing depends on the type and scope of the patient’s problems and needs. Research signifies that most compulsive things need not completely three months of treatment to stop their dependence on the illegal substance considerably and that best choice consequences accompany longer durations of the situation (NIDA, 2020). Recovery from drug cravings is an unending process and repeatedly requires diversified adventures of cases. As with additional incessant sicknesses, relapses to dependence on illegal substances can occur and concede the possibility signal a need for the situation expected to be reinstated or regulated. In fact, treatment changes consistently on the type of drug and the traits of the subjects (NIDA, 2020). Matching situation backgrounds, interventions, and aids to an individual’s particular questions and needs detracts from welcoming or her best benefit in responding to beneficial functioning ancestral, institution, and society.
Recovery Plan
Logistics
In the case of group consultation, all the patients will pass both general and specialized treatment processes depending on their physical and psychological health conditions. As one of the main psychological remedies, a group would exercise behavioral therapies that would be prescribed during the first consultation. In fact, treatments with a behavioral focus may address a patient’s motivation to change, provide encouragement for abstinence, enhance skills to resist drug abuse, replace drug-using activities with more constructive and rewarding activities, and improve interpersonal relationships (NIDA, 2020). Nevertheless, patients should primarily receive a medical treatment plan. More specifically, they will receive an individualized list of special drugs that would help to cure the addiction effects. Gradually, combined with constant help from consultants, patients will disclose the opportunity for psychologists to cure the addiction from a mental health perspective entirely. Some mental diseases might be interconnected with drug addiction. Consequently, medical professionals should be vigilant with patient interaction dynamics and psychological exposure to the treatment process. Finally, participating in peer support programs during and after treatment can assist in maintaining abstinence.
When it comes to the individual consulting process, the patient should have a determined medical professional who has a specialization in drug addiction treatment. Primarily, the patient would attend nearly three general consultations where a medical professional would define the key characteristics of actual addiction (Grenfell & Hart, 2018). After that, a person would certainly follow a prescribed medical course to cure substance addiction physically. Simultaneously, the patient should receive regular medication sessions. More specifically, medications are the main aspect of treatment for many cases, particularly when combined with accompanying advising and different behavioral healings. For example, methadone, buprenorphine, and naltrexone (containing a new long-acting expression) are effective in meal things addicted to dope or added opioids maintain their lives and reduce their illegal dependence on a banned substance (NIDA, 2020). Acamprosate, disulfiram, and naltrexone are drugs approved for curing alcohol abuse. For persons compulsive to nicotine, a nicotine substitute output or oral pill is.
Since drug addiction and abuse are considered mental disorders, and they coexist with different mental diseases, many patients who represent multi-disease should be correctly evaluated for the existence of parallel issues. Finally, the patients should be advised at the end of the course, which is the most significant part of the treatment process since it defines its efficiency. During this consultation, the patient will determine their level of health. In case of normalization, the patient will be prescribed regular drugs that would help to maintain the level of independence. The client will also be consulted at the interval of three days. If needed, the gap might be modified in accordance with the patient’s health conditions.
Treatment Plan
In the case of the basic scenario execution, the drug-addicted patient would pass a 70-day general course of treatment which might be divided into three main stages. The general course contains three main sessions at the beginning of each stage and at least seven supportive sessions that last more than 30 minutes. Firstly, the debut week will be dedicated to actively consulting with the patient and defining the safest and most individualized recovery plan. Secondly, the patient will pass a dynamic 40-day physical and mental treatment process, which includes taking medically prescribed drugs and visiting a professional psychotherapist. After that, the final stage of the treatment would emphasize the development of the patient’s consistent life routine and provide additional consultations with the medical professional, individually attached to the person. In the case of group treatment, patients might experience additional collaboration sessions where all the engaged course members exchange their opinion about the current treatment. These sessions should be added, not interchanged with the general number of sessions.
Issues in Treatment
There are many possible issues during the treatment course, but there is a necessity to analyze only the most probable and significant of them. Firstly, the patient might not be motivated to quit their addiction. Lack of life objectives or family rejection might be the most significant influencers to continue drug addiction. Secondly, the patient could experience negative external influences, so additional psychological issues might become acute. As it was stated before, drug addiction usually coexists with some psychological issues, so it is critical to timely identify the development of mental issues. For instance, a patient might continue abusive interconnections with their siblings that demotivate the individual’s treatment. In this case, the medical professional should immediately provide determined consultation where the patient would decide to limit the dangerous exposure. Last but not least, the patient might be internally disappointed with the course result, in particular, at the middle stage of the treatment. As a result, the individual consultant should consistently dedicate some time to checking the stability of the patient’s mental and physical health. More specifically, it is highly recommended to have regular meetings nearly four times a day before eating. In this case, the patient would be motivated to describe all the issues in a specific manner so that the medical professional would have a better understanding of the problem.