Introduction
The fashion industry is one of the most dynamic sectors around the globe, and the dynamism arises from the diverse needs of the client base. Fashion is a personal statement and a symbol of societal status that also defines a person’s culture and individuality. As a result, clients are always curious about fashionable pieces that serve several factors while maintaining a particular budget. Although many clothes stores stock a variety of fashionable clothes, they do not capture the clients’ personality and individual needs because the designs are premade. Most stores such as Zara and H&M invest significant funds into identifying the unique needs of their clients. However, their reach in identifying these needs is not yet global, and this implies that a significant section of the target market buys what is available. Therefore, bridging the gap between what the clients want from their preferred clothes stores and what the stores are offering is crucial in promoting customer satisfaction.
Our project, Be-Unique , intends to solve this problem by leveraging technology to bring the services closer to the clients. The purpose of the project is to provide a highly integrative platform through which customers can digitally access their favorite clothing stores. The platform intends to revolutionize the fashion industry by offering clients an opportunity to present their unique designs for customization. Online clothes from stores such as Zara and H&M are made using standard sizes that may not fit all body sizes within the standard measurements. Our online stores’ mandate is to ensure that clients have easy access to thigh-quality fashionable items that can be customized to fit their unique sizes. Therefore, our mandate will include offering the clients an opportunity to submit their sizes to our platform, whereby their clothes can be tailor-made to fit their unique sizes. Our highly skilled team will be on standby to take clients’ measurements and submit them to the famous clothes stores for customization.