Electric cars have only recently begun to compete with the internal combustion engine, but they have been actively used by drivers for more than a century. These cars were especially popular at the turn of the 20th century but lost their popularity when Ford’s moving assembly line increased the availability of passenger cars (Simpson 2021). The use of electric vehicles has several advantages, including their environmental friendliness, service cost, and interesting history of the emergence of exciting technology.
The structure of an electric car is not inferior to ordinary passenger cars and may even be considered safer than the usual models. The main structural elements of an electric vehicle are battery, electric motor, transmission, on-board charger, inverter, DC converter, and electronic control system. The device of an electric car implies the absence of a clutch and gearbox, which is why they accelerate more smoothly and climb the slope easier (Magnusson 2017). Such a car does not contain engine oil and spark plugs, which reduces maintenance costs. Electric cars also don’t make much noise, drive quietly, and don’t produce noise pollution. The engine also consumes no energy when the vehicle is stationary. The transmission of an electric car is quite simple. Thanks to the onboard charger, the vehicle can be charged from the household electrical network. Thus, a simple and understandable car device can serve as one of the reasons for their ubiquity.
Climate scientists claim the electrification of vehicles is one of the best ways to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Fully electric cars move with the help of a large electric battery and do not produce exhaust gases. Electric vehicles are becoming more eco-friendly over time, despite the more intensive battery manufacturing process. Common gas-powered cars are the least climate-friendly option, as long-term costs and emissions cover a wide range. It reduces the risk of death from an accident and from the effect of exhaust gases on a person’s lungs. According to Dr. Tranchik’s estimates, the production emissions of electric vehicles will be compensated for six months, depending on the cleanness of the power system in which the car is charged.
Electric cars enjoy less popularity than gas-powered vehicles due to their higher initial cost. The battery capacity price should also be considered since a car that can last longer on its charge will cost more. Nevertheless, actual research shows that electric cars help drivers save money in the long run. The Massachusetts Institute of Technology team calculated the cost of the vehicle’s full life (including the purchase price, maintenance, fuel) and found that electric cars cost their owners much cheaper (Penney 2021). Today, electric vehicles are becoming safe, affordable and, produced by major brands, are starting to be sold in large volumes. The world leader in sales of such cars is Norway, which has a plan to stop selling fuel cars by 2025. A similar policy is followed by New Zealand, which is concerned about the state of the environment. The dissemination of such research would help reduce the financial costs of using cars.
The spread of electric vehicles requires infrastructure development and increased accessibility. Despite the fact that electric cars are already becoming more common on the roads, only some countries are close to their widespread use. Nevertheless, electric machines will be an excellent replacement for traditional gas and will improve the situation of the environment.