Darwin’s evolution theory of natural selection explains how different organisms came to being and how others got extinct. In the theory, evolution occurred from one generation to another as they inherited physical and behavioral traits that allowed them to thrive in rapidly changing environments. This theory starts by indicating that in the olden days, there existed organisms with opposing traits i.e., either strong or weak traits. Geological and other environmental changes impacted the need for the survival of the species. As a result, the organisms with stronger particular traits would remain alive and end up passing the traits to their next generations as they breed. The organisms with weaker traits would get wiped out naturally resulting in the extinction of their generation (Flew 28). Darwin’s theory of evolution was fundamental in discussing the unique occurrences and developments in human sciences. The theory in itself explains genetics despite the lack of its knowledge at the time of its formation.
When relating the theory to the concept of human, life and the science surrounding it, it is clear to note how humans have made significant advancements in science with the intent of developing their world, remaining dominant, and understanding every concept of life to keep them ahead of anything that may want to wipe them out of the face of the world. Understanding the working of the human brain gives a clear indication of how the brain is so developed as compared to other organisms and why humans remain superior to other organisms. This explains why in every century, new developments are made and new scientific studies are identified giving a difference to the world.
Scientific Questions Supporting Connection of Darwin’s Theory and Human Sciences
One of the scientific questions is the origin of life and the extinction of some species. This question is used to identify the origin of humanity and the variation in the organisms that exist now to those that existed in the earlier centuries e.g., mammoths. It also tries to find out of humanity will last or we are also likely to go extinct. Through the process of obtaining answers, one can understand how evolution has contributed to changes in the life of different organisms as well as humans and how humans have gone to a great extent to dig deeper into the existence and development of life. The other scientific questions include:
 1. In what way has the secret of life been unravelled through time? (How different people have tried to study and sustain life).
 2. How unique is the human brain and what is its role in the human body? (History of the study of the human brain and how the obtained information has been used in the development of the field of psychology and neuroanatomy).
 3. How does the brain impact our lives? (This explains the variation in brain development at different ages and among different individuals).
Proof of the Existence of A Link Between Science and Society
The videos indicate how information grew from one century to another and was built on the inventions of key researchers and enthusiasts. All the information was used as guiding principles in the different scientific fields and new information was added to the existing data. The changes observed from one century to another are majorly contributed by scientific advancement. Countries such as Britain that took science seriously rapidly advanced and adapted to the rapidly changing environments as compared to other countries and this is an indicator of the link of science and the society.