In the modern world, the nurse’s role is changing dramatically: From being a resident assistant to the treating physician, the registered nurse (RN) is becoming the critical link in the clinic. RNs help provide a continuum of communication between patients, their families, and medical staff, which means that treatment and recovery outcomes depend on the effectiveness of their work. Given the structural changes in the professional role of the registered nurse, I could not help but take an interest in this field. Thus, my career goal is to pursue a bachelor’s degree in nursing as the first step to becoming a professional nurse.
Nursing has become particularly important in recent years and became especially important to the clinical system during the COVID-19 pandemic. By now, there are over 4.2 million registered nurses in the United States (USAHS). This large number represents about 1.3 percent of the nation’s total population, which means about one in 100 Americans is a registered nurse. This data shows how critical this role is to society, as a large number of people from various states would not choose the profession if it were not in demand. The Rafferty study indicates that “nurses can realise their potential as change agents in building a better future for health care” (Rafferty 475). Additionally, USAHS reports that the number of male nurses has tripled over the past 50 years, which also reflects a positive trend in this professional role and rapid removal of stigma.
There has historically been a bias against nurses regarding their importance. Although the nurse’s role is not controversial for patients who frequently encounter clinics and other stakeholders, healthy people can provoke stigma toward such staff. This prejudice has nothing to do with the current level of medical development since the nurse has long since ceased to be an adjunct to the physician but has been given a separate role, a theoretical foundation, and new functions. Opportunities for continual growth and helping sick people are features of today’s RNs that appeal to my career choice. Thus, my altruistic nature and desire to overcome stigma motivate me to continue my BSN training.
Since my chosen career is feasible, I have to think about the organizational details of professional development. I have to spend at least four years to get my BSN, which is the standard time frame for an undergraduate degree. However, it is likely that I will want to continue my studies after the BSN, in which case I will need additional time. To be specific, I will say that four years is the minimum I wish to cover, to begin with. The cost also depends on the state and university, but the average cost is about $40,000 (NJ). Hence, my plan is to continue to make savings at a compound interest rate that will help me have financial protection. I plan to study all four years carefully and do my homework and tests to get the solid knowledge I will need in the future.
To emphasize the bottom line, my central career goal is to earn a bachelor’s degree in registered nursing. This is the most specific and pressing goal I have set for myself in terms of career advancement. However, once I receive my BSN, I have no plans to graduate, as I want to advance my knowledge continually. Professional development requires careful academic work on myself, but in addition, I will also need to save up some money. To put it another way, in the next four years, I plan to work hard on my education in order to fulfill my personal career goal.