In order to be successful as an organization, its managers and employees should devote themselves to certain principles and seek to fulfill them in real life. In this regard, Fisher (2008) suggests ten principles that, in the author’s opinion, should be central for any entity. Nina, the Administrator of an outpatient dialysis facility, emphasized three core business principles, namely decide who you serve, manage employees, and decide what makes you different, which helped her run the facility successfully.
As for the former, deciding whom to serve is a crucial step as it determines the focus of a company’s activities. Secondly, managing employees ensures that medical professionals are constantly devoted to improving the quality of work and providing patient-centered care. Finally, deciding what makes you different ensures that the company makes constant improvements in regard to its performance and also establishes core values that can make them the most reliable and trustworthy facility.
According to Nina, their mission statement is “To be the Provider, Partner and Employer of Choice.” This correlates with the principles perfectly since every factor receives attention. The facility strives to provide opportunities and training services to their employees incorporating proper mental, physical, and holistic treatment of patients, which helps not only focus on the primary target, patients but incentivize the staff and remain unique. In other words, it can be called a commitment to constant learning and improvement, which is undoubtedly necessary for quality improvement in nursing practice (Caldwel et al., 2017).
Therefore, it can be argued that the three chosen principles are of great importance in the healthcare sphere as they are associated with greater performance. In particular, they ensure that the staff is always aware of one’s scope of responsibility and follow the organization’s mission rigorously. Moreover, their incorporation of other Fisher principles, deciding whom they serve and what makes them different, ensures that they maintain their competitive advantage.
Caldwell, C., Ichiho, R., & Anderson, V. (2017). Understanding level 5 leaders: The ethical perspectives of leadership humility. Journal of Management Development, 36 (5), 724-735.
Fisher, G. (2008). The art of business: The top ten basic business principles [PowerPoint slides]. Web.