In comparing and contrasting the two pandemic situations, Typhoid and COVID-19 virus, the two individuals, Typhoid Mary and Novak Djokovic, were both said to be exposed to the above illnesses. In an attempt to quickly respond to the public health concern of the two victims, the public health departments conducted their brief studies. In both situations, a test was conducted on two persons. The exposure and outcomes of typhoid and coronavirus had occurred in the examination, and a retrospective cohort study was used in both cases (CareerOneStop, 2017). The difference, in this case, is that Mary was infected with typhoid while Novak contracted the coronavirus, and also Mary was a carrier, but Novak was not.
According to the two articles, the investigations of the diseases were conducted in groups, such as families. The tennis champion, Djokovic, had become the fourth player to test positive for COVID-19, while Mary had tested positive for typhoid (Natesan, 2020). In Mary’s case, one could see the wealthy family of the banker Charles, including one of his daughters and his wife, where Mary worked as a cook, contracting typhoid fever. Djokovic’s wife was also confirmed to be positive for coronavirus, similar to Mary’s case, where many of her associates had tested positive. Thus, the similarity here is that, in both incidences, the families of these victims were affected as a result. Additionally, for Novak, three other tennis players participating in the competitions at Adria tour had already tested positive for COVID-19. In Mary’s situation, when she worked for the Warrens, two house-keepers and a gardener were infected with typhoid (Weird History, 2020). Thus, the main issue in both cases is that families, friends, and workmates of both victims had had been infected with the illnesses COVID-19 and typhoid.
How Far We Have Come in 100 Years
For the past 100 years, the typhoid vaccine has been developed. Surveillance, epidemiology, and laboratory activities are also available and in readiness. In addition to that, there are medical counter-measures and health care system preparedness to handle pandemics. Over the past a hundred years, there has been expanded global surveillance and reagent distribution for flu (Natesan, 2020). The most recent care recommendations and pandemic details should be revised and distributed to all healthcare caregivers when required. Lastly, staff members must personally observe their signs and notify the team manager if they or their relatives experience any symptoms.
CareerOneStop. (2017). Community health workers [Video]. Web.
Natesan, S. (2020). The historical/evolutionary cause and possible treatment of pandemic COVID-19 (SARS-CoV-2, 2019-Coronavirus). Open Access Journal of Mycology & Mycological Sciences , 3 (2), 1-26. Web.
Weird History. (2020). Typhoid Mary | The original asymptomatic super-spreader [Video]. Web.