Organizational structure is an essential notion that brings the team together to manage the objective successfully. Five structural configurations help people to achieve team goals. Depending on the purposes of the group, it is essential to choose the appropriate structure. For instance, there are variations: One Boss, Dual Authority, Simple Hierarchy, Circle Network, and All-Channel Network. These structures are different by their nature, and it is vital to examine each of the five to determine the most effective structure for the team to accomplish its goals.
One Boss structure is a situation where the leader charges responsibilities of all people. This structure is classic, and many companies apply it because of its simplicity and clearness. Indeed, it can have some substantial disadvantages, for example, slow communication, delays, and single decision-making. The second structure is Dual Authority, where two individuals have the power to execute control over the group of people. Information flows through these people and reduces a boss’s control degree. This structure allows to free up time, but the added layer might slow the communication.
Simple Hierarchy is another classic structure that suggests a middle manager reporting to the boss. In this case, the boss is responsible for communication with other team members through the middle man. This option limits access to authority; indeed, it is more effective than the previous structure of Dual Authority. Circle Network suggests the information flow from one team member to another; everyone can add to or change the process. This structural configuration might simplify communication, as every group member interacts directly with only two other team members. There is no boss, and every group member has equal responsibility. However, one weak element in the chain can undermine the whole process.
The last structural configuration is the All-Channel Network, which is about interdependence and the involvement of every team member in the process. All-Channel Network embodies multiple connections where everyone is dependent on each other. It is about diversity and equal responsibilities; however, decisions can cause misunderstanding and extra discussion with other team members. It also might slow down the process due to multiple opinions on the same issue. This configuration is often compared to football and basketball, where the result depends on every group member.
As a teacher, I am part of three teams. The first is the One Boss configuration, where I am in charge of the director. The teacher should report to the director, and the absolute authority is in the director’s bylaw. The second structure is the Simple Hierarchy, where I link my students and the director. The last configuration is All-Channel Network, where teachers build communication to reach the educational objective. The most effective structural configuration was All-Channel Network; despite some disadvantages, the decision was chosen fast. In addition, this configuration allows diverse opinions and creates multiple ideas split into one great decision.
A different configuration affects the process significantly; as seen, the decision-making process’s speed and simplicity depend on the chosen configuration. For example, when it is required to decide on the spot, the One Boss configuration might be a doubtful solution. Instead, several team members will accomplish the goal faster and more efficiently. In general, many educational organizations strive to give equal abilities to each team member; it creates a friendly atmosphere and contributes to the flow of ideas within the group.