In the development of nursing in Europe in the 19th century, the activities of an outstanding personality, the Englishwoman Florence Nightingale, played an important role. Florence was looking for an opportunity to help the poor and the sick. At that distant time, activities related to mercy, helping those in need, were considered an occupation not worthy of a noblewoman. The young woman sacrificed personal life expensive relationships with her parents but remained faithful to her calling. Furthermore, her values and commitment allowed Florence to become a historical figure in modern nursing, to whose leadership people owe accolades for paving the way of nursing’s place in our societies.
Thanks to perseverance and perseverance, in 1851, Florence entered the community of the sisters of pastor F. Flender in Germany, where she received a nursing education. Subsequently, Florence made a considerable contribution not only to the treatment of cholera help in wars but to the development of leadership and the reformation of nursing (Kim, 2020) The selfless woman became an example of service to people and a prototype of international mercy. Moreover, Florence managed to change a common thought about nobility of nursing, her leadership allowed to reestablish pivotal understanding of nursing practice. Her significance can easily be depicted on a medal with her image, which is awarded for special merits to distinguished nurses.
A large role in the development of nursing abroad belongs to the international society of the Red Cross. The International Committee for Relief of the Wounded, headed by A. Dunant, convened a conference in Geneva in October 1863 with the participation of representatives of 13 countries, at which the charter of the International Organization of the Red Cross was developed, and the emblem of the society was adopted. The United States achieved tremendous success in the development of nursing in the 19th-20th centuries, when the American Medical Association was first established. (AMA) (Kim, 2020) In 1873, the first three nursing schools were opened in the USA according to the model of the F. Nightingale schools in London (Kim, 2020) Thus, the further formation of international humanitarian organizations was also primarily made possible by leaders such as Florence.