Although the Monster can be considered a bad character due to murdering people, the creature has good traits as well. The Monster is described as ugly and strong but at the same time, inexperienced. Firstly, Frankenstein’s creature is described as “its gigantic structure and the deformity of its aspect … instantly informed me that it was the wretch” (Shelley). Despite his ugly and terrifying appearance, the subject did not have the intention to kill people. The creature can be compared to a baby who tries to examine the world it lives in, and its actions are just contractions to the cruelty of the world. Frankenstein’s monster is not a real monster; it just seeks love and attention that the world cannot give him. The creature’s emotionalism is a positive feature as it allows it to understand people’s feelings and share them.
The “Gothic” elements of the novel include supernatural motives, the architecture from the Middle Ages, and the spiritual aspects of human nature. Other “Gothic” elements consist of the strive for knowledge, the Monster, and the probable moral fall of men. I like that genre because I like looking at diverse issues from various perspectives. This novel allows me to look at the actions of Victor Frankenstein and the Monster and understand their motives and feelings. I also appreciate novels that aim to show moral aspects of society with the utilization of different symbols, such as the Monster.
Mary Shelley’s husband believed that inappropriate social relationships are the result of people becoming evil. To make people bad, other representatives of society should reject them and make them feel useless or bad. I agree with this opinion, as people’s intentions are generally based on their experience of social interactions. If society treats people as if they were misconducts, there is no reason to try to be good or fit in.
I believe that one of the integral themes of the novel is loneliness. The Monster aimed to integrate into society; however, people met him with disgust, fear, hatred, and all the spectrum of negative emotions. Hence, the creature turned to evil because of the feeling of loneliness. Nowadays, society often tries to isolate individuals who do not view the world the same as most people do. This feature often leads to the feeling of being lost and lonely.