I have selected Erykah Badu’s “Bag Lady” and explored its original version, a live version, a 2018 cover by Nao, the singer’s interview, and Erica Swift’s interpretation of the message. The original version presents the song just as a piece of art, so the message serves as the only context (“Bag Lady (Official Video)”). The live version accentuates the singer’s positive reputation (“Erykah Badu Live – Bag Lady”). In contrast, the cover version places it in the context of exploring the pillars of neo-soul. Due to Nao’s introductory word, the accent might be shifted from the underlying message to Erykah Badu’s contributions to neo-soul (“Bag Lady – NAO Cover for the Soul Train Awards”). Nao’s cover uses novel sound recording equipment and technology, which, from my perspective, adds depth and emotion to the song by enabling the listener to distinguish the details of the performer’s vocal control techniques. Thus, technology has influenced the way that “Bag Lady” is perceived. The findings above deepen my previous knowledge about the song. I have learned that young neo-soul singers might see the work in question as the essence of the genre’s unique beauty.
The song research activity has also challenged my previous perceptions of the song’s meaning while also demonstrating that various interconnected interpretations of the song exist. As for the originally intended meaning, the singer explains that the song is about “personal growth” and having “too many things” on one’s mind (HIP Online). Other people’s perspectives, however, further elaborate on this non-specific message to incorporate transitions between various stages of life and recovery after traumatic events. For instance, Swift’s interpretation is that one “cannot get to their destination [the next chapter in life] with too much baggage,” and she understands “baggage” as unresolved psychological traumas. Interestingly, the meanings explained above are a bit different from my perceptions from previous encounters with the song. For me, the song reflects on how taking too much responsibility and spreading oneself too thin leads to exhaustion and loneliness.
“Bag Lady – NAO Cover for the Soul Train Awards.” YouTube , uploaded by BET International, 2018.
“Bag Lady (Official Video).” YouTube , uploaded by Erykah Badu, n.d.
“Erykah Badu Live – Bag Lady.” YouTube , uploaded by Aikan74, n.d.
HIP Online. “Erykah Badu – Interview.” HIP , 2001.
Swift, Erikah. “How I Learned the True Meaning of Erykah Badu’s “Bag Lady”.” Signed with Love , 2019.