Introduction
Genetics and genomics refer to two concepts that keenly study genes which are the basic operational unit of a living organism. Both genetics and genomics offer invaluable insights into the structure and function of the human body. The knowledge acquired from these two fields is vital in dictating the development of medicine and other health sciences. This essay is an analysis of these two fields and consists of six crucial sections. The first part differentiates genetics from genomics, enabling the distinction between the two disciplines. The second section offers invaluable insight into the role of nursing in the two fields. The third section highlights the ethical consideration in research into the two fields. The fourth dwells on the global utilization of genetics and genomics research while the fifth is an analysis of the influence of various factors on the utilization of genomics and genetics in healthcare. The final section is the conclusion that pieces together the knowledge from all the sections and offers direction. Genetics and genomics are amongst the fastest-growing fields that highlight the next crucial stage in healthcare development hence their value is undeniable.
Differences Between Genetics and Genomics
Genetics refers to study of genes and their functions in the inheritance of various traits amongst humans. This field analyzes how human beings pass down various characteristics to their offspring and the processes involved in the transfer (Marchant et al., 2020). This study also analyzes the impact of the genes transferred to various people. Genes are the primary unit studied in genetics and this term refers to basic units of heredity. Genes carry instructions that direct the manufacture of various proteins within the body. These instructions coordinate the manufacture of proteins such as hormones, enzymes, cells, and muscles.
These proteins are crucial in regulating various biological functions including sleep, growth and reproduction, breathing, digestion, and cognitive activity amongst others (Marchant et al., 2020). Genetics also identifies the diseases that can occur whenever an error is encountered in the ability of genes to direct the activity of the body. These diseases include cystic fibrosis, Huntington’s disease, and phenylketonuria and exhibit heredity (Marchant et al., 2020). This implies that the study of genetics can identify people at a high risk of developing these diseases and predict whether offspring can have them.
Genomics on the other hand is a recent terminology that describes the analysis of all of a human’s genes, referred to as the genome. It investigates the interaction of these genes with each other and the person’s environment. Genomics also studies complex diseases such as heart disease, asthma, diabetes, and cancer since these diseases are caused by genetic variation. Genomics aims to offer new possibilities for therapy, diagnostic procedures, and treatment for some complex diseases (Marchant et al., 2020). One of the most remarkable contributions of genomics is stem cell therapy that enables the replacement of the faultiest cells in the body using cells referred to as stem cells. These stem cells can develop into any human cell and are therefore cultured with this sole purpose. Once ripe, these cells are used to replace injured body organs and ensure healing.
The Role of Nursing in Genetics and Genomics
Nursing ensures the role of genetics and genomics through its involvement in research. The nursing profession encourages the involvement of professionals in research initiatives that enable the growth of this field (Beery et al., 2018). Additional research enables the discovery of new knowledge that is vital in ensuring disease is combated. Nursing also contributes to genomics through the popularization of the alternatives presented by these specialties. Nurses are some of the most exposed healthcare professionals, dealing with many patients. Their widespread interaction provides them with an opportunity to impact knowledge to millions of people whenever healthcare scenarios befitting the genomics alternatives are presented. Nursing also provides nurses with an opportunity to venture into a specialty of genetics called genetic nursing.
The professionals within this field are called genetic nurses. The involvement of specialists within this specific field ensures that the specialty is accorded the serious focus it deserves. Genetic nurses are availed with ample time to focus on this field and propagate its growth through research and experimentation. The implementation of the techniques with a genetic background ensures that treatments with this base are fast-tracked and approved.
Nursing ensures that the fields of genetics and genomics achieve practice and approval through the various nursing organizations. Global and national nursing associations have been at the forefront of ensuring that genetics and genomics are approved by the governments and global associations such as the WHO. This involves implementing their advisory mandate to the leaders in the healthcare fields and directing them to approve genetics and genomics (Hickey et al., 2018). These efforts have put adequate pressure on these organizations to offer sufficient funding to this research and also approve clinical trials of the various suggested genetics methods. The increased attention by governments and healthcare organizations has in turn caused an increase in the usage of these services in general and the growth of this field. Accessibility for more people has also been made possible with developing nations also embracing this revolution in healthcare.
Ethical Considerations with Research Involving Genetics and Genomics
When genetic and genomic research occurs, the data on the genomic sequence of individuals is required to be accessible to these participants. When this data is availed, it may reveal disturbing discoveries such as the possibility of developing cancer within the next few years. This is worrying for a patient who was previously unaware of the possibility and may cause anxiety in the patient and their families (Coughlin, 2020). The ethical issue of whether human beings want to be aware of what is happening in their bodies arises here. Additionally, the individual may be informed of the possibility of the occurrence of a chronic illness such as diabetes from genetic research. This disease may fail to occur and cause unnecessary worry and panic for the individual and their family, causing widespread mistrust in genetics and genomics.
Alternatively, the information about an individual may be discovered and withheld by the researchers. The aftermath of this is that a patient may develop the discovered condition and succumb to the disease partly due to late discovery and inadequate preparation. In this situation, the researcher is seen to have committed ethical injustice to the participant and harm public trust (Coughlin, 2020). In other scenarios, the researcher may be required to reveal the data collected on the genetic differences between the individuals participating. The variations may display some individuals negatively with a myriad of conditions likely to affect them in the future. In the unanticipated circumstances when employers or health insurance companies access this information, they are likely to discriminate against people.
Employers are likely to offer opportunities to individuals unlikely to develop a chronic disease that would be unprofitable due to sick leaves. Insurance companies are also likely to charge people with the likelihood of developing chronic diseases differently from others. This creates the issue of inequality and possible discrimination based on genetic predisposition.
How Genetics and Genomics Research is Conducted and Utilized Globally
Genetic and genomics research is conducted in willing individuals whenever the researchers have a specific hypothesis to test. The research requires the necessary approval from all the organizations involved including the government institutions involved. This research requires the involvement of high-level technology that enables the analysis of the data. Additionally, researchers must collect samples from their participants or patients, extract the genetic information, and carry out the tests required (Stark et al., 2019). Genetic research is conducted whenever researchers want to establish the impact of certain environmental factors on various human aspects. This research is also conducted whenever there is a need to establish the possibility of certain individuals developing certain conditions. This is mainly guided by heredity whereby one family member contracts a certain disease and there is a need to rule out the possibility of others having the same disease.
Genetics and genomics research has been vital in advancing cloning, a technique that replicates exact copies of desired organisms or cells. Cloning is vital in developing identical cells for a certain organ and replacing the damaged cells in that specific organ (Brown, 2020). Cloning identifies the exact genetic composition of the damaged cells and initiates protocols that generate replicas. This includes the generation of cells for a damaged liver where a researcher acquires cells from the victim.
They sequence these cells and grow replicates of the liver cells before replacing them to ensure the patient has a functional liver. Genetics and genomics have also been vital in the development of medicines for the treatment of various conditions. The study of the genes and the various processes involved has been crucial in enabling researchers to identify certain pathways that can be manipulated (Morrell et al., 2019). Upon identification of a pathway that is affected in the occurrence of a certain disease, researchers develop medicines that target this mechanism. The drugs rectify the error and prevent the occurrence of the anticipated disease or reverse the damage to assure health for the victim.
Impact of Culture on Genetic/Genomics
Genetics and genomics are well-advanced fields in healthcare that have achieved massive challenges in usage due to cultural and religious beliefs. Some people may have access to these services but avoid using them due to the belief that such scientific advances contravene their beliefs (Modell et al., 2019). Certain religions discourage their members from seeking scientific medical care due to the stigma associated with this form of healthcare. This includes using fields such as genetics due to the belief that modern practices interfere with their faith. They believe that scientific research is akin to competing with their supreme deity and that such investigations are too detailed for the liking of their supreme being. Some religions believe that science competes with the perfect work of creation executed by their deity. They encourage their believers to subscribe to the things taught and to disregard genetic and genomic medical aid, hence minimal usage.
Some health beliefs are misled and encourage people to wait in earnest for recovery and this has led to the deaths of people who could be helped. Some family values encourage the treatment of members who become enlightened and compassionate towards genetics with distaste. They treat these people as outcasts and discourage associating with these people within their spheres of influence. Some people, though knowledgeable, avoid association with genetics and genomics out of the fear of banishment due to traditions. The traditions highlight extensive reliance on outdated health practices. The culture of mistrust towards western medicine that birthed genetics and genomics is widespread in some parts of the world (Scherr et al., 2019). This is due to the dark history associated with western medicine such as human experimentation and torture. The dark ages highlighted a period of medical advancement at the expense of the lives of innocent people. The experimentation was brutal and sometimes without anesthesia, hence the pain. People who have heard stories about how western medicine oppressed their ancestors are apprehensive towards genetics and genomics.
Conclusion
In conclusion, genetics and genomics are crucial healthcare fields and promise to revolutionize the handling of disease and health. Genetics deals with the study of genes and their influence in inheritance while genomics prioritizes the entire human genome with an aim of combating genetic diseases. There is a surge of healthcare professionals oriented to prioritize these fields, including nurses. Nurses play a key role in familiarizing genetics and genomics with most of their patients while contributing to research that increases available knowledge. Genetics and genomics encounter ethical challenges due to the impact of the knowledge discovered during genetic research.
The research acquired from genetics and genomics has been vital in bettering cloning and pharmacokinetics. This is essential as it promises to combat more diseases through prevention before their occurrence and cure before their deterioration. Genetics and genomics also encounter difficulties arising from family differences and religious differences. There is a need for widespread sensitization amongst all people on the importance of genetics and genomics. Further research into the two is also paramount to ensure more alternative treatment protocols are discovered and perfected for the sake of the patients.