Introduction
The patient is a 32-year-old woman who has missed her menstrual cycle over three weeks and continues visiting a tanning salon weekly. She does not take a folic acid supplement because she has no concerns about her pregnancy. The decision to have a maternal serum marker test is recommended to check the mother’s blood. It helps identify any birth defects or chromosomal disorders known as genetic pathology that could provoke developmental or cognitive delays in a baby (Wojcik et al., 2020). The primary care provider offers a plan of care, including 600 mg of folic acid daily and education on the risk of skin cancer.
Pathology: Explanation and Plan of Care
The plan of care does not contain serious steps but taking supportive supplements and education on the possible tanning-related risks like skin cancer. Ultraviolet radiation (UV) from human-made sources may affect the fetus’ birth weight due to nitric oxide exposure and the mother’s overall health (UVA reduces blood pressure and challenges the immune system (Botyar & Khoramroudi, 2018). The patient should consider the relationship between oncogenesis and pregnancy and consider folic acid to maintain birth defects.
Teratogenic Effect of Not Taking a Folic Acid Supplement
Pregnancy is a period when a woman experiences many changes in her health and basic needs, and the task is to make sure the fetus receives enough vitamins. Folic acid is a common supplement during pregnancy to make new cells and prevent the development of the teratogenic effect. Folate deficiency leads to increased neural tube defects observed in 5 to 20 per 10,000 births (Brown & Wright, 2020). In this case, the risks include brain (Down syndrome) or spine (spina bifida) defects because the woman does not take the supplement.
Inclusion of a Maternal Serum Marker Test
The maternal serum marker test is necessary to check the mother’s blood and identify any birth defects in the fetus. The risks of neural tube defects exist because the woman has not taken folic acid during her first weeks of pregnancy. Thus, the primary care provider has to exclude the possibility of chromosomal disorders and predict the development of genetic conditions due to folate deficiency.
Vulnerability of the Fetus Based on Trimesters and Teratogens and the Role of the Folic Acid Supplement
The patient has concerns about her possible pregnancy, which means she is in her first trimester. This period is characterized by developmental changes like the formation of the spine, arms, legs, head, and heart. The second and third trimesters are less serious, with minor birth defects being developed. Such teratogens as alcohol, smoking, and unnecessary medications may be dangerous for fetus development. The woman should use the folic acid supplement to improve the neural tube condition and reduce teratogens’ effects.
UVA and UVB Rays in the Process of Oncogenesis in Skin Cells
UV radiation consists of UVA and UVB rays that penetrate deeply into the human skin, provoking genetic damage. UVA rays affect the dermis increasing the chances of wrinkles and immune suppression, and UVB, compared to sunlight, is a risk factor for melanoma and carcinoma (Botyar & Khoramroudi, 2018). This type of radiation destroys cell DNA and provokes mutations that remain invisible for a long period.
Education for the Patient on the Risk of Skin Cancer and Skin Assessment
The woman should know the risk of skin cancer due to UVA/UVB exposure. When the skin color changes, destruction of the skin and DNA occurs. The woman is responsible not only for her health but also for her future baby’s health, and recommendations include the tanning impact on the baby. Cooperation with a dermatologist solves cancer-related problems, and folic acid helps support the child’s development.
Patient-Care Technologies
Patient-care technologies promote safety and offer the best quality services. In caring for pregnant women, such simple tools as catheters, needles, syringes, and nebulizers help nurses support patients. Besides, the woman needs to understand her level of responsibility, and text messaging or social media are the best digital health technologies in this case (Kuwabara et al., 2019). It is important to communicate on different topics about pregnancy.
Conclusion
In general, this case introduces the woman with concerns about pregnancy and does not take anything to protect the child and create a favorable environment. Tanning is not recommended because of the risk for genetic disorders like skin cancer. Folic acid should be regularly taken to promote the fetus’s development and safe growth. Communication and education with healthcare providers are vital for this female patient.