The ancient historical texts on Minoans published by Halsall reflect some facts about their history discovered much later than these accounts had been compiled. Namely, Plutarch’s story about Theseus demonstrates the notion of the lack of defensive works in Crete. According to this text, Theseus invaded the island’s port and captured it quickly since its citizens mistook his navy for their own. This detail could remind the truth: Minoans were merchants and did not develop extensive safeguards. Moreover, Herodotos’ text depicts the extinction of Cretans, which corresponds to the archeological data, although they mention the eruption as the main factor for the demise of Minoans.
British Institute at Ankara’s video about Helen of Troy is quite informative about the representation of women in ancient times. As such, Helen was perceived as the most magnificent and feminine person for many centuries in Athens as well as Sparta. Moreover, it is known that she became worshipped as a goddess in Laconia. Greeks often depicted Helen via the use of the most precious materials, which signified the importance of this character. This woman was traditionally perceived as a seducer and even the cause of sorrow in the Ancient Greek culture. Moreover, the image of Helen of Troy has surpassed time and is still used as a euphemism of beauty.
Evelyn-White’s translation of Hesiod’s Theogony presents valuable knowledge about the Greek religion. Hesiod describes the gods as anthropomorphous beings who at the same time have natural power or represent parts of the universe themselves. For example, the Earth and the Heaven are consorts that produce other gods, which are often associated with emotions or natural phenomena. The story about Heaven (Uranus) being castrated by his rebellious child, Chronos, is especially remarkable. The war of generations and overthrowing the elder by the younger is also present in Mesopotamian, Scandinavian, and other mythologies. Hesiod’s poem clarifies the Greek conception of gods: the primordial being and their offspring having unlimited powers in the world, and yet creatures with human emotions and motives.
Women by Semonides of Amorgos, published by Temperance, depicts male Greeks’ expectations for their women. The author enumerates the types of women created by Zeus and primarily serve as an eternal punishment for mankind. Semonides describes females that are not beautiful in a sarcastic manner, yet he condemns women who care about their appearance and hygiene. Moreover, he complains about females that care about their household too much, as well as about ones who keep it not in the best ways; irritation expressed by wives also disappoints him. A proper married woman, according to Semonides, should be like a bee: working with joy and caring for her family. Furthermore, she should be a competent householder and not participate in raves with her girlfriends.
Sappho’s Hymn to Aphrodite is an exciting piece of poetry for several reasons. First, it implies that the mortals and the gods can interact; people can pray for the help of the divinities and expect it to be fulfilled. This notion suggests that gods can be both benevolent and cruel, and the fate of humans is always at their will. Moreover, this poem indicates that Aphrodite is a goddess of love who interacts with human relationships by exercising her powers. So, by begging Aphrodite to end the struggle and enter the fight, Sappho invokes the wreath of the goddess for a human being that has disappointed her love affairs.