Health promoters are a trained workforce whose primary purpose is to improve health through a variety of activities carried out by health promotion organizations. Individual empowerment, societal responsibility for health, and establishing an enabling environment for developing personal skills and boosting community action are among their top goals (Nutbeam, 2019). In the realm of health promotion, experts from various multidisciplinary health workers have agreed on the characteristics of effective collaboration and an interdisciplinary approach.
Interdisciplinary teams’ most essential purpose is to bring together a variety of diverse viewpoints on caring and to use the talents and knowledge of many different individuals and sectors. Intersectional collaboration between different health professionals and the public and commercial sectors is critical for effective health promotion (US Department of Health and Human Services, 2018). The diversity of these elements demonstrates that one’s health is not just dependent on medical services or nurses and physicians (Nutbeam, 2019). The large range of activities that make up health promotion needs a diverse set of abilities from a number of health professionals and industries.
Incorporating multidisciplinary specialists within the health promotion team, such as Nurse Practitioners (NPs), Social Workers (SWs), and Registered Nurses (RNs), will be advantageous in the long and short term. Nurse practitioners are nurses who receive further education and training and are capable of treating a wide range of ailments as well as providing preventative care and health education (Pun, 2018). Social workers have specialized training in assisting people and groups in developing skills and resolving difficulties. Whether the issues are personal, interpersonal, or social in nature, social workers can assist in guiding and resolving many of today’s issues (Nutbeam, 2019). Registered nurses examine and analyze healthcare needs in order to decide the best service or treatment, the best healthcare provider, and the best equipment to deliver patient care (Pun, 2018). Thus, their skills and approach will be essential in the success of an interdisciplinary team tasked with health promotion.