The resources presented in the module allow discussion of the future of epidemiology and its transformation to meet the emerging challenges of a new era. Brilliant (2006) emphasizes that it is possible to eliminate epidemiological threats, particularly infectious diseases, through early detection and response. New technologies such as big data can help scientists better understand the characteristics of viruses and diseases and reach wider populations (Khoury & Wei, 2015). Thus, more efficient data collection and analysis will allow epidemiologists to better understand the causes and patterns of infections and diseases, which will enable better detection. Additionally, technologies such as social media can help researchers respond more effectively to threats by monitoring global epidemiological threats and outbreaks (Center for Infectious Disease Dynamics, 2016). In the future, epidemiology may adopt different tools to deal with diseases and viruses on a larger scale. While such an approach will allow for faster detection and response to threats, it is impossible to eliminate them completely.
Thus, I do not agree that in the future, even the development of epidemiology can lead to the complete elimination of diseases. However, I believe that scientists will learn to respond more effectively to them with deeper knowledge, and with the help of technology, this aspect is likely to reduce mortality from various diseases and infections significantly. Aylward (2014) notes that complacency at this stage will be the greatest epidemiological threat. If all diseases are eliminated, humanity will not be able to respond in time to sudden and unexpected threats, which will lead to disaster. Thus, I think that in the future, it will be possible to eliminate global epidemiological threats such as pandemics, but local outbreaks will still occur.
Aylward, B. (2014). Humanity vs. Ebola. How we could win a terrifying war [Video]. TED. Web.
Brilliant, L. (2006). My wish: Help me stop pandemics [Video]. TED. Web.
Center for Infectious Disease Dynamics. (2016). What does the future of epidemiology look like? [Video]. YouTube. Web.
Khoury, M J., & Wei, G. S. (2015). The future of epidemiology in the age of precision medicine: Cancer, cardiovascular disease, and beyond. Web.