The introduction of computer technologies in modern society involves many activities that seemingly do not have a connection with computer technologies themselves, such as the recruiting process. With the rise of corporate culture and the development of a more competitive market of candidates, a detailed candidate selection process required a more straightforward solution than manual filtering. Recently, after assessing the possibilities of wide application of newly developed AI technologies, Human Resource managers started using program software to reduce the workload associated with the selection process. The article by Pardes explores how the candidates learned to manipulate the technology in favor of their own interests.
The article starts with an interview with the person who discovered the consistent patterns in the operation of the software’s candidate selection system, Shirin Nilizadeh. According to Pardes, a friend approached Nilizadeh with concerns about her resume. Alizadeh’s friend has come to the conclusion that her resumes do not reach HR managers as they inexplicably seem to lack something. Through a series of enhancements to a collection of random resumes, Nilizadeh defined that using certain words not necessarily associated with required qualifications can increase the candidates’ position in the resume-ranking program. While Nilizadeh’s interest was related to academic purposes, many platforms offer the candidates a chance to improve their resume with all kinds of hacks, such as inserting relevant keywords in invisible font. It turns out that there are many ways for the candidates to increase their chances of to interview, from including the names of prestigious universities to using competitor company names and copying the job description details.
Further in the article, the author explains that focusing on efficiency can result in over-dignifying technology. One of the interviewees in the article, Joseph Fuller, suggests that excessive use of artificial intelligence in the recruiting process can create “a high-tech pathway to discrimination” (qtd. in Pardes). Therefore, without knowing the necessary keywords or using the different formulations for the existing skills, a substantial portion of job applicants may never proceed to the next stage of the selection process. According to Julie Schweber’s perspective featured in Pardes’ article, software filters as many as 75% of applicants based on the resume meeting the specific job criteria. The issue is worsened by the fact that third parties offer paid resume enhancement and applicant tracking systems, influencing the labor market competitiveness level by improving the situation for applicants with financial means.
Analyzing the information acquired from the article emphasizes the impersonal character of technology. While using technology to optimize organizational processes can benefit productivity, it creates a barrier for individuals with insufficient technological skills. In addition, excessive reliance on technology results in the presence of process weaknesses that can be manipulated for malicious or harmful purposes. Therefore, while the use of technology seemingly increases objectivity in the decision-making process, the potential manipulations can equal the outcomes of nepotism, corruption, and bribery.
Lastly, I decided to choose this article because it displays the weaknesses of technological systems and their improper application in modern society. It was interesting to learn about the influence of the nuances between human and machine perceptions in reading the text typed in white color on white paper. Acquiring the additional perspective from the recruiting process can benefit me in identifying potential mistakes and threats in my future career as an IT professional.