Epithelial tissues of the body represent the tissues lining the surfaces of skin, digestive organs, and respiratory organs. They can be found anywhere in the body where a barrier is needed to be formed, with things being able to pass across the created barrier. Because of the wide coverage of epithelial tissues in the body, there are many types of diseases affecting the tissue, and it is essential to know them to understand how the disease affects epithelial tissues. At this time, let’s focus on eczema as one of the widespread concerns of epithelial tissue.
Put simply, eczema also referred to as atopic dermatitis, is a condition that affects the skin, which is made of epithelial tissue1. It makes the skin red and itchy and can first manifest in people as early as childhood. It is important to note that eczema tends to transform into a chronic condition for many people and can disappear and flare up periodically, often depending on environmental factors. Unfortunately, there is no cure that can help clear eczema entirely and make it never reappear. Although, there are several treatments and self-care activities that can help relieve the itching and redness and prevent new flare-ups on a short-term basis. Examples of good practices for eczema include avoiding harsh soaps, moisturizing the skin on a regular basis, as well as applying medicated creams and different types of ointments.
Getting to know the symptoms of atopic dermatitis can help identify the signs early to engage in preventive and management efforts, according to a doctor’s recommendations. While the signs and symptoms of atopic dermatitis can vary from one person to another, they typically include dry skin, itching of different extents, especially during the night, the appearance of red to darker-colored patches, usually on the hands, feet, neck, ankles, wrists, as well as inside the knees and elbows’ bends. The skin affected by eczema usually appears thickened, scaly, and cracked, and due to scratching, it can often be raw, swollen, and highly sensitive to different external factors. Also, one may check for signs of small bumps that can leak fluid and crust over when being scratched.
When it comes to the age differentiation of eczema, the onset of the disease is often at five years old, with the highest incidence taking place between three and six months, but it can take place at any age. Around 60% of patients develop eczema in the first year of their life, while 90% get it within the first five years1. However, it is notable that atopic dermatitis can happen to people of different ages, although the percentage is much lower than those mentioned for children.
The burden of disease can be different depending on its severity as well as the ways of management. However, pain and itchiness of the skin can be quite cumbersome, preventing a person affected by eczema from doing everyday things2. Also, because eczema can often have an unpleasant appearance, some people can be self-conscious about it and get embarrassed, which is quite unfortunate3. Therefore, the problem with eczema is that it can significantly reduce the quality of life and health. Not only is sore and itchy skin annoying, but it also does not perform its protective function effectively, which causes a problem for the overall health of the body.