I trust that people create relationships according to the interactions’ risks and rewards. A person deliberates or unconsciously assesses the risks and benefits of action and chooses the most rewarding activity. Money, love, power, or societal approbation are examples of concrete and intangible rewards and drawbacks (Cox et al., 2021). Since people base relationships on rewards, each member of society tends to demand more gains from a relationship. Individuals are never born good or evil; however, they are influenced to develop certain attributes based on particular demands. Individuals are driven to labor for fundamental necessities such as food and shelter (Cox et al., 2021). Others obtain motivation from personal, cultural, societal, or economic conditions.
In this regard, people are not born evil or good but motivated by biological, social, and economic factors. Individuals with quick actions and adaptability use agility to maximize their potential. People may also maximize their potential by adopting a positive attitude toward all events and confronting problems front on (Cox et al., 2021). Contemporary issues such as alienation, poverty, and insecurities significantly influence human relationships. Society must foster equity, cooperation, and respect among cultures and social groups to obtain control and achieve stable relationships.
Administrations have an obligation to guarantee economic and social security to the citizens. To guarantee financial stability, the government in socialist ideology sets preparations for equal income distribution among working people (Cox et al., 2021). Other social provisions include free education, retirement benefits, social grants, and accessible healthcare services in allocated cases, such as maternal care. Additionally, states provide and ensure the maintenance of public goods and services such as roads and security. A state’s responsibility is to safeguard its inhabitants against internal and foreign conflicts (Cox et al., 2021). The government safeguards civilians from economic, social, and political attacks through policies and the law. I think states should cushion vulnerable groups such as women, the elderly, and youths by providing free services, employment opportunities, and incentives on particular goods and services. The government should also nurture potential talents to help generate income, particularly the youth.
The current government has initiated many programs that work for the welfare of civilians countrywide. For instance, the education for all movement has benefited many people regardless of age, gender and ethnicity. Nevertheless, wealthier individuals and localities profit from the system more than the poor and ordinary Americans. Some shortcomings include the health and safety of the average citizen. The government spends significantly on internal and external security, but many neighborhoods live in absolute fear due to violence and insecurity. I think the capitalist economic system is appropriate for the State. However, it needs reforms in the labor force regarding individuals with less competitive skills. For instance, providing alternative sources of employment to vulnerable groups such as the mentally and physically unstable. My ideal State entails equality and democracy in distributing social and economic services to have healthy and happy citizens willing to boost the economy through hard work and devotion.
My views are inspired by Josephine Shaw Lowell, a social worker during the 19 th century. Lowell is famous for her charitable activities and reform in social work. She always believed in and promoted equality while helping vulnerable groups. Despite coming from a wealthy family, Lowell saw the challenges and hardships of minority groups and dedicated her life to establishing institutions and reforms in social services. She had a realistic perspective of society where the rich and influential continue to flourish despite the lower citizens’ efforts. Her motivation came from empathy and willingness to sacrifice to improve the poor, sick and mentally disturbed lives through better education, health services, and cleaner prisons. Since government systems were not involved in most aspects of citizens’ welfare at the time, Lowell took it upon herself to make a difference. I would like to follow in the footsteps of creating a better society through social work and state reforms in the field.
Sexual orientation, gender, class, and race are significant predictors of social attitudes among populations. These factors may hinder effective community service at institutional and interpersonal levels. Individuals struggling with sexual orientation may have divergent views on social services, such as resolving social interactions (Cox et al., 2021). Race and ethnicity can also challenge fieldwork since most vulnerable groups come from minority ethnic groups and may pose challenges during communication and general interactions. When addressing serious issues affecting their communities, the groups may exhibit xenophobic sentiments and unpleasant conduct (Cox et al., 2021). Discussing personal experiences and thoughts is challenging when people have different perceptions of each other. Nevertheless, social work involves good interpersonal skills, which I possess and will apply.
The liberal principle dictating accessibility of quality services and welfare when needed supports social work principles of serving the community efficiently. It empowers the practice by providing global competence and institutional empowerment, which enhances service delivery. Nonetheless, the liberalization of the social work market may impede successful service delivery (Cox et al., 2021). Social workers operate under the ethics of integrity, social justice, and community development among all populations. Creating dominance by selling social work services depicts an economic-centered approach based on self-interest than community development. The liberal perspective discourages client discretion since purchasing services works on the terms and conditions of the buyer (Cox et al., 2021). Thus, making money the primary consideration in social work may hinder service delivery due to clients giving selective information as they are paying for the services. Alternatively, the liberal approach can be a barrier to helping poor communities since they cannot afford the capital. I anticipate meeting challenges while working with the vulnerable community due to the relative lack of resources on either side.