The YouTube video published by GP Synergy, “GP Training in Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Services,” sends a message that Aboriginal Medical Services play a crucial role within the diverse community. The services are essential for providing culturally sensitive and high-quality care to the target populations, often marginalized and underserved, ensuring they have everything they need to tackle rising health concerns. The comprehensive set of services provided by the medical facilities ensures that the patients from the Aboriginal community have access to affordable and convenient health care. One service can support multiple aspects of clients’ lives.
The comprehensive approach toward culturally-sensitive care is especially relevant in addressing the social determinants of health (SHOD), which encompass multiple areas of the population’s health, well-being, and quality of life. SDOH includes safe housing, neighborhoods, convenient transportation, racial discrimination and violence, education, income, job opportunities, access to nutritional foods, low-quality air and water, and language and literacy skills (Healthy People 2030, 2020). Therefore, the Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Services aims to address the health disparities and inequities that most Aboriginal patients encounter (Pearson et al., 2020). The professionals working within the Aboriginal Community Health Services framework underline the importance of patient education to ensure that the population is aware of its potential health challenges and knows about the necessity of early prevention and management.
The prominent SHOD that is being discussed in the “GP Training in Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Services” video is discrimination. The health center workers acknowledge that many of their patients have experienced discrimination in the healthcare system and want to receive culturally-sensitive services (Kim, 2019). Providing such services is challenging because healthcare workers do not know what to expect from each patient and must be prepared to carry out culturally sensitive services (Jongen, McCalman, and Bainbridge, 2018). Care continuity is especially relevant in this case because when patients feel that they are being discriminated against or misunderstood, they are less likely to return to their providers to continue treatment or screening for their core health concerns.
Even though implementing culturally sensitive care and addressing the SHOD of discrimination is challenging for providers, it is also highly rewarding. The patients discriminated against want to feel accepted, understood, and cared for. Because of this, the workers of the Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Services institutions always prioritize building meaningful relationships with their patients (Luft, 2017). Besides, the professionals have noted that they have taken the role of advocates who support their patients in terms of healthcare services and their acceptance in their immediate community and the larger society.
Therefore, the work of Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Services professionals entails consistent collaboration between themselves and their patients who feel underserved and misunderstood. To conclude, addressing the social determinants of health that affects the Aboriginal community is a demanding process that requires dedication and focuses on the unique needs of patients coming to a facility to receive culturally-sensitive care. Undoubtedly, the process will take some time because healthcare providers must be well-prepared and well-versed in the social determinants of health affecting their clients.
GP Synergy. (2017). GP training in Aboriginal community controlled health services . Web.
Healthy People 2030. (2020) Social determinants of health . Web.
Jongen, C., McCalman, J., and Bainbridge, R. (2018 ‘Health workforce cultural competency interventions: a systematic scoping review’, BMC Health Services Research , 18(1), pp. 232.
Kim P. J. (2019) ‘Social determinants of health inequities in Indigenous Canadians through a life course approach to colonialism and the residential school system’, Health Equity , 3(1), pp. 378-381.
Luft L. M. (2017) ‘The essential role of physician as advocate: how and why we pass it on’ Canadian Medical Education Journal , 8(3), pp. e109-e116.
Pearson, O., Schwartzkopff, K., Dawson, A., Hagger, C., Karagi, A., Davy, C., Brown, A. and Braunack-Mayer, A. (2020) ‘Aboriginal community controlled health organisations address health equity through action on the social determinants of health of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples in Australia’, BMC Public Health , 20, pp. 1859.