Silke, A. (Ed.). (2019). Routledge handbook of terrorism and counterterrorism . Routledge.
The book describes the main acts carried out by the group, as well as its fundamental motives. In that way, the source includes information on the 1978 bank robberies and other violent actions that ultimately led to the Sri Lankan Civil War. Additionally, LTTE’s objective to create an independent and separate state for Sri Lankan Tamils, who the government had previously oppressed, is reviewed. The research source is relevant for investigating the goals of the terrorist group, as well as explaining the establishment of an independent Tamil state. Therefore, it would be helpful for my analysis of LTTE’s emergence process.
Thurairajah, T. (2021). Performing nationalism: The United Nations Human Rights Council (UNHRC) and Sri Lankan Tamil diasporic politics in Switzerland . The Geographical Journal, 188 (1). Web.
The themes of Tamil nationalism are explored in the following source. The article highlights ways through which the Sri Lankan minority groups acknowledged their right to an independent state and how such groups shared their ideology beyond their country. The source’s relevancy to the exploration of the group’s ideology is evident, as it explains its impact on the rest of the world. It was useful in the process of defining the concept of Tamil nationalism in my paper.
Sauerborn, D. (2017). Political violence revisited: The liberation tigers of Tamil Eelam . Terrorism Revisited , 181-198. Web.
This research paper focuses on the leader of LTTE, Velupillai Prabhakaran. Specifically, his role in the establishment and progress of the terrorist group are discussed. Furthermore, the paper also mentions LTTE’s connections to other terror groups. Understanding the leader’s intentions and the organization’s total impact on other groups is relevant for an in-depth investigation of LTTE. Apart from that, I referred to this information while assessing the organization’s failure in attempting to create an independent state.
Davies, S. E., & True, J. (2017). When there is no justice: gendered violence and harm in post-conflict Sri Lanka . The International Journal of Human Rights, 21 (9), 1320-1336. Web.
While emphasizing the effect of Sri Lankan conflicts on targeted genders and issues of social inequality, the paper reviews the violent and unethical methods of LTTE, including children abduction and blackmail. These crimes are described to highlight the importance of ceasing targeted violence in areas of conflict. While investigating the group’s terroristic features, I was able to include the related child recruitment and violence methods to emphasize their impact.
Fazil, M. M., & Fowsar, M. A. M. (2020). The end of Sri Lanka’s civil war and the fall of the liberation tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE): A critical analysis of the contributed factors to the defeat of the LTTE . Journal of Politics and Law, 13 (4). Web.
The critical analysis provides insight into the ways the organization maintained its resources to battle national security, including financial support and weapon sales. Moreover, the paper explores possible reasons for LTTE’s fall and the factors that had contributed to it significantly. Its perspective on the mentioned topics is relevant for an evaluation of the group’s organizational tactics and possible reasons for their insufficiency. Ultimately, the analysis also aided in understanding the issue from the terroristic group’s perspective.
Sarvananthan, M. (2018). ‘Terrorism’ or ‘Liberation’? Towards a distinction: A case study of the armed struggle of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE). Perspectives on Terrorism, 12 (2), 1-18.