Imbalances and Excesses
Water
The amount of food taken was recommendable on the first day, but the nutrients were not well distributed among the types of foods chosen. According to the principles of water should be taken regularly at least eight glasses a day. Water helps flush out harmful substances in the body, keep our bodies hydrated, and help us lose weight (Knight 1). Water is also vital because it aids during digestion and forms part of all the body fluids. Not even a glass of water was included among all the diets chosen for the three days.
Proteins
The foods containing proteins consumed on the first day are well distributed even though they have high calories. The foods containing proteins on the first day included cheeseburgers, eggs, and yogurt. The sources on the second day, milk and chicken breasts, are also sources of proteins, but they also contain calories. The source of proteins on the third day has the highest amount of calories which is dangerous. Proteins are vital in the diet in that they are the construction blocks of a lifetime; each cell in the human body comprises protein. The basic arrangement of protein is a hindrance of amino acids. One needs protein to help their bodies heal cells and produce new ones.
Sources of proteins should not contain large amounts of calories as they are harmful to health. Human bodies store up excess fats when we eat more calories than we use up. If this behavior becomes, frequent one may put on more weight. Adding weight may lead to obesity, which is a source of other health conditions that are harmful to the body. Calories in excess are unhealthy, so the daily diet should contain minimal calories or do more physical exercises so they are broken. Principles of nutrition suggest that to uphold a steady weight, the vigor that is put into people’s bodies must be the same as the one utilized during physical roles and bodily activity (Villegas 30). There are also minimal foods eaten over the two days that are sources of proteins like chicken and yogurt.
Potassium
Potassium is a mineral required by all of the body’s cells. Since it contains a modest electric charge that activates frequent cell and neuron actions, it is also known as an alkali. Potassium is an organic mineral that might be present in several meals and taken as a supplement. Its principal objective in the blood is to contribute to maintaining steady fluid balance in our cells. Sodium keeps fluid heights stable outside of cells. Potassium also helps in muscular contraction and supports regular heart rates.
Vitamins A and E
Vitamins are minimal in the diet because their primary sources are fruits and vegetables, which are minimally included in the diet. Another low-supplied mineral in the three da diet is minimal. Vitamins are essential because they are preventive foods. They prevent our bodies from disease b increasing the immune system. Fruits should be included in the diet eaten fifteen minutes before the meal. Taking them before eating ensures that the appetite is boosted.
Iron
The only meal in the diet that supplies iron is the cereals taken on the second day. Iron is essential for the formation of blood. About 70% of the cell’s Iron is contained in blood, including in blood cells and deoxygenated blood, found in cardiac tissues. Red blood cells are required to deliver oxygen and nutrients to the muscles in your blood. Myoglobin receives, stores, transports, and releases muscle fibers into the atmosphere. About 6% of the body’s Iron is found in proteins required for breathing and carbohydrate metabolism, as well as enzymes associated with the manufacture of keratin and transmitters. Iron is also necessary for healthy immunological activity. All the foods containing calories are energy sources, so energy-giving foods were well supplied throughout the three days.
Calories
Calories were supplied in excess, and it is advised that the individual increase daily physical activities to ensure that they are used up. All the junk foods contain a high amount of calories. Calories are essential for the body because they are the primary sources of energy, but they should be taken in controlled amounts. Thus, to conduct the basic operations of life, the person’s body requires calories.
Zinc
Zinc is a vital nutrient in the body, and the body does not naturally manufacture it, so supplement foods are recommended. It is a nutrient found in the body and helps the body’s immune systems and metabolic rate. Zinc is also important for remedying injuries and improving the sagacity of the palate and scent. Through diverse nutrition, the body acquires adequate zinc. Zinc can be acquired from various foods such as chicken, red meat, fortified breakfast, and cereals.
Proper Diet Recommendations
The nutrition principles require people to avoid canned foods because they are not suitable for their health. Packaged meals are highly damaging to your health since they include a variety of dangerous components. People may want to fill their bodies with delicious healthy grains and fresh foods while avoiding empty carbohydrates and hydrogenated oils. Consume 100 percent whole grains meals such as whole wheat tortillas, whole grain bread, and brown rice to provide the system with more consistent energy.
Breakfast is the essential dish of each day, so it is mandatory to have it! Taking the mornings to eat a well-balanced meal will be extremely helpful to your health. A well-balanced breakfast increases your metabolism and gets your day started on the right foot. A poached egg, a cup of milk, whole wheat bread, fresh produce, and a cup of coffee are all excellent options. One feels full and energized the entire morning, and you will not go for harmful snacks like crackers.
The principles of nutrition will be used in panning for the other meal. A good breakfast should contain the following whole grains, such as waffles or cold grain whole cereals—lean proteins that include eggs, lean meat, legumes, and groundnuts. Fruits should also be included in the morning meals. Cereal is an intelligent option since studies show that people that eat cereal for breakfast ingest fewer carbohydrates are much less likely to become obese than those who eat other breakfast meals. Cereals, on the other hand, are not all evenly distributed. The rest of the no heavy meals are required when the breakfast is heavy. Supplementary foods rich in calcium, potassium, Iron, and vitamins should be consumed.
Sources of Iron comprise; liver, but it is not recommended for expectant mothers, beans like red kidney beans and chickpeas, groundnuts, dehydrated fruits like the apricots, red meat, and finally soybeans flour. Anemia, a condition characterized by low blood in the body, occurs when our diet lacks Iron. Girls who shed a large amount of blood throughout their monthly cycle (heavy menstruation) are more likely to develop anemia and may have to replenish with Iron. Calcium accounts for around 2% of the typical individual’s physique. The teeth and bones contain most of this; the remaining is kept in the muscles or plasma. Calcium is necessary for a robust skeletal system. It is also critical to the health and operation of other physiological mechanisms, such as neurons and physical access. Dairy meals like cream, yogurt, butter, and calcium-fortified products like various tree kinds of milk (for instance, nondairy milk and rice milk) and morning cereal are sources of vitamins and minerals like calcium.
Various periods of life necessitate different quantities of calcium: small children, teens, and old ladies all need more than the approximate spend. Although potassium and sodium are closely linked, their actions in physiology are opposed. Both are necessary micronutrients that are important for metabolic equilibrium and have been related to the development of serious illnesses, particularly heart disease. High sodium consumption affects the cardiovascular system, contributing to heart disease, whereas high potassium consumption relaxes veins and arteries and excretes salt while decreasing blood pressure (Oak and Ghugre 129). Sources of potassium include; leaf vegetables, carrots, and lean meat. Beans, groundnuts, fruits like pineapples and kiwis are good sources of potassium. Our bodies do not naturally produce potassium, so individuals must eat foods rich in nutrients.
Summary
To summarize, we need a healthier diet to uphold a healthy immunological process and prevent sickness. Maintaining a sturdy insusceptible response to defend one’s body is what “maintenance” means. Individuals should consume a varied range of foods and keep proportionate nutrition. The advantages of forming healthy food and lifestyle habits from a young age significantly influences activeness during their adulthood; it also increases individual and community performance. Nutrient education is an essential component of a broader approach to boost food safety and reduce hunger. Nutrition is one of the most significant fundamental animal needs. Consequently, there is no such condition that might result in considerable health difficulties to reserve the rights of consumers. To safeguard customers and test for misuse, a range of scientific approaches have been proposed, which is vital especially for canned food consumers.