The work of a clinical or medical office worker is characterized by a combination of a large number of administrative operations with medical activities. Primarily, these professionals are office assistants filling out paperwork and interacting with staff (“How to become a medical office assistant,” 2021). As a result, I will be approaching interviews for this job in a professional business style. While the fitting suit can be expensive, I already have the proper formal attire. Using my black formal suit, shoes, and minimal accessories, I can make the right impression without reducing my budget. In warm weather, I can go to an interview right in a suit, and in cold weather, I can add my usual outerwear, for example, an overcoat.
Work clothes, theoretically, may require additional investments and purchases. All healthcare workers, including office workers, must wear a special uniform called scrubs, consisting of a short-sleeved shirt and trousers. This uniform is relatively cheap, and a single set of scrubs can be found on Amazon for about $20-$40 (“Medical assistant’s uniform,” 2019). Most of all, in this context, one needs to take care of shoes since these specialists sometimes have to stand or walk a lot. A good pair of closed-toe shoes can cost around $100, but I have tennis shoes that fit the dress code (“Medical assistant’s uniform,” 2019). However, it must be taken into account that many medical institutions issue uniforms on their own, considering them as consumables, so the choice of purchasing a uniform will depend on the rules of a particular hospital. In any case, it is simple and easy to wear, so it will not entail high costs.
Reflecting on the points studied and prepared, I want to note that the new information will affect my budget and life plan very little. In the best case, if the hospital issues uniforms, I won’t have to spend any money at all, as I can wear my existing suit for the interview and shoes for work. In the worst case, I will still be within the budget when I have to buy everything for work. Therefore, I can put that $200 aside and mentally prepare for possible demands from my interviewers. In addition, this study showed that the issue of clothing for interviews and work is not a problem for me, and I am already prepared for it in many respects.