“Young Goodman Brown” was written by Nathaniel Hawthorne in 1835, but it was set in Puritan New England during the late 17th century. The Puritans split from England’s Anglican Church, arriving at Plymouth Rock and founding both Plymouth and Boston. They became the main Christian sect in New England at the period, though other Christian groups such as Quakers and Anabaptists also had significant populations. Puritans believed in a rigid philosophy that left no space for mistake; for example, immoral thoughts and dreams were seen to be as damaging as actually committing a sin. Native Americans who did not follow Christianity were likewise thought to be Satan’s children, according to them. “Young Goodman Brown” is set during the Salem Witch Trials in Massachusetts and exposes the Salem Puritans’ hypocritical and inhibitive moral ideals.
The Puritans’ belief was that the devil was responsible for every evil deed that took place, whether it was through witchcraft or through rituals. The Salem witch trials, which took place in the late 17th century and involved hearings, prosecutions, and executions, sentenced twenty people to death based on rumor and suspicion, including Martha Corey and Martha Ingalls Carrier, who is mentioned briefly in “Young Goodman Brown.” John Hathorne, Nathaniel Hawthorne’s direct ancestor, was one of the most ruthless judges in the Salem witch trials of 1692. It’s possible that Hawthorne felt some guilt about his ancestor’s crimes; not only did he drop the “w” from his surname to disassociate himself from Hathorne, but he also spent most of his writing career delving into American Puritanism, often finding more criticism than praise.
Despite the fact that the Salem Witch Trials had occurred more than a century before, nineteenth-century New England was still bleeding with inherited guilt, even as it revolted against the Puritans’ restrictive standards. Hawthorne was born in Salem, Massachusetts, into this culture in 1804. His roots and sensibilities were undeniably Puritan, despite the fact that he designated Unitarian as his official religion. The Salem Witch Trials, one of the terrifying incidents in Puritan history, saw the residents of Salem execute twenty-five innocent persons accused of being witches. Accusations of witchcraft were frequently made for motives other than perceived witchcraft, such as retribution, jealousy, or botched child delivery. During the second half of the seventeenth century, Quakers were subjected to Puritan intolerance. Puritans and Quakers both came to America in search of religious liberty and the opportunity to establish their own colonies where they could believe whatever they wished.
In conclusion, the short story “Young Goodman Brown” by Nathaniel Hawthorne describes historical events that took place in the late 17 century. Understanding the historical context of that time helps to understand the main idea of the work. The main message of it evolved around puritanism, which was influential in late 17 century England. Witchcrafts and the idea of the existence of the devil are also part of the historical context of that time. Thus, such rituals as witch trials are also presented in the short story and help to understand the attitudes of the main characters.
Hawthorne, Nathaniel. “Young Goodman Brown.” (1835).