The healthcare system is currently under significant strain due to the COVID 19 pandemic. The problems of supply and staff shortages in healthcare have existed before but have now worsened. In particular, the issue of shortage of medical supplies is noticeable in the outpatient surgical setting where I work. This problem is directly related to the existing principles of building supply chains in healthcare, which should be subject to change. In this situation, John’s Kotter steps in leading change can become a framework for bringing positive results.
The main advantage of this theory is the holistic approach to making changes. Most importantly, Kotter’s theory includes eight steps that are based on the formation and communication of a vision of the need for change (Beauvais & Spahn, 2018). Additionally, this theory is most useful, as it allows innovation to be introduced at a structural rather than purely organizational level. With regard to the described problem, this aspect is the most significant. Eight steps suggested by Kotter that could help in the successful implementation of changes are described below.
 1. The first step is to create a sense of urgency for change. Kotter notes that it takes about 75% of supporters to successfully create a sense of urgency (Beauvais & Spahn, 2018, p. 255). This can be achieved through discussions with other nurses and providing information on how the shortage of supplies negatively affects the quality of care and patient outcomes.
 2. Successful implementation of change requires building a coalition through the practice of effective leadership. On the issue, you need to work with representatives of other healthcare units and organizations to acquire more supporters. At this stage, it is important to find influential associates who could make the problem public.
 3. At this stage, it is necessary to create a vision and a strategy corresponding to it. In particular, it is important to provide people not only with evidence of the existence of the problem and its consequences but also to indicate the overall goal of changes. Additionally, it is necessary to articulate how changes in supply chains, as well as a focus on planning and forecasting, can make a significant difference.
 4. After that, it is important to communicate the vision, for which it is necessary to use every opportunity. Structural changes are needed in relation to the problem, which complicates the process of introducing changes. At this stage, it is critical to articulate the vision not only among colleagues but also in the medical community as a whole. This will help in expanding the publicity of the issue as well as acquiring supporters.
 5. A key aspect for a leader is also to stimulate action and remove barriers to change. In particular, the aspirations of nurses and their active work to implement the strategy need to be supported and inspired. It is also important to identify those who oppose change and try to convince them of the need for it.
 6. For effective implementation, it is also necessary to achieve short-term results, which will become an indicator of the possibility of change. As part of solving the problem, even expanding the publicity of its existence can be a victory. To successfully resolve an issue, it is important that organizations recognize the need for long-term supply planning.
 7. After each small success within the strategy, it is important to evaluate the results and adjust the plan. It is critical for a leader to consider what opportunities for change in supply management are open and how they can be effectively used.
Finally, it is necessary to root the change in the organizational culture. With regard to the problem, this should be done at the structural level through maintaining publicity and active discussion of supply management change initiatives.