This fact might be surprising, however, the survey conducted by the Pew Research Centre (2021) reveals that from 2015 onwards the number of people using cell phones is gradually increasing. More precisely, in 2015 cell phones were used by 95 percent of respondents and in 2021 this number increased by 2 percent (Pew Research Centre, 2021). Undoubtedly, the growth is not drastic, but still, it exists. What is even more curious, only 85 percent of respondents use smartphones (Pew Research Centre, 2021). Therefore, it is a mistake to assume that cell phones are leftovers from a long time ago. Instead, people still need them, and the company is capable of presenting a cellphone of good quality and reasonable price.
Cell phones are commonly used in companies as a means of communication between employees. The problem is that since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, many organizations transfer a significant share of employees to remote work. People who work from home are more likely to use personal smartphones and messengers to communicate with colleagues. From another point of view, the situation is gradually going back to normal and the shift of employees to remote work could be considered a temporary threat to our idea.
To make the product more competitive, it is necessary to focus on its technical characteristics. Since 2019, American companies have widely introduced 5G smartphones (Gallagher & DeVine, 2019). 5G devices transmit signals 10 times faster in comparison with 4G ones. Therefore, it is necessary to incorporate this 5G technology into our new cellphone.
To check whether there will be demand for our newly developed cell phones, we should survey potential consumers. The questionnaire will contain characteristics of the companys and competitors cell phones. The respondents are required to choose between the proposed options.
The company targets both organizations and individual consumers. One of the most effective ways to reach this audience is to employ paid advertising in media (Silva et al., 2020). This method would help to increase the traffic on MMs website and, hence, promote the cellphone. One example of paid advertising is advertisings on websites and in search engines. As for social media, the company should prefer putting ads on Facebook and Twitter, because Instagram and YouTube are less popular among the target audience who are working adults and business owners.
One of the components of business analysis is to determine the objectives of the company. The critical goal of our company is to develop a cellphone with better technical characteristics and a more affordable price to be competitive in the market of communication devices
Another component of business analysis refers to determining the stakeholder of a business. The stakeholders of MM are consumers of the cellphone, mobile network operators, MMs employees, and the search engine through which the new product is advertised. Other important stakeholders are the partners and vendors who produce components of cell phones.
First of all, the company is known for producing devices of high quality. In the case of the new cellphone, it strives to maximize the quality and minimize price as much as possible. The company, in contrast to other giants in this sphere such as Apple or Samsung, does not want to drive up the price just because of its brand. The target consumers of MM are males and females older than 30 years who live in the US and earn no less than $60,000 per year. The largest share of the target audience is the owners of small, medium, and large businesses.
The primary reason for this is that a consumer might find it more comfortable to use a smartphone instead of a cellphone. For this reason, the purpose of the advertising campaign is to explain to the audience the advantages of cell phones and persuade it to use cell phones in the workplace.