Introduction
Intel Corporation (Intel) is a semiconductor computer circuits manufacturer based in the United States. Intel, also known as “Integrated electronics,”- the company’s name, is headquartered in Santa Clara, California. The company operates through segments such as The Internet of Things Group (IOTG) and Mobileye (Hall, 2021). It sells platform goods, including chipsets and the central processor units and system-on-a-chip and multichip packages. In addition, the company offers high-performance computing solutions for embedded and vertical applications in the retail, industrial, and healthcare markets, as well as solutions for assisted and autonomous driving that include computer vision. It also provides platforms that optimized workload and related solutions to cloud service providers, business and government customers, and communications service providers. Cloud services providers, original design, and equipment manufacturers are all served by the firm. Intel Corporation has formed a strategic agreement to utilize and develop artificial intelligence approaches for improving drug discovery. The paper describes the Supply Chain ESG as how Intel corporation creates a positive impact on the global environment.
Intel Code of Conduct (COC)
The Code of Conduct establishes the company’s standards for how it coordinates its activities to create and deliver products, protects the value of Intel and its subsidiaries, and interacts with customers, suppliers, and distributors. When performing Intel-related business, it is the obligation of every individual at Intel to follow the code, the employment guidelines, and other applicable regulations. The company does business with unwavering ethical standards and honesty, treating distributors, suppliers, customers, fairness, respect, and honesty in all business interactions.
Intel and its subsidiaries require all employees to comply fully with internal investigations, comprising the provision of truthful information, except where the act would result in disclosing the participation of the in concerted activity under the National Labor Relations Act of the United States. Staff who fail to do so may face disciplinary action, comprising termination, depending on the applicable local legislation (Hall, 2021). Employee involvement in inquiries into suspected violations of the United States National Labor Relations Act is voluntary, albeit encouraged.
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)
Intel’s dedication to sustainability leadership and corporate responsibility is firmly ingrained in the company’s culture. The company does not create an encompassing and positive work environment where every staff feels like they have a sense of belonging and a voice. Still, it is also proactive in its initiatives to minimize its environmental impact by using natural materials and resources efficiently and responsibly. The company also wants to use its leading position in the global digital ecosystem to assist the industry and company in achieving more progress in corporate responsibility, including governance, social impact, and environmental sustainability. Intel’s 2030 “RISE” strategy aims to utilize the company’s leading position in the global technology ecosystem to build a more inclusive, sustainable, and responsible society, powered by technology and employees’ skills and enthusiasm (Ganusov, Iyer, Cheng, & Meisler, 2020). It aims to double the number of females and the minority groups underrepresented in higher employment ranks over the following decade.
Supply chain responsibility
Effectively controlling and enhancing performance throughout the company’s supply chain lowers risks, enhances product quality, and aids the staff in meeting the social and environmental objectives of the company. This adds value to the business and its consumers. Intel has several rigorous initiatives to educate and educate the suppliers that support the company’s worldwide manufacturing activities to guarantee that the supply chain is accountable, respectful of human rights, and resilient.
The company’s accelerating responsible standards and accountability across sectors via leadership and partnership with suppliers. Intel’s worldwide strategy of supply chain aims to establish a responsible, robust, and varied supply chain that allows customers to generate data-driven technological solutions, suppliers, stakeholders, consortia, and fellow travelers (Bowersox, 2019). Intel functions with approximately 9,000 tier-one suppliers in 89 states to deliver direct production materials, intellectual property, manufacturing equipment, machinery, delivery, and travel services, packing services, office supplies, and software (Ganusov et al., 2020). Other companies produce, assemble, and test some of the corporation’s products and components.
Environmental Sustainability
Intel has developed technology critical to tackling the world’s sustainability issues. The business is always looking for innovative methods to improve energy management and reduce emissions, including conservation, efficient building design, renewable energy, and other initiatives (Bowersox, 2019). The company considers key issues such as smart energy efficiency regulations, policies geared towards managing chemicals, and climate change solutions.
Chemical Management Policies
Chemicals are critical to semiconductor industry innovation. Intel is dedicated to chemical management that protects its employees and the environment. The company’s chemical policy is in line with the protection of the environment, chemical safety, and technological innovation in the United States. Advances in chemistry and materials science enable Intel’s technical innovation. Intel’s manufacturing competitiveness depends on the chemical suppliers’ ability to get novel chemicals authorized quickly, assure the continuity of supply of current chemicals, and safeguard their intellectual property.
Solutions to Enable Climate Change
Information and communications technology (ICT) devices powered by Intel silicon chips can help drive end-use energy efficiency advancements, resulting in considerable reductions in greenhouse gas emissions. The company’s technology enables others to lessen their footprint, which the firm refers to as the effect of the “Handprint.” Government policy should acknowledge and encourage the ICT industry to play a larger role in developing climate change adaptation and mitigation strategies.
Intel’s corporate responsibility goals comprise a total dependence on renewable energy and producing zero trash by 2030. According to the company reports, many of the corporation’s 2020 goals were also met. It recycles over 90% of its garbage and sends virtually no hazardous material to landfills. According to the Intel code of conduct report (2021), the quantity of greenhouse gases it emits has decreased by around 30% since 2010. Yet, yearly emissions have increased somewhat since 2016 as the company has grown. According to the business, it reduced its water use by 38%, saving 44 billion gallons over the last decade (Intel code of conduct report, 2021). It will be a larger struggle to reduce those emissions, which Intel claims it is doing by attempting to make its devices more energy efficient.
Efficiency Regulations of Smart Energy