Vitamin D plays a significant role in regulating phosphorus and calcium absorption in our bones. Far from this regulation, the nutrient is also essential in facilitating communication among cells within our bodies. The other significance of vitamin D in the body is that it can be manufactured when exposed to sunlight. These characteristics distinguish the vitamin from other nutrients since it can be obtained from sun exposure apart from food and dietary supplements. Compared to other nutrients, what characterizes vitamin D makes it a super nutrient.
What sets vitamin D apart from the other nutrients and arguably makes it a super nutrient is that, unlike other nutrients, it can be obtained by exposure to the sun. Exposure to the sun is the most effective way the vitamin can be obtained (Klioze, 2017). The potential magic associated with the nutrient is that it acts as a potential hormone in over a dozen of cells and tissues throughout the body. In so doing, the vitamin helps the body regulate essential gene expression and rapidly activates the already-expressed proteins and enzymes (Klioze, 2017). For example, in the heart, vitamin D binds to a certain receptor of the same vitamin, generating a calming protective effect.
With a considerable amount of research on the nutrient focusing on the significance of the vitamin on overall health, some epidemiological studies have uncovered a deficiency torrent of vitamin D. Based on the read report; findings show that between 50 and 75 percent of Americans have insufficient vitamin D levels in their bodies (Feldman et al., 2018). A growing body of evidence shows that an individual’s chance for optimal health is increased if the nutrient levels are adequate and vice versa. However, important to note is that “Just because low vitamin D and disease are correlated does not mean that one causes the other” (Feldman et al., 2018). Contrary, the same scientific reports have shown that approximately 75 percent of breast and colon cancer can be prevented by maintaining sufficient vitamin D levels (Klioze, 2017). Several reasons exist why vitamin deficiency is widespread in the U.S. and the world over.
Unlike other vitamins, vitamin D is one of the few nutrients the body can make. However, compared to the others, 40 percent of body exposure to ultraviolet B rays, between 15 and 30 minutes, results in the production of 20,000 IU of the nutrient (Klioze, 2017). Shocking statistics reveal that significantly few foods and supplements have the same amounts of vitamin D occurring naturally. Except for sardines, mackerel, salmon, and tunas, daily consumption of any other food results in insufficient vitamin D amounts in the body. Ironically, a one-eight-ounce of milk glass can only give 100 IU of the nutrient with a similar amount acquired in a bowl of fortified cereals (Feldman et al., 2018). Combined, both a glass of milk and cereals can only generate 200 IU of vitamin D, a one-tenth amount that can be acquired from thirty minutes under the sun (Feldman et al., 2018). Hence, it becomes physically impossible to eat your way out of vitamin D deficiency.
Vitamin D is arguably fast becoming a super nutrient, with its importance growing exponentially in the past few decades. Scientific research shows that insufficient vitamin D can be associated with widespread health consequences. However, as shown, just because low vitamin D and disease are correlated does not mean that one causes the other. Contrary, by maintaining sufficient vitamin D levels, some major health complications can be prevented.