Following the 9/11 terrorist attack orchestrated by al Qaeda in 2001, America’s world transformed forever. Conspicuous changes included a fresh era and a new term called Homeland Security. Despite the lengthy pursuit of al Qaeda leader, Osama bin Laden and his ultimate killing by the Navy Seal team, the security threat to America’s homeland still continues. As demonstrated by more than 50 terror incidences, some thwarted while others successful, the U.S. must always remain watchful and continue to safeguard the country (Oliver et al., 2015). The principal strategies for responding to any terror occurrences and natural catastrophes are all anchored in local responders. Homeland security remains an organizational and administrative response to actual and potential threats. Therefore, National Incident Management System (NIMS) aligns with the homeland security structure in various ways.
Firstly, following the 9/11 attack, the Homeland Security Act ordered every level of a government agency to NIMS for responding to any type and size of emergency. The objective of this direction was to provide a synchronized, unified, and joint response during any disaster. As part of efforts to reinforce homeland security, NIMS has a crucial component called Incident Command System (ICS) to address all disaster-related issues (Oliver et al., 2015). NIMS seeks to allay every friction and accelerate emergency arrangements encompassing various responses from many concerned institutions by acting as the common, scalable, and adjustable system used by involved parties. Moreover, its compulsion was strengthened in 2003 by Presidential Directive 5 on homeland security.
Secondly, NIMS can fit into homeland security by offering a comprehensive, national tactic to case management pertinent across functional disciplines and every jurisdictional level. NIMS has matched this role by becoming appropriate across an entire spectrum of potential hazards, incidents, impacts, irrespective of complexity, location, or size (Oliver et al., 2015). It has improved cooperation and coordination between private entities and the public through various incident management undertakings and offering a unified standard for general incident handling.
Thirdly, NIMS offers a reliable framework and method to enable management across all levels (local, state, and Federal) to collaborate to prevent, recover from, respond to, prepare for, and alleviate impacts of incidents. Explicitly, regular utilization of NIMS lays the foundation for effective and efficient responses from solitary agency fire reaction to a multijurisdictional natural catastrophe or bombing response. For instance, state agencies, which have embedded NIMS into their incident management system easily understand the protocols and procedures regarding response and expectations for personnel and equipment (Oliver et al., 2015). Therefore, NIMS offers a cohesion in readiness and response that permits diverse government bodies to integrate or create a seamless command during an emergency.
In conclusion, America’s homeland security remains a key priority following the deadly 9/11 terror attack in 2001. NIMS structure plays an essential role in reinforcing this security objective in the country. The fundamental premise of NIMS in executing its mandate is that all incidents start and stop locally. The system does not draw command away from local authorities and the Federal government. It simply offers the required framework to upscale the capacity of responders, non-governmental organizations, and the private sector to work cohesively. NIMS acts as the baseline notion that connects all the relevant agencies towards providing enhanced homeland security. NIMS integrates the resources and capabilities of various incident emergency and management response disciplines, governmental jurisdictions, and private sectors into a coordinated, seamless, and cohesive framework for internal incident response and management.