Goals and objectives outline desired outcomes and, thus, are often used interchangeably. However, the effect, timeframe, and specificity of the two terms set them apart. Nickels et al. (2019) define goals as broad and long-term outcomes that an organization seeks, while objectives define the measurable, specific, and short-term strategies for attaining the identified goal. For example, the criminal justice system uses goals to task the police, correctional agencies, and the court with the strategy to execute, including deterrence, rehabilitation, retribution, restoration, and incapacitation. Therefore, the criminal justice system particularly addresses criminal behavior with the objective of protecting people’s rights.
In an era of rapid change, diversity, and complexity, leadership and management are critical to the survival of any agency. Besides, the ability to lead and manage strongly permeates every aspect of the criminal justice system. While leaders guide the change through a vision, managers implement coordinated processes and structures to pursue organizational goals and objectives (Nickels et al., 2019). Leaders are constantly challenged to take risks and encourage transformation. In law enforcement, for example, police leaders must develop and instill high standards in other officers to work toward the same goal. Beyond leadership, criminal justice relies on managers to optimize processes and lead efforts toward reliable outcomes. Generally, criminal justice leaders and managers work effectively to balance ethical and legal considerations.
Earning a degree in criminal justice would significantly contribute to meeting my long-term goals. I have always taken pride in influencing change as a leader. However, I must leverage my education with experience in the criminal justice system to become more efficient and productive. The criminal justice system is becoming increasingly complex and requires more lasting and transformative trends. As such, the second goal is to become more adaptable to change. Bringing significant change through robust analytical skills is an objective in itself. Also, gaining strong relational skills to work with professionals and serve people from diverse backgrounds.