English is the simplest form of communication available between people from different parts of the world. It remains an indisputable fact that most people continue to speak with an accent even after many years of learning the language. This fact generates a vast wave of discrimination, especially from native speakers. The truth is that even they begin to twist their language to achieve a certain uniqueness and dissimilarity, especially in the creative sphere. The accent, which is so difficult to get rid of when speaking another language, is that our ear gets used to filtering out frequencies from childhood that are not needed to understand native speakers. It is essential to realize that speaking with an accent is normal, that this is not a reason to discriminate against a person. Still, on the contrary, it is an excellent opportunity to help them improve their language.
The policy of multiculturalism, which is the parallel coexistence of different cultures, is adjacent to the social movement “The English only movement.” The latter actively advocates establishing uniform norms of the American literary language for whites and African Americans (Park Hong). Various political and socio-economic measures designed to rid the country of racist prejudices have not yet been crowned with success. In modern sociolinguistics, a special place is given to language as a social practice that establishes power relations between representatives of various racial and class groups.
The feeling of their alienness, “otherness” in a largely still segregated American society generates tensions between immigrants and the indigenous population. The color of the skin, the size of the eyes or nose remain an unbreakable barrier separating the world of immigrants from the rest of Americans. Although in recent decades, there has been a significant improvement in the material and social situation (Park Hong). The Asian experience is not the only one that shows that language discrimination is still intense, although its boundaries are significantly blurred (Kim 4). Immigrants from Russia, Latin America, and the Middle East constantly face discrimination. It is mainly due to the complexity of their native language, which is not so easy to master perfectly (Ingham). The English language will be perceived very poorly in such conditions, even with many years of study experience.
Linguistic appropriation as one of the forms of cultural appropriation is perceived in the USA as a continuation of the privilege of the white population. White America does not correctly refer to primary sources, ignores the historical context, and perpetuates stereotypes about immigrants. The language of immigrants becomes the object of constant criticism from the public and the basis for linguistic discrimination (Kim 7). This language is associated not with a marker of ethnicity and a means of self-identification of its speakers but with their level of education and intellectual abilities.
Nevertheless, it is worth recognizing that discrimination is beginning to improve, largely thanks to creativity. Many musical artists most often become famous in the United States as migrants (Ingham). They succeed by intentionally simplifying or complicating the language, not just profanity. This experience shows blurred boundaries, and there is a smoothing of corners about a conversation with an accent. It is not important where you are from, South Asia or the Middle East, Africa, or Russia; this will not become an obstacle to dialogue.
The asymmetric relationship between Americans and immigrants is directly reflected in linguistic phenomena. With any level of English proficiency, you can be understood and heard, not only in the USA but also around the world. It is necessary to let go of the fear of talking and writing on social networks in a language that is not native to you. It is a critical awareness that leads to language freedom in the USA.