The introduction of new levels of nursing education is a major reform that has contributed to the complexity of the field. Traditionally, nursing schools provided degrees of a Bachelor’s level associated with the basic skills required by this profession. However, today, aspiring nurses have access to high-quality Master’s programs that further develop their competencies. In this regard, a question may reasonably arise regarding the actual value of such degrees. In fact, Master’s programs in nursing are essential for healthcare, as they align with the growing importance of nurses and the contemporary view of the system. Bachelor’s degrees provide students with the basics of the profession, its fundamental concepts and practical skills. These aspects alone form a full-fledged, competent nurse who is capable of doing their job. In other words, a Bachelor’s degree cannot be considered an “incomplete” education in nursing.
At the same time, Master’s programs serve as the development impetus for those who want to engage with more sophisticated principles of 21 st -century nursing. First of all, Master’s degrees are aimed at the manner in which nurses think. More specifically, such programs promote critical thinking and cognitive agility that is required to make precise decisions in difficult situations. Thus, a certain leadership dimension is introduced, allowing nurses to enter the healthcare decision-making framework while understanding the social dimension of the issues to address (Bryant-Moore et al., 2018). Second, a Master’s in nursing supports the development of emotional intelligence, which is integral to patient-centered care. By employing critical thinking, nurses learn to analyze each case objectively and master the emotional aspect that enables strong patient connection (Cassano et al., 2020). Third, a Master’s in nursing is a major step toward proficiency in scientific research, through which nurses help to build a better system for tomorrow. Overall, Master’s programs complement the fundamental skills of each professional by a stronger presence of cognitive, emotional, and research competencies that support the emergence of nursing leaders within the professional community.