Different circumstances under which medical staff has worked led to varying types of leadership strategies being developed. For example, the COVID-19 pandemic highlighted the role of clear communication and the handling of prompt preparation in top healthcare leaders (Nicola et al., 2020). Another key tactic includes the use of external change agents that ultimately promote excellent organizational decision-making (Alagoz et al., 2018). Moreover, one study explained how implementing positivity-related and open-minded approaches as leaders can improve their employee’s resilience, providing an additional source of motivation (Wei et al., 2018). Hence, effective healthcare leaders must adapt to various external changes and strategically communicate with their coworkers.
Several departments can be interacted with through the role of a healthcare administrator. One of them includes the in-patient department where multiple approaches from skilled professionals are needed. Moreover, critical care and A&E require excellent management and collaborating opportunities. As already mentioned, the selected healthcare areas are prime examples of fields requiring strong leaders to provide optimal patient care. One way this can be improved to obtain the desired outcomes is through a holistic approach that considers external and internal factors. Furthermore, collective decision-making should not be viewed as limiting to effective leadership; on the contrary, it presents an ideal strategy in healthcare management.
The importance of interprofessional collaboration in medical institutions is evident through its effect on patient outcomes. Research has demonstrated significant changes in healthcare conditions after the implementation of the strategy (Spaulding et al., 2018). The method involves acquiring knowledge from colleagues and incorporating it into one’s practice, seeking advice from the respective medical staff. Therefore, the strategy impacts the range of services professionals can offer to their patients and should be worked on further to improve its practicality.
Alagoz, E., Chih, M. Y., Hitchcock, M., Brown, R., & Quanbeck, A. (2018). The use of external change agents to promote quality improvement and organizational change in healthcare organizations: A systematic review. BMC Health Services Research, 18 (1), 1-13.
Nicola, M., Sohrabi, C., Mathew, G., Kerwan, A., Al-Jabir, A., Griffin, M., Agha, M. & Agha, R. (2020). Health policy and leadership models during the COVID-19 pandemic: A review. International Journal of Surgery, 81 , 122-129.
Spaulding, E. M., Marvel, F. A., Jacob, E., Rahman, A., Hansen, B. R., Hanyok, L. A., Martin, S.S., & Han, H. R. (2021). Interprofessional education and collaboration among healthcare students and professionals: a systematic review and call for action. Journal of Interprofessional Care, 35 (4), 612-621.
Wei, H., Roberts, P., Strickler, J., & Corbett, R. W. (2019). Nurse leaders’ strategies to foster nurse resilience . Journal of Nursing Management, 27 (4), 681-687.