Levels of culture can be displayed in different planes and depths. According to Edgar Shein, who developed the concept ‘levels of organizational culture,’ and Edward Granter who later expanded on this concept, the culture of the entity can be seen in four levels: super-structural, symbolic, discursive, and cognitive (Granter, 2019). In other words, the levels of culture in enterprises are developed due to external economic and social influences, artifacts such as logos, story rituals and events, values explicitly expressed by the organization, and underlying assumptions. This paper aims to assess the levels of organizational culture for Macomb Community College.
Artifacts in Macomb Community College show that it promotes concentration, attentiveness, and responsibility, which is reflected in the logo. Looking at the architecture of the buildings, some of which use chrome-plated modern high-tech structures, one can assume that technology and science are the main focus of educational programs. Nonetheless, the central older building and a park with large trees create an atmosphere of solitude and introspection, which is more in line with the study of fine arts and social sciences. Equally important, the college has a high culture of mutual help and respect and cherishes community relations, which is reflected in the developed bus route system available to students.
On the value level, many signs within the college, including parking signs, library signs, and other clues, point to a love of order and organization. Probably in this college, teachers appreciate the composure and commitment shown by students. On the level of assumptions, the college probably seeks to avoid accepting students who are overly self-expressive or whose identity is tied to superficial popular culture. The college website lacks flashy headlines or programs offering to participate in the community in a frivolous way, such as selling cookies for fundraising or taking part in field trips.
Thus, the levels of organizational culture at the Macomb Community College were assessed. The college has a clear identity at the level of artifacts and values. At the same time, the analysis of underlying assumptions suggests several recommendations. Perhaps, the college underestimates the importance of openness in relationships and is too harsh on manifestations of superficial identity or judgment. Given the high commitment to social and community values, Macomb Community College members should consider that openness is an important value for building good social connections.