The present essay analyzes a manual for the use of a dishwasher developed by Bosch. The first positive characteristic of this manual is that it contains a lot of illustrations that make it easier to understand how to use the dishwasher. For instance, the manual depicts how to add rinse aid, arrange crockery in the dishwasher, and remove baskets (Bosch, n.d.). Thus, the manual is focused on its audience, who is not expected to know very well how to use the dishwasher. Besides, the section on the installation of the machine is not detailed and contains only fundamental suggestions. Hence, the authors of the manual expect it to be installed by professionals. Another reason that proves that this manual focuses on the audience is that the largest part of the text is presented in the form of bullet points. Therefore, a user could easily and quickly find all necessary information in the manual. The manual is problem-oriented, purposeful, and persuasive because it addresses precise issues that users might face. For example, it explains how to select the right program for specific types of crockery and food remains, cancel and stop the program, and check the condition of the machine.
Even though the text is written without technical terminology, the manual remains professional. This conclusion is based on the fact that in the instruction, one could find answers to a wide range of specific questions. The manual contains instructions on how to use the dishwasher, take care of it, install, dispose of wastes, and what to do in case of a failure. As it has already been mentioned, the examined manual is designed-centered. It contains numerous illustrations, schemes, and bullet points that make it easy to read. What is more, near the paragraphs with warnings, a related sign is inserted. The exclamation point in a red triangle draws the attention of a reader and makes him or her focus on the content of the section. The manual is also logical: the first section is dedicated to the components of the dishwasher; in the second one, the manual tells the audience how to put tableware in it. Afterward, there is information on how to add water softener, salt, and rinse aid. Finally, the manual explains how to take care of the device and how to act in case of a problem.