Posture and body motions are examples of body language. A straight stance, for instance, conveys confidence; the same holds true for physical motions. Sitting upright and leaning forward on the chair, for example, displays attention and focus in the debate, but a relaxed reclining back posture may imply apathy or superiority. Although looks might be deceiving, not all of them are when it comes to professional communication. Consider the case of a sales agent offering a high-end fashion item. The clothing and footwear they wore would highlight their personal style as well as their fashion expertise essential for marketing the goods. Gestures are acts that are done automatically or routinely, such as tapping fingernails on a table, bending the head from side to side, or laying palms on the cheekbones. Even if they are not intended to, certain gestures might communicate the wrong idea. For example, a worker may rest his forehead in his palms when intently pondering, which may be misinterpreted as boredom.
In my opinion, I perceive body language nicely. When a person makes some kind of movement in order to pay attention, I always do it. I consider my strongest side in terms of non-verbal communication. This style of communication accompanies everyone from birth, and although this type is well developed for everyone, decoding is not always up to par. Most often, I study body language by analyzing the behavior of people in cafes and other public places; in this way, I get to study the maximum possible number of people, which allows me to understand them better. Appearance is complex for me, I cannot always understand what a person wants to show with his appearance, but I would like to develop such a skill in myself since, in my opinion, it is essential.
The capacity to encode good turn-taking messages can assist in guaranteeing that people can retain the ground when necessary in a discussion or make their way into a discussion effectively, without unfairly disrupting someone or appearing disrespectful. Encoding is the process of converting ideas into information. The encoder sends out a message via media such as a phone call, internet, text or email, face-to-face conference, or another communication device. The amount of conscious thinking that goes into encoding signals varies. Other instructions, diversions, or temptations should be considered by the encoder, as well as any disturbance that could conflict with their signal.
In my opinion, I express my thoughts well in non-verbal language; at least people have always understood what I am trying to convey to them. I can say that body language is fundamental and understandable to me. However, as with decoding, I have difficulty understanding how to show some kind of desire to the interlocutor by appearance. I want to develop this skill as it is very versatile in everyday life and can help in many situations.
Implementing the tips for becoming a better encoder of nonverbal will result in improved decoding ability due to greater awareness. Competent decoders of nonverbal information are considered to have nonverbal awareness, which, like skilled encoders, leads to more significant social networking sites, popularity, and reduced social phobia (Burgoon). I believe that the ability to express one’s thoughts not only with words but also with body movements, appearance, and gestures are beneficial skills that can be applied in all areas of a person’s life in order to simplify and improve life.