Young people are known for their desire to change as many things in their life as possible in a short period. They like to make decisions, find opportunities, offer new ideas, and follow their dreams. This is what has recently been happening to me and explains my intention to get accepted to the program in this academic facility. Nursing is not just another career option I want to learn but a field of knowledge that should significantly improve my life. The question of health is more than serious today, and people need additional help and support to cope with an existing variety of diseases, health problems, pandemic-related concerns, and physiological challenges. I am taking a conscious step by applying to this program and choosing nursing and health science as my major to value care quality and promote health through developing the necessary skills and knowledge.
The progress of nursing is remarkable and influential from multiple perspectives. Some people are ready to use any chance to advance this profession, while many individuals believe that this job is full of challenges. Human despair, unpredictable traumas, and innovation aspiration may provoke nursing burnout, anger, and depression (“Health Systems Are Implementing Creative Strategies”). However, modern progress and strategies allow healthcare employees to deal with such situations and predict the growth of negative emotions. Nurses play an important role in human life by supporting, explaining, and encouraging individuals when their health is not stable. I want to become a part of this process and recognize the worth of professional interactions.
I understand that an application to any academic program requires certain skills and evidence that my participation can be beneficial not only for my personal growth but for the people who contribute to my professionalism. At my 22, I cannot say that I am too experienced in many nursing activities, but I am confident that I am ready to study and appreciate each piece of information I am offered. I am a quick learner and observer, which, I think, is critical in health and nursing care. I also comprehend that nursing is a constantly developing field, and it is necessary to investigate most of the time, including reading journal articles, participating in conferences, and commenting on forums. I am a communicative person, and interpersonal cooperation is a core aspect of any occupation.
In addition to my knowledge and skills, I need to focus on my competencies as a nurse. It is not enough for me to help people be treated but to make sure they are aware of how to predict health complications and improve their well-being. I know that most people who address care providers are confused about their health, medications, and other interventions. My nursing support is vital, and I want to learn as much as possible about this profession to become the best.
There are many reasons why I believe that nursing is the career I deserve in this life. I have already decided to move from California to Ohio, and this transfer should bring good results. It is not always easy for me to change something, as most students do, but this choice is inspired by my lifelong passion. An opportunity to care for others is my major motivation, and this program contains interesting and valuable elements for my professional and personal growth.