McDonald’s filed a lawsuit in the United States against its former CEO, Steve Easterbrook, after it was revealed that he had several consensual sexual encounters with workers in the year before his leave and maintained them hidden. Easterbrook misled authorities and threw away proof of his wrongdoing; he prioritized his interests over McDonald’s. Shareholders have filed a lawsuit against the corporation for attempting to prevent misbehavior and prioritizing speed over accuracy in resolving the issue. Negligent recruitment and retention responsibility are widely used to describe an employer’s commitment not to recruit or keep a worker (Monteiro et al., 2019). The supervisor was aware of or should have been aware of the likelihood of engaging in behavior against other persons or otherwise subjecting workers or third parties to legal responsibility. Companies can be held accountable for their workers’ intentional misbehavior (dos Santos et al., 2017). This work is written to study the case of negligence at work since negligence is the most common type of tort.
If a McDonald’s fails to vet a worker before hiring them thoroughly and they cause harm to others, the corporation may be held accountable for their conduct. A McDonald’s, for instance, should examine all prior work, certification qualifications, and current professional associations before hiring an executive chef (Rushchenko et al., 2020). If the chef commits frequent culinary errors that cause health concerns for diners, the popular fast food restaurant is likely to be held accountable since it failed to do a basic employment background check. This is one of the reasons why criminal history checks are required. If a person strikes colleagues and consumers and can demonstrate that a criminal history check revealed past violent conduct, the business may be held liable. Assume an employer knows an employee’s risky, unpredictable, or disrespectful behavior but does not fire the worker. In that instance, McDonald’s might be held accountable for ensuring the safety of others.