Osteoarthritis is a disease that affects people all over the world, but is frequently mishandled within the healthcare system. It is one of the most common causes of disability in older persons, resulting in pain, loss of function, and a lower quality of life. On a societal level, the condition is predicted to cost $303 billion in medical bills and lost wages each year (Abramoff & Caldera, 2020). This chronic, severe disease requires continued efforts to limit its incidence, pain, and loss of function.
Osteoarthritis is known for its degenerative effects on articular cartilage, which becomes significantly damaged over time. The smooth cartilage at the ends of long bones and within the intervertebral discs is known as articular cartilage. It provides a low-friction articulation surface while being able to transmit large loads. Even while the collagen in cartilage has a lengthy half-life, it repairs slowly, if at all, even with slight injuries. Although the cartilage transforms the most, the entire joint, including the synovium, joint ligaments, and subchondral bone, is impacted.
Osteoarthritis is often overlooked, despite its significant personal, economic, and societal costs. Even though osteoarthritis frequently coexists with heart disease, diabetes, and mental health issues, and can aggravate the morbidity and mortality associated with these ailments, it is not included in worldwide strategic plans for noncommunicable diseases. Patients and practitioners may be affected by therapeutic nihilism, with misconceptions that osteoarthritis is an unavoidable component of aging and that there are no viable therapies (Abramoff & Caldera, 2020). The affected people are frequently misinformed about treatment options. Current health-care approaches can range from ignoring essential treatments like exercise, weight loss, and education to using expensive, unproven medications for late-stage disease. I find this issue to be the most interesting, although unfortunate, element of both the article and the condition’s perception. I believe that rehabilitation counselling could combine physical and psychological aid to help patients with osteoarthritis and its various consequences.