Pentecostal movements adhere to some doctrines that are contested by most Christian denominations, whether it be the Eastern Church or the Western Church. Sometimes their movements are treated as sects, still, they are not recognized as destructive. The big denominations will never come to a consensus with the Pentecostals on a number of issues. By most denominations, Pentecostals cannot be considered as a legitimate movement.
Nontrinitarianism rests on the assertion that God is one, there is neither the Holy Spirit, emanating from him, nor his Son, the same divine being. The Bible usually states the trinity of God: “For the kingdom of God is not a matter of eating and drinking, but of righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Spirit, because anyone who serves Christ in this way is pleasing to God and receives human approval” (Romans 14:17-18). Pentecostals reject the divine nature of Jesus Christ altogether, acting as Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Pentecostal Arianism is about ridding the figure of Jesus Christ of all that is divine. This doctrine is completely contrary to most denominations and confessions, where it is customary to say of Jesus Christ: “He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation” (Colossians 1:15). The degree of the divine and the human in Jesus Christ has been the subject of discussion for a very long time, still, the complete elimination of the divine from his figure is not possible.
The Pentecostal movement does not recognize the Apocrypha, and considers only the Bible to be a genuine subject for study. This, in general, makes Pentecostal in some way a bookish religion, similar to Islam. In Latin language, the principle of the inspiration of the Bible sounds like ‘Sola Sriptura’. There can be no additions to the Bible, and other authorities are considered illegitimate. Interpretations of the Bible are also prohibited and are not considered authoritative.
Like Seventh-day Adventists, Pentecostals do not believe in hell. This is contrary to the principles of the mercy of God who cannot send his children to eternal torment. There are usually contradictions here too: “And shall cast them into a furnace of fire: there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth” (Matthew 13:42). This is what divine love is: in saving people from eternal punishment. In conclusion, Pentecostals have a few differences from other Christian denominations and are unlikely to ever come to a consensus, therefore, these denominations cannot legitimize them.