The Coptic religious community has a long history in Egypt. The persecution began at the conquest of Egypt by the Arabs and, unfortunately, has not stopped until now. Coptic Christians are regularly targeted for persecution, sometimes resulting in terrorist acts or murders. At the everyday level, Coptic Christians are opposed by the inhabitants of Egypt, ordinary Muslims (Sherwood, 2018). On a spiritual and more global level, Copts are threatened by terrorist organizations such as ISIS. They were exiled from Iraq and Syria and took secret refuge in Egypt.
Persecution of Copts occurs throughout Egypt, facilitating the persecution of the fact that their religion is written in the passport of citizens of Egypt. It allows the Muslim Egyptians to deny the Copts the desired work, hindering their small businesses development. In daily life, Copts complain that they are being discriminated against in hospitals, schools, and universities (Sherwood, 2018). Terrorist organizations often kidnap Coptic women and force them to marry Muslims (Sherwood, 2018). The meaning of such a marriage is that a Muslim does not want to marry a non-Muslim woman. Before marriage, a Christian woman is required to take her husband’s religion. In addition to kidnappings, radicalized Muslims kill church leaders and blow up vehicles and buildings that may contain Copts.
The article does not describe the help of neighboring countries or any others who wished to support Coptic Christians. Despite this, the Copts have a large community consisting of Catholics, Orthodox Christians, and other offshoots (Sherwood, 2018). Readers can assume that countries do not intervene in the conflict since terrorists from radicalized groups such as ISIS are already involved. After the victims in many countries of the world, which occurred due to terrorists, no government wants to interfere. Another reason for the lack of active support is the deep history of the conflict. The history of the war describes its causes well, and many outsiders perceive the persecution of the Copts as a logical event.