The differences between the Persian and Greek cultures can be seen in several traditions and customs. In Persia, the distinction between different religions and languages was accepted by the society, allowing people from the conquered territories to continue practicing their ancestral traditions without being persecuted (Brooks, 2019). In contrast, Greeks were less tolerant of other religions and cultures, enforcing submission to Greek customs from the populations residing in their territory (Brooks, 2019).
Another significant dissimilarity was the citizens’ attitude toward the authority, with the Persian residents voluntarily supporting the King and remaining strongly loyal to him (Brooks, 2019). In Greece, where the democratic rule was considered the most beneficial, the concept of one person reigning over others was disapproved, with the majority of the elite supporting democracy as a just distribution of power.
The political structures of Persia and Greece were also highly distinct, as each system was to support the established governing methods. Persian government allowed for efficient control over separated locations and managed the authority of the leaders who were given the most power, the political governors and military generals (Brooks, 2019). Alternatively, the Greek political system was based on democracy, but it was highly unequal and challenging to manage over long distances (Brooks, 2019). Another crucial aspect of Persian leadership was modest taxation, which was increased only when military forces were required for war. In comparison, the Greek taxation system was incredibly sophisticated, and to ensure prosperity; it heavily relied on Greece’s allies.
The significance of Athens’ downfall in the Peloponnesian war is connected to Athens’ role as the city-state that unified several Poleis. One argument suggests that after surrendering to the Spartans, Greece lost most of its political and military power, primarily accumulated in Athens (Brooks, 2019). Another point of view is that the Peloponnesian defeat diminished Athens’ possibilities to conduct imperial expansion, undermining the established political order and reducing Athens’ influence on other Greek cities.