A protein-restricted diet involves the reduced intake of protein foods that constitutes an individual’s daily calories. This diet is typically prescribed to control specific medical conditions such as kidney and liver diseases. These foods include eggs, nuts, salmon, chicken, and beef, containing high protein levels (Suzuki et al., 2018). Therefore, a low intake of proteins is a dietary style preferred for geriatric patients considering that their metabolism slows down in senior age, indicating that high-protein foods could result in weight gain and other diseases (Mirzaei et al., 2017). Therefore, an inclusive nutritional teaching strategy on low protein intake among geriatric patients is integral in promoting a healthy lifestyle.
There are various risks associated with aging, including low immunity, unhealthy eating patterns, and the reoccurrence of chronic medical conditions such as diabetes and hypertension. In addition, when people age, their immune system reduces significantly due to the less production of the B and T cells that help fight against illnesses when they occur (Suzuki et al., 2018). Similarly, senior people are prone to developing unbalanced dietary systems due to social-economic factors such as a lack of a certified caregiver and finances to access healthier food choices. Additionally, geriatrics suffers from degenerative diseases such as dementia, affecting their judgment and nutritional choices (Mirzaei et al., 2017). Therefore, effective training in self-management is integral in facilitating change among this population of people. For example, patient M is a 68years African American male diagnosed with polycystic kidney disease (Suzuki et al., 2018). He is reported to have been taking half a pound of meat and three eggs daily. He mentioned that he loves his eggs and meat every day, and he feels happy and satisfied after taking the meal.
When asked about the dangers of his dietary pattern, he said nothing is wrong with eating since proteins are the building blocks of body tissues and muscles. As a retired bodybuilder, he still loves big muscles and maintains a high-protein diet to sustain his physique. However, his responses indicate a man with information distorted from the truth. Therefore, considering his medical history and age, he must be put on a low-protein diet since both variables put him at risk of experiencing health deterioration (Mirzaei et al., 2017). Additionally, he needs training on the best dietary behaviors to maintain a healthy lifestyle.
Considering the high protein levels in his blood and the polycystic kidney disease, patient M should embrace the low-protein diet plan. Therefore, the meat and eggs will be substituted with vegetables and grains such as spinach and green peas. These plant-based proteins contain healthy compounds such as unsaturated fats and cholesterol that are harmless to health. However, the patient can still take low quantities of meat and other grains and fruits to ensure they get enough calories needed. An example is making fried rice with 50grams of meat instead of the earlier consumption range of 500grams daily (Mirzaei et al., 2017). This restricted protein intake will ensure that the blood is detoxified from excess protein intake.
The short nutritional teaching plan, including a meal makeover and focusing on food contents, will be presented using nutritional videos and uniform brochures to promote mindful eating. Meal makeover videos will train the client on ways to incorporate their favorite plant-based recipes to ensure they maintain the stipulated diet (Suzuki et al., 2018). For instance, African Americans love soya and beans, which can be used instead of eggs and meat. The client will also be taught how to interpret the nutritional label to make informed choices. For instance, the patient will understand that 100 calories per serving are recommended and considered moderate through learning and discovery (Mirzaei et al., 2017). Therefore and anything beyond that mark has detrimental effects on health.