Introduction
Providing patients with adequate and effective drug therapies is essential for timely medical care and treatment. In the examined case of the patient with a number of severe diagnoses, one can single out the diseases that are characteristic of older adults and are less common in young people. As a consequence, as a factor to be analyzed in relation to the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic processes, age will be involved. This criterion can help explain appropriate drug interventions and identify optimal treatment regimens to address the patient’s needs.
Influence of Age on the Patient’s Pharmacokinetic and Pharmacodynamic Processes
The examined case study shows that the patient has severe health problems associated with the cardiovascular system. While taking these diagnoses into account, the aspect of age plays an essential role in pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic processes. For instance, Rosenthal and Burchum (2021) note that diuretics, such as furosemide, are prescribed to treat high blood pressure and lower blood cholesterol. However, due to impaired body systems in adulthood, diuresis may start later and persist for less than the standard eight hours. As Thürmann (2020) argues, the kidneys and liver, which are responsible for removing harmful products from the body, function worse in older patients. Anticoagulants aimed at preventing blood clots in people with ischemic problems are poorly absorbed (Thürmann, 2020). Therefore, drugs in the body of older adults enter into chemical reactions worse and have a shorter effect on the body than in young people.
Impacts on the Patient’s Drug Therapy
These changes in the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic processes can affect the drug therapy recommended for the patient. Dodson et al. (2017) state that polyprogmasia may be one of the negative consequences of taking a large amount of medication in older people with heart disease. In this regard, due to the insufficiently effective impacts of drugs and an excess of many components, particularly aspirin, the simplest anticoagulant, with warfarin, dangerous health outcomes may occur. In addition, targeted drug therapy aimed at controlling the blood sugar level with metformin puts a strain on the liver, which is dangerous in adulthood. As a result of these processes, the proposed therapy may pose threats due to the insufficient resistance of the patient’s body to such medicinal effects.
Improvement of the Drug Therapy Plan
To improve the patient’s current drug therapy plan, some changes may be helpful. Since enzyme inhibitors are not included in the treatment plan, atenolol can be substituted for metoprolol since the latter is absorbed faster (Kuprash et al., 2020). Hydrochlorothiazide and Spironolactone may be used as diuretics that reduce blood pressure without stressing the kidneys and liver (Rosenthal & Burchum, 2021). Metformin and Glyburide can remain as they control the blood sugar level successfully and are combined for optimal effect (Rosenthal & Burchum, 2021). The proposed interventions can help address age-related changes in the patient’s pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic processes.
Conclusion
In the case in question, the patient’s changes in the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic processes are considered from the age perspective. Relevant clinical evidence supports the impact of age on health and reflects the diseases common to older adults. Based on this, the current drug therapy plan is proposed to be slightly modified to address poor drug absorption and the threat of burden on the organs to help the patient cope with the severe diagnoses.