Family relations are becoming increasingly important in the modern world. This cell of society has the opportunity to form the most favorable conditions for future generations. That is why it is necessary to research and find ways to solve problems, difficulties and disagreements between husbands and wives. This is also critically important due to the fact that even at present, the deterioration of family ties will negatively affect not only society, but also the psychological and physical health of individuals (Salinger and Whisman, 2021). At the moment, the Western model of marital relations is particularly widespread, where the relationship is based on friendliness and taking into account the person’s personality as the most important indicator. It is important to note the fact that the relationship between spouses is a direct reflection of the trends in the development of society. This is due to the fact that social conditions are constantly changing and transforming, presenting new requirements to the institution of the family. Hence, recently, the roles of husband and wife have been changing in values. There are often cases where a woman becomes the breadwinner of the family and assumes all responsibility, becoming a leader. However, an integral part of the union of men and women is following religious concepts. Moreover, faith emphasizes the preservation of traditional ideological values. The way people will relate to faith can be passed on to the next generations, which will have both a positive and non-negative character. That is why it is necessary to grow children taking into account religion based on mutual understanding, love and empathy.
Modern society, despite its rapid development, is characterized by a sufficient number of social problems. The need to solve them is to improve people’s relationships for the further well-being of other generations. Hence, one of the important questions is the survey of marital relations and issues that may arise in them. It should be noted that in this aspect, the importance of religion and its postulates plays an important role. Thus, this work examines the problems of matrimony, the ways to solve them and the use of faith for a better understanding of the problem.
Therefore, more and more literature and scientific works appear on the topic of the relationship between husband and wife. Moreover, special attention is paid to their influence both on social life and on the psychological and physical condition of the spouses (Masoumi et al., 2017). The family as an institution of society occupies one of the central places, therefore it is characterized by increased interest from researchers in various fields. Similarly, this aspect attracts religion into its component, since it can become both a way of uniting spouses and a cause of disagreement. Despite this, most of the studies prove the positive influence of faith on this type of people’s relationships.
For these reasons, it is necessary to fully understand the marital relationship, which is characterized by constant changes over time. It is also influenced by such external factors as modernization and globalization. To a greater extent, they influenced the development of the concept of a friendly marriage, which has the features of a partnership relationship, where both parts consciously approach solving many issues and understanding what is happening. However, even in this case, negative and stressful situations may arise that require timely solutions and a sober attitude (Masoumi et al., 2017). Moreover, such healthy relationships are described by a high degree of closeness of spouses, a special level of affection, mutual understanding and empathy.
The development of technology and changes in social values have a special effect on the institution of marriage. Hence, in modern society, there is such a type of nuclear family, where a man is engaged in mining to ensure the material side of the family, and a woman is more often engaged in preserving the hearth and caring for children. However, it is also possible to have families where these roles change and the woman is engaged in earnings, and the man is engaged in household aspects. In addition, the Western family model is spreading all over the world, where the main component is just the same friendly relations, and then romantic ones.
Therefore, the modern Western model of the family is characterized by a focus on the personality of the partners, and not on the economic or status component. Unlike past experience, in society, first of all, people choose their life partners based on certain qualities, and then according to the level of wealth and position. Moreover, the age gap between generations is growing, which complicates the relationship between, for example, children and parents. This is due to the shift in the pace of formation and establishment of the individual. Family values and patterns of behavior are also changing, adaptation to which may cause some disagreements and issues. The leader in the family is not always the male breadwinner, which also has its own special influence.
A stable and satisfying marriage can become an important source of emotional and instrumental support throughout adult life. In addition, it is associated with increased economic well-being, mental and physical health (Rajabi et al., 2020). Some of these obvious advantages of marriage may be the result of improved health behavior among married people, care and control by a spouse, or, first of all, the selection of the healthiest, happiest and economically well-off men and women in stable marriages. Although the exact nature of the processes leading to these positive outcomes is not entirely clear, marriage is associated with important benefits for older Americans.
It is worth noting that the close relationship between spouses is based on emotional support and trust. It is these aspects that will contribute to such a concept as a healthy marriage. The difference of interests in a couple can also become a way of bonding. Even if they are different, the main thing is to enjoy each other’s company. Moreover, a healthy relationship between husband and wife is a means of well-being and makes it possible to effectively manage emerging stresses. Conflict situations and problems in this case do not disappear anywhere, but they can be solved much faster and manifest themselves much less often. Moreover, when dealing with different isuues, spouses are even more united and can bring more benefits to society.
Thus, as already mentioned, stressful situations are inevitable and their solution is sometimes quite difficult. One of these problems may be the financial side of creating and maintaining a family. This issue is more often mentioned in the sources and may have one of the most harmful effects. It is noted that disputes over money often conceal the desire to have power over the cell of society. Moreover, it can be caused by different views on the family structure and values that one of the spouses has formed during the formation of personality. Thus, this problem increases the occurrence of difficulties, negatively affecting the psychological state of the husband or wife.
The next problem is everything related to the birth and upbringing of children. These family members generally always contribute to increasing tension in the family, especially at the stages of preparation for parenthood and in the first period of caring for offspring. On the other hand, children in family relationships can significantly affect the cohesion, improvement of their responsibilities and care (Mahoney et al., 2021). With the advent of new family shuttles, however, the spouses manage to pay less and less attention to each other, which also causes conflicts and disputes.
Daily stress in everyday life also has its contribution. Sometimes. It may be insignificant, but over time, tension can accumulate and become the result of a strong conflict. Under such conditions, it is important to see the irritated or depressed state of the partner. This will help to regulate stress and avoid possible consequences. Successful stress management promotes the development of emotional support skills, which will help with a possible recurrence of the situation.
The next problem that needs to be mentioned is the lack of time. It can be caused by many factors, but most often occurs due to the work schedule of one of the spouses. This situation affects not only the mental, but also the physical health of the spouses. A husband and wife may feel alienated and deprived of their former strong bond. Because of this, an issue of communication problems may leak out, which will disrupt the dynamics of the functioning of the family institution. Sometimes, analyzing the interaction of spouses based on their way of communication can immediately make it clear whether their marriage will last or not. The positive side is the fact that all of the above problems can be easily solved. If attempts to fix the situation on their own fail, many couples can turn to the help of family therapy. This aspect of working with a specialist, as if by an outside spectator, will help to come to a balanced decision and change the spouses’ ideas about the importance and criticality of any problem.
Religion and theology also pay considerable attention to how the institution of family relations develops in modern society. Thus, research comes to the conclusion that faith can contribute to both improvement and deterioration of the situation in the family (Kelley et al., 2020). A special place should be given to religion in the issue under study, since without God there is no real and sincere humanity in people, thereby proper relationships cannot be formed. Thus, based on the postulates of faith, it is possible to deepen and improve the understanding of such a social phenomenon as family relations and their problems. Moreover, this knowledge contributes to a more effective analysis of changes in this institution over time and the identification of future trends in its development. Without taking into account religious aspects, people risk getting rid of the understanding of the main values and the role of creating a family, which will have a negative impact in the future.
On the part of theology, in contrast to more methodical data, three main points can be distinguished in family relations. Certain roles must be formed between the spouses, which were prescribed to them by the Almighty. This type of relationship requires the creation of bonds of dependence and service between the wife and husband. Further, these vocations of the spouses have a justification in the grace of Jesus himself, which determines the essence of the marital relationship. It also helps to cope better with conflict situations and brings a man and a woman closer to faith. In addition, the conclusion of marriage ties implies the creation of a community of love and life, forming a kind of home church. However, due to the fact that this aspect is increasingly ignored in modern society, many difficulties arise. Due to the distance of people from faith, the moment of spirituality disappears and a moral distortion of society arises.
Moreover, there is an increasing tendency among men and women to dissolve marital ties. This is due to the rejection of religious values, whether it is the faith of one of the spouses or the complete absence of it from the husband and wife. It is worth agreeing that religion and spirituality do not have such a significant role in the formation of romantic relationships, but in the future they should gain more power and authority. If people overlook this fact, the situation in the family can significantly worsen and lead to undesirable consequences (Aman et al., 2019). in the longer term, spiritual contradictions can worsen, expand and undermine romanticism in relationships. Taking into account religion can give partners the opportunity to unite and avoid the occurrence of stressful cases.
It is worth noting that the religious views of parents in the future strongly affect their children. This fact is especially valuable because it has a role in shaping future generations and how the society of the future will view religion. Thus, families where concepts such as pacification, harmony and mutual support in religious matters are neglected, much more issues occur. In other cases, children and parents find a source of peace and interest at the same time, depriving family members to commit sinful acts. Among the practices that must be had in every family, holding a joint prayer is noted, which has a beneficial effect (King et al., 2020)health. Thus, the members of this cell of society form a sense of cohesion and a goal to achieve and strive for the best for the benefit of each other.
Therefore, the study and analysis of family relations is of valuable importance. This activity will contribute to a deeper and clearer understanding of this public institution and minimize the occurrence of problems related to marriage. Naturally, the creation of a family is accompanied by many difficulties, but with a sober look at the relationship between husband and wife, it will help to solve them in a timely and effective manner. Moreover, regardless of methodological research and data, it is important to take into account such an aspect as religion. It plays an important role in family relations, as it contributes to the creation of cohesion and mutual understanding in the family.