Since it is assumed that skiing is a rather traumatic sport, the company should have taken precautions for minimizing the injury risks for the skiers. However, in that particular case, the actions of the company’s workers have created risks for health damage for Mr. Craig and Mr. Alex, who were actually injured. The fact that it was April and the slopes were supposed to be closed may lessen the degree of the company’s responsibility in this particular case, but not completely. The company made a mistake letting people ski after the snowstorm though it could not have allowed people to do it. Hence, the company’s actions endangered not only the skiers but the staff as well.
Though Mr. Alex’s injury was made by Mr. Craig, it is not only his responsibility in its causation. It would not have happened if Dan and Abby did not send him to the untested slope without any instructor who could have prevented Mr. Alex’s injury. Hence, the health damage was caused both by the company and by Mr. Craig unwillingly. However, it does not mean that the compensation for Mr. Alex’s injury is a part of Mr. Craig’s responsibility since his actions were the result of the actions of Dan and Abby. Thus, the company should compensate Mr. Alex’s treatment costs relying on the severity of the damage he has experienced and the length of the recovery period (Goguen, n.d.). Apart from that, the company should pay for the ski equipment that was spoiled during the accident.
The fact that skiing is a traumatic sport means that Mr. Alex himself should have known the health risks he had to face when skiing after the end of the season. The fact that he decided to ski alone on a difficult slope relying on his experience, says that he understood all the possible risks. However, his actions confirm that he tried to escape the crash and acted professionally without any violations of the skiing rules and norms. It was the actions of Mr. Craig that caused the clash. Thus, it is his responsibility and the responsibility of those who sent poorly skilled skier to the untested slope.