A policy brief is a concise explanation of a particular issue. The brief policy aims at government policymakers or interested parties who shape or influence policy. A policy brief provides adequate background for the reader to comprehend the problem and persuade them to handle it immediately. It identifies the most effective solutions to the problem and gives data to back them up. The policy brief encourages the reader to make the best decision possible.A good policy brief should be concise and focused on meanings rather than procedures. The policy brief should concentrate on a single issue or concern and give enough evidence from multiple sources (“2022 NACo Legislative Conference Livestreams”, 2022).
Policy Briefs on the State, Local and Federal Issue
1st policy brief
Escalating Food Prices – A national crisis
Action to be taken to eliminate poverty and hunger
Escalating food prices pose a problem to the poor, government of low-income countries with high import bills, and aids agencies managing increased demand for cash and food. The poor are unable to buy food. Low-income countries face political unrest. The problem emanates from a lack of better investment in the food industry and poor management of the national food supply (Lubell, 2021).
What happens and why?
Initially, food prices were affordable since the farmers and the government had invested a lot in the agriculture industry. Since 2000, food prices have started escalating due to the increased cost of fertilizers, farm machinery, and chemicals. An increase in food prices was due to increments in fuels prices.
Impact on the poor, low-income counties and farming industries
The poor spend most of their income on food; hence escalating food prices contribute to high expenditure, which is not manageable. The higher food prices contribute to higher transport costs that affect farmers’ income. The low-income countries face pressure from the bills, leading to low economic development and growth (Lubell, 2021).
Policy recommendation
Urgent action is required to eliminate distress that emanates from escalating food prices, and more resources are needed to support WEP and assist developing countries with higher import bills. Relevant policies are required to help farmers produce more food.
Conclusion
The correct measure is needed to control the food prices and promote economic growth. The government must regulate the oil prices to enable farmers and the agriculture industry to reduce their income-expenditure hence low food prices.
2 nd policy brief
Natural resources: climate change challenge
The change of climate has occurred recently in the countries that cannot handle the change. The developing countries are the most affected because they depend on natural resources. The countries face global warming due to industrialization. Effective management of the natural resources leads to climate and suitable development.
Soil erosion
Most of the lands are affected by soil erosion due to cutting down the trees and poor management of the environment, like poor cultivating and grazing practices.
Low rainfalls
Low rain leads to low crop production and desertification. It makes the farmers have difficulty planning crop cultivation, resulting in a developing country.
Policy recommendation
The government protects the water catchment areas and natural forests within arid and semi-arid regions. The government promotes farm levels to mitigate climate change.
Conclusion
The practical measures to be put in place to control adverse weather changes that contribute to climate change (Lubell, 2021).
3 rd policy brief
Suitable agriculture and rural development – strengthening rural and agricultural business
Suitable agriculture and rural development satisfy economic, social, and cultural needs without endangering future generations. There must be an increased and expanded rural economy for better agriculture and rural development.
Free and fair trade
Free and fair trade helps developing countries provided they have humans, technology, and infrastructure to compete internationally.
Income generation
Road development and transport promote access to the markets, hence increasing income among the farmers. The promotion of the local products facilitates increments in the revenue.
Policy recommendation
There is a need to improve access to the markets and develop sound transport systems, roads, and communication channels for more production and increased income generation.
Conclusion
The best measures are required to facilitate income generation to satisfy the economy.
Gun Violence in America
Gun violence is violence through pistols, shotguns, and machine guns. The violence results in homicide, mass shooting, or suicide. In America, many people have died due to gun violence. Gun violence in America needs applicable background checks. Politicians and the concerned groups need to ensure federal regulation on gun ownership (Vernick et al., 2017). The government needs to involve a justice department to ensure anyone who violates the related laws on gun violence is prosecuted in court.
The government and politicians have developed the necessary plan, such as no sales of firearms to unlicensed groups or individuals, licensing the company that sells the gun, and prohibiting individuals from carrying the weapon in public. The implementation of the federal regulations will minimize gun violence among Americans. The politician organized the congress to support the national laws governing machine guns’ licensing. If the set regulations are adhered to, there will be a reduction in gun violence in America (Vernick et al., 2017).