Water contamination is a global environmental problem, and the use of pesticides worsens the situation. This essential element, if polluted, makes plants, animals, and food unhealthy and leads species to disappear and humans to develop chronic diseases. Pesticides contamination must be considered on the legislative level in most countries, and global environment protection organizations must establish regulations. Furthermore, a good rating of water contamination’s severity must evolve before encouraging people and regulators to address the problem (Demir, Dilek, & Yetis, 2019). Each situation is unique, and many countries cannot integrate contamination limiting regulations due to the inability to match the general environmental standards. The alternative strategies to decrease pesticides utilization can be implemented in different institutions such as social work, culture, healthcare, and politics.
Indeed, replacing killing pesticides with natural alternatives can be achieved through social programs and healthcare initiatives that explore and educate about the severity of artificial chemicals. Besides, the impact can be achieved through local political campaigns in the regions with the worst environmental situation or enormous scope of farming businesses (van den Berg et al., 2020). The alternative strategy of cultural influence on citizens’ perception of danger pesticides’ utilization carries can be encouraged through governmental funding into the ecology protection projects. Furthermore, non-profit organizations need to increase their influence by promoting workable pests replacement and initiatives to establish legislative regulation for applying limits for hazardous chemicals (Demir, Dilek, & Yetis, 2019). Encouraging broad groups of people such as certain region inhabitants, doctors, or plant food manufacturers to address the problem is more effective than penalizing the businesses. Consequently, the examples of severe consequences must be publicly discussed, and actionable decisions must be taken collaboratively.