Religion is a fundamental part of most world societies and cultures. There are numerous varieties of religions worldwide with a wide range of differences than similarities. This factor makes it challenging to have an all-encompassing definition of religion that works for all people. The most common traits among the religions include the focus on supernatural or sacred power, ritual acts, and moral codes. Some regions are easily recognized globally, while others are confined to a particular region or country. For instance, Shinto is a Japanese religion widely practiced by that country’s nationals. Although Shinto is a Japanese religion, its myth of origin that supports the divinity of the country’s islands and rulers to ancestral lineage with gods can have a similarity to other religions such as Jewish and Christianity. Divinity
The Shinto Divinity Myth about Japanese Islands and Japanese Emperors
As noted in the introduction, most Japanese communities subscribe to Shinto, an indigenous religion that defines the country’s culture and national identity. According to Mizumura, more than fifty percent of Japanese adhere to Shinto. Shinto myth supports the notion that the Japanese islands are divine by indicating that they were created by gods, Izanami and Izanagi. The two gods used a spear encrusted with jewels to stir the ocean, where crystalized salt on the tip fell after withdrawing it, forming the islands. The gods settled on Onogoro-Shima, the first island they created, and the female deity, Izanami, wedded Izanagi. Later, the divine couple created other islands that comprise Japan, the world, and other gods.
Shinto myth also holds that the Japanese emperors are direct descendants of Amaterasu. According to Mizumura, Amaterasu Omikami, the sun goddess, was of the gods created by Izanami and wedded Iznagi, from whom the Shinto religion believes that the imperial family descended. Therefore, the Japanese people considered their emperors to have qualities of Kami, making them superior. The people obeyed the emperors and divine rulers and worshipped them. The emperors executed religious and political roles in society, such as performing rituals and protecting the country. Shinto’s divinity notion about their land and rulers is relatable to other religions.
The Jewish Story about “The Holy Land” and Shinto’s Divine Land
The Jewish story about God creating and giving “The Holy Land” has significant similarities with the Shinto myth concerning Japanese islands. The Jewish believe that their land is divine, created by God’s supreme supernatural being, and given to their forefathers and descendants. The story began when God asked Abraham, from whom the Jewish descended, to leave his native land for another that He (God) would show him (The Jewish virtual library). God gave Abraham a divine promise that He would bless the latter and make his name promise. God made a covenant with Abraham, saying He gave his descendants the land (The Jewish virtual library). Canaan, or Israel as known today, is the “Holy Land” endowed to the Jewish community. God fulfilled his promise when He used Moses to take the descendants of Abraham from Egypt to the promised. The Jewish right to the land of Canaan shows that God had already planned that the place would be an everlasting possession for the Jews.
Similarly, Shintonians believe that the Japanese islands were created and given to the Japanese community to inherit. Although the Jewish “Holy Land” was created by one Supreme God and the divine Japanese islands by more than one God, the creators were both supernatural beings with the powers to control humans and nature. Like Jewish who believe that God’s power and favor have always been upon their land and consider Israel a center for adoring their Creator, Shinto has numerous shrines in Japan for worshipping their gods.
The Notion of America as God’s Country and Shinto Message
Although several countries worldwide have ever identified themselves as a nation of God, they cannot contest the title “God’s own country” with America. The factors that make most Americans consider their nation as God’s country range from a religious perspective to the prosperity and freedom associated with it. According to Perry et al., American civil religion and Christian nationalism are religious factors that make citizens consider their nation as a country of God (131). The American civil religion considers Americans as united under an ambiguous Creator’s (Judeo-Christian) covenant (131). The citizens are obliged to the Creator because He maintains an equitable and just society. Conversely, Christian nationalism aligns the country’s national identity with an evangelical Christian God. America is among the most economically developed country and one of the world’s superpowers. Living in the country is associated with prosperity and freedom, which are God’s providence.
This notion of America as God’s country is similar to the Shinto myth that Japanese islands were created and belonged to gods. Both perspectives associate particular countries with religions, Christianity for America and Shinto for Japan. Americans, most of whom are Christians, believe that God is responsible for the country. Equally, Shintonians believe that the gods who created the islands are responsible for their land’s high production.
The Egyptian Concept of the Pharaoh as God and the Shinto Belief about the Japanese Emperor
Shinto belief about the Japanese emperor is similar to the ancient Egyptians’ concept of the pharaoh as a god. Notably, pharaohs were the prehistoric Egyptian rulers who played political and religious roles in society. The Egyptians considered their rulers divine, who linked the people and gods (National Society). The pharaohs maintained religious harmony among the residents of the region. Additionally, they participated in different important ceremonies and were head of state, made laws, and oversaw all operations in the land of Egypt. Likewise, Shinto believes that Japanese emperors are divine and worshiped because they are descendants of gods who created Japanese islands. Like the pharaohs, Japanese emperors are also considered important religious leaders by Shintonians.
The European Notion of the King’s Divine Right and Shinto Belief about the Japanese Emperor
Kings were an important symbol in most communities across the world. However, some parts, such as the European region, believed that their kings had divine rights from God. According to Wills, the kings derived their authority from God, and no earthly power could hold them accountable for their actions. The medieval notion that God grants power to leaders formed the foundation of the divine rights perception. The first proponent of the divine right of kings in the European region was King James I of England (Wills). Theorists of that notion asserted that authority is sacred and derived from God, even though the king is a person. This belief is not different from Shinto’s, who consider Japanese emperors to have extraordinary power and authority derived from gods. Shinto holds that emperors are descendants of the goddess Amaterasu. Therefore, no human should question their actions because divine powers guide them.
Christian Notion about Jesus and Shinto Belief about Japanese Emperors
The Christian belief about Jesus also shares some similarities with the Shinto notion about Japanese emperors. The Christians stoutly acknowledge that Jesus was the son of God, who is the most supreme and with supernatural power. Jesus was not born like other human beings but conceived through the Holy Spirit. Equally, they believe that Jesus is the leader of the Christian religion since it originated from his teachings. On the other hand, the Shinto notion holds that emperors are sun goddess Amaterasu, a highly recognized supernatural being in the religion. Although Japanese emperors were born, their origin is associated with divine beings. Like Jesus, Japanese emperors are considered the leaders of Shintonians and are the essential symbol of the religion.
Indeed, religions are a fundamental part of most societies and cultures. Most people in the world have ever associated themselves with one or more religions in their lifetime. While some religions are easily recognized globally, others, like Shinto, are confined to a particular region or country. Shinto myth of origin that supports the divinity of the country’s islands and rulers to ancestral lineage with gods can have a similarity to other religions. For instance, the Jewish and the Shinto believe that their lands are divine and given by supernatural beings. Equally, Shinto, Egyptians, and medieval European believed that their rulers were divine and their authority came from gods, so no earthly power could question or hold them accountable for their actions.