Epigenetics refers to the study of how one’s own behavior and environment can affect the way in which the genes work. Unlike changes that occur directly in the genes, epigenetic changes can be reversed and do not affect the DNA sequence; however, they can change the way in which the body reads the DNA sequence. For example, when one encounters two identical twins, their appearance shows some differences, even though they start out looking the same. As the two twins age, the impact of environmental and behavioral factors becomes more prominent, contributing to the changes and differences between the two twins. Therefore, epigenetics could be used as a critical framework for understanding one’s propensity to develop a particular health condition.
When it comes to the considerations of epigenetics in terms of a disease for which an individual is at high risk, it is necessary to consider family history as well as environmental factors that add to the development of the adverse health condition. Considering all factors, the most highly likely disease to develop in the future is type 2 diabetes. Type 2 diabetes refers to an impairment in the way in which the body regulates and uses sugar as fuel (Rosen et al., 2018). It is a chronic condition that can be managed with medication and lifestyle changes but cannot be cured completely with no traces of the condition left behind. This conclusion was made based on several factors concerning family history and environmental and behavioral factors.
Specifically, both the parent and the sibling had type 2 diabetes, diagnosed as adults. In adulthood, type 2 diabetes is likely to develop as a result of behavioral and environmental factors, such as increased blood pressure, elevated levels of fat in the blood, a sedentary lifestyle, high alcohol intake, obesity and overweight, and others (Rosen et al., 2018). Therefore, since there are direct DNA connections between a parent and a sibling, both of whom developed diabetes as adults, it is essential to consider such information as highly relevant. Other potential diseases included breast cancer, glaucoma, and thyroid disorder, which were identified in other relatives, for which the risk factors are lower.
Epigenetics suggests that even in the case of genetic risk factors, there is a possibility to either increase or reduce the chances of developing a disease with the help of environmental and behavioral improvements. Besides, researchers have been focusing on a new research agenda, emphasizing the interactions between health and environmental and social factors. Therefore, social determinants of health represent a considerable part of epigenetics as it seeks to explain any non-medical factors that directly influence health, such as values, attitudes, knowledge, and behaviors (Notterman & Mitchell, 2016). Besides, across an individual’s lifespan, health can be significantly affected by social disadvantages.
The study of epigenetics has considered the control of both disease and homeostasis. Considering that the risk of diabetes and its complications is associated with environmental and inherited factors, it is not surprising that research in this area is extensive (Rosen et al., 2018). In addition, Rosen et al. (2018) stated that there are several areas of epigenetic regulation, such as direct methylation of adenine or cytosine residues, covalent modifications to histone proteins, higher-order chromatin structure, and non-coding RNA. These areas have been implicated in cellular processes that are relevant to diabetes, with a long history of links between diabetes and epigenetics, as well as other metabolism-related challenges that include obesity, overweight, and other metabolic disorders.
It is notable that the risk of diabetes development in an individual has been linked to increased rates of micro- and macrovascular complications. Clinical trials conducted among people with diabetes have underlined the positive effects of intensive glycemic control to avoid the occurrence of complications and their progression. Specifically, the rate of complications associated with diabetes can be influenced by glucose levels that were experienced years earlier, which is referred to as metabolic memory (Rosen et al., 2018). Energetic changes can offer a biological explanation for the long-standing impact of metabolic changes, as metabolite levels can impact the epigenome while such changes are preserved during the division of cells.
Importantly, studies focusing on cells and tissues from patients diagnosed with diabetes have illustrated striking differences in epigenetic marks at core genes linked to complications, including fibrotic and inflammatory genes. For example, the authors refer to the article by Beckerman, Ko, and Susztak (2014), who used kidney tissues from patients diagnosed with diabetes and chronic kidney disease to illustrate epigenetic changes in renal disease-related genes. In addition, epigenetic mechanisms have been shown to influence cellular models of metabolic memory.
Therefore, the epigenetics article showed that diabetes and complications associated with it could have a combined effect on the variations in DNA sequence, with environmental effects influencing shifts in the cellular phenotype. Because epigenetics as a field develops rapidly, there is a possibility to facilitate the work on the exploration of the cell-type-focused epigenome atlas. Such maps can be used for interpreting genetic variations and highlighting the ways in which such variations lead to disease development. Moreover, epigenome maps that include considerations of genomic and genetic data can enhance the understanding of mechanisms in which environmental changes contribute to the development of diabetes.
After completing the Living to 100 Questionnaire, it was found that the life expectancy was 83, which is quite a good score. However, it is necessary to consider the impact of epigenetics as an indicator that environmental factors and genetics could reduce the quality of life. The family history suggests that diabetes could be a potential contributing factor. Specifically, the combined diabetic life expectancy is 74.64 years (Tachkov et al., 2020). This points to the need to implement positive life changes and adhere to a healthy lifestyle to increase life expectancy and prevent the development of diabetes, given the increased risk identified in the challenges of family history.
To improve health and longevity in light of the findings of the questionnaire and the identified epigenetics implications, it is necessary first to engage in regular health assessments to ensure that a prediabetic state can be placed in time while preventive measures are implemented. Besides, considering the contributing factors to diabetes, it is necessary to stay physically active, have a healthy diet based on the general recommendations of healthcare providers, pay attention to weight gain, as well as not engage excessively in harmful habits such as smoking or drinking. Regular check-ups and timely treatment plans are also imperative to consider because they can be helpful in preventing the development of adverse health conditions at their earliest stages.