Figure 1. Parenting (“Parents,” n.d.).
Parenting implies dealing with multiple issues, some of which require the assistance of experts. In case of a crisis, a parent must not hesitate to consult respective services that provide adequate and immediate support both to parents and to their children. Organizations addressing parenting issues and the problem of parent-child relationships can offer guidance in a variety of scenarios, including the identification of paternity, the search for the non-custodial parent, and many more. For residents of the New York City community, two major sources of information should be considered.
Description
Cap4Kids is an organization that provides an exceptionally broad variety of services linked to parenting. For instance, the benefits program that Cap4Kids offers creates ample opportunities for parents from disadvantaged neighborhoods to support their children and provide them with crucial resources, including not only educational options, but also the support of children’s basic needs, including food and clothing (“Parenting support,” n.d.). Given the dire outcomes t6hat the coronavirus pandemic has produced on the New York community in terms of its economic and financial situation, resources for supporting parents that have encountered economic difficulties are particularly useful and appreciated (“Parenting support,” n.d.). In turn, Cap4Kids provides the specified opportunities to parents, providing them with vital sources and offering a well-developed and perfectly functioning support system.
In regard to education options, including early childhood education, Cap4Kids provides an extensive list of programs for children, which range from recreational to educational to a combination of the two. Thus, Cap4Kids creates premises for promoting literacy among children and assisting them in improving their academic records. For parents in New York neighborhoods affected by the pandemic financially, thus, depriving them of the resources needed to support their children’s education, the specified option introduces a vital step in improving the quality of their children’s lives. Overall, Cap4Kids has developed a wide range of resources and opportunities for children and their parents, thus, addressing the parenting issues that New York City community members are likely to experience presently.
The chance to receive consultations regarding questions on the issue of COVID-19 and the related resources is a comparatively recent yet essential addition to the roster of services that Cap4Kids provides. Specifically, resources addressing the issue of food choices during the coronavirus, assistance with housing and employment, and support in childcare make Cap4Kids an instrumental organization in assisting families with parenting.
Costs
Since the organization in question positions itself as a non-profit one, parents seeking its support will not have to take any costs to receive its services. Furthermore, since the services in question provide online support, even expenses associated with transportation will not be required. However, having a consistent Internet connection will be vital to continue receiving the offered help and maintain communication with the organization and its representatives. Therefore, the general range of costs to be expected from contacting Cap4Kids is likely to be comparatively low.
NYC Department of Youth and Community Development
Contact Information
Texting 311-692
Calling 3-1-1, 212-NEW-YORK, or 212-504-4115 (New York City Department of Youth and Community Development, n.d.).
Description
Being a part of the broader legal representation of New York citizens, namely, the New York City Government, the New York City Department of Youth and Community Development (n.d.) provides assistance concerning parenting issues. Namely, the organization seeks to expand fatherhood opportunities by offering fathers a chance to reconnect with their children. Additionally, the NYC Department of Youth and Community Development (n.d.) provides food services to families in need, specifically focusing on families with young children.
Since the [pandemic, the NYC Department of Youth and Community Development (n.d.) has been especially active in extending support to children from disadvantaged backgrounds by collaborating with parents actively. The focus on family health and emphasis on healthy families as its core goal is another feature of the organization worth noting. Linked directly to the issue of parenting, the specified service provides counseling and consultations for parents and their children, thus, addressing complex parenting issues (NYC Department of Youth and Community Development, n.d.). Due to its focus on health advocacy, the NYC Department of Youth and Community Development (n.d.) deserves parents’ trust and should be regarded as the best source of information, as well as an important partner for cooperation with the target demographic.
Costs
Being another non-profit organization, the NYC Department of Youth and Community Development (n.d.) does not charge its clients, which means that its target audiences will not sustain any costs when collaborating with its experts.
Ensuring that a parent has all available resources is critical for the well-being of the child. The need for crucial parenting resources is especially critical in the environment of the pandemic since the COVID-19 issue has affected a range of ways in which citizens handle their daily responsibilities and manage their roles as parents. Do not hesitate to contact the services listed above in case of any issues regarding parenting or childcare. As long as experts are involved in a crisis situation, the well-being of a child is secured.
Contact. (n.d.). Cap4Kids. Web.
New York City Department of Youth and Community Development. (n.d.). Family support . NYC. Web.
Parenting support . (n.d.). Cap4Kids. Web.
Parents . [Photograph]. (n.d.). Maxpixel. Web.