The author introduces the reader to Mrs. Evergreen, who immigrated to Canada with her parents about 16 years earlier. She immediately took up two jobs as a caregiver.
She soon met her future husband and started living together. They had their first child in 2011 and got married in 2014. She became pregnant again and had their second daughter in 2015.
Mrs. Evergreen decides to go back to school to pursue another career, but her husband remains reluctant, seeing they only married a year before. However, the husband relented when a family friend agreed to babysit while in school.
She becomes a brilliant student and acquires experience by rendering free services in the community.
Upon graduation, she gets employed in a beauty care group, where she quickly rises through the ranks to the manager position. However, the entire staff becomes laid off due to COVID-19 government regulations.
While at home, she decides to start her venture. Thus, she opens The Beauty Shop .
Her former employee hears of her move and goes to court, citing a non-competition agreement Mrs. Evergreen signed with her. Mrs. Evergreen hires a lawyer to represent her, but they lose the case as the court orders closure of her new business.
Mrs. Evergreen becomes deeply traumatized and humiliated since the business was rising with customers flowing in steadily before the closure.
The retention fees for the lawyers become unbearable, and she must continue to pay her weekly rent. The lawyers ask her to relocate the business, but she declines. At the same time, her two children become infected with COVID-19 as her depression peaks, and she even contemplates suicide.
Evergreen starts taking anti-depressant medication. Evergreen’s lawyers countersue Stella (her former employee) for misusing her during her time at their facility. Stella asks to meet Evergreen, but she agrees, though initially reluctant. Stella sees her errors, and both agree to terminate the court cases.
Evergreen remains happily married and appreciates the support of family and friends throughout the ordeal. The business boasts over a thousand clients and about 150 five-star reviews two years later.
Reminiscing on the trials, Mrs. Evergreen calls for self-assertion and resiliency in tests and calls for readers never to give up since all successful stories begin with challenges.