Environment-friendly technologies develop with the growing social awareness about the issues caused by pesticides utilization in various industries. Sharma et al. (2020) claim that “these chemicals enter the ecosystem, thus hampering the sensitive environmental equilibrium through bio-accumulation” (p. 110812). Consequently, alternative strategies become in demand for protecting the plants and species from biomagnification and severe changes in natural settings (Sharma et al., 2020). Biological, semi-chemical, and physical control methods for decreasing the use of pesticides require proper encouragement to achieve sustainable improvement in the ecological situation. Indeed, the governmental programs, legislative changes, and business initiatives that promote environmental protection are the key for the novelties’ implementation.
There are several ways to influence the decision-making processes of pesticides used in the industries such as farming and livestock. Firstly, the awareness about the hazardous effect on human organisms must be increased through public health programs or social events. Knowledge about the diseases their pesticides users can develop in their family members would force them to take responsibility in a more efficient way than reminding them about the consequences to occur in decades (Magarey et al., 2019). Secondly, legislators and government can produce a supportive program for those who move their business towards decreasing pesticides (Sharma et al., 2020).
Indeed, special tax rates, privileges, or rewarding guarantees can encourage farmers to implement alternative control methods to eliminate the neonicotinoid insecticides utilization. Lastly, the range of eco-efficient benchmarks to evaluate the level of hazard caused by one industry or company’s use of pesticides must be developed. Magarey et al. (2019) state that “eco-efficiency is an operational basis for optimizing pest management for sustainability” (p. 3129). The presence of regulations and standards to match production can encourage the industries to seek environment-friendly ways of manufacturing.
Magarey, R. D., Klammer, S. S., Chappell, T. M., Trexler, C. M., Pallipparambil, G. R., & Hain, E. F. (2019). Eco‐efficiency as a strategy for optimizing the sustainability of pest management . Pest Management Science, 75 (12), 3129-3134. Web.
Sharma, A., Shukla, A., Attri, K., Kumar, M., Kumar, P., Suttee, A., & Singla, N. (2020). Global trends in pesticides: A looming threat and viable alternatives . Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety, 201 , 110812. Web.