The foundation myths of Rome represent some of the qualities vital for a successful state in antiquity – decisiveness, militancy, and political and social flexibility. Historians of different sorts have been trying to understand and interpret the story of Romulus and Remus since its creation. The following stages of Rome’s supposed history also raise many questions regarding fratricide, abduction, rape, and also the backgrounds of Rome’s first citizens. The fact that according to most of the myths, Rome started from fratricide seems to be quite relevant as the city’s history is famously filled with civil conflicts and wars. Many historians tried to sugarcoat this episode – Cicero ignored it, Dionysius of Halicarnassus depicted Romulus as full of regret, and Egnatius suggested that Remus had survived and outlived Romulus (as cited in Beard, 2015). Another Roman historian – Livy – told the story of Romulus reacting to his brother’s actions, therefore, portraying the city’s founder as a hard, bellicose, but rather just person (as cited in Beard, 2015). Regardless of the interpretations, it seems that belligerence, resoluteness, and willingness to quickly resolve both internal and external conflicts with blood found their reflection in Roman myths and history.
On the other hand, the history of Rome is the history of unprecedented openness, inclusiveness, and social mobility. The fact that the majority of first Roman citizens supposedly were criminals may cast an unpleasant shadow on the city’s legacy, yet in the end, this led to more open political and social systems. Unlike other states of the ancient world, Rome not only accepted foreigners but also incorporated them into its society, gradually granting citizenship to the people of provinces (Beard, 2015). One of the kings of Macedon in the third century BCE recognized the advantages of the Roman approach (as cited in Beard, 2015). Without much of a doubt, it can be presumed that Roman foundation myths are closely intertwined with the Roman identity, and it is possible to identify some of Rome’s success factors through its myths.