Russia Today (RT) is widely known for its controversial reporting on various topics, especially news in Ukraine. Multiple sources have repeatedly accused it of disseminating distorted information that forms a particular perspective. In many ways, it is dictated by the principles that are laid down in it in Russia and which, through the activities of RT, are also promoted abroad. In such a situation, one can conclude that freedom of the press is not only in danger but practically non-existent, being swallowed up by political rhetoric. The purpose of this paper is to analyze the situation with RT coverage of news about Ukraine through the prism of the Hutchins report on a free and responsible press.
As Hutchins points out in his report, there are three dangers for news publishers and other media outlets. Firstly, the strong development of such tools reduces the number of people who can express their will and broadcast their opinion. This factor is reflected in the current RT activities since only specialized people can post news on their portals. As one of the most massive pro-Russian voices, RT suppresses all other opinions, curtailing freedom of speech. The second factor, according to Hutchins, is the failure to provide the news that society needs, despite having an opportunity. RT covers news about Ukraine in a highly one-sided way, glorifying Russia and constantly pointing out the failures of Ukraine, exposing it in a negative light. While people want objectivity from the news, RT uses its vast resources for propaganda. Finally, the third factor is the use by press directors of methods condemned by society. RT actively distorts the truth, presenting it in a light favorable for itself, which is a condemned practice unworthy of the press.
According to Hutchins, state control of the press is the loss of a primary defense against totalitarianism. In the context of RT and its coverage of news about Ukraine, it can be noted that this media tool is a direct instrument for spreading propaganda. All the dangers to the free press described by Hutchins can be highlighted in the work of this structure, which indicates its incompetence as a reliable source of information. Therefore, applying this report to the situation with RT and Ukraine, it can be concluded that this news resource does not belong to the free and responsible ones but promotes a clear political position sponsored by the Russian government.