Being an international company with diversified sectors, Coates Chemicals developed an interest in fuel production because of the introduction of E10 fuel in the United Kingdom. The organization has a variety of sectors ranging from foods and beverages to pharmaceuticals covering most of its consumers’ needs. The urge for the bioethanol plant compelled the company to construct the plant and produce ethanol from glucose. This report stipulates step-by-step safety guidelines that made the construction and production of ethanol in Coates Chemicals.
After conducting the comprehensive feasibility of the bioethanol plant, it was evident that 10000 terapascal of pressure was economical in ethanol production compared with the viability of the current marketplace. The organization was erected adjacent to River Trent. The main reason for the plant to be situated near the river is to cut down the costs incurred in case water areas are far away from the bioethanol plant. The manufacture and processing of ethanol require a lot of water in its processes (Velazquez-Lucio et al. 2018, 452). Thus, it is of great significance to have plenty of water during the manufacturing and processing processes. Besides its commitment to the manufacturing and processing sector, Coates Chemicals has put more effort into the organization’s sustainable development. Thus, this organization is accountable for its actions to its varied shareholders, like consumers and suppliers.
As part of the company’s aims to serve their consumers the right package of end products from the various sectors under Coates Chemicals, the organization aims to achieve the following objectives by 2025. First, Coates Chemicals is determined to reduce energy and water consumption by 20%. The reduction of water consumption can be achieved through heat exchange network optimization. This process can be achieved by reducing the water footprint by decreasing energy consumption. Secondly, Coates Chemicals aims to reduce the emission of carbon IV oxide from its processing sites by 20%. Recycling it can reduce the reduction (İnan and Özçimen 2019, 133). Thirdly, the organization aims to achieve zero waste in landfills.
Recycling wastes will help avoid the accumulation of waste products in open lands. Besides, recycling will help the organization cut down some production and manufacturing costs because some of the materials required for manufacturing ethanol will be readily available. Fourthly, the organization aims to create a conducive environment among its workers and contractors. Lastly, Coates Chemicals is an ethical organization expecting higher standards from its supply chain. This concept is achieved because the organization has decided to do green production of their products. Thus, the organization tries its best to minimize its emissions, which can otherwise lead to pollution of the environment.
The company decided to produce enormous amounts of bioethanol from bulky glucose solutions prepared by other companies in its production process. The ready-made glucose solution will then be delivered to Coates Chemicals by pipe from a nearby sugar refinery. The following are some of the compositions of the production plant (Velazquez-Lucio et al. 421). First, the organization acquired tanks to store bulky glucose solutions that will run the manufacture of ethanol for five days. The plant will have four continuous fermentation reactors that will carry their operations parallel. Finally, the plant will have a distillation column that will help produce a distillate of ethanol under different processes like purification.
In conclusion, Coates Chemicals successfully processed ethanol with all the expertise and resources made ready. The feasibility study carried out by the company’s experts paved the way for a better start to the process. Coates Chemicals’ objectives were considered measurable and achievable if much effort was put into the new venture.