Background
The action of the prayer effect is based on the regularities and peculiarities of cognitive processes. It is based on two attention abilities, namely, switching and concentration. In the course of prayer, people switch and focus on an area of higher spirituality. The requirement of regularity and systematic recitation of worship leads to frequent repetition of concentration on religious categories, strengthening the mental connection with God. Froese and Jones (2021) wrote in their article that prayer strengthens one’s faith in the supernatural and, therefore, it is a session of faith. In addition, public prayer has long been used as a tool to influence the political arena (Froese & Jones, 2021). Therefore, one can consider this phenomenon as a weapon, sacred and supernatural.
The same idea that prayer is a weapon, and used politically, is also found in Martin’s article. Religion is familiar with precedents when it was possible to defeat enemy troops by force of turning to God (Martin, 2019). For example, in A.D. 174, by the power of prayer, a Roman legion was able to discover a spring of water, and the flood that followed washed away the enemies (Martin, 2019). In general, both authors emphasize that prayers serve as weapons and that their use brings people closer to God.
Participants in the ritual often experience a sense of social acceptance and emotional uplift after the prayer is completed. The rhythmic and systematic repetition of prayers reinforces the ideals and guidelines of a particular religion (Froese & Jones, 2021). Martin also wrote about it in his article, he came to the conclusion that these circumstances determine why prayer can be used as an epiphany strategy. Proactivity manifests itself as a response to a stimulus; a prayer of this type responds to a vision for fate. Due to such rituals, it is possible to create the future by praying (Froese & Jones, 2021). People often asked God to protect them in battle throughout early Christian history. Prayers were used to ease the fear of the Israelites, strengthening their resolve long before Jesus was born (Martin, 2019). The initiators of such prayers were used to reassure soldiers before skirmishes. It was assured that they would be guaranteed a place in heaven if they won (Martin, 2019). Both authors mention that requests for intervention in this way have existed throughout Christian history. They are unanimously convinced that prayers are inherently proactive; there are no significant differences between their positions.
Summary
Repentance
In his second letter to the Corinthians, Paul refers to repentance as sorrow for God’s sake, which leads to salvation (2 Corinthians 7:10). Repentance in Paul’s understanding is when one does not return to sin again. Repentance cleanses the soul, and a clean soul, in turn, is able to more fully receive the grace of the Holy Spirit.
Dedication
Praise
The apostle Paul, in Philippians 4:6, gives instructions common to all. He encourages people to always rejoice in the Lord, to be meek, not to indulge in worldly cares – all these are characteristic features of the Christian life.
Intercession
The apostle Paul says that Christians should approach God with humility, submission, constancy, and gratitude in praying for all people ( ESV, 1 Tim. 2:1-5). Furthermore, he believes that praying for all people is both a privilege and a responsibility. Praying for everyone, including kings and rulers, is good and pleases God.
Warfare
The apostle Paul, in Ephesians 6:12, speaks of believers fighting against evil spirits. If the enemy comes to people with the deception and excitement to evil, then, through a feasible struggle, that is, the feats of fasting and prayer, they must deliver themselves from his temptations to sin. A Christian must be totally irreconcilable with all kinds of evil, but, of course, fight it with means worthy of a Christian.
Supplication
Paul’s letter to the Philippians mentions the need to open one’s desires to God in prayer and supplication. He also writes that Christians should “do not be anxious about anything,” which implies courage and honesty in prayer ( NIV, Philippians 4:6). While reminding people of the need to pray, Paul tells them of the need to stay fearless.
Meditation
The apostle Paul stated in Romans 9:16 that salvation comes only from a Merciful God. The path to salvation in Christian meditation is not a path of mutual concession, and the purpose of meditation is to bring joy to God’s heart. God’s Word directs meditation to show the two aspects of love that please God: obedience and worship.
Faith
The best definition in terms of accuracy of thought and content is found in the Holy Scriptures. In Hebrews, Apostle Paul says: “Now faith is the assurance of things hoped for, the conviction of things not seen” ( ESV Hebrews 11:1). For every believer, faith is not an assumption, not a guess, but actual knowledge, the basis of which is the spiritual activity of man.
English Standard Version Bible . (2001). ESV Online. Web.
Froese, P., & Jones, R. (2021). The sociology of prayer: Dimensions and mechanisms. Social Sciences, 10 (15), 1-19. Web.
Martin, T. (2019). Wielding the power of prayer: The use of prayer in conflict. Obsculta, 12 (1), 38-53.
New International Version Bible. (2001). Bible Gateway. Web.