Recently the self-driving technologies have been significantly developed by the researchers. Many companies consider self-driving vehicles as the future of supply chain management growth. Generally, self-operating technologies can minimize the expenditures on supplying the goods. Such technologies provide more fast delivery opportunities. Due to the large-scale implementation of such technologies, the whole transportation system will be changed. Despite the positive aspects of these innovations, self-driving vehicles have particular ethical considerations.
Self-driving technologies can significantly improve the development of the transportation industry. The global supply data storage can be efficiently evolved into artificial-intelligence-based vehicles. As a result, the trucking industry and supply management will be more efficient and practically oriented. Thanks to these technologies, many expenditures for transportation will be reduced. It will be achieved by eliminating the driver profession because self-driven technologies require almost no human labor. Another positive impact of self-driven technologies is better customer services and more quick delivery. As a result, the total turnover of various companies will grow. Transportation using self-driving vehicles also contributes to more resiliency in deliveries. Some researchers believe that the automatization of supply chain management will contribute to the more profound partnership between companies (Kota, 2018). The expanded opportunities for cooperation will enhance cooperation through the quicker deliveries.
The most dangerous adverse effect of self-driving technologies is global job loss. This is a significant ethically and socially vital issue that should be addressed before implementing technologies. Today the driver is one of the most widely spread and quickly gained professions. People worldwide work in the transportation industries to ensure the efficient delivery of products. However, when self-driven technologies are involved, all these people will lose their jobs. It is essential to develop special training programs for drivers to change their specialty.