Introduction
Human beings maintain good health through practices such as eating balanced diets. Pregnant mothers need perfect nutrition not only for themselves, but also for their unborn babies too. The period not long before the birth of a child is referred to as the antepartum period, where mothers are encouraged to eat healthy diets to ensure the development and delivery of a child. Medical practitioners term nutrition as one among significant factors that contribute to a successful child delivery. According to Clark (2020), eating a balanced diet will provide nutrients for both the mother and the child. However, ladies are still exposed to malnutrition practices that are caused by various factors such as the level of income, awareness, and illness history. This essay discusses the risk factors of age, cultural, lifestyle, socio economic, and dietary complications during the pregnancy period.
Nutritional Risk Factors
Age-related Factor: Teenage
The age of a pregnant mother can have a significant impact on the nutrition habits. Young girls, especially under the age of 20 are associated with poor eating habits (Nana & Zema, 2018). Stickler states that teenage mothers are at a higher risk than those over 20. Pregnant mothers require a variety of vitamins and minerals that are necessary for both body and child development. Teenagers like eating snacks and a lot of starch foods such as fries, thus leaving their bodies imbalanced with nutrients. It would definitely be hard for a teenager to strictly follow a diet schedule compared to a mature woman of about 30 years. Because nutrients are not produced naturally, one must obtain them through eating. When the body does not receive enough nutrients, that is a nutritional deficiency (Nana & Zema, 2018). Teen-aged mothers get exposed to risks such as low birth-weight and premature delivery due to poor nutrition habits during the antepartum period.
Cultural-related Factor: Custom Beliefs
Communities tend to differ in cultural practices, where dietary is one. Some communities believe in herbal treatments and nutrition, while others adapt well with modern foods. In some traditional communities, women used to drink and eat herbal foods to strengthen their pregnancy, facilitate labor, and to improve their overall health. Religions also affect nutrition as some communities such as the Muslims do not eat pork, since they believe it is a cursed and an “impure” animal (Coughlin, 2017). Many people learn taboos, customs, and beliefs from their parents, although information is also passed down through social groupings and generations. Because of cultural attitudes and food taboos against some healthy meals, some pregnant women in the research may be considered nutritionally sensitive. Encouraging such mothers to eat a nutritious diet rich in protein-rich meals, vegetables, and fruits will enhance maternal and child nutrition dramatically.
Socioeconomic-related Factor: Income
The level of income or exposure to money usually has a directly influence to people’s expenditures. To eat a balanced diet, one will be required to buy food that is not available at home. Pregnant women tend to buy a lot of food stuffs from the streets as they perform their regular walks and clinic visits. If a woman has insufficient balance, she will not buy a variety as compared to another with enough finances. Money sources during pregnancy could be the lady herself, husband, or family. Lack of enough money to spend on food will lead to malnutrition among pregnant women (Serbesa et al., 2019). The prices of food products could also be a factor, since poor pregnant ladies will not afford everything that is required for a healthy antepartum journey.
Diet Complication Factor 1: Obesity
Big-bodied people are normally associated with health complications, thus restricted against eating specific food types. Obesity is among the feared factors when it comes to hospital operation activities such as the Caesarean Section (CS) process of giving birth (Ahlqvist et al., 2019). Obese pregnant women are restricted from eating snacks and high cholesterol foods that would increase body fat. Prohibition from eating fatty foods will negatively affect pregnancy, since the child may need the nutrients in those foods. Although food nutrients are transferred to the child through the mother, additional nutrition is required to an already healthy woman. Obese women should seek doctor’s advice to avoid dietary complications out of food types restriction. During the antepartum period pregnant women should regularly check their weight.
Diet Complication Factor 2: Diabetes
Eating sugary food stuffs can result in health complications such as diabetes, which is a long-life health problem. Victims of diabetes are advised not eat a lot of sugary foods, to avoid disrupting their diabetic levels. Women diagnosed with sugar problem are advised carefully about the type of food to eat and to ensure discipline, otherwise the consequences could be severe (Moore, 2020). Nutrients that originate from sugar foods will be lacking in a pregnant mother, which is a risk factor to consider. The well-being of an expectant woman involves taking care of the child too. Regular checkups are required to handle and ensure the pregnancy period is a success, through adhering to all the nutritional precautions. Although many births are usually successful, quality nutrition during the antepartum period is one of the facilitating factors.
Conclusion
Good nutrition is a necessity to all pregnant women, to ensure a successful delivery process. If the mother does not undertake good nutrition practices, the child might be affected resulting in complicated birth process or risking the development of the child. Some of the major limitations to a healthy pregnancy life include the age of the mother, social beliefs, family income, and health complications. Women under the age of 20 are at risk of malnutrition, while those with health complications may be subject to unhealthy antepartum journey.
Ahlqvist, V. H., Persson, M., Magnusson, C., & Berglind, D. (2019). Elective and nonelective cesarean section and obesity among young adult male offspring: A Swedish population-based cohort study. PLoS medicine , 16(12). Web.
Clark, C. (2020). Nutrition needs during pregnancy. Healthline. Web.
Coughlin, S. (2017). Why pork was a pivotal issue in master of none . Refinery29. Web.
Moore, T. (2020). Diabetes Mellitus and Pregnancy. Moore, T. R. Diabetes mellitus and pregnancy . Medscape. Web.
Nana, A., & Zema, T. (2018). Dietary practices and associated factors during pregnancy in northwestern Ethiopia. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth, Vol. 18(183). Web.
Serbesa, M. L., Iffa, M. T. & Geleto, M. (2019). Factors associated with malnutrition among pregnant women and lactating mothers in Miesso Health Center, Ethiopia. European Journal of Midwifery , Vol.3. Web.