The construction of social reality is one of the concepts of great interest to modern scientific knowledge. Ultimately, science develops to make the acquired knowledge possible to implement technologically in the process of transformative practice for the benefit of man and nature. In this sense, social reality appears because of the corresponding technological approach, and the technical procedure appears as a social construction of reality (Lancet, 2013). The structure of social reality, both in the meaning of creating a public image and in the definition of technological transformation of the world, reveals the process of constructing a New World Order and its implementation through globalization processes. The main form of social structuring of reality is human activity, represented by material and spiritual productions. The purpose of social construction is to build universal models in which subjects and groups of people create the reality they perceive. Constructing social reality studies how people make social phenomena standardized and transformed into traditions.
Undoubtedly, people adjust their self-image to appear to others as they would like them to be. For example, when applying for a job, people may attribute the merits that they did not receive. Thus, it can help them get the desired position. Social interaction is represented by the mutually conditioned influence of social subjects on each other. Each person has to perform many situational roles during their life. A person interacts with different people and social groups daily (Fleming, 2006). It rarely happens when they fully interact only with members of one group, for example, a family. Still, at the same time, they can also be a member of a labor collective, public organizations, etc. Being members of many social groups simultaneously, they occupy a corresponding position in each of them due to their relationships with other group members. This is also necessary in order to achieve a certain social role, for example, to get a job. Nevertheless, each person needs an individual approach, which dictates the need to change.