Suicide is one of the serious problems of modern society, the relevance of which is typical for countries with very different socio-economic conditions, cultural, and religious traditions. One of the most suicidally dangerous ages is adolescence (Button and Marsh 13). When sexual and role identification is formed, unrequited love, conflicts with friends and parents, and school problems are acutely experienced. The prevention of suicidal behavior is one of modern society’s most critical and complex problems. Combinations of micro-social reasons and individual psychological features of the person, causing suicidal forms of reaction to psychologically difficult circumstances, assume individualization of work, especially with students at risk.
When carrying out a conversation with the teenager thinking about suicide, teachers are recommended to take the following steps. First, it is necessary to listen attentively to the interlocutor, as teenagers often suffer from loneliness and the impossibility of pouring out the soul. Secondly, it is essential to formulate questions correctly, calmly, and lucidly to ask about the essence of the disturbing situation and about what help is needed. Thirdly, it is unnecessary to argue and not insist that his misfortune is insignificant, that he lives better than others. Teachers should not use statements that make the child feel unnecessary (Coleman 56). Besides, it is necessary to try to give the teenager hope. It should be realistic and aimed at strengthening his forces and abilities. If suicidal tendencies of a schoolboy are noticed, the following tips will help to change the situation.
The first step is to listen carefully to the teenager who has decided to commit suicide and make every effort to understand the problem behind the words. One also needs to assess the seriousness of the child’s intentions and feelings (Robinson et al. 6). If he already has a concrete plan for suicide, he needs help right away. At the same time, it is essential to assess the depth of the emotional crisis, paying attention to details. For example, if the person in a state of depression suddenly starts to show violent activity – this can be a cause for alarm.
It is worth paying attention to all, even the minor grievances and complaints. The teenager may not give vent to his feelings, hiding his problems, but at the same time be in a state of deep depression. To prevent a teenager from committing suicide, parents should cultivate in the child the habit of telling his parents not only about his achievements but also about his worries, doubts, and fears (Kweon 167). In addition, one cannot sneer at the child if, in any situation, he is weak physically and mentally. Instead, it is necessary to help and support him or her, to point out possible ways of solving the problem.
To sum up, taking preventive measures to prevent teenage suicide is deeply individual. Work with the teenager should be carried out both by the teacher and the parents. It is essential to listen to the child and allow him or her to speak openly about his/her problems and anxieties. If the teen feels that he or she has a safe place to talk openly about his or her worries, he or she is less likely to commit suicide. When talking to depressed children, taking their concerns seriously and showing involvement and interest is essential. Thus, if timely prophylactic measures are taken, teen suicide can be prevented.