Introduction
Art is a phenomenon encompassing the innovative expression of humanistic dimensions on contemporary elements. Over the decades, the evolutionary cycle fostered advancement and adjustments of the practice across different domains. In this case, distinct regions uphold dynamic perspectives concerning artistry despite its distinctive sections. The UAE and more broadly the Arabian Gulf’s art scene has evolved in substantial ways over the past decades. As this part of the world witnessed exponential growth in infrastructure, industrial development, and the influx of talent, so has the landscape of modern and digitized art. This has led to a boom of artists, both locally and internationally, who are challenging the old models of curatorial interpretation and audience engagement and leveraging a robust ecosystem that offers greater support for their work (Amiri, 2021). The contrast between traditional and modern art fosters derivation of imminent challenges towards promoting evolvement in the artistic spectrum. The research problem entails assessing the dynamic matters influencing emerging artists and the promotion of inchoate art scenes.
Research Question
What are the challenges facing emerging artists in modern art scenes?
Thesis Statement
The contrast between modern and traditional art is one of the significant challenges facing artists in the emerging art scenes due to the optimal evolutionary prompt for innovation and creativity.
Literature Review
The Evolution of Art
The Flemish art period between the fifteenth and seventeenth centuries involved significant and dynamic events in the historical mark in the field of artistry. The different events that proficiently attributed to the Flemish concept encompassed Late Gothic, Renaissance, and Baroque. During these eras, pioneers portrayed profound insight into the evolution of frameworks in the art world. One of the major evolutionary gradients during the Flemish art period engulfed the optimal use of oil for painting. According to the researchers, the initiative steered the in-depth use of realism perspective in the paintings’ shaping, texture, and structuring (Fong & Ng, 2020). In this case, the artists integrated daily livelihoods with artistry to enhance real-life experiences. Primarily, the renaissance, also known as rebirth, fostered the prominent consideration of humanism in the field of art that rendered the integration of modernism and the Greco-Roman cultural frameworks.
Renaissance is a major historical event during the Flemish art era between the fifteenth and seventeenth century, posing significant insight regarding artistry. According to the researcher, the Flemish art period set off with the late gothic era encompassing (Al Khayyal et al., 2020). The late gothic era enshrined the emergence of distinct architectural designs, such as ornate, flying buttresses, ribbed vaults, the window glasses stained with different colors (Akhmetshin et al., 2018). The architectural designs render the optimal consideration of the dynamic cultural representation across Europe, mainly in Britain, France, and the Netherlands. The late gothic period formed the foundation for the emergence of the renaissance era mainly as a result of the integration of various early renaissance ideologies for the architectural structures. Apart from the late gothic era, the baroque period involved the utilization of bright colors (Amiri, 2021), miniatures, and stained-glass windows. Essentially, the late gothic and baroque contributed to the introduction of the renaissance period through the evolutionary aspect in the painting practice.
Abstract versus Realism in Art
Art is a vital factor of practice mainly as a result of the prominent integration of visual and real-life experiences. During the early and mid-gothic era, the artists focused on contemporary objects during the drawings. However, the emergence of Flemish art encompassed the alteration of the perspectives, mainly the incorporation of humanism. Humanism is the practice of integrating artistry approaches with the significance of people and the dynamic philosophical constructs (Erie, 2019). An excellent example of a renaissance artist is Michelangelo, an Italian whose famous work is the Sistine Chapel, demonstrating theology’s rebirth. According to Michelangelo, it is crucial to use art as a visual depiction of reality (Li, 2021). Therefore, the expert utilizes the religiosity approach to enhance humanism and realism within the artistic spectrum.
Studying renaissance under the spectral view of humanism and realism fosters a profound overview regarding the interdependence between artworld and contemporary issues. Previously, Flemish art regarded the prominent use of abstract images, posing minimalist meaning to artworld mainly because of the lack of relevance to integral real-world endeavours. In this case, one of the elements of the real events during Flemish art encompassed intensifying the significance of artistry to people and the community (Salisbury, 2020). Michelangelo focused on enhancing the visual meaning of Jesus’ feast with his disciples through the painting of entities on the Sistine Chapel wall. The initiative fostered the appreciation of art locally and globally due to the humanistic perspective on ideological practices. Primarily, Michelangelo spearheads the evolutionary scale in theology based on integrating historical accounts with visual perspectives.
Gradients promoting Art’s Aesthetic Value
Renaissance fostered the alteration of the dynamic philosophical constructs in the innovative and creative perspectives. Apart from painting using oil, the artists incorporate distinct values on using various colors to enhance the visualization of the realm. In this case, colorations fostered the abstract meaning of life and the environmental mainframes articulating the individualistic personality. A researcher agrees that a different event that fostered socio-cultural and economic growth and development is capitalism (Salisbury, 2020). The concept enshrines the private ownership of property and wealth accumulation hence the individualistic essence in the international community. The rebirth era prominently influenced the dynamism of interactions among personnel and business competence. While the art world evolved along the gradient of humanism and realism, society exploited the capitalist approach to boost the living quotient among individuals. Fundamentally, the Flemish art intensified the visual and contemporary perspective regarding the interdependent relationship between artistry and business performances.
A significant percentage of the global population focused on innovation’s integral aspect, hence the intensification in business competence. In research, the author indicates that the reflection of the individualistic nature among people spanned through the artistic and economic structures. During the renaissance period, societies focused on intensifying economic growth, hence adopting dynamic frameworks and the emergence of social classification perspectives. The researcher further argues that technological advancement is an initiative that attributed to the rebirth of the Greco-Roman era that involved intense business operations and trading activities (Kryzmowski, 2022). The integration of the ideological perspectives regarding enterprise transactions enhanced the overview and enhancement of people’s attitude on diversity. Creativity and innovation significantly contribute to boosting the living conditions among community members. An excellent example is the utilization of innovation in the architectural industry to render the construction of sustainable structures and settlement areas. Dynamism is an integral feature towards promoting growth index across distinct societies.
Art Practices in Different Regions
Innovation and creativity bridge the gap between modernism and traditional appeals across the different facets of human activities. The Flemish art significantly affected the key articulation of individualism despite the profound emergence of mainframes and concepts through various phases, namely late gothic, baroque, and the renaissance to establish realism (Li, 2021). As a multidimensional phenomenon, Flemish art enhances the integration of modernism with the Roman aspects on architectural designs and the Greek’s philosophical overviews, Napoleonic constructs. As a result, the study of the concepts fosters an insight into the evolutionary process among people while advocating for the emergence of modern society. Hong Kong and Singapore are excellent examples of countries that proficiently integrate traditional and contemporary art.
Asian countries prominently use traditional medicine to treat different diseases in the modern era. The approach renders the profound impact of conventional art despite the evolutionary process. Xin et al. (2020) postulate that a significant percentage of Chinese mainly prefer conventional practices as remedies to alleviating illness. Although current medications pose distinctive effects, the majority of Chinese rely on traditional aspects. In a different spectrum, Singaporeans highly value dynamic aspects of art, mainly portraiture and ink painting. Fong and Ng (2020) establish that the Singapore government optimally invests in conventional art as a strategy of promoting the country’s social identity while incorporating modern perspectives for better preservation of the aesthetic value. On the one hand, the initiative renders an adept opportunity to market conventional art internationally. On the other hand, the mainframe fosters a risk of acculturation. Aesthetically, it is vital to integrate modern and traditional art to appreciate the implications of the evolutionary process. Art exists in different forms thus the importance of appreciating the transition from the classical era to the present artistic structures and perceptions.
Relevance of Art’s Evolutionary in UAE
The UAE is one of the members of the Gulf Cooperation Council hence attaining optimal support concerning economic development. As an Islamic state, the government highly regards Muslims and their beliefs despite the incorporation of diversity-based religious practices and policies. The UAE administration further advocates creativity and innovation under the spectrum of distinctive elements, such as sports and architecture (Al Sallal et al., 2018). Historically, the Emiratis were nomads living in an arid and semi-arid area. However, technological advancement and unity fostered growth and diversification of socio-economic and political domains. Emerging artists are representatives of UAE entrepreneurs utilizing conceptions as formative strategies to intensify business practices within the country and abroad.
Over the decades, one of the significant challenges affecting the distribution of benefits in the UAE entails gender disparity in the participation scale concerning business growth and development. Evolution steered by technological advancement fostered the necessity of equity despite gender identity. UAE is one of the countries due to the focus on enhancing sustainability practice across the enterprise world. As a result, different government institutions focused on achieving the primary goal of boosting business performance against the outlying essence of independence. The emergent concept that stimulated the emergence of UAE as one of the safest countries globally is the advocacy for the participation of all parties. In research, entities rendered implementation process of entrepreneurial empowerment initiatives among men and women to enhance gender equality. The UAE government seeks to establish an economy that empowers locals with optimal productivity while appreciating the globalization mainframe (Salisbury, 2020). Globalization emerged as a result of effective technological advancement. In this case, individuals from different states significantly exchanged information and networked, causing a global village loop.
It is the responsibility of government institutions to implement policies that steer social justice and equality. Ethnicity and gender differences negatively affected the quality of interactions among personnel, causing an uproar among the UAE. Therefore, the UAE government implemented business policies to improve a sustainable enterprise environment for investors despite gender differences. Different indicators attributed to the establishment of competent business and entrepreneurs’ empowerment, such as advancing infrastructure and talent management among residents. Dubai is one of the cities that encounters a significant change in determining the quality of interaction among locals, promoting sustainability. As one of the ideal tourist destinations globally, the UAE government offers incentives among men and women to intensify the trickle-down effect of accrued benefits among the residents with minimal revenue leakage (Salisbury, 2020). Despite the influx of clients in the country, the nation faces an increase in foreign workers whose salaries are transferred to their respective countries’ bank accounts. As a result, it is crucial to appreciate UAE entrepreneurs’ empowerment in the spectral view of entrepreneurial opportunities.
In the digital era, online business boomed fostering a prominent impact on national economic growth and development. Research by Krzymowski (2022) establishes that the digitization of dynamic economic activities demands the implementation of policies empowering entrepreneurs in the UAE. The researchers further illustrate that promoting gender equality within the entrepreneurial world is an opportunity within the UAE economic spectrum to enhance profitability and growth. Apart from advocating for empowerment, it is crucial to establish key variants that influence men and women involvement in business establishment and management. Empowerment encapsulates the indication of major factors enhancing effective decision-making. There are dynamic government interventions that elevate the performance of business entities. However, it is vital that the parties involved focus on promoting sustainability by appreciating productivity within the scope of distinct problem-solving perspectives.
The personal traits of an individual attribute to the capacity of investing in entrepreneurial opportunities. In the study by Erie (2019), the research indicates profound results regarding the personality values that foster the emergence of entrepreneurs. The investigation encapsulated assessing the core factors that render students as entrepreneurs. In this case, the factors derived included entrepreneurial confidence, orientation, cultural support, and learning institutions’ support for entrepreneurship. Despite the dynamic indicators, Erie (2019) established that entrepreneurial confidence is significantly attributed to engagement in entrepreneurship. Primarily, the research indicates that effective entrepreneurship empowerment enshrines advocacy for entrepreneurial confidence among distinct parties. Optimal integration of values fosters proficiency in appreciating individuality and the development of a productive investor across the UAE.
It is the responsibility of the UAE government to incorporate measures that advocate equality within the scope of entrepreneurial empowerment. UAE is one of the Asian countries highly developing mainly because of prominent investment in infrastructural development. The intensification in urbanization attributes to the establishment of a suitable investment environment for foreigners. Empowering entrepreneurs in UAE is an approach that fosters equipping individuals with proficient skills and knowledge for innovative and business perspectives (Pauceanu et al., 2021). Apart from advocating for the influx of foreign investors in Dubai, it is important to intensify the pool of residents engaging in entrepreneurial opportunities. The strategy elevates the trickle-down effect on accrual benefits based on the participation of residents in business practices. Major initiatives that promote entrepreneurial empowerment include financial literacy and determining distinct government intervention techniques. The advocacy for entrepreneurial empowerment is a multidimensional aspect that enhances optimal business competition and the adoption of innovative techniques elevating standards of operations.
Analysis Framework
Social growth and development is an entity that encompasses the interplay of dynamic elements to boost performance outlier. The different ideologies that render an understanding to challenges facing emerging artists include functionalism and Marxism that profoundly establish a relationship between human behavioral patterns and virtuosity (Akhmetshin et al., 2018). Functionalism defines society as a multidimensional phenomenon whose advancement depends on the coordination among all stakeholders. Marxism indicates that capitalism is an essential factor within the populace since it asserts the balance between the rich and the laborers. According to the Marxism framework, the significance of commercialism is the provision of opportunities to workers in equally accumulating wealth akin to the employers. Marxism and functionalism prominently explore the effect of imbalance in the distribution of resources among individuals. The mainframe interwove promotion of art as alleviation of key challenges among the emerging artists.
Methodological Considerations
Research Questions
Main Research Question
What challenges are emerging artists facing in the emerging art scene?
Secondary Research Questions
  * What is the contrast between traditional and modern art?
  * What are the challenges facing emerging artists?
  * What is the implication of issues among artists to emerging art scenes?
The research process entails a qualitative method using case studies for the assessment of the challenges affecting emerging artists in the emerging art scenes. This study focuses on the necessity of incorporating measures that alleviate negative effects on the societies and promotion of traditional and modern art. Innovation is an essential element across the global domain enhancing socio-cultural identity. The exploration of Hong Kong, Singapore, and UAE cultural facets fosters an understanding of evolutionary gradient and dynamic implications.
Analysis and Discussion
Different countries significantly promote the art scene across distinct practices despite the emergent challenges. One of the major issues in artistry is the integration of traditional and modern art. Krzymowski (2022) postulates that the UAE proficiently supports innovation among the citizens based on the incorporation of policies enhancing entrepreneurial opportunities. The study further establishes that common art scenes promoted in the UAE include live performances, such as Arabic dances, dressing codes, and culinary elements. In this case, researchers articulate that the locals significantly embrace traditional dressing, dances, and culinary practices. The components attribute to the establishment of social identity among individuals despite advocating unity. Nevertheless, there is a profound conflict among designers due to the intersection of the digitization era demanding globalization of artistry.
Traditional art in UAE encapsulates the prominent features portraying the foundation of Emiratis’ cultural framework. It is the responsibility of government institutions to incorporate dynamic aspects that render sustainable practices. Despite the contrast between abstract and realism, it is vital to establish approaches that enhance the preservation of the aesthetic value. The core foundation of art is creativity hence the importance of implementing guidelines protecting the key meaning of a construct. In this case, the UAE, Hong Kong, and Singapore residents significantly maintain their traditions and incorporate minimal modernist dimensions.
Conclusion
It is crucial to establish policies that promote interdependence between traditional and modern art to alleviate the core challenges. The main issues affecting emerging artists include the digitization of art and the intensification of technological advancement. Although the frameworks render an empowerment tool to diversify perspectives, it is crucial to indicate vital entities that protect aesthetic essence. UAE, Hong Kong, and Singapore prominently preserve their conventional cultural practices to boost social identity among personalities while advocating morality and ethical domains.