Introduction
The shifts in attitudes of people towards romantic relationships and, more specifically, marriage are attributes of societal development. From this perspective, the trends common for Gen Z are incredibly informative and, therefore, used for analyzing the situation in this area (Klein, 2022). It is clear that individuals’ mindsets are formed under the influence of external circumstances, which implies the correlation of opinions about love and sex with the presence of threats to personal well-being. Hence, one cannot examine the accompanying phenomena and cause-and-effect relationships while neglecting either the human factor or the conditions of the environment. One of the articles devoted to the subject is “Are Gen Z more pragmatic about love and sex?” and its critical analysis can reveal the elements of effective writing intended for considering complex events.
Summary of the Article
In the selected piece, Jessica Klein narrates the tendency for representatives of Gen Z to postpone marriage and avoid long-term relationships while prioritizing personal issues. Compared to previous generations, these individuals do not view this area as a natural condition for entering adulthood due to a number of reasons. First, the advantages of single life are more attractive than settling down and help them satisfy their need for introspection (Klein, 2022).
Second, people in this group adopt a pragmatic approach to the matter because they understand the necessity of gaining stability in life in order to have a family (Klein, 2022). Third, Gen Zers face more problems than their parents due to the pandemic and prefer to reflect on the kind of person they want to be partners with and choose them carefully (Klein, 2022). As a result, the processes in this area slow down significantly, and the primary focus on self, as opposed to interactions with others, justify the changes which happened to this part of human life.
Response
Evidence
The examined article is an effective piece of writing due to the inclusion of evidence from numerous sources, both of qualitative and quantitative nature. Thus, Klein (2022) refers to multiple studies related to the subject under consideration, including surveys conducted among the target population and statistical data gathered by official institutions. More importantly, she analyzes the current tendencies in the relationships of Gen Z through the lens of the experience of previous generations (Klein, 2022).
This approach to the task makes the findings more credible compared to a possible orientation on the information received from the participants and, consequently, confirms the reliability of conclusions for conducting further research. The overall extensiveness of this publication is also supported by the inclusion of personal opinions alongside the studies mentioned above (Klein, 2022). In this way, the selection of appropriate instruments for the purposes of this article is one of its main advantages.
External and Internal Factors