Nursing Theory Case Study
The measurable nursing desired outcome related to improving the chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patient’s condition is to retain respiratory stability with concise respirations. Another anticipated result is for the patient to exhibit behavior patterns that strengthen airway clearance, such as coughing successfully and expectorating secretions. Additional goals regarding the above include the advancement of the patients presenting improved respiratory rate, personal autonomy in self-care operations, improvement in exercise prejudice, and nutrient requirements that meet calorie consumption. The present research looks at frequently utilized quality indicators such as pulmonary function, overall health, exercise performance and activity level, dyspnea, acute episodes, the multifaceted BODE rating, and death rates. The current clinical practice is producing the intended care outcomes. The 75-year –old Native American has shown some improvement in his exercise performance activity level and overall health.
One of the theories of care that have been developed to help direct nursing and improve the outcomes for the hospitalized patient is the ‘care-based on-oxygenation’ (CBOO) theory. This theory focuses on providing the best possible care to the patient based on the level of oxygenation in his blood. The concept is founded on research that shows that giving the best possible care to the patient leads to improved consequences. Moreover, it is also a way of delivering care focused on the needs of the COPD patient and oxygenation to achieve the very best possible results for the client.
Concept Map
The International Council of Nursing (ICN) and the World Health Organization (WHO) developed a nursing theory that asserts that the nursing profession is an interrelated phase of human experience that provides, but not restricted to, the socioeconomic, structural, and universal healthcare framework. Nursing theory is essential to understand the nursing assistant’s role, feature, and procedure concerning a person, household, and community. The patient care role, purpose, and practice environment are characterized as an interconnected core of personal experience that provides the interpersonal, structural, sentimental, psychological, religious, and cultural milieu of the particular participant. According to this theory, nursing practice is not limited to the context and placing of the health care system.
Nursing theory provides a basic understanding of core concepts, allowing many in the career field to clarify what they are doing for sick people and why they do it. This is especially essential because it enables nurses to express information that proves the methods and techniques that underpin their profession (Suthasini, 2018). They also discover critical thinking skills, which allow them to recognize and apply data, scientific proof, and concepts from a wide range of sources and layouts.
An individual who has studied nursing theory as a registered nurse has influenced their practice. It is time to delve slightly deeper now that they are in nursing education. Critical thinking and problem-solving are central to health care since both have been established through a comprehensive examination of the base of information and applying theory in the healthcare setting. Individuals can use their critical thinking skills to recognize research gaps, investigate multiple viewpoints, and summarize fresh concepts as critical thinkers.
Nursing theory teaches everyone to think like a nurse by implementing clinical reasoning and critical thinking in real-world clinical environments. Individuals will learn the meaning of nursing theory, various theoretical approaches, and how to differentiate between legitimate and invalid hypotheses in the theory class. You will also know how to develop nursing theories in a healthcare setting, which also will assist one in making rational choices and providing the best care to their patient populations. As a registered nurse (RN), one’s role would be to provide vision and management in a set-up that emphasizes treatment, convenience, and preventative measures (Thelakkadan & Chacko, 2021). As a manager, they will contribute to the definition of nursing theory notions and clinical decision-making required to provide protected, efficient treatment to those in greatest need. A healthcare professional, one will be skilled at interpreting and enforcing theoretical concepts to actual clinical contexts and using your care judgment to provide comprehensive care.
One will have to use their clinical experience, expert opinion, and skills to provide vision and management to the staff nurses and other representatives of the multidisciplinary teams, which include doctors, medical assistants, and other medical professionals, in the care of experience in a wide range of severe, critical care, and long-term care settings. The primary goal is to provide the best medical service to sick people.
Understanding nursing theory concepts and how they can be used to continue improving the nursing interventions and procedures is one of the most crucial matters nurses can do to improve the patients’ services. The nursing care plan is an essential aspect of nursing. It is an integral part of the patient’s medical record used to plan nursing home care for that particular patient. The nursing care plan could satisfy the needs of specific groups or individuals. The nursing care plan guides the nurse and other medical professionals.