History and Impact of Employing Women and Minorities in Law Enforcement
Law enforcement shows how laws are enforced and public order is maintained. White men have been disproportionately holding positions in this field for a long time. Nowadays, the situation is different, and more women and minorities are encouraged to join law enforcement professions to reduce the impact of bureaucracy and other biases. The first women and African Americans were hired as police officers in the middle of the 19th century. In the middle of the 20th century, the Civil Rights Act removed other discrimination-based debates and supported equality in public accommodations. Racial diversification of law enforcement organizations is favored to increase confidence in the police and improve police-minority relations (Sever et al., 2018). Women in law enforcement also promote decreasing in the use of physical force and misunderstandings in communities (Sever et al., 2018). Although men prevail in law enforcement employment, changes and respect cannot be ignored today.
Various Roles of Law Enforcement
Law enforcement is a vital activity of the government to enforce the law and control communities’ behaviors and relationships. The major roles of this profession are to maintain public order and manage public safety. It is expected to see how individuals suspected of criminal offenses are treated and how investigations are organized. The courts aim to ensure that suspected criminals receive fair trials and that their guilt or innocence is properly determined. The correction system, in its turn, focuses on altering behaviors to make people socially acceptable and legally abiding. When an offender is caught by the police (a law enforcement representative), it is necessary to make sure that no unnecessary violence is applied. The courts analyze each detail and conclude that all rights are considered and no mistakes are made. Corrections help people change their behaviors and understand what they should and should not do within the frames of the existing system and society.