At the moment, AIDS is becoming quite widespread, despite all the preventive and familiarization measures carried out in educational institutions. Thus, in order to improve the situation, college administrations are introducing various measures to combat the problem. The educational organization, Camden County College decided to install dispensers with condoms in the toilets. Henceforth, this work aims to prove that condom dispensers are an effective measure to lower the incidence of AIDS in adolescents, increase the credibility of college and develop sexual education and awareness.
Therefore, as already mentioned, Camden County College decided to install special dispensers in the toilets of the educational organization. The main problem was the ambiguity of opinions about this decision. However, this work believes that this initiative can play a positive role in changing the dynamics of sexually transmitted diseases and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome or AIDS. At the moment, it is noted that the age of sexual activity is significantly reduced. Research shows that “in a nationally representative survey of college students, only 58% of sexually active students reported condom use at last vaginal intercourse” (The Condom Dispenser Initiative para. 1). Further, one of the sources indicated that “The contributing factors are the cost, lack of convenient access, social norms, and lack of knowledge on how to use a condom effectively” (Turner 2). These indicators are disappointing since, at the same time, the risk of contracting a dangerous disease increases. Moreover, feelings of shame or lack of money can also influence the decision of young people to neglect contraceptives.
Limited access to protective equipment such as condoms is the most important obstacle in the fight against sexually transmitted diseases in young people. Hence, when installing dispensers, the incidence rate can significantly improve since it directly affects the issue. Every young person cannot worry about buying a contraceptive measure. Particular influence in this process should be paid attention to the aspect that the introduction and improvement of sexual education are crucial. It is vital to instill in students the importance of following the rules of contraception and how important it is not to have promiscuous sexual relations. This will allow a positive response to the installation of dispensers with condoms in the toilet. An equally important role is played by the social factor, which can hinder the success of the introduction of dispensers in condoms. This may be met with contempt or vice versa with abuse of the opportunity provided.
In addition, it will contribute to maintaining organization in this process, where students rationally and responsibly use the resources provided by the college. Thus, when introducing awareness about sexual education and the importance of observing AIDS-related preventive measures, college students will treat the installation of dispensers as vending machines. Therefore, the almost animal instinct that leads to a wrong attitude to initiative and ridicule will be absent.
In conclusion, this work was engaged in the study of the effectiveness of the installation of dispensers with condoms at Camden County College. The main argument given for this measure is the reduction of cases of infection with AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases. Moreover, it will contribute to strengthening the credibility of the educational organization and the development of sexual education in it. In addition, the argument supporting the initiative implies an increase in the availability of contraceptive measures for young people, who sometimes do not have the opportunity to purchase them on their own.