Introduction
The appearance of material and monetary resources is the starting and initial point of forming a bottomless and wide gap between several people. From now on, the world has split into “two camps,” and individuals are classified not only by physical, personal or mental characteristics but also by the principle of having specific benefits. Today, there are both rich and poor citizens in any country, and sometimes the ratio between them is exceptionally remote. Nevertheless, each person is equal, less or more dependent on each other since they live in a society. Dedication is a vital sign of a spiritually rich, profoundly and broadly thinking person who has not lost human and compassionate qualities.
Responding to the Ideas
The main idea and thought of the passage is self-feedback, dedication and selflessness, regardless of the amount of money and the availability of precious items. According to Andrew Carnegie, any wealth requires sharing and returning to those who need exceptional help and support. Everyone should recognize their qualities for the sake of the whole society. Accordingly, if the rich continue to get prosperous, ignoring the poverty of others, this will lead the entire society to decline, and the rich themselves will also suffer. Indeed, wealthy people should give part of their capital to the impoverished. They are obliged to use their skills and means to fight poverty and help needy people get out of deprivation.
Undoubtedly, the achievement of wealth, if it is not inherited, will require a lot of effort and time. However, this does not always bring the desired happiness, and this reflection most often turns out much later. Many individuals, realizing that wealth does not make them happy, cannot give up their habitual way of life. Therefore, that is why it is worth understanding what one really wants. For instance, Carnegie realized that money is not a goal or even a means to achieve it, but only an accompanying attribute. Thus, the man collected the necessary amount to take his time, not chase money, live in pleasure, enjoy the calm flow of days and live one day.
Conclusion
In conclusion, any good earned by a person requires dedication and devotion. Some people lack the opportunity to have enough money and funds for the best life because of external or internal factors. Undoubtedly, Carnegie worked a lot, but there is a high probability that the man got to the right time and place. He realized in time that wealth does not bring him happiness, and one can obtain joy and pleasure even simply with the help of “small,” kind gestures – sharing and dedication.