I have chosen a specific kind of work that is not universal for most people. I decided to write about the teaching profession or skill as a kind of work. For most people tied to production, teaching in a job is additional employment assigned to the main one. The primary occupation is the personification of a person in the labor market. However, some people enjoy teaching and have a sincere interest in it. The opportunity to share knowledge and experience among such people is a genuine interest.
The specifics of the teacher’s work include the transfer of basic knowledge about the profession and the obligatory support of the student in his first work experience. Psychological support and faith in a still inexperienced person are essential in such situations. This type of work is specific in that the teacher closely intertwines his or her immediate professional activity (drawing, dancing, shoe repair) with communicative and emotional aspects (Kosuri, 2018). Because of this, this type of work cannot be chosen by most people, as they find it too exhausting.
The teaching profession has always been prestigious and sometimes even symbolically loaded, especially in the Eastern mentoring culture. The modern social context leaves this profession among the most respected. However, people cannot say that the younger generation has passion and dreams for this type of work. Despite this, the significance of this type of work for society is colossal, although in most cases, it is not visible to the human eye in everyday life. Examples of mentorship inspire people to take action, work hard, and stubbornly pursue goals.
In addition to the spiritual role, teachers play an essential socio-economic role in every state. Education in a developed society is a strategic base for the future state. Education is a public good that any government must provide at a high level. Young trained specialists in any specialties are representatives of certain social strata within the state and representatives of the country within the framework of international cooperation. At the moment, technologization also penetrates the type of work of the teacher. It overhauls the system for obtaining a specialization for this kind of work. Now young people who want to try themselves in this area need a different qualification (Sociological Dictionary, 2017). The qualifications that their teachers once obtained are no longer considered sufficient in society; it makes some older teachers feel inept.
Plato’s statement applies to this type of work since the chosen type fits well into precisely that state model, which is described as approximately ideal by the philosopher. Only a developed society and the state that supports it can afford a complete division of labor (Annas, 2017). Emile Durkheim made a similar statement, but he combined a clear division of labor with simultaneous cooperation. This statement refers to medieval factories, small enterprises with the division of labor, and manual production (Sohn-Rethel, 2020). Durkheim postulated a person is tightly woven into the social mechanism, working clearly according to his tasks alone or in a group (Todd Armstrong, 2018).
The teacher alone can bring significant benefits to the local enterprise, city, and country teaching. It is essential to understand that such a specific type of work is almost incompatible with other types.
According to John Locke, a position in any of its types should encourage mutual respect in people. Every working person deserves the right to use the shared resources and accumulate their own. Although the chosen type of work does not involve the creation of a physical product and does not even contribute to the result, it creates a kind of intellectual product. It makes the issue of intellectual property also raised by John Locke related (Jones, 2017). By inventing methods and concepts that are not physical or material products, teachers can lose their well-deserved resources in copyright infringement.
Annas, J. (2017). Virtue and law in Plato and beyond . Oxford University Press.
Jones, C. (2017). The meanings of work in John Locke . History of Economic Rationalities , 51–62. Web.
Kosuri, S. (2018). Evolution of rights of labour. International Journal of Management, IT and Engineering, 8 (2), 66-74.
Sociological Dictionary. (2017). Division of labor [Video]. YouTube. Web.
Sohn-Rethel, A. (2020). Intellectual and manual labour a critique of epistemology . BRILL.
Todd Armstrong. (2018). Durkheim division of labor [Video]. YouTube. Web.