Essentially, the cause is the independent variable; its value is unchanged by the other factors in the research. The effect is the dependent variable, and changes influence its importance in the independent variable. The relationship between the independent and dependent variables is the primary focus of the research (Pokhariyal, 2019). The independent variable in the research idea is the situation that makes people feel nervous and unsure of themselves. Hence, the dependent variable is people’s level of conformity when facing stressful situations. Moreover, conditions affect whether people are more likely to exhibit conformity.
The two most important features of any research are reliability and validity. According to Cypress (2017), the rigor of research equals the ideas of reliability and validity, which are all crucial components of quality. The more the number of times a study’s findings can be duplicated, the more stable or trustworthy the phenomena are deemed to be (Cypress, 2017). The scientific element of reliability presumes that repeated measurements of study, with the same results, using objective procedures prove the truthfulness of the observations.
Therefore, to measure the validity and reliability of the research idea, it is crucial to investigate the consistency of obtained data regarding situations and people’s reactions and tendencies to conformism. The use of research techniques with consistency and care results in reliability, which is evident in the transparency of research practices, interpretation, and findings. Reliable research should demonstrate what occurs and is factual, and a valid instrument or measurement should evaluate what it is intended to examine (Cypress, 2017). Additionally, the research data, goals, and ideas should be accurate, factual, and up-to-date. The secondary data and previous research could be compared to the primary data obtained. The situations and conditions and the measurement instruments chosen for the study should not change during the investigations to correctly evaluate and compare the level of conformity.