Studying the literature of previous times can provide valuable insight into how society was organized and what people had views on social, political, and other problems. This work explores the literary work of Franz Kafka, “Metamorphoses.” Therefore, this paper is a piece of literature that is still relevant and could be applied to society today in several ways. The main problem of this response highlights the problem of loneliness of people in the world, despite the simple idea of a good life.
Before discussing the relevance of the work under study, it is necessary to have an understanding of its plot. Therefore, “Metamorphosis” will tell about Gregor Zamsa, an ordinary seller who one day a man realizes that he has turned into an insect of enormous size. The rest of the story focuses on his attempts to adapt to the new conditions of life. Family members lock him in a separate room and feed him; later, Gregor dies of poisoning.
Therefore, “The Metamorphoses” can be easily attributed to current society. Research shows that “it no longer follows the methodical analysis of souls, but seeks the inner disorder, the secret of the character’s existence” (Balaban 235). One of the most striking is the problem of loneliness of people. Despite the fact that the main protagonist had a family he took care of and supported, he was left alone in the end. Even at the end of the work, the author shows a picture of a happy walking family, according to which it is impossible to understand that they only lost one of their members. In the modern world, people are also suffering from loneliness, which is especially provoked by the development of new technologies. Individuals are increasingly locked into their separate worlds and cease to interact even with the close people themselves.
In conclusion, it must be underlined that Franz Kafka created his works during such a period as modernism. It is characterized by the destruction and confrontation of established social norms. Therefore, the author of “The Metamorphosis” focuses on the problem of lack of love and loneliness of people, which can be related to the modern world. Despite the fact that this problem cannot be immediately identified, many experiences internal suffering from having such feelings.