The visual argument will be published in a one-page spread of a newspaper. The visual argumentation will target the general population to address ocean dumping. The audience values environmental preservation in the oceans and understands the threats of sea dumping on aqua life and the environment. There is, however, less awareness of deep-sea drilling and the impacts on the habitat and human life in the oceans and along the coasts. The augmentation will create an apprehension of the environmental effects oil companies drilling close to water bodies have on human and aqua life. The theme of the argumentation is to stop deep-sea drilling. To make my request clear and direct so that the audience would comprehend it without any misunderstanding or appearing of additional questions about the content of my visual argument, I will use an image with a help of the text reflecting on deep-water drilling, threats to habitats, and life. People unevenly feel the impacts of ocean drilling, and the newspaper spread should enhance awareness among the general population
The core of the argument is the environmental impacts of deep-sea drilling. The core argument should challenge the human/environment dichotomy. Deep-sea drilling creates very high risks of oil spillage that is disastrous to marine wildlife and contributes to climate change. The continued utilization of the extraction method causes a rise in the sea level, extinction, and decline in marine life and threatens the landscape environment and human life. The core argument will highlight the possible future calamities following extensive deep-sea drilling. The visual argumentation will be implicitly expressed in one visual image and a slogan. The visual image will be impressive, catching, clear, and appealing to the audience, supported by the slogan.
Appropriate use of font sizes, styles, color, and layout will catch the audience’s attention at first glance. The spacing and design will be proportional to the page size and the type of paper. Double spacing and precise words in the slogan for good formatting and avoiding clutter. A simple conventional typeface in the slogan will improve the readability of the augmentation. The slogan will be relatively large to emphasize the critical idea. The color selection in the image will be catchy and communicate the concept behind the design in the visual argumentation. The color will create deep meaning and reflection of the image. The slogan will summarize the image to pinpoint the core argument. Each first letter of the saying will be capitalized to catch attention and create a persuasive effect.
The image will display a coastal area with drilling rigs and large oil barrels leaking to a large water body and marine life soaked in oil. The water body’s surface will be covered with oil, and besides the barrels will be individuals covered with oil-like substances. The image should evoke emotions of sympathy and horror in the viewers. The image will demonstrate the direct impacts of oil spillage resulting from ocean drilling on human and marine life. The marine life soaked with oil will create an emotional appeal to the suffering inflicted on the animals. People covered in oil demonstrate the reciprocating effect ocean drilling can have on human life. By depicting significant risks, the relevant authorities should respond to put environmental considerations over the monetary benefits of oil extraction (Meyer 5). The image should appeal to the broader audience to abandon oil dependency and embrace sustainable energy sources.