The Hippocratic Oath, created in the fifth century B.C., is among history’s earliest writings. Although the authors meant it to be a formal commitment, modern doctors consider it as a vow to protect the art of medicine and work in the best interest of the patient. Throughout generations, the medical industry has amended the vow to reflect changes in healthcare and the community. One of the variants of the oath was written by Dr. Louis Lasagna in 1948.
The most drastic difference between the original oath and the modern version is addressing the oath. The traditional version of the oath, for instance, is sworn by Apollo and other Greek gods of medicine ( Various physician’s oaths , n.d.). Today’s variants of the oath are sworn by anything sacred, or they start merely with a vow to preserve medical ideals. Moreover, Dr. Louis Lasagna stresses one vital moment “I will not be ashamed to say “I know not” ( Various physicians oaths , n.d.). In my opinion, it is crucial to understand that nobody can know everything, but there is always an opportunity for improvement.
Additionally, in the original oath, a doctor is seen as a body carrying out its duties. They also swear to keep themselves away from the “seduction” of their patients, “be they free or slaves,” which seems inappropriate ( Various physicians oaths , n.d.). Contrary to this oath, in the modern version, a doctor is seen as “a member of society” who, in turn, not only performs their duties but respects their patients ( Various physicians’ oaths , n.d.).
Hence, the Oath of Hippocrates does consider the interests of the patient, but it is accustomed to the realia of that time. In comparison, the oath by Dr. Louis Lasagna reflects my ideals and values more. I put the patient’s interests first and believe that it is necessary to remain humane and respectful while performing my duties. Moreover, I also see the part of not being ashamed of personal unfamiliarity as vital since it can always give impetus to learning something new.