Historical Overview
Multiple religions characterize Brazil as the Church emerged due to the Portuguese conquests. It is believed that the first religion to enter Brazil with the Portuguese was Catholicism. The starting point is the Catholic Mass of 1500, verified by some of the first colonizers. Subject to the strong influence of colonization and the rigidity of their forces, Brazil struggled to cope with the religious onslaught. Missionary and educational activities helped strengthen Catholicism and the formation of elite communities. Although the influence was strong, early Catholicism intertwined traditional motifs and cultural beliefs.
Catholicism spread to Brazil for two centuries: monasteries and indigenous church schools. By 1551 a separate diocese was formed, and then the first bishop became the head of the religious current. By the end of the 17th century, Bahia became the seat of Catholicism, followed by bishoprics in Rio de Janeiro, Pernambuco, and Maranhão. Bishops, orders, and holy clergy led the Catholic Church to unite the people. During the period of Catholicism, the citizens of Brazil fought for their independence, trying to find a way to overthrow the colonial system. Brazilian independence was declared in 1822, after which the first Brazilian constitution was adopted. The constitution regulated the rights and freedoms of Brazilian citizens and freedom of religion. It led to the Roman Catholic Church becoming the state church, so believers were legally protected. In 1889 Brazil declared itself a republic, after which the Church was separated from the state.
Until 1930, the Catholic Church had a strong influence on the population’s life. The Church intervened in public discourse and imposed restrictions on private life. In the 1930s, the Church supported an authoritarian regime, bringing the Church back to the forefront. After World War II, however, Catholicism began to lose its influence. Brazilian citizens were finally able to receive a diverse education, which lowered the status of the Church’s schools. The military dictatorships of 1964 and 1980 were catalysts in the subversion of the population and the Church. Catholicism had divided into currents by the end of the 20th century, with radical or conservative churches responding differently to social problems. Catholicism has declined significantly since the last century due to political and social divisions.
The Current Situation
Brazil is a multireligious country with Protestantism, Orthodox Christianity, marginal communes, and Catholicism. Catholicism is widespread among about two-thirds of the population and permeates various structures: politics is mainly influenced by religion. In Brazil, at least five party formations have incorporated Christian values into their ideological platforms. For example, the Christian Workers Party was formed in 1985 and is a conservative political branch. The Social Democratic Christian Party of Brazil (PSDB) advocates center-right movements toward neoliberalism. Although the religious ideas of public figures are not limited to parties, politicians and officials have certain beliefs broadcast to the public. This presentation leads to social conflicts in electioneering.
The other side of the religious component of Brazilian political life is discrimination. Although Brazil is generally regarded as a country of tolerance, including racial-religious, tolerance figures for minority religions are still far from ideal. In general, the state preserves the rights of citizens to freedom of religion, but there is a pronounced aggressive attitude toward people of Afro-Brazilian faiths. Discrimination cases are pretty frequent, but there are still hotlines, human rights organizations, and structures to promote other religions.
The number of churches in Brazil is nearly 300, with dioceses and archdioceses. Often churches as organizations are vital instruments of pressure on social life. It creates more prejudices about religion, leading to new social conflicts. Although the political situation with religion is unstable, support for the educational aspects is strong. Despite the decline of Catholicism, more than 30 universities in Brazil are supported by the Catholic diocese. The Pontifical Catholic University of Minas Gerais is recognized as the best among the private universities, providing predominantly academic training but with a permanent message of social inclusion.
Competition and discrimination between movements caused Catholicism to surrender to the influence of other denominations. Protestantism in Brazil is growing steadily, the crucial branch being the Pentecostals. Their number reaches about 22% of the country’s population. In the 21st century, we can state that the religious agenda is returning to Brazil. The expansion of the new heavyweights of religious-political space – Protestants and Pentecostals in particular – will be a defining trend in the religious sphere in Brazil in the coming years. With their resources and influence, the Protestants are likely to seriously challenge the traditional player, the Catholic Church.