The work Promises and challenges of Blockchain in education by Jae Park examines the blockchain concept, which has the potential to become a leading socio-economic technology in the context of network neutrality and big data. This study suggests that current trends in the Internet space will set new standards for digital ownership and storage. A comprehensive study of industrial and financial blockchain will greatly contribute to crypto education, crypto administration, human resources management, financial procurement, and other related fields.
The principal purpose of the study is to observe the proposed tasks set by blockchain technology and the challenges expected in this direction. Blockchain was originally developed to operate with digital documents in 1991. In 2009, the technology started to be used in terms of cryptocurrency and has been proving its effectiveness for a long time (Park, 2021). The leading purpose of blockchain technology is to sidestep the violation of identity and information transmission. Avoiding any suspense is conducted with the help of blockchain. The technology preserves all data regarding the virtual identity and transactions, which is transparent to all parties involved but severely secured by well-built cryptography. The paper also explains the successful usage of blockchain in any aspect of intellectual property, copyright, and licensing. It describes the advantages and mechanisms of blockchain application in industrial sectors and education systems. Despite the proven effectiveness of the technology, the main challenge is the lack of promotion of learning on the blockchain. It can be supported by the evidence of other research papers such as the work by Delgado-von-Eitzen et al. (2021). Technological learning requires large financial investments, continuous intellectual effort, and directives, which currently face a lack of focus on sustainability.
Blockchain technology has a great potential to provide benefits to society and collective interests. Blockchain courses can become an integral part of any educational content for positions in government and political sectors of work (Bartolomé et al., 2017). The paper of Park claims that now the main charge is to create a stable educational program regarding technology with an emphasis on cooperation and social responsibility.