Using innovative technologies, ADNOC is planning to apply its electronic developments in all spheres of activity and production as early as next year. An equally noteworthy example of the diversity and multifunctionality of the use of artificial intelligence is the predictive ability of computer programs. The company is developing a computer capable of processing an impressive amount of large data and suggesting strategies for the company’s actions depending on the forecast. The developers of software for ADNOC strive to build a machine that would work according to a certain theory but would be able to offer the possibility of effective data reading. That is why, within the framework of the company, a powerful program was developed not only for material processing but also for its visualization. By using more accessible visual media to convey complex information, the development makes the future and present of the company more clearly visible and intelligible.
The use of computer technologies in the development of a large company is noticeable at all levels of its existence. ADNOC uses computer simulations to improve the operation of the network chain and visualize data for a clearer picture of the company’s position. All these developments are implemented in each of the branches of the company’s operation, increasing the speed of performance and the effectiveness of actions that are more beneficial. Their project to computerize and update all sorts of areas of the company’s activities should be fully implemented in 2022 (ADNOC, 2020). This underlines the firm’s commitment to anticipating and adapting to the future. The company strives to develop a forecasting model that would include the largest possible amount of statistical data.
The results of big data processing show that ADNOC has significantly accelerated the speed and the number of financial transactions through its software. Based on the logic of increasing the turnover of money, one can conclude that this software improves the financial performance of the company. In addition, it should be noted that as part of the accelerated exchange of money, an innovative blockchain technology is used, which provides a permanent digital transfer of currency. The program’s ability to make smart business decisions is already reflected in its $ 1 billion worth of stocks (Arabian Business, 2020). The varied opportunities for financial enrichment brought by this program are potentially enormous.