Frankenstein possesses both positive and negative traits that help readers build his character. The main hero can be looked at from diverse perspectives; therefore, the creation of Frankenstein’s character can be seen as believable or even sympathetic. Due to his life difficulties, such as losing many of his family members or friends, Frankenstein is generally pitied by the majority of the audience. Later, the reader can understand that the main hero feels quite lonely and pays much attention to his research and studies to cover this inner loneliness caused by the loss of his beloved ones. Despite several inappropriate or sometimes immoral actions performed by Viktor Frankenstein, the readers have a tendency to consider his character quite sympathetic because of his traumatic past and lonely present. Additionally, the hero’s character is even taken for attractive because Frankenstein possesses several positive traits such as improving his mind by constant reading, observing the surrounding nature, and being interested in many research fields (Bowta & Puhulawa, 2018). Because of these habits, the character is quite believable and trustworthy as well.
Viktor Frankenstein’s character can be considered a trope of warning, especially in several central situations in the novel. For instance, after creating his monster, the researcher simply escapes this creature and tries to hide because of the posed threat and a scary appearance (Bowta & Puhulawa, 2018). The situation in the novel does not end up well for the main character; hence, this situation can prove that running from someone’s fears, problems, and difficulties without fighting them did not prove to be effective. In addition, in the example of Frankenstein’s character, the researchers may see that not all inventions are really demanded by society and can bring more risks than profits. The monster had the ability to feel, think, understand, and even pronounce some words, which can be considered a type of artificial intelligence (Agustina et al., 2020). However, the invented creature turns out to be a threat to Frankenstein’s life which proves that people need to be careful when trying to substitute their loneliness or inner struggles with their artificial “friends’ ‘.