Treating people is a difficult job, and even the most competent doctor will not manage to do it alone. Nurses are an essential link in the work of the medical system and the process of saving the lives of the population. Thinking about my past, I find events that led me to the profession of nurse. The people’s experience significantly forms their character and thoughts, which determines many life choices (Woźniak, 2019). My experience in various circumstances helped me realize my vocation. These situations in my life may seem ordinary, but for me, they have become pivotal and those that prove that all events are not coincident at all.
Issues of difficulties and challenges people face, for instance, global problems and similar concerns, have occupied my mind since childhood. I kept wondering what could be done to change something. In response, thoughts arise about changing the world, environmental protests, the invention of technologies that will save the ocean. However, although these activities are critical, they seemed unsuitable for my character, and I wanted to do something more practical and influential. These thoughts are the first reason that led me to the profession of nurse. For me medicine and care change the world for the better. Moreover, without them, humanity would have never reached the modern standard of living. Changing the lives of even one patient for the better is also important as changing the whole world.
Many of us had some experience of illness and even being in hospitals in childhood. Such a situation happened to me – I had to stay in the medical center for treatment for several days. Being a child, I was terrified and worried, especially at night. However, there was a nurse who managed to calm me down and support me. She even let me call her by her name, Tina, and I felt that we became friends. I always recalled her with joy, and when I grew up, I realized how valuable and important her actions were for a little child. This situation was the second reason that led me to the profession of a nurse – I understood that there are many people in the world who, like me then, need the same support and comfort, and I can give them.
We have to deal with diseases and injuries not only in hospital conditions but also in emergencies in any circumstances. Family members, friends, and even strangers may suddenly become ill or injured, and it is necessary to take action quickly – after all, saving a life can depend on a few seconds. As a teenager, I witnessed my friend break his arm. We were lucky, and there was a person nearby who could provide aid, and the ambulance reached quickly. However, for a few minutes, I felt helpless and confused – I strived to help but did not want to harm. This event was another reason that prompted me to decide to become a nurse. First aid skills, and even simple help in measuring pressure, can be life-saving.
Thus, several important events and long reflections when making decisions are behind my decision to become a nurse. I see many advantages in the work of nurses and believe in their particular importance. Saving lives and giving comfort and care to many people is what I want to do. Kindness, attentiveness, and support are what our world needs, and these features can bring wellbeing to the population.