Based on the Texas Board of nursing consequences are taken by a DWI 9 license obtained by an RN on an annual renewal form in Texas within nine months. In Texas, handling such a scenario requires the Texas Board of Nursing (TBON) to think that not all complaints about a nurse’s capacity to practice safely will need the same level of board involvement or result in disciplinary action. Furthermore, the TBON thinks that substance use disorders are curable diseases and that nurses who have made a stable recovery may safely offer care to patients in specific circumstances (Bettinardi-Angres, 2020). In this case, the Registered Nurse should expect a Tex. Occ. Code 301.4521.
The board of nursing considers all of the details surrounding the specific incidents in the issue. In some situations, there may be a need for occasional drug tests, letters of recommendation, assessments from current and previous employers, and signed records of support groups. Individual participation in a Texas Board of Nursing-approved peer help program may be one of the fines. Because this is a second infraction, it may subject the nurse’s license to probation and other limitations (Bettinardi-Angres, 2020). If the RN follows the board’s ruling and suggestion, the outcome will be good, with the board giving the nurse’s license. However, the decision might go either way based on the situation.
The RN with a current New York license that has moved to Texas and applied for a Texas license. On application, she wrote that she was convicted of Medicaid fraud ($ 5,230.00) four years ago be off probation in six months. In this circumstance, the nursing board will examine the case as if it were any other. According to Texas Board of Nursing policies on fraud, will thoroughly investigate various factors surrounding this event. However, the board clearly defines fraud over $5,000 as a felony (Stowell et al., 2020). In such a situation, the board will advise the nurse because it will most likely deny the practice license based on this information. If the nurse license is approved, it will very certainly come with conditions, such as the nurse not being allowed to work with Medicare patients.