The introduction of new genetic technologies that allow people to locate and modify genetic codes has received many mixed opinions on the technology. In particular, the discussion of genetic modifications circulates around the possibilities of human embryo modifications and ethical considerations of the consequences of such experiments. Experts have concerns about the societal issues that might occur with the widespread application of genetic modification programs such as CRISPR. This essay will explore some key moments from videos, an article, and a film that features the theme of ethics in genetic engineering and define arguments against genetic modifications.
First, in his TED talk Paul Knoepfler suggests that the genetic modification of human babies is similar to designer items for their price, quality, and status features. Knoepfler (2017) explains that the reality where the non-usage of genetic modifications for children will be looked down upon is closer than it seems. However, the author also explains the scenario is developed purely to emphasize the influence of such powerful technologies. In reality, it is more likely that genetic modification will help people become healthier by eliminating the genes that carry genetically transmitted diseases. I think that it is necessary to remember that human evolution took a long time, and any interventions from outside may upset the balance of human existence and become a potential threat.
Next, another video on CRISPR technology suggests that genetic modification has been one of science’s priorities since the discovery of DNA. CRISPR significantly reduced the time required for genetic modification experiments from one year and over to several weeks, making it a big technical revolution (Kurzgesagt – In a Nutshell, 2016). Moreover, it vastly reduced the overall cost of genetic modifications, and now genetic modification experiments can be performed in any lab. In my opinion, such availability of technology presents a flaw rather than an opportunity, as wide implementation of the technology by the wrong people could result in underground or backstreet human genetic modification labs.
Furthermore, the article by Caplan et al. (2015) explores how even non-human genetic modifications could bring damage to the ecosystem. The authors illustrate how gene drives are passed to offspring in the mosquito population. Gene drives could be used to stop the spread of diseases; however, the process will have unpredictable consequences on the population (Caplan et al., 2015). Therefore, even though the CRISPR technology sufficiently improved the time and cost of genetic modification operations, external regulating commissions should thoroughly examine the experiments and their potential consequences.
Lastly, the concerns expressed in the videos and article were explored much earlier in sci-fi literature and films. Even though in pop culture, genetic experiments are generally perceived with a negative tone and are often associated with eugenics practiced by governmental control regimens. For example, Gattaca is a film released in 1997 that focuses on the future where genetic modifications become the foundation of societal organization. The film emphasizes the system’s flaws, as some privileged valid individuals have imperfections not inherent in ideal-modified people and in-valid people have more physical strength than their perfect counterparts. Gattaca (1997) presents an argument against the use of genetic engineering as it showcases how genetic basis could be forcefully used to limit individuals’ life goals and aspirations.
Therefore, while genetic modification could be used to eliminate deficiencies such as hereditary diseases, genetic engineering should not be used in humans because of potential threats to the population and ethical concerns. Lastly, before proceeding into the era of genetic modifications, scientists should concern about the potential exacerbation of society’s division into supporters and opponents of genetic changes.
Caplan, A. L., Parent, B., Shen, M., & Plunkett, C. (2015). No time to waste—the ethical challenges created by CRISPR . EMBO Reports, 16 (11), 1421-1426. Web.
Knoepfler, P. (2017) The ethical dilemma of designer babies [Video]. TED. Web.
Kurzgesagt – In a Nutshell. (2016). Genetic engineering will change everything forever – CRISPR . [Video]. YouTube. Web.
Niccol, A. (1997). Gattaca [Film]. Columbia Pictures. Web.