A clinical office assistant is an employee who has numerous clerical and administrative tasks that need to be performed quickly and qualitatively. Time management tools are the most practical options that enhance the work process. One of the most generally applied tools is Call Please , which optimizes receiving and making calls (Helms, 2021). It dramatically simplifies the process of logging and allows one to compile a list of outgoing rings in a specific order. Therefore, Call Please reserves a lot of time and eliminates the case of omitting a patient or contacting the wrong person.
Evernote is another frequently used tool that is an advanced workspace for increasing productivity. It can be utilized to upload vital notes, create messages, commotion lists, tables, and access the data to any other devices (Helms, 2021). It is beneficial during patient care and registration, as its functionality enables one to organize snapshots, store handwritten notices, create photos of documents, make scans, and send them to doctors.
Moreover, clinical office assistants use Todoist , which allows monitoring task statuses in one place. It synchronizes with other applications and makes it feasible to form the daily schedule and plan the work (Helms, 2021). Thus, one can intelligently distribute the available time on the number of tasks and assess productivity at the end of the day. No less critical tool is NueMD , a medical billing software with electronic record capabilities. It includes an online patient portal, electronic prescriptions, and labs; furthermore, the tool has custom reporting capabilities (Helms, 2021). Its prominence is hard to overstate, as using NueMD bypasses paperwork and preserves data in a secure place in the cloud. With its aid, assistants can quickly find the proper document or record, organize the work process and reduce the number of skipped appointments.
The clinical office assistant is often the first person to interact with patients and familiarize themselves with their needs. The Medical Assisting Pocket is a tool that enables them to improve and give immediate and quality service (Helms, 2021). An accurate pocket guide provides access to medical abbreviations, billing tips, and insurance coding. It also has several handbooks and training in administrative and clinical skills, allowing one to improve mastery and reduce the time it takes to complete the tasks. Thus, there are many tools for time management, but those mentioned above are considered the most appropriate for assistants.