The author is JK McKnight, who created Art of Impact to genuinely engage Gen Z and millennials by positively impacting their lives and communities. He founded the Forecastle Festival, a three-day celebration of music, art, and environmental activity. The article was published on December 3, 2021, on Lane Report, a website that specializes in business news (McKnight, 2021). The paper’s target audience is employers interested in having Gen Z and millennials working for them. McKnight wrote the article when most workers were leaving jobs they could not enjoy. At the same time, the pandemic situation contributed to this because when employees returned from isolation, they felt exhausted and dissatisfied with their careers (McKnight, 2021). This factor caused most of the workers, especially Gen Z and Millennials, to begin searching for jobs where they could satisfy their desires.
It is significant to mention that the purpose of the article is to inform employers about which factors can encourage the younger generation to work for their company. McKnight has also included some essential advice that is beneficial to recruiters. The author’s central thesis is that there are changes in the workplace now, and successful employers should conform to the major trends in order to retain workers (McKnight, 2021). The article completely achieves the purpose of informing employers of the processes and steps that need to be implemented to ensure that work satisfies the expectations and desires of employees.
McKnight effectively applies logos to provide a logical development of his opinions. The author first notes the problems and then indicates the reasons for them. At the same time, he uses the theory of evidence to provide evidence for his arguments (McKnight, 2021). In addition, after clarifying the issue and providing facts, the writer offers advice for encouraging workers to engage in company operations. This presentation is logical and understandable to the reader, which leads to a quick understanding of the basic ideas of the article. Importantly, McKnight defends his position and provides statistical evidence to justify it (McKnight, 2021). He does not address counterarguments in his article, which permits the reader to focus only on his thesis. In terms of sources, the writer applies statistical data and historians’ opinions in equal measure to explain the changing attitudes of employees.
The writer effectively uses pathos to represent the feelings and emotions of workers. It is essential for readers to understand the factors that contribute to generational Z and millennials changing workplaces. For example, Gen Z’s attitude toward being a fundamental part of the team is an integral element of pathos (McKnight, 2021). McKnight has expertly conveyed the understandable desires of employees in such a way that readers support their decision to search for a better job.
McKnight, J.K. (2021). Op-Ed: ‘The Great Resignation’ Rethinking WHY We Work. Lane Report . Web.