This question has a hypothesis that answers and figures out the components of matter, the essential element of all materials and objects on earth. For instance, it leads to understanding water’s nature and behaviour elements as oxygen and hydrogen.
This scientific question describes the different origins and nature of the materials that make the world look the way it looks today. The constituents of matter, such as water, break down to oxygen (the gas which supports burning) and hydrogen (the flammable gas) (BBC. 3). In this case, it can be argued that this scientific question plays an essential role in conducting experiments and creating inventions that have played a vital role in promoting humanity.
The world has developed and reached it through notable scientists and inventions who worked tirelessly to understand the world and nature. Indeed, they played an essential role in going deeper and acquiring knowledge that others at their time could never contemplate. Through their sacrifice, hard work and learning, and quest to know more, they were able to achieve inventions that, up to date, have been developed by their successors to create a better world in which human beings are living today.
This scientific question is vital in trying to identify what powers humanity. Indeed, human beings’ development and inventions depend on energy. This energy is essential in powering life and enabling people to live comfortably (BBC. 1). This quest led to the creation of chariots used to carry amour and soldiers along the coast. The same pursuit led to the integration of mathematicians and created more effective windmills, which would drain marshes and an entire lake.
Human beings are wired to demand more even when they have enough. The quest for a better life and earning prestige are the most critical drivers who have played a vital role in propelling humanity towards inventions. Competition and the drive of power and prestige among human beings have been crucial elements in propelling innovations and development to create a new and better life to appear different from others.
Human beings have always desired to have a better life. People have always desired to have prestige and have a better life when compared to others. Successive scientific inventions and the development of old technology have played a vital role in transforming the world to its current economic, social, and political success (BBC, 2). However, noble people and successful, wealthy business people had the desire. They funded scientific experiments to invest the technology in their territories and businesses to benefit from it.
This scientific question was vital in understanding earth with its relations to the universe. Indeed, the hypothesis of this question was a key driver in understanding earth and connecting it to the universe so that the world would be developed with effectiveness and efficiency. Indeed, the experiment that started in ancient Greece was a key stepping stone in understanding the world and its relation to the solar system.