Television has “helped change the differential Negro into the proud Black,” has “given women an outside view of their incarceration in the home… enhanced their aura and prestige (Nye, 2006).” I selected this quote because it illustrates how technology can be used in the educational system to teach students by watching educational programs on television. This resonates with the educational system because television helped a black American to transform into a proud and self-esteemed person in society because of the educative programs he or she watched on television. This aligns with how technology can be used in schools to support learning. The wisdom that this quote provides when one thinks of using technology in the future is incorporating it into learning. Students learn to conceive technological solutions to issues that affect them, and in doing this they change their imaginations (Nye, 2006). Technology in modern times applies to many sectors, including manufacturing, education, health, and governance. Currently, technology is being used to shape this world.
Globalization and innovation waves have generated both losers and winners. The winners’ group comprises entrepreneurs, investors, and high-skilled workers that have embraced new inventions and fast-growing markets. The losers are individuals who depend on high-cost labor markets because their skills cannot match the pace of globalizing markets and technological change. Therefore, technological advancements such as the use of robots lead to disruption in the job markets. Robots are used in many fields comprising medical, and education. Robots play a critical role in the operation room where they assist with complex surgeries like cardiac valve repair. Robots can replace human surgeons because they can do what humans cannot. They also assist people with severe speech and hearing impairments. Robots have also been adopted in some countries to serve as teaching assistants in computer and science classes (Ross, 2016). Robots also facilitate communication in students with autism.
Consequently, educators need to teach their students the need to embrace technology such as robots because that is where the future is. In this modern-day technology-driven world, educators need to teach robotics to students throughout their education life to increase their capacity to be innovative and creative thinkers and become more productive people in society. Educators would have to advocate for laws and create programs that would integrate robotics into the education system. Parents and teachers are advised to embrace technology and teach it to their students and children. Technological changes and globalization imply new opportunities for all people comprising governments, businesses, parents, children, students, and investors (Ross, 2016). Therefore, the new inventions aim at improving the lives of many people across the world.
The big data explosion implies that this has changed how people learn both in informal and in formal settings. Big data and analytics help industries and commerce add value to their production. Big data applications can be implemented in any industry or commerce to enhance their production and operations. The collection of data supports the effective assessment of programs, interventions, and resources to facilitate school, student, and country’s success. Companies or industries can use big data to profile their consumers in a far-reaching way allowing the business to engage with them in real-time. Companies can better identify operational issues, understand their customers, manage supply chains, and detect fraudulent transactions through big data applications. Big data enables New Zealand to enhance its dairy and beef production for export to China (Ross, 2016). Companies that fail to adapt to big data applications are deemed to perish in the current big data-driven economies.