Introduction
The shifts in attitudes of people towards romantic relationships and, more specifically, marriage are attributes of societal development. From this perspective, the trends common for Gen Z are incredibly informative and, therefore, used for analyzing the situation in this area (Klein, 2022). It is clear that individuals’ mindsets are formed under the influence of external circumstances, which implies the correlation of opinions about love and sex with the presence of threats to personal well-being. Hence, one cannot examine the accompanying phenomena and cause-and-effect relationships while neglecting either the human factor or the conditions of the environment. One of the articles devoted to the subject is “Are Gen Z more pragmatic about love and sex?” and its critical analysis can reveal the elements of effective writing intended for considering complex events.
Summary of the Article
In the selected piece, Jessica Klein narrates the tendency for representatives of Gen Z to postpone marriage and avoid long-term relationships while prioritizing personal issues. Compared to previous generations, these individuals do not view this area as a natural condition for entering adulthood due to a number of reasons. First, the advantages of single life are more attractive than settling down and help them satisfy their need for introspection (Klein, 2022).
Second, people in this group adopt a pragmatic approach to the matter because they understand the necessity of gaining stability in life in order to have a family (Klein, 2022). Third, Gen Zers face more problems than their parents due to the pandemic and prefer to reflect on the kind of person they want to be partners with and choose them carefully (Klein, 2022). As a result, the processes in this area slow down significantly, and the primary focus on self, as opposed to interactions with others, justify the changes which happened to this part of human life.
Response
Evidence
The examined article is an effective piece of writing due to the inclusion of evidence from numerous sources, both of qualitative and quantitative nature. Thus, Klein (2022) refers to multiple studies related to the subject under consideration, including surveys conducted among the target population and statistical data gathered by official institutions. More importantly, she analyzes the current tendencies in the relationships of Gen Z through the lens of the experience of previous generations (Klein, 2022).
This approach to the task makes the findings more credible compared to a possible orientation on the information received from the participants and, consequently, confirms the reliability of conclusions for conducting further research. The overall extensiveness of this publication is also supported by the inclusion of personal opinions alongside the studies mentioned above (Klein, 2022). In this way, the selection of appropriate instruments for the purposes of this article is one of its main advantages.
External and Internal Factors
As for the individual circumstances influencing people’s choices, they are the perception of responsibility for one’s happiness, the desire to achieve success before getting married, and the need for stability as a foundation for interactions (Klein, 2022). The scholar’s focus on these two aspects of the matter proves to be effective in presenting a clear picture while also specifying the cause-and-effect relationships between personal attitudes and the rapidly evolving conditions of society. Therefore, this factor is another advantage that allows claiming the publication’s significance.
Psychological Underpinning
Finally, the psychological underpinning of the article demonstrated by individuals’ feedback is a valuable area, and its presence indicates the precision of conclusions from the perspective of one’s understanding. In this piece, Klein (2022) effectively refers to the ideas which were common for people in the past, namely, the perception of marriage as a critical stage in life. They are contrasted by the changing needs of respondents, including the desire for greater flexibility in all areas and the recognition of the failure of the previously existing mechanisms (Klein, 2022). These conditions are explicitly related to citizens’ psychology since they are guided in their decisions solely by comfort, as they see it critical for both being in relationships and staying single. Therefore, the orientation on this aspect is particularly beneficial for determining people’s motives.
Conclusion
In conclusion, the analyzed article is an example of a compelling message concerning the pragmatism of Gen Z in approaching romantic relationships and marriage. This standpoint is primarily conditional upon the inclusion of extensive qualitative and quantitative data as evidence of the trends. They are complemented by the examination of external and internal factors which correlate with the changes in this area and serve as proof of the link between the environment and individual actions. In addition, the author highlights the psychological aspect of the matter, which adds credibility to the findings while being informative in terms of the motivations of people who delay long-term partnerships.
Klein, J. (2022). Are Gen Z more pragmatic about love and sex? . BBC. Web.