In Bob Dylan’s song Scarlet Town , the world’s view is presented as Dylan sees it. By incorporating his thoughts in several words throughout the music, Dylan sets the song as a dancehall from the start to when he makes a request. Through intertextuality, Dylan writes the song presenting a state of the interplay between Scarlet Town and other embedded songs. The effect of the other songs embedded in Dylan’s song and how they help invoke the overall theme becomes the point of consideration throughout the analysis.
The town constitutes distinct features: a bar of heavy drinkers, a junky whore, a dancehall that plays rock n roll of the 1950s, and a folk club. Dylan sings, “Set ’em up Joe, play Walking The Floor Play it for my flat chested junky whore I’m staying up late and I’m making amends While the smile of heaven descends” (n.p). From this part of the song, the narrator acknowledges his negative qualities, but the qualities should not condemn them. Dylan embodies the perfect characteristic of what the town shapes people to become, and his cruel description of his lover shows the evil nature he possesses. However, despite being cruel, Dylan’s kindness becomes evident when he requests for a song to be played for her. Moreover, the narrator acknowledges his imperfections to the point of ‘making amends,’ being optimistic the heavens will descent on his act of kindness. Therefore, it is best to accept things for what they are since everything mentioned is all here in the town, and it is all good.
Lastly, Scarlet Town presents a more detailed study of Barbara Allen’s folk song. While Allen’s main theme tells of a tale where a young woman spurns her lover on his deathbed and comes to regret it, Dylan brings out a world full of both bad and good. However, Dylan argues there is no way the bad in the world can prevent combining the two forms from leading to eventual good. The entire world presented in the town appears complete in several ways. The events of the characters present a global real-life significance that resonates on beauty and ugliness, wealth and poverty, cruelty and kindness, and life and death.
Dylan, Bob. Lyrics to Scarlet Town . Special Rider Music 2012. Web.