The fight for the independence of Latin America was of great historical significance. As a result of this struggle, the people inhabiting the former Spanish and Portuguese colonies achieved national independence that served their vital interests. Among the leaders of the struggle for independence came from different classes. However, because of the small and weak colonial bourgeoisie, the liberation movement’s leadership was, in most cases, in the hands of the Creole landlords. The growth of opposition among the Creoles and the emergence of secret Creole organizations aimed at plotting were also the reasons why this group led the uprising.
By the end of the 18th century, in the Spanish and Portuguese colonies in America, the bourgeoisie formation accelerated, the layer of Creoles focused on foreign markets strengthened, and the intelligentsia emerged. These social groups were acutely dissatisfied with the colonial authorities’ policy of severe restrictions on trade and enterprise (Doc. B). They also resented the discrimination against the Creoles in the legal sphere and the lack of favorable conditions for creative activity. At the same time, the great mass of peasants, consisting of Indians and mestizos, was brutally exploited. They sought the opportunity to work freely on their ancestral lands. The struggle of the people of Spanish America for independence objectively met the needs of capitalist development, which was impeded by the colonial regime.
The international situation was favorable to the struggle for independence. At the end of the 18th and beginning of the 19th centuries, Spain was involved in devastating wars with France and England. In these circumstances, the Creole opposition intensified its activities. During this period, secret patriotic organizations were established throughout Spanish America. Their goal was to prepare an armed action and overthrow Spanish colonial oppression. The Creole opposition led uprisings because they were in need of the elimination of colonial taxes and restrictions on trade and industry.
It was for Creole entrepreneurs that the markets of the colonies and even those of the metropolises became cramped. For their continued growth, free access to the world market was vital. Moreover, it was on their side in the competition with Europeans that they had the advantage of the abundance, cheapness, and virgin fertility of the lands of the New World. In them, the ideas of liberalism found the most ardent admirers, determined fighters for complete freedom of trade and enterprise. Moreover, this ideology was incompatible not only with the Iberian but also with any other colonial restrictions. In addition to their place in the colonial economy, the Creole upper class differed from the other strata of colonial society in their clear awareness of their interests and goals. This is because many Creoles were extremely educated and belonged to the intelligentsia class.
The struggle of the people of Spanish America for independence objectively met the needs of capitalist development, which was impeded by the colonial regime. Nevertheless, the elimination of the colonial regime and achieving political independence were accompanied by important transformations. Almost all Latin American countries established a republican system. In several countries, slavery was completely or partially abolished, and the church’s rights were restricted. The indigenous population was exempted from paying per capita taxes and forced labor service (Doc. B). Latin American countries were allowed to actively engage in international trade, which created favorable conditions for developing capitalist relations.