End-Stage Renal Failure (ESRF) is a decrease in the excretory filtration systems of the kidneys, which arose due to the death of nephrons and was provoked by a chronic organ disease. The extinction of renal function causes a violation of normal life, to which various body systems respond with complications. The incidence of ESRF has recently reached more than 1 in 7 adults in the US, with 144 cases per million reported globally (Cobo et al., 2018). In the last decade, the prevalence of ESRF has been steadily increasing in parallel with the rapid growth of the population, including about 759 people per one million (Benjamin & Lappin, 2021). In 2017, the ESRF-caused mortality rate was 28% worldwide, with frequent comorbidities of ESRF being hypertension, diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular diseases, and malignancy (Cobo et al., 2018). Given this evidence, ESRF is a highly dangerous disorder with numerous adverse effects on the population’s health.
The body cavity associated with the disease is the abdominal cavity, where the kidneys, the main affected organs, are located. Kidneys are gradually losing their functions, failing to filter blood; there may also be a deterioration in blood clotting, the level of prothrombin decreases, and thrombocytopenia occurs (Cobo et al., 2018). The affected body system is the urinary system, which cannot efficiently eliminate waste from the blood; however, changes in the central nervous system may also occur, such as sleep disorders, problems with concentration, and inhibited reactions.
Prefixes that could be used for describing the disease are nephro-, hemato-, patho-, and reno-. While nephro- and reno- mean kidney, which can be used to describe the organ’s failure, hemato- is defined as blood and can be utilized to specify the issues with blood filtration. Patho-, which means disease, can be used to explain the pathologic nature of ESRF. Thrombo- could also be used, as blood clotting may occur together with ESFR.
A useful suffix for ESFR could be -al, defined as “about”; for example, renal is “about the kidney”. Another similar suffix is -ic, which has the same meaning. Suffixes -in and -ism can be utilized to discuss the condition of ESRF, with -ism also referring to the process. Finally, -osis explains the abnormal condition of the kidneys and body systems.
Combining forms that could be used to describe ESFR can be renal, nephric, and nephritic, which means “relating to the kidney”. Nephrosis could be used to describe the degenerative nature of the kidney tubules. Nephrogenic and renogenic are also utilized to describe the excretory body system, as these words are defined as “originating in or derived from the kidney”. Renopathy and nephropathy may be used to discuss a kidney disorder. Nephroma is another word specific for the kidney system, as it relates to the tumor of the renal cortex; a nephrocyte is a cell involved in the excretory process.
As chronic renal failure causes a decrease in hemoglobin levels, hematopoiesis is a term related to this disorder. Although this process is defined as the creation of blood cells, during ESRF, it becomes suppressed. Hypertension, myocarditis, and pericarditis are also related to the disorder (Cobo et al., 2018). Hypertension is defined as elevated blood pressure. Myocarditis is an inflammation of the heart muscles. Pericarditis is the swelling of the heart’s pericardium. Congestive heart failure , where the heart cannot efficiently pump blood, can occur. Convulsions or random muscle contractions can also be observed in most ESRF patients (Cobo et al., 2018). Skin irritability is a frequent symptom during ESRF. Anemia , or lack of hemoglobin, is also closely related to ESRF. Diarrhea is another condition that can emerge, with the patient’s bowel movements becoming watery.
It is extremely difficult to keep my productivity up; I feel fatigued most of the time. I often have a dry mouth, and I recently lost a lot of body weight. I noticed that my skin is less normal, it has less color and is easily irritated.