Throughout the COVID-19 global public health crisis, supply chain and transportation issues have posed a continual challenge. During the outbreak, shipping issues caused havoc on the medical equipment and healthcare institutions as a request for key items and other medical aid increased. Concerning the opportunity for improvement, it can be proposed to separate working groups into multiple teams and subgroups responsible for operating in different areas and regions.
Medical equipment is utilized for the diagnosis and therapy and treatment of patients after a disease or accident; it can be used alone or in conjunction with various consumables. Healthcare equipment and supplies are essential for patients’ needs, and the inability to obtain the necessary medicament can seriously threaten life. Consequently, in terms of maintaining a high level of treatment quality, it is obligatory to establish an efficient and effective medical equipment delivery and shipping system, elaborating a supply chain. At the commencement of the global pandemic, pharmaceutical products and equipment were desperately required in developing countries, and numerous offerings were acquired that needed to be packed for transportation. With regard to my contribution, it can be stated that I suggested the concept of splitting into smaller teams and subgroups, each focusing on a separate area. This enabled the group to segregate two full deliveries of donated medical supplies in two to three days instead of two to three. Thus, it was possible to send the healthcare equipment and medicaments successfully.
In conclusion, patients’ needs for healthcare equipment and supplies are critical, and the failure to receive the appropriate medication might be life-threatening. In terms of my contribution, I proposed separating into smaller teams and subgroups, each concentrating on a different aspect of the project. This allowed the group to segregate and classify two complete deliveries of donated medical goods in two to three days rather than two to three.