Many concepts have universal definitions but are still too broad because they may have unique and varied meanings to different people. Some may place great importance on money and define it as the most essential value in their life. Other people do not agree with this definition since, for them, money is only one of the ways to achieve a goal. The family also belongs to such concepts – although there are many different dictionary definitions of this social institution, people can still add their meanings to it. The purpose of this paper is to give a general description of the family, list its main characteristics, and relate them to my family.
To begin with, the family is one of the most important social agents and the smallest social unit. As noticed by Mondal (n.d.), it can be defined as “an intimate domestic group made up of people related to one another by bonds of blood, sexual mating or legal ties” (para. 1). At the same time, McCarthy (n.d.) says that the family is “people who share goals and values, have long-term commitments to one another and commonly reside in the same dwelling” (para. 2). However, some people consider themselves their own family or can extend this concept and include friends and pets in it. What is more, this group is not necessarily defined by blood relation – many married couples or single persons adopt children and form a real family unit.
As mentioned above, there are many characteristics of this social group. For example, family is the most valuable concept in a human’s life that usually plays the primary role in one’s socialization (Mondal, n.d.). Within it, ancestry or descent can be traced, and even large families are typically limited in size. Finally, another characteristic is that sentiments and feelings are the strong basis of this unit. Love, affection, and procreation, as well as responsibilities and duties, form most families.
When relating the mentioned characteristics to my own family, I can say that it fits all of them. I have too many relatives, including uncles, aunts, and cousins, and our huge family always tries to spend time together, have fun, and support each other. My brother and I were raised to be loving and affectionate, make ethically right decisions, and share. Our family is based on the most positive feelings and connections, and it is the main concept in our lives.