A healthcare manager is a person who organizes the work of a certain number of employees in a market economy based on modern management methods. He or she is a specialist in managing and controlling processes in the health promotion and system. It is necessary to consider many nuances related to employees’ activities in the workplace to master this profession successfully. A professional in this field can properly keep performers under control and motivate them by the manager’s desires and goals. The manager forms communications between people and determines the individual contribution of each employee to the overall result. There are two main bases of influence that encourage the performer to cooperate: personal and organizational (positional). Below is a description of these abilities and the sources of their development by managers in healthcare organizations.
The sources of a manager’s power base in the healthcare organizations on a personal side include the following elements and aspects. First of all, a healthcare manager has that method of leadership under a certain level of education, knowledge, experience, skills, and abilities. The performer believes in the influencer’s special knowledge that will allow the subordinate’s needs. This is influence by reasonable faith in the skills of the leader. Secondly, the right of the head to power is conditioned by the measure of recognition of subordinates. There is a desire to influence other people, which is manifested in the desire to strengthen one’s reputation, give persistent advice, and offer help (Gopee & Galloway, 2017). Thirdly, a manager has access to the necessary information and the ability to use it to influence subordinates. The power of information can become a source of influence, both for the manager and assistants. Thus, it is based only on managing data and not on understanding the subject. Fourth, the head influences the behavior of subordinates with the help of charisma and charm. An aide consciously or subconsciously strives to imitate the leader because he wants to be like him.
The sources of a manager’s power on an organizational (positional) basis include the following components. A healthcare manager in organizations must have enough authority to influence decision-making. For example, he may use the “carrot and stick” method. As an influence on the result, a director uses the tactics of rewarding in his activities, which helps strengthen the authorities’ legal rights. Such power is determined by the level of the formal request to management and exerts influence through positive reinforcement. The manager also influences the behavior of subordinates through reprimands, fines, demotions, dismissals. However, one should remember that such force is exerted through fear, and fear restricts initiative and creativity. Sometimes heads create a shortage of resources when they cannot effectively use other sources of power deliberately (Mason et al., 2020). Thanks to the manager’s connections, they also get the opportunity to influence others.
In conclusion, power is an opportunity to influence other people’s behavior and is an addition to the formal powers of heads. It is determined by the position the manager holds in the organization. Such ability ensures stability, order, and timely solution to problems within the structure. Every manager in the healthcare system needs constant development of this quality to achieve the company’s effective functioning. Power permeates the entire life of the enterprise, supporting its structure. Therefore, power is a necessary condition for the successful operation of an enterprise. Without sufficient power to influence people, the manager will not be able to achieve his goals.