The primary source for this study is the general medical journal The Lancet. It publishes the survey data and provides statistics and a comparative analysis of the obtained quantitative information. The Economist can be seen as a secondary source that describes research with less digital content. The study represents a decrease in the HIV infection rate of girls in school by stabilizing their families’ financial difficulties.
The World Bank funded the study to demonstrate the value of money in reducing the spread of HIV among young, poor girls. The study was authored by Berk Özler, Lead Economist and Poverty Research Manager. The medical journal The Lancet presented statistics based on a survey in the Zomba district of Malawi (G.C. 2). The Economist later summarized the study with the most critical findings from the analysis.
Thus, 1,300 unmarried girls aged 13 to 22 took part in the study. This is a sufficient number of subjects to consider the prevalence of HIV in poor areas. The sampling took place with the help of a computer, so the girls fell into different experimental groups randomly. Thus, a group stood out in which girls and their families were given small amounts of money every month, girls paid to attend school, and girls left without financial support.
Based on the study, it can be concluded that the subjects who received the money in both groups showed a significant reduction in the spread of the virus. However, test subjects with no money were forced to look for a sugar daddy. Therefore, in this group of issues, the statistics of the spread of HIV were preserved. Thus, the drug called money is adequate and affects the spread of STDs. The implication is that the global community needs funding to stop the spread of HIV. However, research and further assistance to young girls have several limitations. Firstly, it is hard to understand how much money each person needs to stop looking for sugar daddies and move on with their lives. Moreover, the study was conducted over 18 months, so it is impossible to assess how it will work in the long term