Mark Hendrickson’s article titled “Advance agent of expanding empires: George F. Becker and mineral exploration in South Africa and the Philippines” investigates the geologist’s role in shaping the American imagination of imperial expansion. The first few paragraphs of the article describe the period in which the British Empire suffered as a result of its inaccurate colonial politics, especially in South Africa, where the British had constant conflicts with the local Boer government. With this in mind, the author smoothly attracts readers’ attention to George Becker’s persona, who had an experience working in the South Africa region full of gold mines and political instability (Hendrickson 2019). He also worked in the Philippines, which was recently occupied after Admiral Dewey’s victory over the Spanish.
I believe the main argument proposed by the author is that given the global empire transformation of the United States, the country needed people like Becker. These are people who might enlighten both politicians and the public about the peoples, their traditions, and resources of unfamiliar and outlying countries. In this way, Hendrickson underlined Becker’s exceptional position as an educator within the American political elite of that time (Hendrickson 2019). For instance, Theodore Roosevelt, the future United States 26 th president, was a big fan of Becker for his comprehensive knowledge of the Philippines, including the political reality of the Asian country.
I partially do agree with this statement since, indeed, Becker contributed to raising awareness about specific regions’ resources and to American geopolitical achievements. However, Becker’s becoming one of the most influential scientists of his time in scientific and political societies was not instantly. Shortly after his return from South Africa, he gave a lecture about the political situation in the country where he spent more than a half year at Columbia University, and this speech became his gateway to popularity. Later, Becker wrote his reflection on what he thought to be the leading cause of political problems in South Africa (Hendrickson 2019). That was a lack of political leaders who could govern the country in light of recent geo-economic discoveries, which turned out to be a prophetical prediction.
Subsequently, Becker was missioned to the Philippines to obtain general information about the country’s mineral wealth. Later, the general public was told that America’s mission was to bring civilization to the corners, remaining uncivilized. A geological survey was the first step in bringing enlightenment to the Philippines. However, Hendrickson (2019) supposes that Becker’s mission in the Philippines was far from geological interest. Instead, he was to find a basis on what the American public could tolerate the intervention and violence against foreign nations might be justified.
Therefore, although their statement of Hendrickson is certainly justified, Becher’s persona is definitely questionable and controversial. The geologist actively took part in military operations against Filipino. He participated in army violence against foreign people on their soil, but he also intentionally deteriorated his reports for the American audience at the request of US Senator Beveridge. Moreover, they called rebels “sincere though misguided patriots,” “adventurers,” and “pursuers of charms of an exciting life” (Kramer 2018). This changed the reasons and motives of rebels on a fundamental basis in the eyes of the American public.
It must be noted that Becker’s image of gold deposits in South Africa strongly affected both mining processes and British colonial policy in Africa, justifying British aggression against local people. Moreover, he the same justification he applied in the case of American imperialistic expansions in the Philippines and beyond (Hendrickson 2019). Thus, Becker was one of the significant contributors to American expansionist policy and determined most western countries’ foreign policy concerning countries that are weaker but rich in mineral sources.