Why Austinville Community Health Centre Is a Good Place for Mrs.. Smith to Receive Care
Austville Community Health Centre is an ideal place for Mrs.. Smith to access healthcare services because it is a short distance from where she lives. This means that it is convenient because she can easily access the health center with little or no transport cost. In addition, the small distance between Mrs.. Smith’s home and the Austville center can help her exercise through walking, which is very beneficial in managing her condition. According to research, regular exercise is essential in maintaining a healthy weight and also regulates blood sugar levels (Borse et al. 2021, p. 113). Likewise, the short distance to the facility will make it easy for Mrs.. Smith to get regular check-ups to ensure her blood sugar remains within the target range.
Austville is also a good place for Mrs.. Smith to obtain care because it has multidisciplinary healthcare personnel trained to offer high-quality services to the elderly. In this case, it has several specialists, such as a podiatrist and optometrist, who can detect and treat symptoms associated with type 2 diabetes. Therefore, Mrs.. Smith will be able to obtain appropriate medications for her condition. Likewise, the center has a diabetes educator and provides education programs on diabetes. This implies that Mrs.. Smith will get insightful training on managing her condition. This may include useful tips like how to maintain a healthy diet, test her blood sugar, and the appropriate exercises that aid in weight loss. Such education will help Mrs. Smith to manage her condition and prevent further complications.
The environment around Austville offers Mrs.. Smith an opportunity to establish positive social networks that may benefit her general well-being. Since the health center provides most of its health services to the elderly, Mrs.. Smith may establish friendships with other patients. She may also make friends with her peers during the group exercise programs offered by the center. Similarly, Austville has a community café where people living in the neighborhood can meet and talk. A study shows that stronger social networks and support among the elderly are linked with increased patient adherence to medical treatment and improved self-care (Li 2021, p. 1). In this case, social networks may help Mrs.. Smith maintains her happiness, reducing any incidences of stress that are detrimental to her health. Equally important, Austville is located in a low socioeconomic community, which implies that it offers low-cost healthcare services. Thus, it is ideal for Mrs.. Smith because she solely relies on her pension.
Five Health Professionals That Mrs.. Smith, Will Need to See at the Health Centre, and What Services Each of Them Could Offer
Since Austville is a primary healthcare center, Mrs.. Smith can benefit from the services offered by several specialists. The five health professionals that Mrs. Smith would seek assistance from including the podiatrist, optometrist, diabetes educator, physiotherapist, and clinical exercise physiologist. In this case, a podiatrist is a valuable specialist in the diabetes care team. Patients with diabetes are highly predisposed to developing foot problems such as foot ulcers, nerve damage, Charcot foot, and amputations. A podiatrist is adequately trained to assess any complications associated with a patient’s foot and prepare a treatment and prevention plan (Blanchette et al. 2020, p. 2).
These specialists can identify foot health risks and effectively treat them to avoid further complications. In addition, an optometrist is critical in managing Mrs. Smith’s health condition. One of the common symptoms of type 2 diabetes is blurred vision. Thus eye care is essential for patients with diabetes (Ford et al. 2021, p. 1). In this case, an optometrist will check Mrs. Smith’s eyes regularly to detect and treat any injuries or abnormalities associated with her vision.
A diabetes educator is crucial in offering valuable insights into the management of diabetes. In this context, a diabetes educator will work collaboratively with Mrs. Smith to develop an effective treatment plan and educate her on proper nutrition and other positive lifestyle choices (King et al. 2017, p. 2). Patients with diabetes are advised to eat nuts and avocadoes as well as use beans and eggs as a healthy source of protein.
They are also directed to consume a diet with fruits, vegetables, lean proteins, and whole grains (Borse et al. 2021, p. 113). The diabetes educator may also recommend regular exercise to help in reducing body weight. Similarly, these professionals also train families to assist patients with diabetes in managing the disease. Likewise, a physiotherapist may assist in alleviating the severity of diabetes through therapeutic exercise programs (Harris-Hayes et al. 2020, p. 12). In this case, a physiotherapist may recommend various aerobic and resistance programs to Mrs. Smith to help her maintain healthy body weight. Aerobic exercise may include swimming and walking, while resistance activities may comprise yoga, weightlifting, and calisthenics.
Finally, Mrs. Smith may require the services of a clinical exercise physiologist (CEP) who is integral personnel to patients with chronic illnesses, especially diabetes. A CEP assesses a patient to determine the most suitable exercise regimen (Pearce & Longhurst 2021, p. 2). They also monitor the exercises to ensure that the patients engage in safe practices. Through such patient-centered exercise programs, patients can maintain healthy body weight and regulate their blood glucose, protecting them against further complications.
How Mrs. Smith’s Care Would Be Funded, and the Benefits Mrs. Smith Might Be Eligible for
Mrs. Smith is on an aged care pension, one of the income support payments from the Federal Government for individuals who are 66 years and above. Therefore, her primary care may be funded through the aged care scheme. One of the benefits that Mrs. Smith is eligible for is a carer allowance. For people of her age to qualify for this type of government pension, they need to be frail, aged and have a severe illness or disability. If a community health center offers ongoing or continuous primary care services to an individual meeting these criteria, the institution may also qualify for a carer benefit (Payments, Concessions n.d.). This payment intends to help individuals who have assumed responsibilities to care for the geriatric population. This is because unique demands associated with caring for older adults usually hinder or negatively impact caregivers’ ability to actively engage in formal employment. In this case, since the patient is frail, aged, and has recently been diagnosed with type 2 diabetes, Austville qualifies to receive a carer allowance after every two weeks.
Under this national scheme, Mrs. Smith is also entitled to an extra supplement pension. This can help the patient with her bills and drug costs. In addition, since Mrs. Smith is a beneficiary of the Age Pension, this automatically qualifies her for the Pensioner Concession Card (Payments, Concessions n.d.). This means that she can receive healthcare services and utilities and use her Pensioner Card to access more discounted rates on medicines through the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme and other support services. Therefore, all these advantages could mean cheaper medication, considerable refunds for medical costs, Mrs. Smith having her physician’s visits bulk billed, and reduced rates on household supplies. Others include lower water rates, property, motor vehicle registration, and public transport.
The benefits a Primary Health Centre Such as Austville Would Offer for Others in the Local Community
Primary health centers have several benefits to people in the local community. Such facilities increase the access to care services for the community residents, especially people with low socioeconomic backgrounds and the elderly. Additionally, primary healthcare institutions provide a range of services to people in the neighborhood. The services may include health promotion, early intervention, preventive care, and screening, as well as treatment and management of acute and chronic health conditions like asthma, cancer, and hypertension. Likewise, primary health centers provide a broad range of healthcare personnel, such as general practitioners, nurses, social workers, nutritionists, and other allied health professionals.
This greatly improves the healthcare outcomes of the residents in the surrounding areas because they can receive high-quality and patient-centered care. According to research, a robust primary healthcare system is linked with low medical costs, improved efficiency, reduced hospitalization rates, increased patient satisfaction, and positive health outcomes (van Weel & Kidd 2018, p. 464). Therefore, the Austville center will provide comprehensive and tailored services to meet the health needs of the locals.
Primary health facilities provide continuity of care to local residents. Having a specialist who is familiar with a patient’s medical history is essential. This is because they can adequately recommend an effective treatment method based on the patient’s records. In addition, such healthcare personnel can efficiently detect a health abnormality in its initial stages due to frequent check-ups and contacts with the patient. It is also important to note that the familiarity between a patient and a physician builds trust and improves communication. Therefore, patients can easily talk about sensitive health issues and receive much-needed help.
Not to mention, a primary care doctor may help patients avoid certain health complications that may affect them in the future. In this case, based on a patient’s health records, a physician may detect an increased risk of conditions such as cancer, diabetes, stroke, and obesity, among others. Such information may, in turn, assist a patient on what steps to take to avoid developing the ailments (Agarwal et al. 2017, p. 7). Therefore, primary care centres offer continuity of care which substantially improves the local residents’ health outcomes.
The Community Need
The growth of the geriatric population has negatively impacted the provision of primary care. This is because older adults have more co-morbidities demanding higher levels of care than the younger generation (van Gaans & Dent 2018, p. 2). Another report shows that one in four senior Australians lives below the poverty line, and individuals aged 65 years and above equals 7 percent of those who are homeless (Face the Facts n.d.). In addition, instances of older adults living alone and away from family members have also been reported.
The city’s population growth rate has increased significantly over the last few years, driven mainly by an increase in net overseas migration. The research indicates that migrants currently represent about 28% of the country’s overall population (Raymer & Baffour 2018, p. 1055). Therefore, issues facing refugees and asylum seekers are also things that Austville endeavors to address. This often involves providing them with the most basic needs, such as food, education, and temporary housing. The implication here is that Austville must be adequately equipped to address the challenges of growing senior citizens and cultural diversity. The goal is also to assist informal caregivers like friends and neighbours who provide daily assistance to these groups.
Solution
Since the community has continued to experience a high growth rate of the older population and an increasing number of migrants, inadequate clinical and social services have left these individuals in a dire situation. Austville sees the opportunity to continue running primary care, community café, education group exercise, and English conversation programs to enhance these groups’ dependent functioning and social integration. A study shows that community-based support can help senior citizens live safely in their residences and delay institutionalization (Robinson et al. 202, p. 133). Austville provides older patients with various services, resources, and general assistance around their homes. These include fitness training, nutritional support, and consultation and coaching services about health and aging.
The organization’s staff members also provide counseling services to older adults’ informal caregivers and general assistance with finances. Similarly, research indicates that language proficiency is crucial to social integration and increases their chances of securing employment and promoting social and political participation (Lundberg 2020, p. 4). For this reason, Austville also runs English language classes, which can help this group interact with the community.
Project Description
Austville aspires to continue providing much-needed services to prevent the hospitalization of older residents and promote the social functioning of newly arrived migrants. The organization plans to invest additional resources to help diabetic patients manage their lifestyle conditions and aid in the social integration of migrants. For instance, dancing classes can help senior residents lose weight and boost their heart health. It is also important to support refugees coming to the center by offering food, medicine, and nutrition assistance to those living with chronic illnesses to enhance their recovery.
Offering English language training can also improve social engagement and improve migrants’ opportunities and acceptance in the community. For these stated reasons, Austville wants to continue offering these services and get more professionals involved to ensure that these people receive the resources and services they need. Therefore, these are some reasons Austville is applying for a $2,000 grant to fund some of its operations.