Introduction
Significantly, health care safety and well-being are key issues towards achieving a quality healthy population. The complexity of patient technology has been transforming. Before, nurses used to touch, smell, and hear about monitoring patients when caring for patients. With the current evolution of technology, various measures have been developed to enhance and improve health care services which have been of great success (Alotaibi and Federico, 2017). While technological changes elaborate both problems and solutions in enhancing patient safety, much must be done to overcome the issues. One of the devolved technological strategies involves Automated IV Pumps, a device used to administer medication. The introduction of Automated IV Pumps has led to both negative and positive impacts in the nursing profession based on the illustration.
The necessity of providing quality health care is the level to which health services to populations increases the probability of meeting desired health care outcomes. Automated IV Pumps are one of the key technological advancements in health care which is a device designed to help nurses give the right dosage. Using Automated IV Pumps has improved the efficiency of service care, reduced errors and flexibility, which is believed to improve general patient safety. To a greater extent, safety measures such as following instructions, monitoring and dosage must be considered.
The problem of the statement
Despite the technological advancements in health care, 100% attained of patient safety is still an issue. The rising number of patient issues are increasing hence calling for more attention to carry out more research (Wei et al.,2021). Patient safety and care are the major concerns to all hence the study will evaluate the patient outcomes related to use of Automated IV Pumps to come up with the necessary measures. Alternatively, there is a little improvement of care services in nursing profession.
However much the technological measures have improved the level of patient care, there are still issues about patient safety concerning the use of technological evolutions, such as they have Automated IV Pumps. Patient issues, such as medical errors, are one of the key obstacles which should be minimized to ensure safety and well being.
Objectives of the study
The study’s main objective will look at the major impacts of Automated IV Pumps in the nursing profession. Further, the study will achieve this by assessing the outcome of patients undergoing medications using Automated IV Pumps.
Research question
To determine the impacts of Automated IV Pumps in nursing profession.
Justification of the study
My study will aim at finding out both positive and negative impacts of Automated IV Pumps on patient care and safety to give the necessary support to use Automated IV Pumps in the nursing profession or not.
Findings
Nurses involves in a lot of activities on delivering quality patient care. The evolution of technology such as use of Automated IV Pumps is of great achievement since it enhances accurate judgement of drug administration. Patient care should no longer be a guess work instead accuracy and consistency. On the other hand, the use of Automated IV Pumps lightens the work of nurses who are overworked. The impact of Automated IV Pumps has been felt in reduction of medical errors, easy infusion capabilities, and simple usage,
Reduction of errors
Wrong dosage and medication to the human body can be hazardous. Nursing medication administration errors has been reduced since it gives the right dosage appropriately. The use of pumps offers the sure way to administer medications making safer environment for patients. In addition, it makes the work environment for nursing professionals who have to give medications using IV’s.
Infusion capabilities
An infusion pump system is not a fixed piece of equipment, it can be tailored to various conditions. Having anything too large to move might waste time and energy. It has a simplified process of infusion that can save a patient’s life if triaging them in an unfavorable place. Also, hospitals frequently deal with crises, an infusion system that can be moved across the building is beneficial. A smart infusion system allows to use it in non-traditional settings, therefore, to serve more patients.
Simple user interface
Using a infusion pump does not require a technician. A person does not even need to know how to program it. It is simple and easy to read, which helps when providing IVs quickly. These IV pumps are fantastic choices for nearly any medical facility because of their accuracy and ease of usage.
Pros of Automated IV Pumps
Alternatively, Automated IV Pumps have less medical errors and have alerts to reduce the rate of errors. On the other hand, they are flexible and convenient to nurses as they can be easily carried around and used during emergencies. Above all, Automated IV Pumps simplify the treatment process as nurses find enough time to attend to patient hence improving patient safety and treatment for quality recovery.
Cons of Automated IV Pumps
Despite the positive impacts of Automated IV Pumps in nursing profession, there are also negative impacts associated with the use of Automated IV Pumps. Automated IV Pumps are expensive to purchase hence limiting other health care organizations and nurses to provide safe care. In addition, programmed language of Automated IV Pumps may have an error which might lead to serious health effects to patients leading to low patient care and safety.
Conclusion
Having reduced medication errors and flexibility of Automated IV Pumps, Nurses have lately achieved a lot in care and patient safety. On the other hand, the positive impacts of using Automated IV Pumps outweighs negative impacts of the device use. I would therefore recommend continuous use of the Automated IV Pumps in drug administration and medications. Further, there are improvements measures to out do negative impacts of using Automated IV Pumps.