The article by Vargas and Soriano is dedicated to an innovative solution in the educational field, namely the use of blockchain technology in Edublocs. In the introduction, scientists note the problems of the modern educational system that can be solved with the help of Edublocs (Vargas & Scott, 2019). The main feature of the blockchain is the impossibility of loss, damage, or forgery of an educational document. Since a block created once can no longer be changed, it cannot be deleted from the network (Fedorova & Skobleva, 2020). In this way, the reliability and integrity of the data are guaranteed, and the learning history can become completely transparent.
This is followed by both a theoretical and a practical overview of the Edublocs platform. The first section of the main part presents the theoretical aspects of using the program, and the second demonstrates the interface of the platform (Vargas & Scott, 2019). The Edublocs blockchain platform will unite students, educational institutions, employers, and recruiters, as it will be developed taking into account their needs (Vargas & Scott, 2019). This will give the sphere not just a useful tool for interaction but will push it to significant changes and the emergence of new solutions. A separate section of the article is devoted to tutors: the authors note that the introduction of new technologies will require radical changes in educational institutions. These changes will primarily affect the transformation of management, management methods, financial management, and specific people (Ismail et al., 2019). Therefore, today it is necessary to prepare the teaching staff and staff for serious changes.
In conclusion, scientists claim that the result of the introduction of blockchain technologies in education will be the automation of production processes and the provision of services. This means that those educational institutions that have switched to a modern developed digital infrastructure will be able to maintain economic stability. Using Edublocs will allow these educational institutions to remain competitive.