As apparent from the title, the focus of the article “Positive leadership psychology: Authentic and servant leadership in higher education in Pakistan” is the Pakistani educational system, whose organization the authors analyze through the lens of leadership. Specifically, they examine the role of centralized guidance in the learning process and speculate on which style can influence its participants in the most favorable ways. In particular, the piece highlights the importance of relationships of trust in education. According to the authors, any suppressive hierarchy, strict subordination, or an atmosphere of complete obedience prevents people from openness, becoming a serious obstacle to social exchange. The latter is seen as the foundation of productive teamwork and presupposes an awareness of the other’s feelings as well as motives for searching for the most appropriate behavioral patterns. Therefore, within Bloom’s taxonomy, more precisely, its cognitive domain, the article describes the knowledge, the primary level.
The publication is quite coherent and well-structured, which marks its appropriate quality. Notably, the outcomes of the analysis appear in an understandable form and actually serve to illustrate the theoretical background, in which part the authors comment on the essentiality of proper leadership in organizations. The practical part involves a detailed examination of several types and styles, specifically, the ways various leaders interact with employees. The general conclusion is the criticality of mutual respect and dedication to recognizing everybody’s needs, which underlies servant leadership as a practice.
Human resources and psychology of leadership apparently are the areas where the investigators specialize. Notably, they participated in a range of publications on several topics within the above fields, such as organizational leadership, individual leadership, culture-specific peculiarities, and others. As mentioned, Current Psychology, the global peer-reviewed research forum, accepted their work for publishing, which means that it meets its quite specific quality requirements. It was found through the JFL, Jerry Falwell Library.