Notably, ulcerative colitis is a chronic inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) in which the immune system’s abnormal reactions lead to inflammation and ulcers on the inner lining of the large intestine, which is the last part of the GI tract. Based on the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (n.d.), ulcerative colitis can happen at any age; nonetheless, it is more common in people between fifteen and thirty years old. Ulcerative colitis symptoms may differ from person to person, such as diarrhea, passing blood with stool, and abdominal pain. Experts are unsure what causes ulcerative colitis, but they assume genetic factors, abnormal immune responses, the microbiome, and the surroundings play a significant role.
Generally, ulcerative colitis is treated with medications that reduce inflammation in the large intestine and aid in the onset and maintenance of remission. Some people with ulcerative colitis may lose their appetite and eat less; they may not get enough nutrients (National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, n.d.). Essentially, a healthy, well-balanced diet is recommended for people who have ulcerative colitis. I would suggest the perfect dinner plate to a client, which includes cooked vegetables, refined grains, lean protein sources, and omega-3 fatty acids (Santos-Longhurst & Watson, 2022). Therefore, I recommend eating asparagus, white rice, and chicken or better fish because it is full of Omega-3. Additionally, I will emphasize that the client should eat sugar-free or unsweetened applesauce for dessert. It is also vital to avoid alcohol and spicy food.
If a patient has celiac disease, I agree that the only treatment is a gluten-free diet. As a result, avoiding gluten for the rest of the patient’s life is critical. Individuals with celiac disease must take special precautions to avoid gluten because it can cause a detrimental response. I would also add that naturally gluten-free foods include beans, chia, millet, quinoa, rice, tapioca, and potato. Essentially, I like your choice of the perfect dinner plate for your patient with celiac disease, consisting of smoked salmon, a kale salad with a balsamic vinaigrette and chopped strawberries, and a side of quinoa. Balsamic vinegar can be used because it is gluten-free; it can also be replaced by grape vinegar. I would recommend adding fortified orange juice or dried figs because of calcium and cashews because they are rich in iron.
Your post is very informative because you mentioned that there are three types of IBS: IBS with constipation (IBS-C), IBS with diarrhea (IBS-D), and IBS with both (IBS-M). I liked that you suggested two ideal dinners for patients with IBS-C and IBS-D. IBS-C’s recommended food choices are whole-grain bread and cereals, beans, fruits, and vegetables. Patients with IBS-C should consume foods high in the sugar substitute sorbitol in moderation, such as dried plums and prune juice. You have included prune juice; nonetheless, I would add dried plums as well as a snack. It is crucial to mention that the patient should drink plenty of plain water. When an individual has IBS-D, consume a moderate amount of soluble fiber is vital, such as wheat bread, grain pasta, and dried fruits. Therefore, I would recommend adding dried fruits to the dinner plate. It is crucial to note that patients with IBS-D should avoid drinking water during the meal; water is recommended only an hour before or after the meal.