The rapidly changing situation in the market of goods and services forces organizations to adapt efficiently and quickly. It results in overly rapid changes within the enterprise without a smooth transition. The fast pace is becoming a problem for both the company and employees. Team members are forced to quickly adapt to new work formats, promptly learn new skills, and take on additional roles. In such conditions, competent and high-quality change management and decision-making are essential.
In an age of global transformation, change management has become one of the principal success factors for most companies. The surrounding reality is in a state of constant shift: the demands of internal and external customers are changing, new market barriers and opportunities are emerging, unforeseen risks are occurring. Companies that cannot withstand the pace of development and adapt to new conditions often have to leave the market, giving way to more flexible organizations. The central concern is that for most employees, rapid change causes a feeling of anxiety and discomfort. It often causes longer sick days, days off, constant complaints, and employee turnover. People are distressed about their jobs, an unknown future, and ever-increasing competition (Anastasiou, 2020). The situation can be aggravated by the inability to master new technologies, the lack of high-quality communication, and a sick work environment that negatively affects the overall progress.
The decision-making process can be challenging, especially in times of crisis. The crisis is a severe external factor that significantly affects the quality of conclusions. Many people do not have enough personal experience or psycho-emotional strength to make a straightforward decision and accept full responsibility. Inaccurate decisions can be based on numerous internal and external errors. Internal factors are related to the personality of the decision-maker. They may help to overcome the anxiety and conduct effective brainstorming. External factors are related to decision-making conditions and external influences. Such decisions may be limited in time, effectiveness, or sources, depending on other workers or the status of a performer (Anastasiou, 2020). All of the above factors have the potential to interfere with the decision-making process.