The evolving technologies have impacted various sectors including health among many others. Eventually, this has prompted to the development of various technologies that enhance patient care. Automated IV Pumps, one of my identified technology developed to improve patient care, executes many advantages. Notably, they are used in hospitals, nursing homes, and home-based care to provide quality patient care. However, with the elevating number of patients in hospitals, there is a need to develop better technologies to improve patients’ health care or to improve on the available technologies. They improve the Automated IV Pumps involves instructions, maintenance, alert, delayed therapy and missed treatment various changes have,e to be enhanced. One of the significant changes to be implemented to improve use of Automated IV Pumps in improving the patient’s health care is by conducting effective training to health providers. The enhanced chances of improving the effectiveness of healthcare providers effectiveness willlogies, thus improving the patients’ healthcare,
Amidst their widespread use, Automated IV Pumps proceed to have design flaws that endanger patient care. Operating system bugs and errors, human factors (e.g., errors related to user interface issues), damaged elements, battery failure, alarm failure, and over-or under-infusion are all frequently reported issues with Automated IV Pumps (Lyons et al., 2018). Notably, among these challenges, the user interface issues are the most common, and they involve pump tags, and elements deteriorate over time. For example, having to clean the pump, as the user-maintainer chooses to believe is an acceptable option, may damage the pump, rendering it useless for clinical use. Long-nail users may destroy the print on the pump keys, rendering them unreadable.
However, despite the reported challenges, various benefits have also been executed from my project of using Automated IV Pumps in improving patients’ health care. Nevertheless, they are a secure way of implementing IV fluids. These injectors are solely designed to deliver a specific fluid volume at a specific rate. The use of these pumps greatly helps practitioners reduce the possibility of errors in the volume, timeframe, and rate of fluid administration (Chaturvedi et al., 2019). Therefore, health centers are expected to use infusion pumps in improving healthcare for patients as it is more beneficial.