Blockchain can be defined as a developing technology that is increasingly used in various fields of human activity. The report by Grech and Camilleri (2017) provides insight into applications of blockchain in education, which are “still in their infancy” (p. 8). The authors emphasize the numerous benefits and social advantages that this concept can bring into the academic setting. Grech and Camilleri (2017) state that “within education, activities likely to be disrupted by blockchain technology include the award of qualifications, licensing and accreditation, management of student records, intellectual property management and payments” (p. 8). Although the application of blockchain in the educational field is still underdeveloped, this technology can disrupt the student information systems market and offer numerous benefits for society.
The open implementation of blockchain technology can enable the automatization of such processes as achievement record verification, certificate validation, and license issuing. Overall, Grech and Camilleri (2017) offer “eight scenarios for the application of the Blockchain in an education context, based on the current state of technology development and deployment” (p. 95). In particular, it can be used to secure certificates, verify accreditation, recognize and transfer credits automatically, and store lifelong learning passports. Furthermore, this technology can help track intellectual property, receive student payments, provide funding to students, and enhance student identification processes.
Overall, the report discusses the fundamental principles of the use of blockchain in education. The authors conclude that this technology promotes such values as trust, collaboration, transparency, self-sovereignty, and disintermediation. Furthermore, Grech and Camilleri (2017) “recommend that further development of the technology in the educational field should be considered as a shared competence of the market and of public authorities” (p. 9). Blockchain can empower students and disrupt the market due to its innovative approaches to education.