Bakhtiari, Kian. “Why Brands Need to Pay Attention to Cancel Culture.” Forbes , Web.
The article focuses on the role ‘canceling’ plays in the modern corporate environment. The author explains how the Internet has become central in business strategy. He makes a case both for and against ‘cancel culture.’ The article explores brands’ need to be reactive to consumer attitudes, which are often dictated by social media.
“Cancel Culture, Part 1: Where It Came from.” New York Times , uploaded by The Daily, Web.
The podcast features a conversation about ‘cancel culture’ with Jonah Bromwich, a reporter for the New York Times . Jonah discusses the origins of ‘canceling’ and emphasizes the role of Twitter in its development. The podcast episode focuses on the implications of the aforementioned trend on the U.S. politics. Jonah explains why the 2020 election is integral to understand the impact ‘cancel culture’ has.
Chotiner, Isaac. “Thomas Chatterton Williams on Race, Identity, and “Cancel Culture”.” The New Yorker , Web.
Harper’s Bazaar has published a piece titled ‘Letter on Justice and Open Debate,’ which was signed by almost a hundred academics, authors, and philosophers. Thomas Chatterton Williams, one of the contributors to the letter, discusses its significance in a global conversation surrounding ‘cancel culture.’ In an interview with The New Yorker , Thomas mentions the importance of ideological diversity. The interview concludes with Thomas’ call for a less censorious society.
Gerstmann, Evan. “Cancel Culture Is Only Getting Worse.” Forbes , Web.
This article defines ‘cancel culture’ and sheds the light on its most prominent victims. The piece discusses the phenomenon’s impact on ordinary people. It includes examples from the academic and corporate field. The author encourages the public to recognize the dangers of ‘canceling.’
Greenhut, Steven. “‘Cancel Culture’ Is a Dangerous, Totalitarian Trend.” Reason , Web.
The piece centers around ‘cancel culture’ being an instrument to destroy political opponent. The author argues that the main purpose of the movement is suppression. According to the author, it is undeniable that t is a form of censorship. ‘Canceling’ can therefore be used in an effort to challenge democracy.
Greenspan, Rachel E. “How ‘Cancel Culture’ Quickly Became One of the Buzziest and Most Controversial Ideas on the Internet.” Business Insider , Web.
The article examines the development of ‘cancel culture.’ It is a social phenomenon, which has been popularized during the #MeToo movement. Since then, it has gained public attention and affected hundreds of celebrities, politicians, and other public figures. The names of those ‘canceled’ include Kanye West, Ellen DeGeneres, Gigi Hadid, and others.
Grobar, Matt. “Kevin Hart on Cancel Culture’s “Bad Environment” and Defending Ellen & Nick Cannon: “I Know Who They Are”.” Deadline , Web.
The interview with Kevin hart focuses on his Oscar scandal in 2018. Hart explains his thoughts on getting ‘canceled’ over past homophobic tweets. He examines how his worldview has changed since the scandal. In addition, Hart criticizes ‘cancel culture’ and justifies his decision to defend its victims, including Nick Cannon and Ellen DeGeneres.
Nossel, Suzanne. “‘Cancel culture’ Censorship Can Be Most Dangerous for Those Who Promote Social Justice.” NBC News , Web.
Suzanne Nossel discusses the positive effects of ‘cancel culture.’ This movement created an abundance of opportunities for social changes, according to the author. The article urges people to look at ‘canceling’ as a dangerous tool. It can, in fact, be a threat to social justice if it is used by institutional authorities.