Ageism is a global problem of discriminating and stereotyping people based on their age. It contributes to prejudice in society, causing a psychological impact on individuals and creating biased attitudes toward certain populations (Ayalon & Tesch-Römer, 2018). Media is often responsible for stereotyping different age groups, in particular, older adults. This paper aims to discuss two examples of ageism and one example of a positive characterization of the elderly in the media.
Cliches and stereotypes about older adults in advertising cause negative attitudes in people as they present unrealistic and out-of-touch messages to the audience. For example, “This Is Getting Old” is an advertisement by E-Trade that depicts older adults working jobs they hate and cannot perform because they have not managed to save enough for retirement (Advertising TV, 2018). This stereotypical video is ageist because it supports bias and discrimination against older workers, people struggling financially, and the elderly in general. Another example of ageism is an advertisement, “Dear Young People, Don’t Vote,” where older adults urge the youth not to vote (NAIL Communications, 2018). This video is ageist because it portrays the elderly as a selfish, indifferent, and uncaring category, which is inaccurate and discriminative. A positive example includes an advertisement by DocMorris, where an older man persistently exercises to lift his granddaughter to help her put a star on top of the Christmas tree (Sport for Business, 2020). This video is respectful, supportive, and heartwarming as it pictures an older individual who can achieve goals and live a fulfilling life.
To conclude, ageism has harmful effects on the perception of older people in society. Bad examples of the elderly’s media portrayal discussed in this paper devalue the abilities of older people. Besides, they form negative attitudes towards aging in society, even though this process is natural. However, there are also positive examples not marked by ageism. They do not promote misconceptions and bias, helping form a healthier and more supportive attitude to this age group in society.
Advertising TV. (2018). This is getting old | ETRADE | Super Bowl 2018 commercial [Video]. YouTube. Web.
Ayalon, L., & Tesch-Römer, C. (2018). Contemporary perspectives on ageism . Springer Nature.
NAIL Communications. (2018). Dear young people, “Don’t Vote” [Video]. YouTube. Web.
Sport for Business. Take care of yourself Doc Morris Christmas advert 2020 [Video]. YouTube. Web.