A caster can be described as a simple wheel mechanism usually attached to the bottom of a particular object to simplify its movement and reduce the effort needed to change its position. Such details can be used in shopping carts, office chairs, beds, or furniture. The presented caster consists of six parts needed to guarantee its stable functioning, attaching to the demanded object, and rolling. These details are the metal base, two vertical supports, four screws, bushing, axle, and a wheel. Being assembled, they ensure the proper work of the detail and its attachment.
The base is made of malleable cast iron and weighs 1083,5 grams. It is the basis to fix all other objects and assemble the caster mechanism. It should also be attached to a particular surface to enable it can be moved. The vertical supports are placed on the base by using available SHCS screws. The choice of steel as the material is explained by the high pressure caused by objects on the base.
The caster mechanism also has two vertical supports made of malleable cast iron. Their primary function is to hold the wheel and guarantee its rolling without friction on the base. The mass of every vertical support is 437.6 grams. They are placed on two sides of the base using SHCS crews and should also resist a significant load, which explains the choice of the material to manufacture them.
The mechanism has four socket head cap screws (SCHS) needed to fix vertical supports and ensure their stable position on the base. Each SCHS weighs 20.3 grams, and the screws are made of plain carbon steel, ensuring their reliability and resistance.
There are also two bushings needed for the stable work of the caster mechanism. They are made of tin bearing bronze and weigh 58.9 grams each. They are attached to the vertical supports to hold the axle and reduce the friction between two surfaces, and resist abrasion.
The mechanism has the axle needed to guarantee that the wheel will spin and simplify the object’s movement. It is made of AISI 1020 carbon steel and weighs 182.2 grams. The choice of this material ensures that the axle will resist the pressure caused by the wheel and the mass of an item that should be moved.
Finally, the wheel is the last detail of the caster mechanism. It is made of malleable cast iron and is placed between two vertical supports by using an axle and two bushings. Its mass is 872.5 grams, making it the second heaviest detail among the rest. The diameter of the hole in the middle of the wheel should fit the size of the axle to ensure it is possible to assemble the mechanism and attain its stable work.
Altogether, being assembled, all details enable that the item or object can be moved. Being placed at a stationary fork formed by two vertical supports, the wheel reduces the effort needed to change the position of an item. The orientation of the two vertical supports is selected when a caster is mounted to the necessary surface. The axle with two bushings on sides allows the wheel to roll without friction and ensures the stable work of the mechanism. The use of metal and carbon steel guarantees the demanded strengths and the ability to resist pressure during the service.