Rucol General Merchandise is opting to implement an enterprise resources planning (ERP) system that requires a superb storage solution. The organization has several branches with employees allowed to work from home two days a week. An effective storage solution for Rucol General Merchandise must meet some credentials. Such qualifications include access from multiple points, top-notch data security, affordability, and stability. As noted earlier, Rucol’s employees work from home at least two days a week. The organization operates six days a week and has over fifty functional branches.
Possible storage solutions for Rucol include cloud storage, solid-state drives (SSD), and hard disk drives (HDD). Each of these options has advantages and demerits in the organization’s case. SSDs and HDDs, for example, provide cheaper storage alternatives for Rucol. The two options are readily available and do not require a constant internet connection for access. Moreover, SSDs and HDDs provide excellent offline data storage and backup solutions for organizations undertaking vulnerable processes like Rucol. Shortliffe and Cimino (2021) note that data storage solutions that can be kept away from the internet offer some of the best data management options for sensitive data. The argument makes SSDs and HDDs appropriate for the organization.
HDDs come with large space at a relatively lower cost than SSDs, making the former option more appropriate for Rucol’s case. The company will thus utilize HDDs for data backup in a high-efficiency computer without internet connections. Nonetheless, the best data storage alternative for Rucol is the cloud storage system. Choosing Google Drive will allow the organization to acquire about thirty terabytes for $300 a month. The choice will offer data security, increased accessibility, and reliability (Weiland et al., 2019). Coupling the cloud option for data management during normal operations and an HDD system for backups promises the entity a better solution for the data management problem.