The US is considered a staunch supporter and promoter of democracy. However, some ethnic minorities, including Chinese and Native Americans, had suffered a lot from discrimination and had to fight for equal rights with white Americans. Despite all the oppression, they did not abandon their country during World War II and significantly contributed to the victory making the government and society see the need for collaboration.
The major contribution of Chinese Americans to WWII was their active enlisting in the US army. According to Takaki (2020), their zealous support destroyed Japanese propaganda, which portrayed Chinese Americans as victims, and made China side with the US. Despite the dire conditions many of them lived in and white Americans’ discrimination against them, they used the war as the opportunity to prove themselves as loyal patriots.
As for the Navajo tribe, they also had reasons for being hostile towards white Americans. However, they agreed to fight as allies to protect their country and people. Their main contribution was participation in coded interaction: Americans utilized Navajo’s native language as a base for it (Takaki, 2020). Thus, a minor language, which once was forbidden and was considered inferior, became a valuable instrument of victory.
It amazes me how much Chinese and Navajo Americans had suffered from discrimination, yet they fought together with white Americans for their country when the external enemy appeared. Moreover, the use of Navajo’s native language during the war is truly inspirational, as it turned the US cultural diversity into a weapon. We should not forget about this valuable experience and support minor languages and cultural traditions.
It is frustrating that immigrants or citizens with non-white ancestry had to prove their value before white Americans accepted them as equals. Unfortunately, the emergence of such movements as Black Lives Matter shows that some non-white ethnic groups still face discrimination (Garret, 2018). Therefore, new immigrants often suffer from ethnic intolerance like their predecessors did, as their languages and cultural values are considered inferior, or they do not get the same vocational and educational opportunities.
To sum up, Chinese and Navajo Americans have greatly contributed to protecting their country during WWII and proved their loyalty. Despite discrimination and oppression they had experienced from white Americans, they offered help and demonstrated the power of collaboration. The use of the native Navajo language also showed the significance of cultural diversity. These historical events gave us valuable lessons, which we should not forget.