Circumstances and Encountered Issues
In the case study presented, the overall setting surrounding the Asian Health Services (AHS) corporation appears to put additional pressure on the enterprise’s executives. AHS is a prosperous organization that was able to process over 117,000 patient visits in 2014 and possessed seven sites in addition to three owned properties (Chung & Chin, 2015). However, with the introduction of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), the situation changed drastically, creating both advantages and disadvantages for AHS. Although ACA increased patient supply, the medical organization encountered a significant challenge when introducing the new uninsured clients into the system and beginning their treatment (Chung & Chin, 2015). Furthermore, under the introduced act, the quality of care had to be improved tremendously, and the pay for performance framework had to be implemented (Chung & Chin, 2015). In the long term, these challenges were overcome by establishing an electronic medical records system, focusing on patient support, and adding new services.
Nonetheless, several issues remained to be addressed despite the successful changes. Currently, the organization needs to enhance its efforts in providing better care for its employees. As such, the customer services department requires more multilingual staff for efficient communication, while the chief medical officer argues that physicians and other providers need additional incentives (Chung & Chin, 2015). The medical and dental clinics were also suggested for expansion, given the increased numbers of patients (Chung & Chin, 2015). Therefore, crucial decisions are to be made if AHS is to improve its current outputs and resolve the emerging complications.
Asian Health Services: Mission, Vision, and Value Statements
To properly understand the enterprise’s mission, vision, and values, it is imperative to consider how the involved entities define the key terms ingrained into these concepts. From the industry’s perspective, medical services’ provision and quality should be based both on the necessity to cater to the needy populations and the desire to create a care delivery system for the future (Dumitraşcu & Feleagă, 2019). However, from the point of view of the organization, medical services and their quality must adhere to the patients’ needs while simultaneously maintaining financial balance and continuing organizational development (Dumitraşcu & Feleagă, 2019). Therefore, these understandings of the key terms clarify that medical services play various roles for the industry and the organization, and they must fulfill such requirements.
Asian Health Services Interpretations and the Surrounding Circumstances
Although formulating an appropriate mission, vision, and values statements is a necessary step for any organization, the exact interpretation of these notions is especially significant for overcoming the occurring problems. The executives should be knowledgeable of the surrounding circumstances and be able to create a strategic plan that adheres to the mentioned concepts. The understanding of the mission, vision, and values can impact the external setting by defining the company’s area of activity and clarifying which obstacles must be faced to achieve the desired goals (Gulati et al., 2016). For instance, AHS’ mission statement is to provide the demanded medical services to immigrants and refugees in the Asian community. In the 1980s, the organization had to adopt a cultural approach in order to balance the Asian American “no health problems” stereotype and ensure the provision of care to individuals from this minority (Chung & Chin, 2015). Had the mission statement not included the aid to Asian populations, the surrounding circumstances would not have been centered on the Asian community.
Similarly, the vision and values interpretations also directly impact the organization’s external environment. While the vision for the future dictates how the enterprise will evolve and perform its activities, the values define which endeavors will be conducted and what ramifications will emerge as a result (Gulati et al., 2016). In the described case, AHS’ vision is to offer high-quality services while maintaining business affluence, which is evident in the practices undertaken by AHS. As a non-profit organization, AHS aims to maintain an exceptional quality of care and cater to various populations that need medical assistance (Chung & Chin, 2015). However, this vision determines the need to adopt the strategy to raise the needed amount of financial funds.
Chung, K., and Chin, W. N. (2015). Asian Health Services: Rediscovering a Blue Ocean [PDF]. Web.
Dumitraşcu, M., & Feleagă, L. (2019). Mission, vision, and values of organizations, the catalysts of corporate social responsibility. Audit Financiar , 17 (153), 142–148. Web.
Gulati, R., Mikhail, O., Morgan, R. O., & Sittig, D. F. (2016). Vision statement quality and organizational performance in U.S. hospitals. Journal of Healthcare Management , 61 (5), 335–350.