The healthcare problem discussed in this assignment is diabetes mellitus, which is increasingly becoming the leading cause of disability across the world. The disease manifests itself through hyperglycemia, and it is categorized into type 1 and type 2. Type 2 diabetes is the most prevalent and it consists of close to 90% of all infections. The causes of this disease are varied, including gestation, drugs, and lifestyles. Its complications affect all body organs, leading to lethal implications. The population to be studied in this assignment majorly comprises older people with diabetes type 2 in a setting with nurse-led management.
The presence of this problem is substantiated by diverse information and data from different researchers. Macido (2019) found that Diabetes mellitus is among the leading medical concerns in the United states and the world at large. The researchers used data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, where more than 12% of older people in the US live with the condition (Macido, 2019). Additionally, a significant number of the population remain undiagnosed with diabetes mellitus. According to the American Diabetes Association (ADA) (n. d.), the issue remains the seventh cause of death and morbidity, and there are more than one million newly reported cases per year. Therefore, diabetes is chronic illness that currently strains healthcare and stakeholders.
The research is relevant because there is a need to improve population/patient knowledge and adherence to management strategies. Furthermore, the study will inform caregivers on better patient approaches beyond the clinical setting. Nikitara et al. (2019) states that most patients develop complications due to poor knowledge of self-management and adherence to treatment courses. At the same time, uncontrolled diabetes mellitus is likely to increase hospitalizations and emergency visits in healthcare facilities. Thus, this research is relevant to inform on various aspects that could lead to shorter lengths of stay in a hospital and improved wellness outcomes after discharge.
Various literature reveals that the prevalence of diabetes is rising. The number of people infected with the disease is expected to reach close to 350 million by 2030 (Macido, 2019). The most notable demographic transition is the rising number of patients older than 60 years. Nikitara et al. (2019) found that nurses should check for further clinical manifestations of the disease. They include a cool feeling, moist skin, add higher than normal blood sugar levels. The nurse can use automatically generated procedures to manage the disease but intravenous administration of medication could be necessary when treating lethargic patients. In case of extreme hyperglycemia, the caregivers should report to the physician, who will, perhaps, transfer them to intensive care units and follow the appropriate treatment procedures such as intravenous insulin administration, or other fluids. Data reliability would depend on its currency, relevance, authority, accuracy and purpose. It would be unreliable of it misses the importance research needs, apart from being outdated and having incorrect and untrue information.
There are many barriers hindering the implementation of evidence-based practice in addressing diabetes mellitus. Limited time allotted for primary care appointments with healthcare providers hinders the implementation of evidence-based remedies (Macido, 2019). Additionally, poor patient-provider communication affects the quality of information gather to inform treatment plans. Lower patient educational levels also hinder their ability to understand their health and management protocols. Poverty is an obstacle because it places patients at a higher risk of complications. Nurses also struggle to cope with the changing treatment targets due to limited resources, compromising the quality of care. Similarly, some of them lack confidence in their understanding of guidelines and abilities in particular tasks. They might also fail to share responsibility with clients, and therefore not support behavior change. Nikitara et al. (2019) found that responsibilities have changed between physicians, and secondary and primary caregivers, creating uncertainty on the appropriate clinical responsibility. This failure creates frustration among them because it affects patient adherence to treatment.
Nursing standards and policies are effective in improving the health outcomes of a patient and the overall population. They emphasize care that is shared and nurse-led to achieve the desired health results. Nursing standards focus on autonomy, which helps patients manage the disease for lifelong bases. They emphasize day-to-care management to be individually-oriented and include skin care, dietary changes, physical activity and rest, self-monitoring, consulting healthcare professionals, and adherence to medication (AADE, 2017). They have brought changes that allow them to prescribe medicine. This step improves health outcomes, apart from reducing outpatient attendance and unnecessary referrals. Nurses set policies as advanced caregivers to be involved in conducting physical examinations and provide the best practice patient treatment.