The modern culture of food consumption is very diverse, and there are many recommendations and prohibitions from different social groups. Sometimes food intake becomes part of a large-scale and widespread subculture, distinguished by a particular worldview. One of the most essential regulators of eating meat was religion. Now religion is not able to control most of the society and their food addictions. Sometimes the refusal to eat meat is due to some medical factors, for example, a previous surgery. Meat is heavy food, and it is vital to cook it the right way, using steam, and not fat and oil. Modern society provides a variety of reasons for grass-eaters to stick to their position. The noticeable difference between grass-eaters and meat-eaters is in the diet and sometimes in the way of life. In addition, these people have different medical conditions and often have different medical histories and risks.
Grass-eaters do not eat meat, no matter how it is cooked. Sometimes they consume dairy products or eggs, especially if they understand that their bodies will weaken without animal fats. The severity of the herb-eater’s diet can vary based on health, lifestyle, age. Some grass-eaters fit their dietary habits into their lifestyle and eventually give up wearing leather and silk clothing. It is a strict option in which the grass-eater must adhere to a clear ideology (de Boer et al., 2017). In turn, if meat eaters have bans on consuming specific meat (Muslims do not eat pork for religious reasons), then the prohibitions are due to personal reasons and choice. Taste, associations, unpleasant smell of a particular type of meat can affect the refusal to eat. Sometimes, meat-eaters refuse to wear leather clothing for ethical or aesthetic reasons. They are guided by the principle that brand, fashion, and aesthetics in clothing are not sufficient grounds for killing and experimenting with animals.
Many people are confronted with the myth that the health of grass-eaters is better than the health of meat-eaters. The herb-eaters’ diet forces them to be attentive to their bodies and often visit doctors. For this reason, they may appear to be the healthiest, but this is not true. Like many conscious people, grass-eaters try to be attentive to themselves. Many herb-eaters additionally purchase nutritional supplements and vitamins, and they need medical advice to make the right choice. Meat-eaters are not attentive to their health; they neglect vitamins and rarely go to the doctor without listening to their body.
The average grass-eater usually has less fat and cholesterol than the meat-eater. It allows doctors to say that people on such a diet have a lower risk of heart diseases, such as coronary artery disease or hypertension. Grass eaters are generally less likely to develop type II diabetes (de Boer et al., 2017). However, this is not strictly related to eating or avoiding meat. Cooking habits play an essential role, and sometimes food for herb-eaters is prepared in a very unhealthy way. Meat eaters can eat any meat, but avoid oil, deep fat, and a lot of hot spices. So they will maintain their body mass index and protect the body from irritants and overload. For both the meat-eating and grass-eating diets, it is recommended not to overeat.
The first and noticeable difference between meat-eaters and grass eaters is the daily diet in which the latter lack animal meat and animal fat. Grass eaters also do not eat eggs and animal milk, replacing it with coconut or almond milk. This is the case for people with lactose intolerance who do not adhere to such a diet. Sometimes grass-eaters refuse to wear clothes made of leather, but this requires a rejection of meat in the diet and a formed view of meat consumption, an ideology. The diet of grass-eaters requires medical attention, so they add vitamins to their diet, having received recommendations from the clinic. It is usually not done by meat-eaters, neglecting food additives. Statistically, the average grass-eater has less cholesterol, lowering the risk of certain diseases. Their body mass index is usually lower than that of meat-eaters.