In order to understand the structure and functions of society, it is essential to study a vast number of sociological theories and perspectives created by various scientists. For example, Emile Durkheim, a French sociologist, expressed his view of society in the theory of functionalism. According to Durkheim, there is vital interconnectivity of all the elements of any society that share common ideas and principles, and the sum of these elements is not as great as the society itself. The sociologist viewed society as a huge biological organism that requires all its parts to function properly in order to remain alive. Further, when discussing collective and individual behavior, Durkheim stated that these two concepts are entirely different, and there is the collective conscience that makes people adapt their actions and act in predictable ways. The concept of collective conscience is beneficial and positive as it defines and evaluates the norms of behavior.
Nevertheless, not all sociologists share the same view on society. For example, there is also a conflict theory developed by Karl Marx. Unlike functionalism, conflict theory views society as a system with an ongoing class conflict, primarily between the proletariats and the bourgeoisie. The main cause of this conflict is the lack of resources and their unequal distribution, while its effects are connected with the necessary changes happening in society. Further, while functionalism focuses on collectivism, social integration, and the necessity of acting in similar and predictable ways, Karl Marx emphasizes individualism and promotes alienation that isolates a person from society. Finally, while Durkheim insisted on the ability of collective consciousness to hold people together and unite them into society, conflict theory tried to eliminate false consciousness and replace it with class one.
It is evident that functionalism and conflict theory contradict each other. They are different in almost all ideas and concepts, including the primary structure of society. The main purpose of functionalism is to promote stability and make all elements of society function properly to avoid errors. At the same time, the key goal of conflict theory is to emphasize change because, without it, society cannot exist. Therefore, it is completely or almost impossible to see how these theories may complement each other.