“Edges of the Rainbow” was created by Michael Delsol and Haruku Shinozaki in 2017. It is a collection of photographs and personal stories of LGBT+Q community representatives from different parts of Japan. Michael Delsos is a French photographer who depicts the people connected with art creation, and his pictures are published in magazines and newspapers. He also participates in the exhibits where Delsol presents his work separately or with other photographers. Haruku Shinozaki is a journalist, and he explores the marginal communities and minorities in Japan, particularly LGBTQ+ community members. This book applies to a specific audience, such as social activists, representatives of minority groups, demographic researchers, and those who are interested to learn more about the experience of the marginal communities in Japan.
The purpose of the work is to tell the audience about the experience of minorities in one of the most conformist and traditional countries in the world. The title of the book means the two different sides of the LGBTQ+ culture in Japan, implying that, on the one hand, it is a general topic that appears in books, shows, anime, the Japanese cartoons (Delsol & Shinozaki, 2017). On the other hand, underneath it, there is a certain amount of prejudice and conservatism, which is clearly depicted by the name “Edges of the Rainbow.”
The confessions of the people whose stories are told on the pages of the book are intriguing and fascinating since, eventually, the person of different professions and class belonging can represent the LGBTQ+ community. Delsol and Shinozaki (2017) mention an Episcopal priest that from a very young age, was very religious and decided to hold services for the LGBTQ+ parishioners so they would have a safe space where they could embrace their spirituality. Another example is an initiative called akta that works to provide sexual education for people and spread awareness about HIV/AIDS prevention (Delsol, Shinozaki 2017). They also have literature and other informational resources on the LGBTQ+ topic and welcome queer people that seek help or assistance in any personal situation.
People of different sexualities and genders are much more diverse than it demonstrates the typical stereotypes. One of the main thoughts of Delsol and Shinozaki (2017) is that society has the image of an LGBTQ+ person as someone extravagant in bright clothes and unusual appearance, but mostly they are regular people. This can be a priest from the local church, a school teacher, or a bus driver – they are all different, and each has unique history and personality. The aim of the book is to show the world the life of LGBTQ+ people and their way of self-representation in places where society is considered to be traditional or conservative towards the subject.
The work dedicated to the difficulties of the life of minorities in a country with a strong traditional culture is a real protest. The lives of ordinary people captured in it with their difficulties teach us to be more tolerant of others because severe pain can be hidden behind a smiling mask. Although the inner strength of the stories told, “Edges of the Rainbow” cannot teach us what to do to improve the situation of these people in a global sense. “Edges of the Rainbow” fits into the ASAN 201 concept as it also helps to understand Asian culture through a multidisciplinary approach, depicting the social side of the question. Despite the provocative theme, the authors describe life with honor and dignity, as it should be in Japanese culture. According to Delsol and Shinozaki (2017), the book lifts the veil of the world, which was previously not customary talked about. One thing is clear: this work has made a significant contribution to efforts to improve a lot of minorities and talk about a topic that has long been taboo in Japanese society.