Technology can be utilized in diverse ways to facilitate collaboration, co-teaching, and recordkeeping between special and general education teachers. Such tools as audiobooks, the alternative mouse, and speech-to-text features can be implemented to provide a better understanding of the given material by students with disabilities. For example, children with bad eyesight or retina stratification, who may be considered disabled, should be provided with audiobooks or transcripts of the lecture instead of making notes. This feature could be supported in recordkeeping through the creation of informative versions of apps for people with bad eyesight. Additionally, collaboration and co-teaching require a profound examination of students’ cases; therefore, the personalization of tasks and the division into working groups based on certain criteria can be implemented.
Moreover, co-teaching and collaboration require sharing of personal student data; hence, ethical and legal norms should be taken into consideration. For example, collaborating teachers should not share students’ personal data or utilize this information for their own sake. In this case, both special and general education teachers should operate on only the relevant information. One of the strategies of ensuring confidentiality is the division of data into relevant and irrelevant topics based on the topic of co-teaching and collaboration. Only the information that can be utilized for finding a personal approach to the students should be shared and discussed among collaborating teachers.
In my future practice, I would like to implement the Station teaching theory where stations are set up and both teachers teach at a station and provide instruction to students. Such a strategy allows students to gain access to the teachers’ help easier, involves asking for help, and provides students with the opportunity of obtaining different explanations. This cooperation strategy helps both teachers establish a successful study plan, collect relevant resources for students, and individualize the educated material according to the needs of their students. For example, in the case of teenagers with a strong retina stratification, cooperating teachers could find a better solution for the enhancement of motivation and productivity in such students. Young adults with eyesight problems might be given special material (video or audio recorded or developed in a better online version) provided by their tutors.