Ackerman Institute for the Family (2021). Beverly Greene. Web.
This article presents the biography of psychologist Beverly Greene, which is a scientific understanding of the life story of her personality. The text is aimed at finding and identifying the origins of a woman’s socially significant activity in her individual biographical experience. The prerequisite for the creation of this biography was the recognition of the importance of personality for Beverly Greene for psychology both nationally and globally. In this biography, the events of a woman’s life are documentary material, and they are presented from the factographic side. The plot of the biography, identified and formed by the Ackerman Institute for the Family in the life of the heroine, consists of dynamics, personality development and its patterns. The genre affiliation of this publication is defined as a popular science biography. This work is addressed to a special audience and meets the requirements of verifiability and consistency.
The degree of the author’s presence in the biography, and the amount of transformation of life events are insignificant. Interpretation of life events and logical analysis are carried out without moral evaluation, there is no emotional coloring. Since authors are objective, and there is no biased interpretation of the life events of Beverly Greene, the source can be called accurate and valid. It has documentary and scientific features, devoid of stylistic picturesqueness or imagery. The authors of the biography do not bring their life experience and values to the study in any way. The text of the biography is organized through a consistent description of verified and repeatedly verified facts. A special scientific concept is summed up under the description of events; this biography is a scientific study. The narrative about the personality of Beverly Greene is built on verifiable facts.
This source was very useful, as it allows the reader to get a fairly clear idea of the origin and scientific path of Beverly Greene, which are necessary to understand the context of the psychologist’s views. After presenting this work, the reader can get an idea of how the scientist’s life path influenced the formation of her new scientific theories. By reading this article, it can be also tracked which events in the life of Beverly Greene preceded the making of discoveries in the field of psychology and the emergence of new ideas in her. Due to the information presented by the authors, it is possible to observe in what conditions the information accumulated by different scientific disciplines formed into a single picture. Ensuring productive interdisciplinary interaction of history and psychology helped in solving the difficult problem of identifying the concept of the flow of scientific knowledge in Beverly Greene.
Rubin, L. (2022). Beverly Greene on Race, Racism and Psychotherapy . Psychology. Web.
This article deals with the peculiarities of the psychotherapeutic work of people suffering from racism. The reader is presented with an interview with Beverly Greene, who raises the problem of racism and considers it from the perspective of psychotherapy. The focus of the professional activity of the psychologist includes clients who have suffered from racial discrimination. Beverly Greene gives a detailed answer to the question of how racial stereotypes, prejudice, discrimination affect psychological health. The psychologist also refers to the situation with George Floyd as an example illustrating the actual problem of modernity. Beverly Greene emphasizes that the signs of nationality should act as an incentive for a psychologist to show increased attention and alertness to the presence of injuries associated with the experience of discrimination.
The main advantage of this publication is its objectivity which in this case does not mean the mathematical accuracy of the transmission of the scientific position expressed by Beverly Greene. Rather, it is the coverage of the conversation with her, excluding emotions and separating facts from opinions. Such objectivity is associated with the structure of writing a text in a form of an inverted pyramid, when facts are arranged according to their importance from top to bottom. Objectivity, the accuracy and validity of the source in this case is considered as an accurate coverage of the psychologist’s opinion in the form of an impartial description. There is practically no analytical coverage of the scientific concept of Beverly Greene in the article, which excludes the possibility of biased interpretation of her ideas. The interviewer asking the scientist questions is unbiased and has a good knowledge of the subject of the conversation, as a result of which the source fully correspond to the position of Beverly Greene.
The advantages of this source are that an interview is chosen as a form of research; it allows the information to be as useful as possible. The reader can see not only the specific view of the Beverly Greene person on the specifics of working with patients affected by racism. It is also possible to assess the level of her education and culture, calculate the angles of her worldview and identify her high competence in psychology. If there is a lack of understanding of what the respondent is talking about, the interviewer asks her clarifying questions, so that everything said is definitely presented in an accessible form for the reader.