Ford Motor Company presents a clear and concise business strategy that consists of four key elements. In particular, the company strives to improve people’s lives, strengthen the bonds between communities, and make our planet healthier ( Ford , “Our Purpose”). Therefore, it is important to hire employees who will be committed to these elements of corporate strategy. Aligning their talent with the company’s strategy would demand clear communication; as such, an HR specialist must recruit capable people and build an atmosphere of trust and cooperation among them. In addition, the employees must be motivated — in this regard, it would be necessary to maintain high job satisfaction rates through friendliness, fairness, and adequate pay for their work.
These tasks are accomplished on multiple levels within the typical HR Department. For instance, the U.S. Bureau of Labor and Statistics offers two variants of the HR Department job positions: Human Resources specialist and Human Resources manager. The HR specialist screens candidates conduct interviews and introduce new employees to their professional roles ( U.S. Bureau of Labor and Statistics , “Human Resources Specialists”). The HR manager operates on a strategic level by planning, coordinating, and directing recruitment efforts for the whole organization ( U.S. Bureau of Labor and Statistics , “Human Resources Managers”). Consequently, the HR manager is usually required to have several years of experience in a related occupation and receives considerably higher pay. Given these facts, I would prefer the position of an HR manager since it offers better pay and implies significant influence over matters critical for the company’s future. However, a realistic assumption tells me that one has to work for at least several years as an HR specialist to acquire the skills and competencies necessary for an HR manager.
Regarding Ford, Human Resource Management (HRM) can be used to enhance the competitive advantage associated with diversity and inclusion. Most importantly, diversity will bring no good if the objectives and goals are not set. Therefore, Ford should provide all employees with an explanation of the benefits that diversity brings to them and the company. Furthermore, it would be useful to eliminate any remaining non-merit-based status differences between the demographic groups in the organization as possible (Guillaume et al.). According to the One Ford truth of Ford’s corporate culture, all company employees should rely on, respect, and care for each other ( Ford , “One Ford”). Therefore, removing the existing status differences would bolster unity among the employees and strengthen their loyalty to the company.
Finally, it is possible to highlight specific ways of increasing Ford’s workplace diversity levels. Workplace diversity provides a valuable competitive advantage in the modern globalized economy, as it helps synergize employees’ skills and competencies (Tamunomiebi and John-Eke 263). In this regard, Ford might benefit from the three solutions in HR management. Firstly, the company can encourage HR managers and specialists to prioritize hiring candidates from different genders and ethnic backgrounds if their level of competence meets the job requirements. Secondly, the company can facilitate the work of internal employee groups, organizations, and communities that represent various population groups. This measure will help evoke a sense of belonging among the employees, which is essential for talent retention. Lastly, Ford can extend support to currently unemployed specialists to incentivize their re-entry into the workforce. This move will let the company show that age or gap in employment is not a world-ending obstacle. As a result, Ford will be able to obtain the valuable professional knowledge of new employees and stay true to the declared principles of diversity and inclusion.