Generalization of the results identifies the most significant features for a group of objects or phenomena that determine their most critical qualitative characteristics. In experimental practice, generalization usually concerns four main points of the research process (Žukauskas et al., 2018): the situation, the answers, the personality of the subject, and the dependencies between these components. Generalization of the problem involves transferring the results to a broader range of circumstances. Generalizing responses means summarizing various reactions under one common category that unites them (Žukauskas et al., 2018). It is necessary to prove that the differences in the form of specific answers are insignificant, are private, and do not affect the final result and the relationship between cause and effect.
Generalization at the level of personalities is the recognition of the representativeness of the sample, that is, the correspondence of the responses of this contingent of subjects in this type of situation to a wider set of people. The connection between variables can be established at different levels of generalization (Žukauskas et al., 2018). As the spectrum of relationships expands, it becomes possible to compare variables by an increasing number of indicators. The generalized form of communication also becomes an explanatory factor concerning particular types of behavior.
Research is a type of cognitive activity of a person, a system of logically consistent methodological, methodological organizational and technical procedures that allow obtaining reliable data about the object, phenomenon, or process being studied. Scientific research is the process of acquiring new scientific knowledge, the content of which is the processes of study, experiment, conceptualization, and verification of theoretical ideas (Žukauskas et al., 2018). There are two levels of scientific expertise: empirical and theoretical, and the corresponding methods – empirical and theoretical research.