Every individual in a family has a diverse character depending on the generation they find themselves hailing from; as a result, such personnel is fueled towards achieving different ambitions and desires. In this context, characters have portrayed disproportionate aspirations. For instance, in Lorraine Hansberry’s play Raisin in the Sun , the concept is shown via the manifestation of generational parity and its influence on the Youngers family’s characters. Furthermore, in a society or family aspect, people often have unique personalities based on the generation from which they come or are raised; consequently, the particular person is motivated to accomplish a variety of goals and aspirations.
Selflessness is a virtue that is critical towards ensuring the bond within a family is maintained, while greed has separated many families. As demonstrated in the play Raisin in the Sun , Mama worries about the entire family’s future. Therefore, she asserts that she will purchase a better house for the family away from the slums upon receiving the insurance payout. Moreover, Mama feels like men today; Walter, an example, is lazy and does not want to toil to earn wealth; instead, they want it easy; she further aspires for Walter to work hard as other men she saw in the past generation.
I come from five generations of people who were slaves and sharecroppers – but ain’t nobody in my family never let nobody pay ’em no money that was a way of telling us we wasn’t fit to walk the earth (p. 89).
Evidently, the above quote illustrates that African American forefathers were independent in the past and did not accept gifts they did not rightfully earn. Mama appeals to Walter not to take Mr. Lindner’s money, a notion which Walter is pondering. She argues that hardly any of her forefathers acknowledged payoffs intended to suggest that they were unfit to exist on the earth a few centuries ago. Mama again emphasizes to Walter that he hails from a proud legacy of consciousness and identity despite the world’s attempts to diminish him as an individual due to his poverty.
Today, most men dream of being rich and successful by engaging in business activities. As seen from the play Raisin in the Sun, Walters’s idea, like most men of his age, dreams of being successful business owners, and thence he wants the compensation money to start a liquor store. He has demonstrated that he desires to become extremely wealthy by running a liquor store and using it to support his family. He asserts that money is the foundation of a family; life would face extinction without it. Walter is a depiction of the recurring power of money’s influence in today’s society. He is also an example of young African Americans viewed in the play as lesser and worthless throughout the historical past. Since ancient times, their sole interest in society has been liberty upon its fulfillment, their desires shift towards success.
Education has influenced individuals to acquire desirable characters as some literate African America who acquired formal education were enlightened towards the current issues around the world. In the play Raisin in the Sun, Beneatha Younger’s trait is portrayed more contrasted as compared to her other family members. Her educative background played a fundamental role in influencing her ambitions. Her ambitions are to further her education and fulfill her dreams of becoming a doctor.
Walter: Who the hell told you you had to be a doctor? If you so crazy ’bout messing ’round with sick people – then go be a nurse like other women – or just get married and be quiet…
Beneatha: Well – you finally got it said…It took you three years but you finally got it (p. 38).
From the preceding quote, it is evident that Beneatha aspires to be a doctor, a concept which Walter belittles. He does not believe women can be doctors; he perceives them as fit only in supportive roles. Therefore, Walter feels he is entitled to the insurance payment so that he can accomplish his dream of being a renowned businessman, whereas Beneatha, who also needs the same money to further her education, can be get married or be a nurse like other women.
In today’s culture, cases of unwarranted abortion are rampant as compared to the preceding cultures. The play Raisin in the Sun has demonstrated this fact as highlighted in Ruth’s predicaments. She aspires to keep her pregnancy a secret as she is sympathetic to the family’s financial constraints and struggle. Regrettably, she plans on aborting the child as she feels the baby will be more of a liability to the family, but after contemplating, she decides to keep the pregnancy. Ruth is an example of an unselfish woman who puts other individuals’ needs before hers. Albeit, she is further the opposite of today’s women who lacks patience and compassion, she endures the hurdles she faces in her marriage with Walter.
Giving back to society has always been an aspiration for many young learners studying abroad, as evident in Lorraine Hansberry’s play Raisin in the Sun . Asagai hopes to return to Nigeria, bring his knowledge from abroad, and share it with the citizens living in his hometown to better their lives. Likewise, he has confidence in transferring the technological developments he learned in the West to Africa so as to better the continent’s living standards. He is positive about his ambition while being cognizant of the obstacles ahead. Asagai also proposes to Beneatha as he always aspires to marry her. Asagai assures he will educate and guide the people while Beneatha study’s medicine and assist in the care of others. She seems reluctant to accept Asagai’s offer, but she will eventually accept.
Racial segregation dates back to ancient times, and it has encroached on most neighborhoods to date. Segregation has impacted harmonious coexistence in society; as a result, it is few and between to see a black man living in an all-white neighborhood. As seen from the play, Karl Lindner, a white man representing Clybourne Park, has his character as a racist influenced by the fact that he is a white representative of the neighboring Clybourne Park.
It is a matter of the people of Clybourne Park believing, rightly or wrongly, as I say, that for the happiness of all concerned that our Negro families are happier when they live in their own communities (p. 553).
From the above quote, Lindner aspires not to see the Youngers in an all-white neighborhood since they are blacks; hence he feels they are inferior to live within Clybourne Park. Therefore, he confronts the Youngers in their home and tries to cajole them towards moving to the neighborhood where most white people reside. However, the Youngers overlook his idea and instead move to the neighborhood despite no guarantees of being happy ever after.
The racial disparity has been a menace to tackle since time immemorial. The latter has been rooted deep down the hearts of individuals; hence eradicating it has been a hard nut to crack. In the play Raisin in the Sun, the generational difference has ensured the likes of Mrs. Johnson detest the black people. Hansberry’s play exploits the Mrs. Johnson persona in order to foreshadow and ring the bell on impending danger awaiting the Youngers. When they move, they will be the first blacks to live in the white neighborhood, Clybourne Park. Mrs. Johnson is rude and unpleasant, asking indelicate, too intrusive inquiries. At one point, she virtually declares that she is prayerful that the Youngers’ new home would be attacked. Even though her warnings are about the very serious risk to the Youngers, her tone is so insulting that she looks almost laughable.
In general, Lorraine Hansberry’s Raisin in the Sun vividly depicted how generational distinctive can influence individuals to seize notable traits to fuel achieving their ambitions today. In as much as some of them may be too overambitious and difficult to achieve. The play has depicted the diverse traits regarding different generations as per the Younger’s family. For instance, Mama is preservative of her culture, which drives her to be independent and believes in hard work to achieve possession. On the other hand, Walter believes he should be a prominent businessman as he is droved by the success of his fellow men. Beneatha, since she is educated, dreams of being a doctor upon completion of her study, something which is difficult due to financial constraints. A racial generation has also manifested the play as it can be seen that whites did not like the blacks in their neighborhood. Lastly, Asagai aspires to return to Nigeria and transform his hometown with the new ideas he learned in school.