The Bhagavad Gita is an ancient Indian scripture that consists of 700 verses and is part of the larger epic Mahabharata. This book is one of the central holy scriptures of Hinduism and dates from the second half of the first millennium BC. e. The plot of the Gita unfolds within the framework of a conversation between Arjuna, the prince of the Pandavas, and Krishna, his guide, charioteer, and the supreme God incarnate. Krishna prompts Arjuna’s behavior patterns and helps to solve some moral expectations. The latter is connected with the need for the Pandavas to fight against the Kauravas. This paper aims to reflect on the Bhagavad Gita , one of the most outstanding books of the Indian epic.
Arjuna exhibits characteristic traits, such as self-confidence, arrogance, pride. Arjuna demonstrates outstanding martial skills and is one of the best warriors. Krishna is the personification of the Supreme God and his traits include wisdom, humility, knowledge, and benevolence. The two characters have a close relationship: “Then, Madhava (Krishna) and the son of Pandu (Arjuna), stationed in their magnificent chariot with white horses yoked to it, loudly blew their divine conchs” (“Bhagavad Gita,” 2021, p. 13). Other characters are the Kaurava king Dhritarashtra and his adviser Sanjaya, secondary characters.
The purpose of the author of the epic was to tell about the battle of Kurukshetra, where two Indian armies gathered to fight until the final victory. Arjuna asks Krishna to drive up to the center of the battlefield and finds those who will participate and those who want war – his relatives, friends, and teachers. Arjuna feels betrayed as he doesn’t want to fight and kill them. Full of doubt, he drops his bow and asks his charioteer Krishna many questions about the reasons for the war, the possibility of renouncing the battle, the correctness of his action, and ethical dilemmas.
Thus, the reflection on the Bhagavad Gita, one of the most outstanding books of the Indian epic, was provided. The book is relevant, as it reveals eternal themes – morality, justice, a sense of duty, a feeling of love for one’s neighbor. The philosophical dialogue between Arjuna and Krishna touches on the most challenging ethical topics that apply to both war and peace. The characters discuss identity crisis, the purpose of life, the human self, and human temperament.