Elon Musk is one of the smartest and wealthiest people on the planet. The engineer is considered the genius of the modern world. Musk achieved everything himself through hard work. Despite a difficult childhood, he stubbornly went forward and reached great heights. The primary mission of the Mask is to help humanity and improve all areas of life. His main virtues are his desire to work and create something new, listening to criticism, not being afraid of risks, and achieving great goals other people would not understand.
Elon Musk faced many difficulties on the way to his current status, but this did not stop him. He started working at an early age, and at the age of 12, he created his first video game. Currently, the engineer works about 80 hours a week and follows the development of his two companies, which is admirable. Musk believes that working harder than others is the most critical key to success because life is short, and a person must do everything possible for a successful existence (Fernholz 16). He maintains that the ability to work should be so high as to achieve what some take years to complete in months. However, Musk says that not everything depends on performance (Higgins 35). The most important is the organization of hard work to achieve results. Musk works hard and does things that are different from many others. He believes that his competition in the market is less this way, and his constant work pays off better (Higgins 35). The engineer focuses on creating innovative technologies with a small number of these products. Additionally, his ability to work depends on his passion for his work. If a person hates his job, he will never achieve high results and will quickly give up. Elon Musk entered the engineering industry with innovations initially not accepted by society (Musk 57). As a result, he almost went bankrupt but could avoid it through hard work. Thus, he listened to the criticism, understood his risks, and successfully coped with them.
Despite earning money from his first projects, Elon Musk wanted more recognition for his technologies. In this regard, he was not afraid to take risks and sell his first companies for the sake of the new SpaceX and Tesla, which subsequently entered the world market. However, Musk’s ideas were initially on the verge of collapse, and he understood his risk when entering the market with new products. His ability to take responsibility even in such difficult moments is admirable. Elon Musk did not give up because of the initial failure of the company and put all his savings into the cause. It was a significant risk, as the entrepreneur did not know if his investment would pay off. However, at the same time, he advises taking on such responsibility at a younger age, when a person does not have to feed his family. At an older age, risk should be calculated more carefully, and savings should be left in case of failure. This approach causes respect for a person and highlights positive qualities in him. Additionally, Elon Musk’s risks were justified because he constantly asked for criticism, which he listened to carefully. Even though many people, including entrepreneurs, want to hear praise, Musk chose a different way to reap the benefits. In his opinion, criticism helps a person see his weaknesses and develop them. The complaint can be why a person stops believing in himself; nevertheless, Elon Musk could process a negative assessment into a catalyst for new ideas and tasks. He asked friends and investors not about positive experiences with his products but the negative feedback (Muegge and Reid 9). In addition, Musk clarified all the feedback from his customers, which helped him improve the business. Thus, he always thinks about big goals, consisting of small feedback.
Elon Musk’s ambitions are extraordinarily high and admirable. His desire to colonize Mars is not only a dream, but he is working hard toward it. His plans include the first human landing on Mars within ten years. Even though many people ridicule him for ambitions that they cannot achieve, Musk continues his work. Even if his company fails to achieve this goal, it will progress more than similar organizations with smaller goals. Elon Musk believes that the more time a person has and the smaller his plan, the weaker progress he will achieve. This approach is admirable since the engineer does not buy time and justify his inaction. Thus, Musk continues to work, ignoring ridicule from the outside. At the same time, he always treats negative statements with respect and does not enter into controversy. As a result, Elon Musk achieved big goals, allowing him to become one of the wealthiest and most successful.
Musk is admired for the many positive traits he brings to his work. First of all, he works hard despite the difficulties he faces. He constantly creates something new to improve humankind’s life and contributes considerably to technical innovation. He is thriving and famous since he always steadfastly accepts criticism and listens to every negative review. Moreover, he takes responsibility for his actions and understands that every risk can lead to the collapse of both companies. One of their main features of Musk is a global goal, which he seeks to achieve by all available means.