The correctional and prison system of the US is a hot topic for discussion in modern times. Being one of the most common topics for political manipulation and populist claims, the criminal justice system has become heavily ineffective. According to Harvard Political Review, the US has a shocking 76.6% of prisoners who returned to prison within five years (Benecchi, 2021). This essay aims to show the alternative way of dealing with the correctional system proposed by Brandon Matthews. This concept requires the split between two different tracks of punishment and rehabilitation with the goal of breaking the false link between these two processes.
The true nature of the modern American prison system is that it takes its roots in the tradition of punishment. From the ancient Code of Hammurabi to the harsh ways of the death penalty in the 19th century, there was an evolution of practice that the response to violations of law should be strict (TEDx Talks, 2017). As a result, the idea of punishment has become the core aspect of the US correctional system (Carter, n.d.). Brandon Matthews argues that to change the existing state of affairs, there is a need to draw the line between punishment and rehabilitation (TEDx Talks, 2017). In a true sense, punishment requiring a “strict prison environment” should be directed towards criminals who committed serious crimes and used high levels of violence (TEDx Talks, 2017, 5:30). In contrast, people responsible for non-violent crimes should follow the rehabilitation track (TEDx Talks, 2017). Notably, only with the break from the punishment nature of modern prisons can it be effective.
However, such prison philosophy can cause criticism and opposition from the relatively high proportion of people, especially those who work in the correctional system. Brandon Matthews told the story when he spoke with a correctional staff member about the practice of rehabilitation, she responded that “they [prisoners] are inmates, not patients” (TEDx Talks, 2017, 9:59). It is evident that combining punishment and rehabilitation in one place does not work correctly. The work with inmates of serious misconduct requires a distinctive type of morality, while the practice in rehabilitation centers demands less strict relationships. In reality, prisoners are true patients whose criminality should be cured before they reenter the communities.
In my opinion, the model described by Brandon Matthews is truly legitimate and effective. There is no reason to punish inmates who committed nonviolent crimes with prisons’ strict and demoralizing atmosphere. The primary concern is how this reform will go through the legislature. Evidently, this reform will face the criticism of conservative politicians, who are biased toward any kind of offenders. What is more, the negative attitude toward any prisoners among Americans is also widespread. For example, it is clearly seen how Internet users severely criticize the prison conditions of Anders Breivik, the cruel terrorist who killed 77 people. He has relatively comfortable living conditions in a Norwegian prison, the quality of which may be better than someone’s in the US. Thus, there is a need to change some people’s perceptions about the prisoners and publicly insist on the high value of the rehabilitation process.
To sum up, professionals should address an apparent problem of the ineffectiveness of the modern American prison system. The high recidivism rate bothers all Americans, so new and new ideas about the radical reforms mushroom. Brandon Matthews presented the model of drawing the definite line between punishment and rehabilitation. These two ways of the correctional system’s operation should be independent. By distinguishing rehabilitation, the professionals will have the ability to change prisoners’ morality and prepare them for everyday life after the release from prison.
Benecchi, L. (2021). Recidivism imprisons American progress. Harvard Political Review. Web.
Carter, D. (n.d.). Incapacitation. Open Oregon Educational Resources. Web.
TEDx Talks. (2017). The surprising reason our correctional system doesn’t work | Brandon W. Mathews | TEDxMileHigh [Video]. YouTube. Web.