In the video, an actual six-level Hong Kong Air Cargo terminal is described. This technologically advanced building meets the needs of clients and management departments. Due to its $1 billion logistics facilities and computer-driven automation, the terminal works great and brings a number of benefits, including security, speed, and flexibility. Handling equipment, advanced automation, and IT development promote the development of customer-focused services. For example, no physical (human) intervention is possible through the implementation of the pack tools box storage system (BSS). There are about 3,500 storage positions at the highest level, and cargos are administrated with the frames of computer-generated plans.
One of the main elements of high-tech methods to sort, track, and control shipments at Hong Kong Air Cargo is the absence of direct human activities and total automation endorsement. According to Elias (2018), enhanced targeting depends on how well automated systems are implemented to measure potential threats to security. Unit and pallet handling must also be improved to reduce the participation of people (go to the container directly from the tarmac). The “sushi-bar” style for conveyors allow holding about 10,000 storage positions for clients’ consignments.
Japanese air freight industry continues developing and setting high standards in the sphere of management. Today, the country’s terminals are directed to support the population’s growth and establish positive trends in marketing and managing (Bhattacharya, 2018). If I were a manager in the air cargo industry, I would use the Hong Kong system as one of the best examples to be followed. First, it is necessary to use computer-controlled conveyors to reduce the human impact on shipment activities. Second, the implementation of mapping systems cannot be ignored because they enhance security and flexibility. Finally, the idea of pack tool BSS is a good chance to support total security in the cargo system.