The primary objective of the presentation is to explain the hardships the Israelites had to pass through after they fled from Egypt and the harsh conditions they had to make through. The presentation also pertains to the way of living of the Israelites during the Exodus. There is no undeniable archeological proof to verify the story of the Exodus. Some intellectuals date the Exodus around 1260 BC during the leadership of Ramesses II (1290-12130). Some suggest an earlier date, around 1440BC, under the reign of Thutmosis III (1490-1436). The kingdom period is between 1550-1069, according to Egyptian history. The red sea had two arms–the Gulf of Suez (nearEgypt, Suez canal today) and the Gulf of Aqaba (North-Eastern arm pointing towards the Dead Sea). Israelites left Egypt for Canaan to the North part of the Red sea
Exodus is the freeing of the people of Israel from slavery in Egypt in the 13 th -century AD under the leadership of Moses. It dictates the living delivery of the Israelites by their God, Yahweh. This is the Journey that the Israelites had to take before reaching the Promised Land, Canaan. It also defines the memories of the Israel community and the hardship they experienced in Egypt. The route the Israelites were instructed to take passed through a wilderness where there was no water, no growing food, and was inhabited by hostile tribes. Water was accessed through the wells at particular points. Sometimes, they had to request water directly from their God via Moses conducting miracles; thus, in this context, water was sacred. Agriculture is a sector that was not given so much concern during the journey as the climate could not support crops; they were provided with manna by their God.
During the departure, the Israelites camped at the foot of Mount Sinai. The Bible dictates that it is on the top of this mountain that Moses met with God and was given the tablet of the Ten Commandments. On this very location, the Israelites had lost faith in God, were punished, after which they entered into a new covenant with God, and offered new guidelines to follow as they continued with the journey. According to the Book of Exodus and the Book of Kings, this mountain is regarded as the mountain of Yahweh. Mount Sinai is also named Mount Hareb. Horeb means glowing heat, which refers to the sun, while the Sinai is derived from the name sin, the Sumerian deity of the moon. Sinai would be the mountains of the sun and the moon sequentially. Christian tradition contemplates Mount Horeb adjacent to Saint Catherine’s Monastery.
Moses wandered in the wilderness leading the children of Israelites for forty years. This is a distance that can be covered in eleven days. Spending forty years in the wilderness was a punishment that God gave the Israelites due to their unwillingness to take over the land of Canaan. The Israelites took at least two months to travel from Egypt to Mount Sinai, where Moses was offered the Ten Commandments, approximately 8940 km. Mount Sinai is 509 kilometers away from Canaan, the Israelites destination or Promised Land. This journey was also disrupted by the hostile communities the Israelites had to conquer as they proceeded to Canaan. This journey was to act as a reminder to the Israelites and as a way of re-establishing a connection between them and God through dependence.