Biracial people have many advantages that open many opportunities for the non-standard perception of the world. In this case, the reader is confronted with the story of a girl who has problems with the perception of her own identity. There are problems associated with the fact that the girl cannot detect her belonging to a particular group, which causes anxiety about the impossibility of having friends. This essay reveals various features of biracial people that allow them to feel their identity better. This is an opportunity to combine different cultural characteristics, which manifests itself in confidence and a decrease in the feeling of belonging to one particular group.
Multi-racial persons can have better self-esteem than mono-racial people if they are nurtured to identify with both parents and comprehend their diverse racial ancestry. An important feature here is that biracial people do not depend on the stereotypes that society imposes on other people. An example here is a situation where a person may face uncertainty or fear of failure since others may judge him as a stupid or uneducated person based on their race. That is why being a biracial person is less influenced by someone else’s opinion. The girl needs to realize her main feature, which allows her to adopt the qualities and characteristics of different cultures. In addition, another important characteristic that allows people to develop their own confidence better is a more excellent range of interests and hobbies (Weaver, 2020). This allows biracial people to strengthen their self-confidence since they are also independent of stereotypical ideas. In this case, they open up many opportunities related to professions or other things that could be perceived negatively by society in a normal situation.
The fact that multi-racial persons might inherit a more extensive range of characteristics is significant. Mixed-race offspring are more likely to inherit a variety of physical traits from both parents, allowing them to defy preconceptions. They can be brown-eyed blondes, fair-skinned tiny brunettes with various eye colors, or fair-skinned petite brunettes with various eye colors. There are many physical combinations for mixed-race children, especially when their parents do not look similar (Weaver, 2020). In reality, there have been reported occurrences of mixed-race twins that appear to be significantly different from one another, such as one who is fair-skinned while the other is brown-skinned. The girl needs to understand that various qualities do not limit her from belonging to a particular group, but the set opens up more opportunities. In this case, the feeling of dissimilarity should not become an obstacle, but on the contrary, it should be an advantage for the girl.
The sensation of vulnerability that comes with feeling like a person is just a part of a small minority in society is fading. Mixed-race persons are tired of constantly defending their identification and are more secure in asserting their own identity rather than accepting whatever society assigns them. Mixed-race persons have seldom opposed this imposition because they have historically been conditioned by the necessity to live in cultures controlled by single racial groupings (Weaver, 2020). Instead, people have merely conformed to whatever identity designations others have assigned to them or have arisen from previous interracial confrontations. On the other hand, the girl must recognize that the opportunity to establish her own identity is a significant duty.
Thus, summing up, it should be noted that biracial have unique characteristics that allow them to perceive the surrounding reality in a different way. This is manifested in overcoming the framework of stereotypical judgments and reducing the level of dependence on one racial group. All this also makes it possible to increase confidence and strengthen interactions with representatives of different, heterogeneous cultures. Thus, the girl from this case needs to learn to be aware of her own special identity.