A cardiac angiography entails the determination of any form of blockage in blood vessels. The procedure is done by injecting contrast dyes through a catheter, followed by the visualization of the flow of the pigment through blood vessels (SCOT-Heart Investigators, 2018). Any impediment to the movement of the dye is an indication of blockage of blood vessels and restricted blood flow to the heart.
The doctor ordered this test because the patient complained of chest pains when climbing up the stairs. Chest pain is a common problem for people with heart disease even though other organs could contribute to this discomfort. However, the patient’s weight and lifestyle (smoking, sedentary lifestyle, and consumption of fatty and sweet foods) predispose him to heart disease. Mr. Perkins’ diagnosis is angina pectoris, which is chest pain attributed to the inadequate flow of blood to cardiac muscles. The organ system that is mainly affected by Mr. Perkins’ condition is the cardiovascular system, which includes the heart and blood vessels. However,
Cardiovascular disease impairs the transport of blood to and from the lungs, which ultimately affects the respiratory system. Other organs that may be damaged by poor blood flow are the kidney and brain. Insulin resistance may also develop due to being overweight. The doctor ordered an angiography to find out whether the patient’s blood vessels were blocked and contributing to the chest pain. Mr. Perkins’ blood work might show high levels of cholesterol, triglycerides, low-density lipoproteins, and glucose as well as low levels of high-density lipoproteins.
Suggested treatment plans for Mr. Perkins include pharmacological interventions such as statins, beta-blockers, angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs), nitroglycerin, aspirin, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, and calcium channel blockers. In contrast, non-pharmacological interventions for the patient include engaging in at least one hour of moderate-intensity exercise for three to five days a week, cutting down on the consumption of fried and sugary foods, eating plenty of fruits and vegetables, as well as reducing his intake of salt. Mr. Perkins should also stop smoking cigarettes to reduce the risk of additional heart problems.
Shilipa is suffering from a bleeding disorder. Antibiotics have inhibitory outcomes on hemostasis and the coagulation of blood. This phenomenon is common following the use of broad-spectrum antibiotics such as second and third-generation cephalosporins in addition to semisynthetic penicillin. These medications mimic the action of warfarin on the blood clotting mechanism. They also augment the functioning of warfarin, which prevents the clotting of blood by blocking the formation of blood clotting factors by the liver using vitamin K. As a result, blood fails to coagulate and clot. This occurrence could be a dangerous problem because it can lead to excessive loss of blood through internal or external bleeding. Patients who are using warfarin to manage other blood clotting disorders should be cautious when taking these antibiotics.
Several lab tests can be recommended to the patient. A complete blood count (CBC) can be done to measures any changes in the number of red blood cells, platelets, and white blood cells. Changes in the level of platelets could indicate a blood clotting problem. A bleeding time test establishes the speed of blood clot formation to preclude bleeding. This test assesses the functioning of platelets. In contrast, a platelet aggregation test evaluates the clumping of platelets to form a blood clot.