Two Uses of ICT at Home
ICT has a variety of utilities, and it has proved relevant in the home environment. In the home environment, it is used for social media access. Currently, people can communicate and interact with others in the comfort of their homes. Another good use of social media is when it is used for business. ICT now enables people to order goods via e-commerce platforms, and these products are delivered to their home addresses. Similarly, people can also run their online businesses from their homes while paying their bills.
Key Skills needed to use ICT
The main E-Mail management skills relevant to ICT include word processing, e-mail management, electronic media presentation, website design, database management, web navigation, spreadsheets, and camera usage skills.
Three differences between a smartphone and a tablet
The first difference is that tablets have relatively larger screens than smartphones. Secondly, smartphones are more portable than tablets because of their smaller size, which makes them easier to carry. Thirdly, the tablet is designed to offer more entertainment perks. For instance, they have larger screens to provide better capabilities for watching movies and playing mobile games.
Five ways to improve the format of word-processed academic reports/essays
The first consideration is choosing the word processor that one is most comfortable using to ensure that the written content will be presented is of superior quality. The second thing is to clearly understand what to write after a session of brainstorming relevant ideas. All ideas should be presented formally, as it is a requirement in academic writing. Thirdly, it is imperative to understand how to utilize the preferred word processor effectively to present work that follows all the instructions of academic writing, including good grammar, punctuation, font size, and line and paragraph spacing, among others. The fourth way to improve the format of word-processed academic reports is to use the correct vocabulary and to ensure all words are used correctly.
There are useful features that are availed by word processors, such as the synonym option, which can help people to use numerous variations of words. The translate feature is also relevant to help users understand the proper meaning of words. The fifth way to improve the format of academic content on word processors is to use online tools to make requisite corrections on writing and ensure that all written content is grammatically correct.
Three health problems caused by computers and how to avoid them
One of the prevalent health issues caused by computers is eye intricacies. Computers tend to emit light that tends to affect their users. Therefore, computer users should control the amount of light their computer screens emit to ensure it does not affect their optical health. Extended usage of computers has caused headaches among a significant number of computer users. The only way to prevent consistent headaches associated with computer usage is to limit the time people use computers. The third health problem caused by computer use is a pain in the back, shoulders, and neck. The remedy for this issue is for people to own proper furniture that will help to maintain the right posture when working on their computers (Barnat, 2018).
Characters that passwords should have to make them more secure
One of the fundamental things to be assertive about when creating passwords is to avoid predictable alphanumeric strings that people can easily guess. For example, some prevalent passwords are date of birth and digits like 1234 or 1111. Therefore, it is important to make sure that passwords have many characters as they tend to reduce the probability for malicious people to hack passwords and gain unauthorized access (Jančis, 2022). On that note, the optimal solution is combining uppercase letters with lowercase letters and using numbers and punctuation characters. For instance, a password such as “abyss” would be made more secure by adding extra characters to make it “The_Abyss001!”
Someone in your class says they have forgotten their password to access their university account. Why should you not let them use your credentials?
It would be irrational to give such individual personal credentials because computer systems are strategically designed with security systems that enable users to change their passwords if they forget them. Therefore, this should be the solution for people who lose their passwords as opposed to borrowing these credentials. Secondly, it is a common rule of thumb in cyber security to ensure access credentials are only limited to the account user. Shared accounts are perilous because it makes it difficult to know who the responsible party is when malicious people access the account.
Four sectors of society where computers are highly used
One of the sectors in that computers have proved most useful is the banking sector, which enables people to deposit and access their money ubiquitously. Another sector is the field of telecommunication, where people can communicate even when they are located thousands of miles away from each other. The medical field has also embraced computers through sophisticated systems that collect, store and analyze patient information. Government institutions also use computer systems to store information and to keep it safe and confidential. The corporate world also has a massive application of computer systems to carry out various tasks.
The advantages and disadvantages of using zoom
The advantage of using zoom is its ability to accommodate many people, as it can handle up to 500 people (Simon, 2021). Secondly, people can be in different locations to have a successful zoom meeting. It also has a friendly user interface that is easy for people to use efficiently. Unfortunately, the success of the zoom teleconferencing platform is its reliance on internet access, which cannot be useful if someone happens to be in a place with a poor network. As much as the free plan is still useful, it has its limitations compared to the premium version.
Main considerations in PowerPoint presentation
The first consideration is to ensure that one uses a consistent number of words, such as five or six words for each sentence for a total of five or six sentences, respectively. One should also use notes to ensure that presentations pass the required information fully. It is also salient to ensure that presentation slides are minimalistic to focus on the content the audience should understand.
One should be assertive in choosing colors and fonts that are easy to read. While animations make presentations more interesting, they should be used sparingly so they do not distract the audience. It is important to use interesting fonts to make the presentation visually smooth. The layout should also be systematic to emphasize the points considered more important for the audience to capture.