The Caribbean history includes the ruthless colonization by Western countries like Spain. Upon colonization, the area was home to native groups such as the Ciboney or Guanahuatebey, Taino Arawak, and Carib. The colonizers brought a bunch of enslaved Africans who would work in their homes and plantations. The Whites were the minority and foreigners in the Caribbean but brutally seized and ruled against the Blacks majority. However, the Blacks maintained their identity and self-expression through various cultural activities evident to date.
The Caribbean is the home for many musical genres expressing human freedom and revolution. Reggae is associated with the Caribbean people, and it is the unofficial soundtrack of many Caribbean vacations. Reggae musicians such as Bob Marley and the Wailers produced revolutionary and redemptions songs protesting against the White brutal rule in the Caribbean. Therefore, through Reggae, the Caribbean people expressed their anger against the ruthless White control.
The majority African population in the Caribbean identified themselves with their cuisines and customs, including religious beliefs. The enslaved people maintained their African culinary art and cherished their cuisines. For instance, the Callaloo, the Caribbean vegetable soup, is one of the national dishes in Tobago and Trinidad. Furthermore, carnivores and parades are serious business in the area. The Caribbean parades manifest the area’s folklores and customs of African origin. The Caribbean people commemorate events in history like slavery through carnivals. The distinct African heritage in the Caribbean helped in identifying the Blacks.
The Caribbean was colonized by the whites, who were the minority of the area’s population. The colonizers brought Africans who worked in their homes and plantations under the fierce rule. However, the enslaved people and the Blacks in the area expressed and identified themselves through music and distinct African heritage. Reggae songs helped the Blacks protest against the pitiless white rule, and events such as the parades and carnivals commemorated slavery. Furthermore, African cuisines such as Callaloo identified Africanism in the Caribbean. Despite the brutal rule by the White minority, the Blacks in the Caribbean expressed and identified themselves through songs and events that are evident to date.