Summary
Type 2 diabetes mellitus is defined as one of the most dangerous chronic diseases in contemporary societies. It poses a significant challenge to manage for individuals, not because of a lack of treatment options but rather a population issue. Because families and patients typically accomplish managing diabetes, self-management is chosen as the best method to perform diabetes care. Nonetheless, a large number of individuals have a problem self-managing their care, necessitating new intervention measures to address the issue (Carpenter et al., 2019). Therefore, it is crucial to discern how interventions influence self-management actions for individuals with Type 2 diabetes. It is essential to consider that diabetes mellitus poses a problem for self-management because of the expenses involved in acquiring medication. These expenses pose a problem for the patient’s well-being as they have to work longer and experience illnesses such as fatigue, anxiety, and depression.
Self-management is the practice of dynamically conducting self-care actions while intending to boost an individual’s well-being and behavior. It includes measures such as planned physical activity, taking diabetes medication, meal planning, managing illness episodes, monitoring blood glucose, and determining high or low blood glucose (Carpenter et al., 2019). Treatment plans involving self-management are continually advanced in tandem with the consultation of various healthcare professionals such as pharmacists, dieticians, nurses, and doctors.
An individual should maintain a regulated glycemic control using the tenets of self-management to reduce the possibility of complications related to diabetes. Nonetheless, diabetic self-management and strict glycemic controls are distinct and could be confounded by concerns connected to treatment plan adherence (Carpenter et al., 2019). The majority of diabetes research indicates that many patients do not conduct proper self-management routines. Lack of commitment to a strict self-management process is known to derail patient progress and inhibit adequate handling of diabetes.
The Necessity to Address the Problem
Diabetes Mellitus poses a significant danger due to the limited awareness of every party involved. This qualitatively influences the care and treatment care effectiveness. If a patient poorly manages their health, their diabetes may adversely affect them more than their current state. The study is also critical as it illustrates the medical system’s absence of proper communication channels. It also defines the issue of limited time as individuals should access medicine within a particular time, barring which they face physical problems (Carpenter et al., 2019). These people may lack access to medical treatments due to faulty medical coverage or poverty. The disease also poses a problem for many individuals across the world because of the limited capacity for individuals to gain medication. Such issues impede the development of a good course of therapy when compounded, necessitating effective government, medical and patient intervention to prevent the proliferation of diabetes mellitus around the world.
Relevance of the Problem to Nursing and the Patients
Type 2 diabetes of a unique condition that is growing in prevalence; for instance, about 12% of Americans, accounting for 24 million individuals, have the illness (Konchak et al., 2016). Nurses are the primary healthcare professionals that offer care to these patients. Lack of proper self-care prevents people from knowing they need to have a special diet, come up with an exercise routine, have drug therapy, self-monitor their blood glucose levels, and monitor the psychosocial impact. Joint decision-making is also another significant component of self-management. Patients should develop a program with their nurses and families to prevent the illness from progressing and monitor it.