In the modern world, despite the development of various technologies and medicine, people are still at risk of contracting many different dangerous diseases. One of these was salmonella, which is caused by a bacterium and can be quite dangerous for the population. The study of scientific literature on this topic is of particular value as it can help prevent the occurrence of cases of the disease. In this case study, two articles were analyzed for usefulness for further research.
Typhoid fever becomes the most common ailment when faced with salmonella bacteria. However, at the moment, it has been replaced by other diseases, such as salmonella typhimurium and salmonella enteritidis. One of the characteristics of a dangerous cell is a high degree of stability and viable when treated with average temperatures. Moreover, the risk is also that multiplying on products, salmonella bacteria do not affect their appearance and taste in any way.
Two articles “Multistate outbreak of salmonella infections linked to raw Turkey Products” and “Salmonella outbreak linked to onions” were chosen because they can become helpful resources for conducting scientific work on the study of salmonella cases in the Caribbean. This is due to the fact that in the last few years there has been an outbreak of diseases associated with the salmonella bacterium, which affects not only the population, but also tourists.
The aspect that interested me was the consideration of the issue of the occurrence of pathogenic cells in a product such as onions. Moreover, this source briefly and clearly describes possible symptoms using words from a useful dictionary for my work, such as diarrhea, fever and abdominal pain (“Salmonella outbreak linked to onions”, 2020). In addition, for the final project, this article can be valuable, as it provides solutions that businesses and the public can take when faced with a problem and to avoid it further. The source also provides statistical data that will help give the future project more credibility.
The second source also looks at the salmonella outbreak and how it was investigated. It provides information about what the disease is and the causes of its occurrence. More specifically, the scientific article provides information about how multiple patients complained about the harmful effects of various turkey products (“Multistate outbreak of salmonella infections linked to raw Turkey Products”, 2019 ) . After analyzing the products, it was concluded that there was a general industrial infection.
This source is also specifically valuable for collecting information and analyzing it in a future project. Therefore, it notes that all measures taken by States and manufacturers should be aimed at all parts of the supply chain. In addition, attention should be paid to sources on farms. An important aspect in the presentation activity is the establishment of public health organizations that will contribute to raising consumer awareness about food safety.
The first mention of the disease that I remember is through the media. At first, it seemed that salmonella is a very dangerous and deadly bacterium. However, after I read “Salmonella Outbreak Linked to Onions” I learned that with proper preventive measures, occurrence of serious symptoms can be avoided. Moreover, after reading the article “Multistate outbreak of salmonella infections linked to raw Turkey Products”, it also became clear that with the help of a detailed investigation of the causes of the disease under study, it is possible to significantly reduce the risks to the population.