I sat at my desk, racking my brain to find who could have possibly discovered the truth behind the death of Phillip Mercer, the heir to one of the most powerful petroleum companies in the world. The job was done without a scrap of evidence, I made sure of that much. It simply made no sense, every living soul that knew I killed Mercer were the very ones that orchestrated it. I may not know who this mysterious person is but I do know that I will answer their question with a bullet to the brain.
It was nearly 3:00 AM when I heard muffled footsteps down the hallway. I reached for the silenced 9MM pistol in my bag, aiming for the only entrance to my corner office. The doorknob began to turn as I steadied my aim. Sweat was trickling down my spine, my heart pounding as if I were about to come face to face with the devil himself. The second it took for the door to open felt like an eternity, but I would have rather endured that second of agonizing torment for the rest of my life then to meet the eyes of Phillip Mercer when the door opened.
His face was covered in scar tissue, leaving it almost unrecognizable. It was the eyes that were the giveaway. The look in his eyes was the same as the night I thought I killed him. There was a look of superiority in them, as if to let me know I would never be capable of surpassing him in any way.
"There is no way, you should be dead!" were the only words I was capable of mustering.
"For all intensive purposes I still am, thanks to you" he replied with an odd sense of calm in his voice. "Will you at least give me the courtesy of an answer now that I am here? God knows I have been to the depths of hell and back in these last 5 years so surely you can give me that. I will answer any questions you have after."
I told him the story of how I was approached by a man who worked for the most powerful energy corporation in the world.
The bullet lodged itself in the cheek region of my skull after hitting the side of my jaw.
"You can't possibly think you could take down Prism single handed!"
"I won't have to do it alone because your going to help me." He said with his eyes glimmering with more determination than superiority. It was the kind of look that was impossible to refuse.