Infertility is one of the most common problems these days, and it means that a person does not have a chance to get pregnant for several health issues. Many couples in the United States may face this problem, and the causes can vary from congenital diseases to acquired physical or psychological trauma. This body condition does not always affect only females but also males can suffer from this issue. Genetics has a strong influence on infertility, and it may be connected to people of all ages and nationalities. Around 18% of women in the United States between the age of 21 and 52 stated that they had faced infertility in their lives (Mancuso et al., 2020). I believe that environment plays a significant role in this issue. People should be more cautious about their health to predict health problems that may cause the inability to become pregnant or impregnate a partner.
Older males and females are more likely to get infertility, and hormones play an important role.
The percentage of male infertility is not high.
The percentage of females suffering from infertility is higher, and it is usually related to diseases that cannot be treated. When women become diagnosed with several health issues which do not allow them from becoming pregnant, doctors rarely have a chance to restore the ability to procreate (Barbieri, 2019). Nevertheless, a female’s mentality is under a lot of pressure due to sentimentality, which is specific to this gender, and this factor may cause psychological problems which cause infertility. Abortion might also become the reason for the inability to become pregnant. While the procedure is at the late stages of pregnancy, doctors might not restore the functions that allow women to become pregnant again.
Infertility remains the main problem that is not under full control. In some cases, it may become impossible to give a person a chance to continue becoming pregnant or impregnate their partner. However, sometimes it is possible to solve the problem by using medicines, surgical procedures, and In vitro fertilization (Repping, 2019). Moreover, a psychotherapist can help deal with psychological problems that are barriers to conceiving a child. Every case is unique, and only doctors can decide if any treatment would be useful or not.