The whole field of astrophysics and astronomy, in general, is quite perplexing. The rich history and significant discoveries made by well-known scientists paved the way for the technological revolutions of the 20th and 21st centuries. However, these distinct discoveries would not have been made without equipment. In the beginning, he indicates that the telescope was used against the enemies as a terrestrial instrument. The article The telescope in the seventeenth century written by Albert Van Helden, sheds light on the device and its significant importance in the history of astronomy. In this article, the author made several strong arguments. I agree that the telescope can be the conduit of information for astronomers, and with its help, they can gather new data and make new discoveries. However, with the advancement and multiple improvements to the lense, the writer indicates that the telescope started to be applied to magnify objects (Van Helden 1974). According to Van Helden, it was the telescope that made the difference in science, and it is the main reason why astronomers encouraged the telescope-makers to work on lenses (Van Helden 1974). Nevertheless, I disagree that it is the only source of achieving such significant results in the astronomy. Consequently, as has been mentioned by Van Helden, different methods of encouragement of telescope makers were used. There are also other sciences that contribute to the development of engineering. For example, physics and chemistry focus on the appliance of knowledge about forces, pressure, and chemicals and their combination. The most recent developments might include the development of new technologies like phones or modern motors for vehicles. Specific developments might be prohibited if they jeopardize the health or lives of people. Moreover, while the advancements have been so big, there are no fields of engineering which are prohibited. Hence, the development of telescopes and the improvement of the lenses gave an impetus to the advances in astronomy. The activity of engineering is, therefore, controlled by special laws. While the telescope was first used as a terrestrial tool, it soon became astronomers’ tool. With the help of telescope-makers and developments of lenses, it was possible to make discoveries. However, other kinds of sciences, such as physics and chemistry, contribute to the technological advancements of our time. While there are no strong prohibitions of engineering, it is unlawful to jeopardize the health or lives of people.