Children with normal eyesight and intelligence can be affected by Dyslexia. Coaching or a specialized educational intervention may help most children with Dyslexia to perform better in school. Learning difficulties are one of the consequences of Dyslexia. A youngster with Dyslexia will have difficulty keeping up with their classmates in most classrooms since reading is such a fundamental ability in so many areas. In the absence of treatment, Dyslexia may lead to poor self-esteem, behavioral issues such as anxiety or anger, as well as detachment from peers and teachers, and parents. It may lead to long-term issues in adulthood if Dyslexia is not diagnosed and addressed throughout the childhood. The chances of children succeeding in life are reduced if they cannot learn to read and comprehend. According to the author, attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder may make it more difficult to cure Dyslexia. Children with Dyslexia are more likely to experience learning challenges if their siblings and parents suffer from the same condition. People of all ages are affected by the disorder, and men are more likely to suffer from it than females. Children born with dyslexia struggle with reading, understanding, and spelling. The article expands my topic understanding in several ways. Dyslexic children are great empaths and many people with Dyslexia have a real personality. The writing and reading difficulties might help children empathize with those struggling. The article’s strength is that it has discussed the causes and effects of Dyslexia with the right age bracket consideration, that is, from age 4 to 10. The article’s weakness is that it generalized the genders without being specific; again, it only mentioned that Dyslexia is more often experienced in male children compared to females without explaining the reasons. Concerning race, there is a sparse number of research papers regarding Dyslexia among black children and its consequences. Dyslexia mainly affects white children than black children, and thus the article addresses white children widely. I will use this article to create a public health education proposal to prevent the public from viewing Dyslexia as a curse.