Britain's largest mortgage lender, the Halifax Building Society, said Friday its planned initial public offering in June could be worth as much as 12 billion pounds ($20 billion). Unveiling a price range and details of share allocations to the society's members, Halifax Chief Executive Mike Blackburn said it "will represent the largest single extension of private share ownership ever witnessed in the UK." If the IPO had taken place on December 16, the share price would have been between 490 and 450 pence. This equals a market worth of between 10.4 billion ($17.5 billion) and 12 billion pounds ($20.1 billion), and analysts expect the final outcome to be at the top end of this range given the recent positive performance of the most comparable stock in the market, former mortgage banker Abbey National Plc. "The valuation of 12 billion (pounds) is right in line with our expectations," said Peter Toeman, banking analyst at ABN AMRO Hoare Govett. Friday's figures looked a little conservative, but other analysts think the price on flotation day will be higher. The Halifax said each qualifying member will receive a basic allocation of 200 shares in a flotation of 2.675 billion shares. There are over 6 million investing members and over 2 million borrowing members. The Society is sending out a total of around 8.0 million voting packs. Investing members will also get a variable share allocation depending on how much money they had in their accounts on particular dates. This will range from 200 shares to a maximum of 1,181 for those with 50,000 pounds ($84,430) or more. If less than half of the investing members vote in favor, the proposal will fail. The society has started a huge advertising campaign to encourage members to vote. Abbey's position as Britain's fifth-largest publicly-owned bank is likely to be threatened by the fact that the Halifax is expected to be in the top 20 companies by market value. It said it sees room for huge expansion in the British insurance and long-term savings sectors.