MCI Communications Corp. said Monday it reached a 10-year deal with NextWave Telecom Inc. that thrusts MCI into the top tier of U.S. wireless communications providers. MCI will be able to offer personal communications services to more than 100 million people in 63 areas, including 29 of the top 50 markets, under the terms of the deal. MCI will buy 10 billion minutes of capacity from NextWave over the next 10 years. The terms of the deal were not disclosed. Personal communications services represent the new generation of celluar communications services, allowing customers to send both voice and data transmissions over wireless telephones. The deal will help underpin the financial future of debt-laden NextWave, which was the largest bidder in the U.S. Federal Communications Commission's auctions for "C-band" wireless radio spectrum held in early July. NextWave, based in San Diego and New York, also plans to sell stock to the public. MCI will be able to expand quickly into the rapidly growing market for wireless personal communications services. Two years ago, MCI dropped out of the auctions for U.S. PCS licences after the bidding became too rich for its taste. But with the NextWave pact and previous smaller deals, MCI has moved to become a major reseller of wireless services. As part of the deal, NextWave selected MCI to provide telecommunications and other services supporting the development and ongoing operations of its personal communications services system, MCI said. "This agreement with NextWave establishes an immediate nationwide PCS footprint for MCI and represents an important next step in MCI's wireless strategy," said Whitey Bluestein, vice president for MCI wireless strategy and development. "This is the first full interconnection agreement of its kind and brings new competition to the wireless marketplace," he said, noting that with full interconnection, MCI does not need to own its own wireless facilities. MCI said the NextWave agreement is a model for additional agreements it expects to sign with other wireless providers as part of its wireless interconnected network strategy. The strategy is MCI's blueprint for developing a full range of wireless services and features that will be integrated into MCI's existing communications services. "This was MCI's strategy all along," said Jeffrey Kagan, an Atlanta-based telecommunications industry analyst. MCI has historically preferred to resell its services rather than invest in its own infrastructure. Over time, the company selectively builds its own infrastructure as it proves profitable to do so. "Reselling service was how they became a heavy hitter in long distance in the first place," Kagan said. "What their plan is, is to resell service from other providers and build networks where they see the need to do so," he said. MCI's deal with NextWave marks the rapid realization of its reseller strategy. "This all of a sudden puts MCI on the wireless communications map in a big way." He noted that AT&T's AT&T Wireless unit is twice as large as MCI's cellular business, with about 6.5 million subscribers in geographic regions. MCI's deal with NextWave covers about 110 million potential customers living in a mix of metropolitan and less-densely populated areas. MCI's stock traded at $25.25 a share Monday, down 25 cents, on Nasdaq.