The conditions in which people live, learn, work, play, worship, and age are the social determinants of health. People's health status can be affected by the social environment in which they live. Health outcomes are not determined solely by biological factors or access to quality health care (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, n.d.). The health of a population can be improved by resources that improve the quality of life. Examples of these resources include safe and affordable housing, access to education, public safety, availability of healthy food, local emergency services, and an environment free of life-threatening toxins (Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, n.d.). I also support the recent shift in the view that it is solely up to the individual to influence their health in favor of recognizing the significant impact of external influences on it. The modern world is not dependent on one person. He can choose what to eat, whether to exercise, and whether to seek medical care in a timely manner. In fact, most of the choices that affect health are made by the marketing machine, the government, and life circumstances. For example, modern advertising presses from all sides, forcing one to choose specific products that are often not conducive to a healthy lifestyle. The need to work hard to earn money for these products pushes people to sacrifice a healthy sleep schedule and exercise. The chain has many links, but the result is the same: people's health is not up to them. External factors also indirectly affect health, such as health inequalities. When I read the CDC (2022) report on these inequalities, I was most surprised by the racial and ethnic inequalities. In an era of globalization and liberalization of society, a phenomenon like racism must be eradicated. The field of health care is one in which treating people equally is sometimes vital. That is why I believe that racial and ethnic discrimination in this area must be eradicated in the first place.