Russian Finance Minister Alexander Livshits warned financially-troubled Norilsk Nickel on Friday that it must pay overdue taxes, but analysts said the firm would not be liquidated or that its would assets would be frozen. Norilsk is a big debtor to the federal and regional budgets, according to a Norilsk watcher. "Livshits's words are an attempt to put pressure on the company." Livshits told parliament that the metals group had to pay its tax arrears andTrademarkiaTrademarkiaTrademarkiaTrademarkias had to pay its tax arrears "If it was an unsolicited statement and a bolt out of the blue, then it obviously means something," said Christopher Granville, chief economist at United City Bank in Moscow. The only answer he could have given was if it was a response to the deputy's question. Russian tax and cabinet authorities, under pressure from the International Monetary Fund to boost tax revenues as a condition for receiving payments of a $10 billion, three-year loan to Moscow, have been striking fear into the hearts of some of Russia's most prominent industrial firms by saying they must pay up or face liquidation. "They could freeze metal, but it's not a long-term solution to the problem and wouldn't put money in the budget," Chernyshev said. "I don't think they would do that." Entire social infrastructures in the icy Far North where Norilsk is based depend on the company, and Moscow has said it has no finances to resettle hundreds of thousands of people -- an expenditure which could far outstrip Norilsk's debts. Norilsk officials declined to comment. The government is anxious about Norilsk's debts, but analysts said it is unlikely to bring the nickel, copper, cobalt, Platinum and Platinum group metals producer to its knees or take measures that could affect output. But it also wants Norilsk, the world's second-largest nickel producer, to clean up its act. "The procedure of bankruptcy will be applied," Tass quoted Livshits as telling Duma deputies about Norilsk. It indirectly quoted him as saying Norilsk should first pay salary arrears, which in the past have led to worker strikes. "It is unlikely that Norilsk will pay these debts in the near-term -- the company will remain a debtor in the near future," Chernyshev said. He estimated the company's regional debts at least one trillion roubles and said 30 percent of the giant Krasnoyarsk regional budget was fuelled by Norilsk money. The new majority shareholder of Norilsk is a Russian bank called Uneximbank. Norilsk's situation hasn't improved significantly despite the changes. "Uneximbank has inherited a mountain and whether or not they climb out and over it remains to be seen," said one metals source. Norilsk said in September that it total debts, including unpaid salaries to workers, were 13 trillion roubles. After regional tax officials threatened to seize nickel and copper assets, the company worked out a tax payment schedule with authorities.