Britain's Serious Fraud Office has yet to contact London-based securities houses after a request for help with a French probe into Eurotunnel SA /Plc share dealings, market sources said on Monday. The SFO said on Sunday it had been asked to lend a hand in an investigation by the French authorities into alleged market manipulation of the debt-laden channel tunnel operator's shares. The SFO said that it would help in the French probe, but that it had no grounds to investigate the dealings which form the basis of the latest Paris investigation. According to securities firms contacted by the news agency, they had not received an approach from the SFO. They all said they would co-operate fully if they were approached. The investigation is another chapter in a troubled corporate story littered with incidents, which earlier this year saw two firms -- Salomon Brothers and Swiss Bank Corp (SBC) -- cleared of insider trading. The two had been among underwriters of a Eurotunnel rights issue in 1994 and, although never named by Paris stock exchange watchdog the Commission de Operations de Bourse (COB), said that they were under investigation in July last year. The underwriting group also included Banque Indosuez, Morgan Grenfell, now owned by Deutsche Bank AG, Societe de Banque, Banque Nationale de Paris, Banque Paribas, Caisse des Depots, Crdit Agricole, Credit Lyonnais, Robert Fleming, S.G. Warburg (now part of SBC) and Belgian utility Tractebel SA. As a general rule, more trading in Eurotunnel shares goes on in Paris than in London. If it wants to surprise its target, the SFO can apply for a search warrant if it wants to interview a person. On Monday, it remained unclear what period is currently under investigation. The period surrounding the rights issue has already been investigated by the COB. There have been persistent suggestions that some operators were short-selling at around the time of the rights issue -- forcing the prices down by selling shares they do not own in the hope of buying them back more cheaply later. Over the years, Eurotunnel has called on stock exchange authorities on both sides of the Channel to investigate volatile dealings. Another example was in Agust 1995, when a rogue report that the company had signed a debt rescheduling agreement sent the stock reeling. At that time, the tunnel operator denied it had signed a debt agreement and demanded an inquiry into the trading activity and reports surrounding its shares, which may have been the focus of the French probe.