British National Lottery operator Camelot  LOTT.CN on Tuesday posted lower interim profits as income from scratchcard sales fell by over 450 million pounds ($750 million). Camelot chief executive Tim Holley also told Reuters that the planned second weekly National Lottery draw would be launched on February 5 and be held every Wednesday thereafter. Pre-tax profits were 31.5 million pounds for the 24 weeks to September 14 and sales were 2.1 billion pounds. This compares with pre-tax profit of 36.2 million pounds and sales of 2.51 billion pounds in the same period a year ago. The five companies paid a total of 10 million pounds in dividends. Sales for the weekly National Lottery game rose two percent to 1.68 billion pounds. The Saturday draw, which is televised live and has become a ritual for many Britons, is bought by two thirds of the adult population. The sales of the "Instants" scratchcards fell from last year. The decline in scratchcard sales was expected, as the initial enthusiasm generated by their introduction waned. "Mirroring the experience of lotteries worldwide, sales of Instants have fallen since their launch and are now settled at around 17 million pounds per week," Chairman Sir George Russell said in a statement. National Lottery game tickets should increase in sales by 15-20 percent after the second weekly draw. Camelot said that over one billion pounds -- 50 percent of turnover -- had been handed out in prize money in the first half and that 567 million pounds had gone to "Good Causes" -- including charities and projects in sports and the arts. Camelot, which has been granted a seven-year licence, said that over 40 percent of turnover went to "Good Causes" and the governnment in duties, making it the world's most efficient lottery operator. Profit after tax is just under one percent of total sales and Holley dismissed criticisms of Camelot's performance. "I think we have a slight problem in this country with success," he said, adding that foreign lottery companies were bemused by the atacks on Camelot. The group confirmed plans to set up The Camelot Foundation to support organisations helping the disadvantaged and disabled.