Hit shows for teenagers helped the rock and music pop scene gain popularity. The three primary ones were Where the Action Is on CBS, Shinding on ABC, and Hullabaloo on NBC. As more households had access to televisions along with the growth of widespread range of programming, including musical ones, the television played a significant role in distributing the music to the public. The bands that appeared on these hit TV shows went on to see significant success in the charts. The television shows helped to articulate the new sort of youth music culture and almost became a star-making mechanism in a relationship and profits that the music and television industries shared. The American response to the Beatles was created with the purpose of television performance as their acting and on-camera comfort as a group were initially prioritized over music. The music of the Monkees was beyond expectations. They were a band groomed by the entertainment industry with an emphasis on television performances which took away much of the authenticity, even when compared to The Beatles, who focused on their own music strongly. Television drastically went on to change the landscape of the music industry. First, a split formed among artists and fans, with one side focusing on the pop-oriented, performance-focused television music, while the other, typically older audience was drawn to serious-minded music of rock which continued to be played on the radio rather than TV. The popularity of the Archies, a cartoon band popular with young teens, was brought about by television. This is the first time a new genre of music-television entertainment has been created. However, until the advent of cable-network of television resulting in dedicated channels such as MTV, the television phenomenon in the 1960s had its limitations. Most TV sets at the time had poor audio and visual quality, and as recording and radio sound quality improved with hi-fi recording and FM, the disparities were noticeable. Television is not by nature of design a sound medium, and the musical experience is meant to be enveloping leading to the split in the fanbase, where younger audiences who generally cared less about sound quality appreciated the visual medium to their music (Frith 279).