Lear Corp., furthering its quest to supply complete car interiors, said Friday it agreed to buy the instrument panel and trim parts unit of Denmark-based Borealis Holding AB. Lear said it signed a memorandum of understanding to acquire Borealis Industrier AB for undisclosed terms. Borealis Industrier is a Swedish company that makes components for the European car and truck industry. Borealis Industrier had sales of about $230 million in 1995 and has five plants in Sweden. Volvo and Scania are two of the primary customers for the business. Statoil is an oil group in Norway. Completion of the transaction is subject to approval by the Swedish competition authority and other conditions. The acquisition supports the strategy of having in-house capability to provide total automotive interior systems, including instrument panels. "Not only does this acquisition strengthen relations with our European customers, but it positions Lear as the only independent automotive supplier in the world with in-house capabilities in all five interior systems -- broadening the appeal of our already strong one-stop-shopping competitive advantage," Lear Chairman Kenneth Way said in a statement. The deal is the latest of a series of consolidation moves in the automotive interior market. Lear earlier this year purchased carpet and floor-mat maker Masland Corp. for $384 million, and last year bought door panel and console maker Automotive Industries Inc for $626 million. Lear's U.S. operations include the manufacturing of a wide range of automotive interior components. The company's stock was not traded on the New York Stock Exchange. Lear's competitors are also pursuing the same acquisition strategy. The interior parts maker Prince automotive, based in Holland Mich., was acquired by Johnson Controls for over $1 billion in cash. Canada's Magna International Inc., one of the "Big Three" automotive interior firms along with Lear and Johnson Controls, recently acquired seat maker Douglas & Lomason Co. for $135 million.