In the grand scheme of things, prosecutors and victims of violent crimes are natural allies. The prosecutors strive to bring the offenders to justice, whether to fulfill their duty before the law or achieve career progress. At the same time, the victims get moral satisfaction when the criminals are brought to justice. Therefore, one might think that prosecutors and victims are naturally supposed to cooperate. However, this logical scenario does not necessarily happen in practice. Sometimes the victims can't cooperate with the prosecutors because of the shock, fear, or mistreatment in the prosecutor's office. During the mid-70s, the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration funded the first Victim/Witness Assistance Projects (VWAPs) in order to enhance cooperation between the prosecutors’ offices and victims (Karmen, 2019). The VWAPs support crime victims. The victims of violent crimes can be assisted by prosecutor offices. The best practices include psychological help in hotlines and crisis counseling, shelter, food, transportation, and property recovery (Karmen, 2019). Most VWAPs make referrals to local agencies that provide long-term care for the victims. Legal assistance is offered by prosecutor offices through pamphlets. VWAPs inform the victims about indictments, postponements, acquittals, convictions, and other possible developments in the case. As such, the modern prosecutor offices are well equipped for ensuring the victims’ cooperation through legal, psychological, and even financial support. The San Diego County District Attorney’s Office serves as a specific example of a well-rounded victim services project. The Victim Assistance Program offers emergency (crisis intervention), legal (court support, orientation in the criminal justice system), and psychological (referral assistance) help (San Diego County District Attorney, n.d.). In addition, victims of violent crimes may receive special reimbursement for eligible losses from the Victim Compensation Board, which is funded by restitution fines (San Diego County District Attorney, n.d.). Losses such as medical expenses, home security improvements, or outpatient mental treatment are covered by these reimbursements. Overall, crime victims in the County of San Diego can rely on decent support from their District Attorney’s office.