Millions of people worldwide suffer from mental disorders: manias, phobias, and panic attacks exhaust and torment a lot of individuals. An obsessive-compulsive disorder, or OCD, is a long-term mental illness that can be difficult to control. Due to the four D diagnostic indicators, the analysis of this disorder can allow us to explore it more deeply. When individuals are forced to fight the terrible thoughts torturing their heads and repeat meaningless acts intended to decrease anxiety, they feel abnormal. In addition, having “unwanted, recurrent and persistent images or impulses that evoke anxiety or extreme distress” and realizing “the unreasonable nature of symptoms” people cannot stop them (Van Leeuwen et al., 2020, p. 1-2). The level of distress is high because they become nervous and depressed. The daily life of a patient is influenced by this disorder. Firstly, obsessive thoughts often interfere with the usual people’s acts and cause a surge of panic, disturbing to complete their work. Sometimes, “cognitive biases cause dysfunctional beliefs” (Van Leeuwen et al., 2020, p. 2). Secondly, compulsive actions interrupt a patient’s daily routine, forcing them to do specific steps a certain number of times. Such activities can last even for an hour or more: therefore, the extent of dysfunction is also noticeable. * Danger: OCD may represent a significant danger for an individual since sometimes, people feel so depressed that they are ready to commit suicide. They can strike themselves to get rid of the unwanted image if they try to defeat their obsessive thoughts. One of the most common fears of people with OCD is to harm others. Thus, the level of danger to self is significantly higher than that of danger to others. * Deviance: Since OCD causes abnormal thoughts and behavior, people with such a disorder can be characterized as deviant. However, it would be wrong to claim that it is easy to “determine the degree of deviation from the norm” (Davis, 2009, p. 1). OCD causes anxiety, stress, and panic; it makes people live in fear that if they do not do specific actions, they will not be able to avoid danger. An individual should visit a clinic and have specialists help them fight.