I saw a news on Yahoo yesterday. It reported that Chien - Ming Wang cut his hair and had a new hair style. Here is the link. URL
My English translation of the title is" Wang changed a new hair style, but Jeter sucks it" As long as you are a Chinese, nine out of ten you will think that Wang matched the new style very much, and that his new style is very handsome.
However, the news mentioned that Derek Jeter think his hair was really a damn.
The different values about handsome among cultures are very interesting.
I have seen an article on TIME.
It talked about there is a big difference about different values of a handsome man between Western countries and Eastern countries. It mentioned many examples of Japanese men, Korean men and Hong Kong men. They paid much attemtion to their faces and also spent lots of money to shop. But in Western countries, the standard of a handsome man depends not on their faces, but on their masculine symbols, say, muscle and behavior. I started to notice the ways of foreign clothing and hair styles these past days by watching TV programs, such as Friends, Srcubs and etc. I found out that the clothing and the hair styles was very different.
About clothing, the western men dressed mostly very simple, and about hair, most of them don't have a fringe at all and their backhair were short that no hair cover necks.
If they had a long hair, it will be really long and thick. By contrast, men in eastern countries most dress up. Except a shirt and a jean, we usually wear an accessory. As to hair, men usually have a median hair, neither very short or long. If we want to cut a very short hair, we must leave some hair on the back of neck in order to avoid looking like a nerd. If we want to have a long hair style, mostly it will be light and especailly long on a fringe or backhair.
Oh my god.
I make a long entry again.
It almost cost a whole morning. I have to watch the NBA final game 3. Hope you will not feel bored about this diary and help me for correcting it.
I like you give me any commets and opinoins too. I really like to discuss.