It's summer.
The session is passed, and I work as apprentice at the souvenir shop.
When I was at school, we painted a lot of wooden handicrafts like small plates and cases. The making souvenir is a hard and interesting work. On the one hand you need to be attentive and neat, but on the other hand you should set all your imagination and inspiration in motion.
Maybe, in this August my mom and I will visit Norway, Sweden and Finland.
I like Finland.
When my family used to go there very frequently (about 3 or 4 times a month), I had a nice time.
I will never forget my first time at customs.
I suppose, I was 7 (nice age, you don't need to think about serious things and can do what you want).
We drove at our heavy truck to border, there was a long queue, we were waiting.
Well, finally, my mother took me to the customs window, she gave a passport to man... and when we were going to sit in a truck, frightened man suddenly said" lapsi!".
Mom stared at him and raised me up to show him : D That's my first memory about this country.
The second memory is the toys, which I was given near the border.
That's two balls : one with a cat inside, other with dog. You know, you can take them at slot machine. So that's the second.
The third memory is the house we lived. It was situated near Helsinki, big and light house with the small lake behind it (it was winter, so it was frozen). The rooms were big enough, but not so big.
There were few furnitures.
And one of this I liked the most is a big white fridge.
Don't know why. I liked the winter Finland. And I hope I like the summer Finland. By the way, today I went to guitar teacher, and the only thing he said after" Show me what you can!" was" What do you want?
You play really well, you level skills are higher than just amateur.
Just improvise already!" To tell the truth, I myself didn't expect what I CAN play like that I did. And why I didn't play that good at the audition?...
Well, I just proud of myself, yep.
: )
And, by the way," white nights" have already come.
And now they disturb me.
If only I had black dense curtains.