Last week passed quickly, especially the weekend.
I even didn't realize what happened until the week passed. And it seemed that I forgot a lot of things, like finding a part time job, making a call to my mom. I quite didn't know what I was busy with, it just passed. Now, let me make a summary of my last week.
First, during the weekday, I got a little busy, and things about my work seemed got better, because my colleagues treated much better last week, and they seemed more believe in me now, except one, who have never say anything nice to me. But I don't care much about it, because I will learn about this job as much as possible.
And it becomes my goal of this week.
Actually this job taught me a lot of things, especially the attitude towards work.
Like me, I am not very patient and sensitive about numbers, but now, my work is close related to numbers, It makes me learn to be much more patient and careful. Since then I am very sensitive with every thing, and every word that my colleagues tell me.
And I have learned another important skill, that is to write down everything that you don't know, or you can not remember clearly, especially which are very improtant to your job. I know that I should be confident, and should be more sensitive, so that my colleges will believe me more. It is urgent for me to make them believe in me, so they will teach me more, and I will be more skilled with my job.
Then I would like to talk about the weekend.
It seemed like I didn't prepare it well, but it also passed quickly. I have been to see one of my E - friends.
Maybe you will worry about me, but the good news is that I was fine, and I am very happy, because my E - friends treated me well.
He cooked for me.
In fact, this is my second time to meet a E - friend, but these two time all turned out well. I always believe that there are a lot of good people in this world, and I don't want to treat everyone as a bad person.
There is an old saying in China says that : Habour no ill intention against others, but never relax vigilance against evil - doers.
I don't know whether you understand it or not, but sometimes it is quite correct.
Like me, before I went to see my E - friends, I was quite scared, and I was pray for a good luck. so before you go to see a stranger, you should learn about him as much as possible, like name, age and it will be better if you have seen his / her photos.
You know, when you stay at a big, you shlould be more careful about the things around you.
But donot over react to it, because there are also a lot of nice people in the world!