My hands are itching now, I have to write about this! Everyone has a favorite animal and so have I. Well, it's so cliche, but I can't help it!
The cat is my favorite animal just like my profile picture tells you, hehe.
And who doesn't love cats?!
Well, my mum is laying claim to this title.
My mother is allergic to cats in the way she isn't a ' ' cat person ' '. A tabby - and - white cat ended up in our garden a few years ago.
Although my mother didn't like cats, and still she does, she agreed with the idea to look after the cat for a few days. We placed an advertisement in the papers, hoping that the owner of the cat would pick her up.
After hearing nothing for a few weeks, we knew that nobody wanted this poor wretch ; _ ;.
So me and my brother tried to persuade my mother to keep the cat.
And it worked!
So I 'm sitting in the sofa with my purring cat. * Kiki happy *
But when you have a pet, you have to give it a name.
My father came up with ' Kitty '.
I know it, my father has no sense for originality! > < Fortunately, my mother came up with something better, although it couldn't be worse than ' Kitty '.
We decided to call her Maxime, but sometimes I wish I named her ' Baka '. (= idiot in Japanese).
Maxime was her baka - self yesterday.
I was watching TV while I drank some hot chocolate, yumyumyum! I heard some cracking above my head. Well, old houses make some noise sometimes when you walk. So I didn't make a fuss about it.
The cracking intensed as the time passed by and it seemed to move.
Then suddenly a plate of the ceiling broke into two and my cat fell through the ceiling.
The result was a mewing heap of insulation material on the ground XD Fortunately, my cat was unharmed.
Cats land always on their feet, phew! I was flabbergasted when I saw it happening.
When I took the pieces of insulation material of her, I had to laugh about my clumsy cat! I laughed and said : You're a hairy, obesed idiot! It seems my cat crawled between the ceiling and the floor of my room via a crack in the wall.
My cat isn't the slimmest (She weighs 5 kilo's o _ 0), so the thin plates couldn't support her weight. So she ended up as a yellow, mewing heap XD
( By the way, I didn't know how to call the ceiling. We have a ceiling which consists of small, aluminium strips on which lay plates, made of some soft material.
So it's not a ceiling which consists of one part, but at a lot of small pieces )