Hello!
Today I thought about posting a video from a French movie, in which the scene takes place in Harlem. So the protagonists speak English of course, and then everybody could understand the video, I don't need to transcribe or to translate. I introduce a little bit the movie : The movie, takes place in the 1980s, it's a comic French movie as they were very popular in France. The main character is played by Michel Colucci a. k. a Coluche, a very popular French humorist (one man show) and actor. In this movie, the protagonist (Coluche) works for an insurance society and have to travel around the world to bring back the unlucky tourists who have unfortunately had problems or accidents, in France. Thus, in the movie, Coluche travels around the world, and experiences some adventures in various countries such as Marocco, United - States (Harlem), China and so on... It's one of my favorite French comedies, I still laugh each time I watch it, even at this very moment writing the entry and listening to the extract at the same time. I think it may be interesting to listen the French accent and the (maybe exagerated) view of Harlem by the French at the time. Now, I must introduce the scene itself.
We don't see when Coluche is in the plane for New York, but he meets a business man and they have a conversation about what they do in New York.
The man says that New York is very dangerous and warns Coluche to be careful, especially from the black people who attacks the whites. Coluche who was not afraid before he met the man, is now very tensed and afraid... He gets on a taxi, in which the taxi - driver is a black man...
And asks him to go to Harlem, but even the black taxi - driver refuses to go so far and leaves him close to the district. Which is not very reassuring for him.
And the video begins as we see him walking on the Harlem deserted streets. After the part in Harlem, Coluche meets again the business man whom had warned him...
Surprised to see that this same man was in bandages and apparently injured. He asks him what happened, and the answer is that the man has been attacked (if I remember well, I even think that he was attacked by white men. .. Which is funny as he only warned about the blacks).