While I was searching some information about alternative energy for 5 minutes speech, a thought occurred to me. It is necessary that we use another energy to develop alternative energy. In capitalism, it is inevitable that alternative energy become to be means for profits. So I think what we need now is not developing energy but less consuming that. In modern society, especially in urban life, we have dependant on energy too much. For example, when I come back home after work, I use water and gas energy to take a shower. I surf the internet with an air - conditioner and a fan turn on, after finishing web surfing, I watch TV with the dest - top still on and use a stove and microwave to have a dinner. Before going to bed, I usually read a book listening to the music unless I drink at the pub. I went thought blackout once during staying in the Philippines. I totally realized that how much I depend on energy. Darkness made me a fool who couldn't anything at all. I was just sitting in front of my laptop in darkness for a while. I didn't know what I could do.
Next thing I know, darkness suddenly came to me. So I went outside felling my way. I couldn't nothing. electronic devices hadn't been recharged were useless such as a laptop, tv, mp3 player, even refrigerator. It was getting hotter.
All I could do was drink beer going vapid in the frigerator. Fossil fuel is limited and getting exhausted. Therefore we will develop alternative energy someday. But the energy itself will be merely a commodity to be sold or bought in capitalism. We also made carbondyxide a commodity even sell and buy the right of emission. I think it's impossible that sustainable development is realized. The concept of sustainable development must have been made by capitalists who wanted to legitamize much more development and exploitation. Development and exploitation were already enough. We must stop development and exploitation and change the way of thinking on energy consumption.
Unless we do so, we will be attacked on by nature like huge climate change as much as we exploit.