I can not say I 'm very fond of reading, since I haven't read almost anything, other than technical textbooks for my college exams, for about 2 years.
But, I did enjoy my latest read, some of the titles I list here :" The Dark Elf" series by R.
Salvatore.
I had been reading it in Russian, until I was able to get my hands on the original, which I am planning to read through someday soon.
The translation looked quite poor, but it allowed me to explore a classic fantasy world, with a handful of interesting characters, picturesquely designed landscapes and wonderful legends.
The described actions were quite predictable and sometimes cliche, but it was just the right thing for my mood )" The Lord of the Rings" by J.
R.
R.
Tolkien.
I completed it in Russian some years ago, and now, for the original, I must say : fascinating language!
Though I could not read a paragraph without checking the dictionary, it was great pleasure just to recite those words in my head.
By the way, I absolutely loved the movie trilogy, so reading the original for the second time is a whole new experience.
It now stands as enormous pillar of an epic masterpiece in my memory and conscience.
First three books completed, the other three to go.
The" Harry Potter" series by J.
Rowling.
Honestly, the most entertaining thing I have ever read, in both languages.
(This is possibly due to my little reading experience, my being lazy and ignorant.) I certainly enjoyed reading it in the original a couple of years ago, and for that now I probably need the dictionary no more. I admit to associating myself with the protagonist greatly, that probably being one of the main attractions.
The flow of narration kept me thrilled till the very end, and I really loved the characters, some of the magic and the ass - kicking )
Occasional reading of short stories doesn't count, so that concludes the list of my latest literary endeavors.
So far for the graceful English originals.
As for my mother tongue, I haven't read much since high school (which ended 3 years ago), and it is beginning to hit me on the back.
Not only do I not remember many rules of Russian language, but I often stumble upon some linguistic structures (supposedly, the remnant knowledge of my Russian and Literature classes, scattered across the memory) which I am eager to employ in my speech, but find myself wondering if they are correct, and end up rephrasing it all in several variations, one after another.
Basically, my speaking has been turning into something weird lately, and for the same reason my writing has become quite time - consuming.
Sometimes I am even afraid that my Russian does not sound natural anymore, especially when it comes to thoughtfully correcting one's lexical mistakes.
It often happens so, that I encorporate original English syntactic forms in my speech, which does sound funny, perfectly clear to my friends, but appears frighteningly too often.
Just at this very moment I thought that the whole previous paragraph may not be exactly true, or even entirely incorrect ) ) The truth is, it does not matter much, because the main purpose of this long post is to practise my English, and hopefully to get a bit of attention (or even comments from!) native speakers )
The title of it supposes me to write about something literary.
Unfortunately, I 'm no liberal - arts major, and I don't read much.
I only named it so for the stylish old sound it produces.
It sounds better than" On Books" or" About Books and Reading", don't you agree?
I'd be very glad if a short discussion of such trivial matter as the name of the post were to take place.
That's it for now, I guess.
A lot of words, but not much valuable information here.
Thank you very much, O dear reader, for reaching this point and even more for your highly appreciated commentary! : 3