When people begin to make a living in a new city, the first thing they would like do is to make a plan and decision as soon as possible.
There is no doubt that a good plan is a part and parcel of sucess in one's life.
There are two different groups of people in selecting their future plan : people who choose plans which are practical for them, and people who choose plans which are
challenging for them.
Both plans have thier own advantages and disavantages.
In this essay, I will compare each advantage and present my preference.
On one hand, some people prefer to chooes practical plans when they make desicions.
They say that through practical plans, they can achieve their dream and career step by step without any abrupt difficulties.
In other words, making a rational plan just like to set up a rule or a clearly goal to make sure whether we can get it or nor.
Elaborate pratical plans can give you a hand when you face difficults or feel depressed and help you get rid of unexpected situations.
Those people believe that only through practical plans can they find their niche in future.
When it comes to another group of people who prefer to chooes challenging plan.
As for as I concerned, I 'm in the middle of this group.
Evev through challenging plans may full of unknown arduous situations, as the proverb says :" The bigger his dream, the wider his arena." Neither of approaches can achieve your life finall goal without challengig plans.
To further clarify my demonstration, I would like to quote an example of Bill Gates, a notable and sucessful businessman in the world.
It is even known to women and children that Bill Gates left Harvard university when he was a sophomore and run his own enterprise - - computer company with his friends.
It's really a bold and challenging plan so that most people around him didn't support this plan. Nevertheless, Bill Gates never give up his faith and keep struggling Finally, he created Microsoft Empire because he knew that there would be a huge market for personal computer decades ago.
This story tells us that challenging plan you love can recall more passion to you and bring a sence of accomplishment for you.
It's becauce of changes and challenges that lifes become vivid and fascinating.
I 'm a person with a spirit of adventure, challenging plans may bring a huge harvest to me that I have never gain.
What's more, only challenging plans and challenging plans can fulfill our potencial.