In response to the article ' Beautiful Things Work Better ', being a teacher myself I could not agree more. The years spent on desperate search for better techniques, the very practice of teaching with its amazing ups and sleepless downs has definitively proved that learning as such is to take place solely in favourable surroundings. Unarguably, if we take a step further to accept it as the cornerstone of any teaching method, we will be astonished to see the whole range of possibilities which will open up.
The point on which I could take issues with the author lies sooner in how to create the right environment for the language acquisition to happen, given each person is strikingly different. There were students in my teaching practice who could not stand bright light and felt safer with shut windows.
Yet, they were making impressive progress in spite of the teacher suffering in the dark about what was going on.
On the other hand, there have always been a considerable number of ambitious students who will find pride and joy in doing tests and all sorts of ' dull ' work.
Indeed, is there anything more attractive and pleasing in terms of language learning than passing an exam with flying colours?
However, in the era of maximum comfort it is little wonder that an unprecedented number of learners prefer fun and relaxation accompanied by a cup of coffee and soothing music in the background.
The thing I feel strongly about is that it seems unfair to defy traditional education on the grounds that it fails to meet every student's needs. What does not, then?
' Beautiful Things Work Better ' is what the author is trying to make us believe.
Unquestionably, when stuck between nasty weather and daunting deadlines it looks very much so.
Nevertheless, if we dare take a closer look at creativity (and what is learning if not a fascinating mixture of experimenting, forming, shaping, producing and the like?) then we have to admit that, in the long run, successfulness is not a bed of roses, albeit highly rewarded in the end. Finally, I would like to thank the author for touching on the issue of aesthetics in language teaching and learning, which appears to be among the most effective features nowadays.