On March 11th, Tohoku region was devastated by earthquake and washed away by Tsunami.
Up to now, the death toll reaches at least fifteen thousand and ten thousand people are still missing. Everyone would be really shocked by the horrible scene.
However, we have to make a gradual advance toward a revival.
Therefore, I would like to propose three plans that we university students can do for the region.
First of all, since we relatively afford to do a volunteer work because of long vacations in summer and spring, we should do so for them.
According to TV news, there is still a lot of debris in devastated area. That is, it is necessary to remove it immediately for revitalizing there. In terms of this work, we will be able to do so without any knowledge.
Also, the region has a serious problem on education environment. Because of the chain of disaster, the children in the region have not got enough education. Therefore, since we have knowledge to teach them study to some extent, we will be able to provide the education with them. In addition to the volunteer work, by taking other ways, we can also contribute to the revival.
Presently, the region is in the middle of a dire depression.
In order to pull the economy out of recession, it goes without saying that our corporation is necessary.
Let me introduce one example.
What we can do is to buy as many products made in the region as we can. Thanks to that, the economic will be stimulated and people will be able to get new jobs.
Moreover, even if we do not have enough time to do such a volunteer work or do not afford to buy them a lot, you still have an option to help for them.
At the present, the companies carrying out Socially Responsible Investment or SRI become the center of public attention gradually.
At first, let me explain the SRI in detail. It is one of the strategies to not only sell products but also contribute to the society.
Until recently, most of Japanese people had chosen the product from their points of view such as quality, price and others.
However, in addition to the points, the factor of social contribution is being needed. For instance, there are two clothing stores.
The former invest 100 yen per a cloth for Tohoku region. Meanwhile, the latter does nothing about it.
If we buy the same kind of a cloth, we will buy it from the former. That is, by buying the products, we can easily donate and contribute to the development of society.
Therefore, if you want to do so, I would like you to find such companies carrying out SRI from variety industries. In conclusion, although it is seemingly difficult to contribute for Tohoku region, we can do it in some way or other.
Thus, through my presentation, I would like you to seriously think about what we can do for them.
This is my assignments at my university. If you have time, please correct my mistake!