From my perspective, I strongly disagree with the statement that the help from government is often not necessary since most people can solve their problems by themselves or with the help from their families. On the contrary with the statement, I believe that even people may receive helps somewhere else, the helps from government, in some cases, is what citizens need most, because of government's authorities and tremendous powers. Besides, offering various helps is a government's obligatoriness, no matter such help would be regarded as unnecessary or not. First of all, since government has tremendous power in managing the country and intervening international affairs, the help offered by government could be something can not be offered by individual's strength, like environment protection, national defence system and disaster relief.
I still remember the deadly earthquake happened in Sichuan, China in 2008, which exceeded magnitude 8. 0, and made that little town suddenly a living hell.
In that kind of situation, can one expect helps from families or friends which may at the same time suffered either?
No way.
Government's aid was what they need and only need at that time.
Fortunately, just 90 minutes after the earthquake, Premier Wen Jiabao flew to the earthquake area to oversee the rescue work.
Soon afterwards, over 10 emergency medical teams and 50000 troops were dispatched to help with disaster relief work.
I should say, everyone who has been through that period in China may never say that help from government is not necessary, because we saw the efforts government exerted on rescue and its amazing effects.
From the bottom of my heart I felt that when facing macro issues, government is much more a reliable source than weak individuals.
Besides, I do believe that offering various helps to its citizens is a government's obligatoriness, no matter some people would think such helps are unnecessary or not.
First, because of diversity of demographic distribution, people is in various different needs.
What you perceive as unnecessary could be exactly what others desperately long for.
So, there could be always sounds shouting the that the helps offered by government are unnecessary, but that will not be the reason government stops offering help.
Furthermore, offering helps and securing just rights, those are what the government was built up for.
The Declaration of Independence once indicated that men are endowed with unalienable rights that among these are life, liberty and the pursuit of Happiness.
That to secure these rights, government are instituted among men.
So government is with inborn responsibility to secure citizens ' right and therefore offer helps.
However, it should also be admitted that, although helps from government are with tremendous powers and effects, some problems involving private feelings or interpersonal relationships are better to be solved by families and friends.
Take myself as an example, last semester I broke up with my boyfriend and I got so upset that I locked myself in my room.
It was my sister's persuasions on daily bases that brought me out of that hazy days.
In situation like that, helps from government could, in some degree, be seemed like unnecessary.
In conclusion, although most people can solve their problems by themselves or with the help from their families, the help from government, in most situations, should not be regarded as unnecessary, since government could offer helps that can not be offered by individual strength and it is governments inborn responsibility to do so.