My summer holidays ends and school will start again tomorrow.
How sad! : (
I wish my summer holidays could be longer!
To be honest, I am not very motivated.
My nummer holidays were to short, as usual ; - ) Next year will get more difficult, so I have to push myself more!
The reason why my school starts on Thuesday is, pupils with the grade 5 in their school reports can make a test about the whole last year to get in the next higher class. Otherwise they must repeat the last school year.
The test is very hard and many pupils learn their whole summer holidays to pass the test.
I wish them good luck!
So, what is new in the new school year?
I am going to a technical higher school.
I am learing Electronics with Informatics and Computertechniques. That means I learn how to build software and hardware for computers.
But I have also subjects as History, Economy, Physics and so on.
The austrian schools are very univerally that we know from everything a little. Next year is my last year on that school.
In the second part of the school year, the so called" Matura" test is waiting for me.
It is our school leaving examination.
It consists many technical acknowledgements, but also subjects as German, English and Economy will be asked. But that the hardest and the most fearsome test is the" FTKL Project" (translated in english : Manufacturing and Construction Doctrine). It deals with computer software and hardware.
We get the work order and then we 40 hours time to finish it in one week.
It requires everything we learned in the whole five years going to that school.
That will be my most stressful week in my life!...
After passing all tests, I can decide to start working or go to an universaty. (Austrian school system is a bit different than the rest of the world I think)
But I think I will choose working, because I am already sick of studying >. < Addionally, after 2 years work experience, I will get automatically the title" Engineer". So long, I hope my last school year will be great and I hope will pass all tests!