I hurt my boyfriend. I couldn't stand his attitude and I said to him really bad words through an email." I know we have different valus and thoughts, but this is the worst person to ignore the question what you're asking. I did the same thing when I was in school and I know how painful that is.
So I try to react no matter who I like or not. But, you know, there's a person like that never care of others. I felt this from a certain person yesterday so I was so sad."
It was about him but I never referred that because I just want him to notice something.
After sending this email I felt better, although he didn't reply anything. In the evening I found that he had disappered. I took around I found him in a book room, and he was arranged. (We're going to move another building nearby this month of 13th.) I spoke to him, he seemed to get angry." Was that mail about me?"
I denied what he said.
He seemed to be crying because I noticed that his eyes out. I realized my words injured his mind... It might be strange to say, I didn't want to hurt him.
I just wanted to notice my heart. He was apparently got down and I proposed going to dinner. I just wanted to talk to him.
We needed to talk each other yesterday. If we misunderstand each other, that would lead us break up. He's really important to me and I didn't want to lose him.
I talked to him my true feeling that I have felt these days. I tried just to be honest and open my thoughts. And then, he told me his true feelings.
He was always care about what he did to me, and sometimes he felt sorry for me. And he said to me," I was going to break with you, actually." Just jokking, but when I heard this, I realized that how bad thing I did for him. What I was thinking for him was always my egoism, and when I saw his tears, I was really ashamed of myself. When I broke friendship with a boy friend in college, he said to me," you're always thinking about yourself. Is there time to think what I feel when heard what you said?" After all I couldn't heal relations with him after all at that time.
This was one of the biggest depressed experience for my life and since then I tried to keep my mind about this. Even if I loved him in word, I didn't trust him from hearts of my hearts. I always want his reply, and reaction because I want to find out his thoughts, views and values. But after all,
that's painful for him to do that.
This matter was bad things from one aspect, but somehow I 'm reliefed to talk to him my thoughts. It might be difficult to share our thoughts
each other but if we try to know each other all the time, I believe we can make good relationship with each other.
Thanks for reading.