In the last semester, things got very messy. I felt like I've wasted a lot of time.
I could have done a lot of useful things, but I didn't.
Well, blaming myself isn't going to do any good right now.
We've just started the second semester so I thought if I 'm really thinking about compensations which I should pay for the wasted time, then I should start taking some actions.
So here is the plan :
1 ) Read at least four books each month.
A novel is also considered a book.
So I don't have to read a complex academic book to count one up.
2 ) Try as much as possible to write every day a new entry in English here in Lang - 8.
I might not be able to keep my promise for the whole semester but I'll try. 3 ) Study a little bit of Spanish every day and write an entry once a week.
I might try to raise the number of entries per week after I get a decent knowledge of Spanish. But I'll just wait to see what I can do.
4 ) Fight procrastination, which was my major problem in the last semester.
I had to leave assignments until the last minute.
I used to feel very stressed when I did that but I couldn't stop procrastinating.
The same with lectures, actually, lectures were much worse.
I didn't even have any time to think about procrastinating this one. 5 ) I really would like to start studying hardware, because I would like my graduation project to be something that combines between hardware and software.
I know it's not going to be easy.
It might require doubling my effort and a lot of sleepless nights.
Actually, I enrolled in a competition for that matter but I 'm not sure that one semester is enough.
But as Flawless group from Britain's got talent said," Chase the dream, no the competition." I just hope that I could make it, not necessarily before the end of the competition but it'd be nice if it was accomplished for the graduation project. You might find this plan very lame or nothing worth attention, but to me, accomplishing these tiny goals would make a huge difference in my life.
I keep pushing myself to always be optimistic, but there are some moments when I find this a very hard thing to do, who doesn't?!" Our greatest glory is not in never failing, but in rising up every time we fail." - - Ralph Waldo Emerson
This quotation is the only thing that keeps me trying. I hope it does the same thing for you too.