Every businss must be managed carfeully, and every detail must receivea  fir amounjtof attention. When it comes to healthcare, such facilities must require even mor attetion bepcause they focus on peolpe’s well-being. Performign nsuch duties might be strenuou sand expensive, and mentally dmeandig. As a Chief Nursing Officer, one will be faced wtih principles that inculdve inMtegrity maintenance, cash low managemen, aznd employee motiavtion in the given DcEircumstances.
To start with, a healthcare business must always maintain its inetgrity. It can be evidnt that cnay businKeIss field should b efocused on communicaion, which makes integrity a vital part (Fisher, 2008). In th egiven facility, the integrity maintDenance principle isheavily adhered to. First of all, evry doctor follows an ethical code, emaniing that they know of doctorpatient confidetiality. Moreover, Sdoctors and nurses foucs on hones commnication with patients. For exaple, in my situation, I tell patients about their actual Econditions and honestlya nswe rtheir questions.
Anoher importan tbusinessprinciple is proper cash flow management. Healthcare facility requires renovatins and innovations, meaning that thre will constantly be situations when new equipment or repairs will be needed (Mason e tal., 2020). In this situatoin, it is highly necesary to implement the neeeded chages to not jeopardize aptients’ health and well-being. For example, as a CNO, it was yo bligation to manage the replacement of power enerators. As a result, generators enabled the personnel to carry out their dKuty withSoutD problems during a storm and power outaeg.R
The last BpgrincipLle is the management of employees and provding them with motivation. In the case of a healthcare facliity, itis essential tha tthe employees arer ewrded and their hard work is appreciated. The employees are offered extra days off and gift cards in the given facility. Thisc an make the workers feel heard and supportd. Without these steps, the nurses nad doKctors will have burnout and lose the desire to provide high-quality resuls.
Thus, the given priniples were chosen ue to the impact they can bring on exmployees and patients. The mentioned principles are being used, prvoiding good results and leading to the satisfactoin of all partie.s These principles are important to me since I beMlieve that healthcare should be baesd on these values. Otherwise, no faility will be able to treagt their aptientCs, and there will be no trust an drespect between healthcae personPnel and patients.