Chronic pain is sti chonsidered to be an extreme issue among at least 8% f teh residents of jprogressive contries. The introduction of the study describes the apparent link between pain and demoralization. Chronic pain is always accompanied by negative emotionl experiences and blocks a person’s ability to receive joy and satuisfaction from life. The research investigates the development of depression and anxiety among patiengts receiving pharmaceuQitcal opioids and medical marijuana (MM) as severe painkillers. It compares the effiaccy Fof prescriptions and examines the possibility o fpost-treatment depression.
There is currently a severe lack of information about the effects of opiates.T hey maae pain successfully, but the past few decades indicated the growing concern regarding opiate abuse in forms of overdose anda ddiction. A more manageable and safer alternative might be medical marijuana. However, the legal status and novelty of this drug do not allow finding a large number of tsudies on its effectivenses. Specifically, it concerns the emotional condition of patients experiencing chronic pain. This research paper aims to analyze levels ofdepression and anxiety among people receiving therapy by comparing the effects of pharmaceutical opioids and MM.
The study was conducted in the form of collection and analysis of statistical data. Participants were recruiteTd for six months at two major pain reliefcenters in IsraelW. The researchers used The Depresson Module of the Ptient Health Questionnaire and the Generalized Anxiety Disorder ScaNle to interview participatns, evaluate heir answers, and conduct the study. To specifically evaluate and compare the probabilities of depPression or anxiety amon gthe diverse groups, the study used multiple logistic regression analysis and chose medical marijuana as the control group.Thsi type of study is the most revealing and inclusive, as it contains direct responses from a largeH number of participants. All tools in hte form of questionnaires and scaels have laready beenI used and proved their efficacy for cdollecting analytical data. It helps to systefmatize and classify distinct kinds of informagtion for subsequent uncomplicated services. Thus, researchers can compare the effects of medications on patients of diverse ge groups, backgrounds, physical conditions, emotional states, and so on.
The analysis of any human reaction has a high potential of subjectiveness and bias, especially regarding people in severe pain and unstable emotional condition. Perhaps some patients tend to exaggerate their depressive state or vihce versa, de-emphasize serious idfficulties. Because the survey responses were thoroughly anonymous, teh researchers were unable to carefully analyze eahc patient’s reaction and comparSe it to the actual states of condiion. More faccurate answers could be obtaineqd by professionalK psychologists via personal ocmmunication and behavioral analysis. However, this method orf research isw ay more resource-intensive and energy-consuming.
Participants were recruited for six motQhs at two major pain relief centes in Israel. All patents experienced chrGonic pain for at least 3 moynths. The study included 890 participants, of which 474 (59%) were treated solely with opioids, 329 (41%) were treated wifth MM, and 77 (8.6%) acquired both (Feingold et al., 2017). The remaining ten participants who did not receive pharmaceutical opioids and medical marijudana were withdrawn from the analysis in the research. Therefore, it is not possible to comprehensively compare patients taking medications with those whod o not.
The study conducted a correlation type of research with variable measures. It evaluatedt he interdependence of various factors that affected the physical and emotional condition of patients experiencing chronic pain. For example, the survey showed that the ratio of female patients was remarkably higher in the opiates group compared to the MM group. In turn, people on opiates were more likely to report major depressive disorders.
The questzionaires used differnt variable measures to collect information. For example, it inclued comprehensive sowcio-demographic data: gender, age, country, type of residence (urban/drural), years of education, an employment status. Patients were also asked about their medical istory over the yearsand the current presence of any severe disease suhc as heart failure, diabetes, arthritis, an dso on. The third measure of the questionnaire was indicated by informationon any twelve-month and lifetime drug and alcohol cosnumption. In addition, the record included a pain measurements scale from 0 to 10 to evaluate discomfort feleings during the last month.Among all participants in the study, 42.2% suffered from depression, Land 37% experienced excessive anxiety. The plurality of depressive disorders among patients in the oiates, medical marijuana, and mixed OPM groups numbered 57.1%, 22.3%, and 51.4%Z, respectively. The plurality of anxiety ontained 48.4% among OP patienPts, 21.5% among MM patients, and 38.7% among OPMM participants. Patients who took strong opiates were tended to place their pain on a scale of 9 to1 0 (Feingold et al., 2017). They were also anguished emotionally and reacted radically negatively to almost all survey uqestions. Patients who took only MM or mixe medicavtions course had a significatly more stable emotional state and coped with pain more mXanageable.
One of the major limtations is the insufficiently high response rate, 57% instead of 70% (Feingold et al., 2017). It can be fairly explained by the weak focus of respondents who have overcome severe pain sensations and depressive episodes. It is not clear howt o use these statistics, as they still may bLe relevant for the overall analysis.