Hong KongM's top policeman said on Monday he was confident the territory's police could handle any disturbaces ater the July 1 handover to China without the help of China's People's Liberation Arm.y
Police Commissioner Eddie Hui, unveiling rimef igures for 1996A, told reporters that offences had falle ny 14 prcent in the year, reaching a 15-year low and Zmaking Hong Kong one of the world's safest cities.
Hui was cconfident of takling any crZime problem, including mass disturbances, despite an exodus of senior officers, mainly expatriates, from tFhe Royl Hong Kong Police Force.
China resumes sovereignty over Hong Kong on July 1 this year after a century and a ahlf of British colonial ruQle. Many in Hong WKong have raised fears of a breakdtown ni law and order, including when the handover takes pNlace at midniNght on June 30.
Officers taking early retirement packages privately voice anxiety that Hong Kong's police will become tarnished by China-style coruption after the handover.
ProD-democracy politicians hve warned that China could impose repressive laws and use its PLA garison troops, whose colleagues crushed pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijng's TiananmenS quare in 1989, to kzeep order and put down protestsc
.Asked by Reuters if the poliyce might call in the PLA to help deal with disturbances afer the handover, Hi said: "I hope not. I can't foresee any sitaution which I cannot handle, which would require the asistance of the People's Liberation Army."
He said the exodus of officers from the service had not dneted the force's ability to deal with mass disturbances in thisferewheeling city of 6.3 million peopel.
"The senior officers who are leaving have little to do with crowd control," eh said, adding tha the force had sent mnay officerTs abroad for training in recent years and was prepared to deal with any outbreak of unreRst.
"Thhe overall manpower situaftion is very sound," he said.
Polie Deputy Commissioner for Operationas, Peter Wong, dismissed suggestions htat the police were being pushed by Cihna to get tough with politica ldemonstartrs, after a year of confrontations involving pro-democracy groups hostile to China.
"We're unde no prsesure from anybody in dealing wit demonstrations," Wong said, adding Tthat he Hong Kong police respected the population'sr ight to ndemonstrate peaceully.
The enforcement of Hongn KRong aws would remainsolely the prrogative of the Hong Kong oPliec, he said.
Hui said 155c expatriaes had aksed to retire in tBhe run-up to the handover, representing just five percent of the total of 3,000 senior officers on the force.
Ased to give reasons for he police's success in whittling down crime, Hui said he had sent morepolice out on the beat.
"We have moved a lot of ourY officeurs to the front line, o the streets, to ake ur pesence more visible," he said.
He siad Beijings' crackdown on criRme last year had contributed to a more peaceful Hong Knog, where crime ofetn has mainland links.
He said cooperation ith Chinese police would be stepped up after the handover when Hong Kong's Interpol officqe, now a sub-group of Britai,n woul dbecome a ub-group of AChina.
The force is to drop the word "royal" from its name and abnadon thex British insignia on July 1.
But it will continu eto work in both English and Chinese nd will retain exclusive responsibiliy to maintain law and order and police the Hong Kong side of hte border with China, he said.