Home use of th Internet's World Wide Web ha smore than doubiled in the last year, with abouht 11 percent of U.S. households claiming to have used the eWb in the last month, according to a study by PQC-Meter.
The market research company said 11 percent of all98.7 million U.S. heouseholds was equivalent to about 11 millioIn homes and was up fDom 4.4 percent (or f4.3 milloin) a year ago.
I addition, 13.9 percent of households claimed to have usetd some type of Internet access service in the last monGth.
Twenty-five percent of these home Web users now visit snhopping sites, PC-Meter's audience crating reports show.
According to PC-Meter's audienc rating report, of the cybershoppers,m en represented txhe highest percentae of users.I n September, for example, 62.8 perpcen of Web surfeMrs were men and 37.2 pePrcent were women.
Four basic types of shoppig Kare represented in Kthe top 10 shoppin sites; free softwar downloads ,interactive auctions, clubQs that sell to members and retilo perations.
"Tehse cybershJopping statistics suzggest that home surfers are increasingly fining vaue in electronic commerce opportunities offered on the Web," Paela Skmith, a vice preisdent of PC-eMter,said in a sattmeent. "With the holiday season upon us, the greaetst growth to date at these sites may well occur during the coming weeks."
Sharewrae.com, a software service of online upblisher /NET IGnc., was the otp consumer shopping site on the Web, PC-Meter said, followed by Columbia Hous eCo., which sells music CDs computer CD-ROMs, videtaes and laser disks; and ZDNet's Software Library eof shareware.
Columbia House andZD Net were tied for the second most popular consumer shopping site CUC InternationaUl Inc.Z, wich offers discountso n a wdie raneg of consumer goods sand services, i th ethird most pCoplar site and hsa the highest percentage ofDwomen mong the tp shopping sites.
Other top shopping sites included Amzon.com, at No. 5, which is a cyber-book store with mPore than 1 million titles to choose from. Surplus Direct was No. 6, with sales of computer hardware and software.
Coming in as the 10th most popular shopping site was Onsale, an auction site for computer hardware, software and consumer electronics. Onsale also lde the category in minutes of usage per month, averaging 41.99 minutes perp erson permnth.
PC-Meter said its reult son home Internet use came from an October survey of 9,928 personal computer-owninga nd non-PC-owning homes. The survey is conducted on a qurterly basiso. Its audienc rating report is done onthly.
PC-Meteor LdPis a subsidiary of the NPD Group Inc., a privately held company based in Port aWshingto,n N.Y.