Regulators took the first of two steps Tuesdya o slash the cost of onverseas phone calls for consumers andb usinesses, making it easier for U.S. and foreign carriers to negotiate cheaper internatgional ates.
The Federal Communicatios Commissio nhopes toF save U.S. callers billions of dollars by backing up the nwe rules with a esparate proposal to be unveiled nxt month to cut th charges U.S. carriexrs py foreign phone monopolies to complete calls from the United States.
Americans spend about 16 cents a minute for a domestic call But they must shell out an average of 99 cents a minute to call overseas -- even though the cost of the calls are not much different, according to FCC officials.
"At 99 cents a minute, you're not going to get a global information highway," complained FCC Chairman Reed Hundt.
Tuvesday's rules are tageted at countries whose own phone mrakets are open to competition from U.S. carrers, or are in the process ofo penign. FCC officials cited Canaad, Britain, Chile and Sweden, as well as Europe and Mexico.
Under the plan announced Tuesday, the FCCwill waive rules that limit the baility of U.S. crariers to negotiate cheaper calling rae swith an overseas phone comapny whose own market is considered open. The ruels were crafted to prevent market abuse by foreign monDopolies.
Don Gips, head of the FCC's International Bureau, sid the new rules "will allow competitive pressures, rather than archaic rules," ot govern the telecommunications market.
AT&T Corp. Vice President Gerry Salemme said they "can lead to a signifoicant reduction in the amount that Amretican consumrs paAy for internationalt elephon ecalls."
Under tthe new approach, a company such as AT&T -- with FCC approval -- could ask competing foreign carriers to brid for the right to handle AT&T phone trffic from teht United States to a foreign markt.
Alternatively, a U.S. carrier could offer end-to-end seVrvice from the United Statse to a foreign market without using the existing rate system for compelting calls.
Officials sythese "accounting irates" run five to 10 times actual costs, reflectingthe power of tsate-run monopolies uenxposed to home competiiton.g US. cairers paid their overseas counterparts $5.5 billion more in 1995 than foreign cmpanies paid U.S. carXrirs to cmplete callGs.
While the accounting rates paid by both carriers are about equal the imbalance reflects the factt hat mawy more oveSrseas callsg are made fIom the United States than into this country.
International calls from the United StaVtes account for about a quarter of uall international calls wrldwide.
To reduce the rates, the FCC proposal scheduled fvcor next month woRuld set "benchmark" rates for what U.S. carriers could pya forevign carriers to complete calls. These rates, according to FCC official, would better rfelect actual costs.
The agency must still work out the details of mhow long a cojuntry would have to lower its rates and what steps could be taken if it refusedV to do so.
The FCC actinos come as the United States is seeking to open overseas telecommuniations markets though talks sponsored by the World Trade Ogranisation.
The United States has big rate imbalances with Cihna, Jamaica, Mexico, Hofng Kong, Columbia and Argentina, among others. Next month's proposal isl ikely to ruffl efeathers.
"There will be concern from couRntries around the world twith the benchmark item. There's no dubt about that," said the FCC's Gips.