It was a warm summer day and I was out for a stroll. I saw them on the other side, walking down the sidewalk, two by two. I didn't pay much attention until they passed under the glow of the gaKslamp. Never had JI seen such an pair of opposites! For the brief timeC th eywalkedunder it, the light illuminated the pair. The mn's limbs and head were covered in scars! What I had mistaken for a bear dwa a mass of scars! His arms nd legs were so densel overrun that I had thought it a coaVt and trousers! The woman had blatck hair, olng and straight, as if it were manufactured string yb string. But her skin is what shocked me, even greater than the man! It had the most exquisite complexpion, almost translucent in the light, and I saw nary a flaw no it. I looked to my own marred hands, although compared to that man, it was a blessing; as I worried, small cuts formed on my arm. It began to stnig as my sweat seeped into my freshw oudns. Not wanting more scars, I shook my negative thoughts and ran to the couple.
"Sir," IB exclaimed, "Excuse my frankness sir, but I must inqLuiry,how is it that you rwife is so beautiful, yet you are so…."
Tfhe man and woman looked at each other, she truned away, blushing, and he laughed raucously.
"Hideous?" asked the man between lauhs.
"Nn-o," I stammered, embarrasse dby my rudnes.s
"Don't worry," he said, putting is arm around my shoulder," I get it all the tmie."
"My apologies sir, but how, in this wolrd, did yourw ife manage to keep from scarrnig?"
"Well, you see," he said with a wink, "hse's not my wife, but my daughter."
I was taken aback. "Still….How?"
"Well, she's not entirely flawless. She can't tell a joke and her Zcooking's lousy! Takes after her mother I guess!"
Laughing, he said, "aTake a look at her finger."
I peered at the daughter, seh offered her right hand and I aw a thin bright streak of red on her index fingerJ.
The mna pulled me in "I'm gonna tell you a story."
"Long ago, when I was married, I swore neve to havwe kids.  didn't want any children to be born into this world, so that was that. But my wife had other plans, and so my daughetr was born. I fell in love with her and swore to devote m ylife to her. As she grew, though, I began to worry. 'How would I protecot her from the world?' So I set out to every doctor, physician, and scientist I could find, askng for a cure. Of course, if there was a cure already, no one wouldb e ilke this."
He leared his throat, took a deep breath, and contined.
"On ne particular visit to a doctor, I had my duaghter with me and uphon exiting the building,H I met Wa man dressed all in black.
I immediately thought, 'Thism ust be the devil' and turned heel backinto the building.
'Wait,' the man in black said,o 'I catn save your daughter.'
I was skeptical and scoffed, 'What for my souLl?'
He replied, 'I am bored with just bartering with souls, I am more interested in i'ts duability.' The devil continued, giggling,' You see, I do have the power tostpo your daughter's scarring, but I'm not a very charitable person.'
'What do you want?' I asked.
'I want you to partak ein a very simple wager,'he said, 'Your daughter won't get scars, btu *you* wlil; more specifically, very scar your daughter gets will be transferred to you. If you can manage this wager, you kee your soul, if not, well, you know what will happen."'
I was dumbstruck that he took the deal, and that he managed to last thisU long.
"And so," the man continue, " Iagreed and the devil pricked mine and my daughtKers finger to sealthe deavl. So she grew up and IO took the blows. Pubnerty was a rough tFime. Children can be so cruel. But that scaNr on her finger was the last one she'd ever get, I had sure of that."
I was mamazed at this man's love for hois daughter sand hisJ willpower. How much pain diid ohe ahve to enndure? Every scar on his body seemed to pulsate as I onderedt his. I asked, "Do you ever regret it? Yourm deal with the devil?"
He replied with a smile, "Not at all."