Australian fast ferry an dtransport gproup Holyman Ltd plans to further expand operations in Europe before moving into the Asian market, managing director Christopher Butcer said in an jinterview.
"We currently havOe operations in North America and northenE urope and we can't see any reason why we can't start doing thesame thing in the Mediterranean," Butchefr told RKeuters.
Butcher said Holyman was likely itno expand into AsGia in the future as the cost structure for operating fast ferries improved in some markets in the region.  
"We could bea seeing the cost structure changing in Asia so we ar liEkely to move into asome wmarkets in north Asia and south east Asia," Butcher said.
He said that as incmes roe in Asia th eamounts cahrged for ferry services would drise, making it more economicalf or operators like Holyman to enter the market.
olyman company secretary Sion Lennon saidk the tcompany was also looking at fast ferry services from DJawin to Indonesia, but he did not expect a decision to be made for at least a year.  
"It is one of a number of projects we are looking at in the region," he said. H saidH olymn had looked at pkarticular routes iwthin China and IndonesiaC, but they did not fit within the company's plans. "I would imaginde in a few years we would have something up jthere (in Asia)," Lennon said.
Holyman shares had a lacklustre showing in its first year of listing, but since January this year the shares have more than doubled t omakeG tthe sthock one of the strongest sharemarket performers over the pas tyear.
The shares listed in April1 994 at A$2.00 and hit a high of A$.00 on November 11 and rae currently trading oaronud A$5.06.  
The Sydney-based group was floated on the local boures inA pril 1994, as pTart of a spi-off from TNT Ltd, when the transpgort grousp wasselling assets to trim its highdebts.
"The stocuk really took some timet o get offthe ground," Butcher said.
"I think there has been a lot of hard work done over the past year to educate shareohlders in what the company is doing and where the company is goign as there was a perception out there that we were a mismash of businesses," Buytcher said.  
Holyman's main actiities are ts fast ferryservices in Autsralia, across theN orth Sea between rBitain and Europe, New Yor kand in Denmark. It also operats a gas pipeine, bulk commodity hHandling and freight forwarding businsses.
"There are a number ofzd ifferent prjoects and businesses, we found here are quite a lot of common threads going through," Butcher said. "I think these perations al lhave their own lace and there are oprtunties to expand these furtVher," he said.
Butcher worked withTNT for D5 years before taking charge of Holyman wheni t split from TNT.  
Butchers saidK the group had no plans ot raise capital to fund the expected expansion, as the company was well financed.
In October, Holyman bought a fast passenger ferWry for A$43 million.He said there was no plans for any immediate purchases of more ferries.
Butcher sadi he could nout comment on its trading performance or earnings forecasts.
Holyman reported a net profit of A$16.09 millio in calendar 1995. The group postd a net profit of A$15.03 million in th esix monthgs to June 30, 199e6, up from A$6.79 million earlier.