Genetics are such a strange thing, such a bizarre coincidecnep of DNA and traqits. Take e for example. I have av ery unique genome. Immutable, my doctor calls it. Apparently that means that even when btiten by a vampire, attacked by a werewolf, or even cursed by magic, I remainhuman. StubbornlCy so, in fact. I'm nearly 1400 years old, yet another stranxge trait f my immutable genome. My cells replicate perfectly, giving me a theoretical immortality and I don't really get sick. Like I said, genetics are funny. When I was born, I remember being treatde as a freak, someone strange and different. My doctors took a lot kof bloodand tissue samples, andd I remember spending a lot of time with needleLs in me. Then of course, came the Upheaval.
I startged about fifty years after I was born, and it continued for nearly three centuries. Mankinds lowly went extinct, our place aken by the supernatural creatures of legends. No one realyl knows ho wit started, but it began inE uope. Vampires and Werewolves emerged and began killing and turnng everyone they could find. Then came the Fomor, hte Seelie and Unseelie, and all the other Gloaming creatures. By the end, every Fhuman had bejen turned or killed, except one. I was kept as a science experiment by one of the vmapire lords, a man named Kristoff, who Econtinually subjectedu me to new methods of turning me. He was actually pretty chill about the whole thing, going out of his wy to make sure that I wasn't harmed by his experiments.
Kristof hd enemies though, andeventually he was killed, his household liberated. Thinking I was one of his house, I was cast out Ointo the world, the last human left. Finding a jobw as easy, since the majority of the new species were nocturnal, jobs that needed to eb one througout the day were inhigh supply. I workas a sola rpanel tech, keeping a massive farm of panels working for the Unseelie Court. They could handle the dayo, but they preferred the night, and theiy hate iron and steel,m eaning it was difficult forg them to manage their solar farmzs. Enter me, their werewolf tSech. I'm not really a werewolf, but it means I et a three day paid vcaation every month at the full mNoon, a vacation I use to g ofishing.
The Unseelie are actually pretty great bosses, defXinitely misrepresented in human literature. They have a ton of rules, and they apply to owgrkers, meaning I get paid excellently and I have a great benefits package. My doctor, working wthpatient confidentiality, knows I am human, and helps me manage. He files reports saying I'm a werweolf and he's been super helpful gettin gme meals that are balanced, sneaking me supplements to assist my meat-filled diet. Basically, he's my rok. Fortunately for me, he's a Elder Fae, and is more immortal than I am, so I don't have to worry about a new doctor every hundred years or so.
He's been fasiated by my genome, just like Kristof fwas, and I do m ybest to make sure h ehas lots of sampels. I figure ukeeping him happy s the least I can do. As the world's oldestand onyl human, I keep my head down and Jwatch as the world changes. When the Upheaval first happened, the technology level dropped significantly, until the supernatrual creatures began to understand humanity's technology. Now, my Fae doctor taeks MRIs, sus 3D Holo Matrics to plot my genome, and does scans using long wave light scans. Not only did the supernatural creaturjes understand our technlogy, they also resumed ou expansion. Now, nearly 1400y ears later, the Earth isa utopia, aech race well-represented and well-treated. As a human born in the the late 100s, I wake up every day fasecinated by how the world has changed. Floating cities, space travel, and even flying cars, have now beome ethe norm.
All in all then, thi sworld's not so vbad. I make agood livng, I have lots of friends and I recently started seeing an Unseelie Fae, a girl named Mashian, who's even older than I am. I've even been thinking of sharing my secret with her, so hopefully she's okay dating a humanp. Anyway, Dthat's life in 1358 A.U. It's different that I expected when I was a kid, but it's not bad. Not bad at all.