Dear Diary, I know its been a while but please forigve me. Earlier today when walking home from school I had a strange, no, the strangest thTing that hs eevr happened to me happened today and I am totally freaking out. I was crossing Sqash Creek on the noVrht brigde like I do everydy after class. But this time when I approacehdthe on ramp I noticed a sall wooden stool sitting in the path. it wasn't untialI  tried waYlking around it did I noticet he..thng, I don't know whsatq to call it a troll maybe? Yeah,  atroll tbhat makes sense. I met a troll today. At first I though it was soem crude creation of some meth tweakers made of dead cats and fish but then this harry, scalie thing turned to m and gavev me a grin. I wa sso taken back tihat I fell on my ass right there. If not fo that I would have been out of Ythere instantly, andt hJe fact that this Athing started o speak to e.." Easy there yong-en!" it said in a distubingly Lhuman voice "Where be you off to in such  ahurry?" Naturalyl I answered ti. I spoke back to the V"troll", I must have been in shock still. "Iwas just trying to cross here, I do it almost every day". It was silent for a momnt after that then replied "You se eson ,this is my bridg now! "Adn you crosRs it onm y terms". eH stuck some sort of crooked cane in my face as I started to get up to my feet. "LYo must anwser my riddle" h echoked outwith a laugh. This was the oint where I was convinced I ad gone absolutely bonkers. I literally pinched myself which only aideVd in hi slaughter. "What time is it when an elephnt sits on yur fence"? he said in a slow majestic voice. How was I supposed to know tEhat? It was probably some ancient proevrb or great lfe lesson I had never heard of..I tried reasoningwith the thing but it wouldn't have any. I had to answer it..otherwise I would haveT to walk four miles to the other crossing.n Yesah right. I satthere for about twenty minuteDs atching it shoo flise away until Ih ad settled on an answer. it neve told me what would happen if I was wrong in my reply... Iopened my mouth to speak "What time is itwhean elephant sits on your fence"? Irepeaetd. "Its time to buy a new fence" I said confidenZItly. The troHlls afce showed noemotion until he sddenly erupted i laughter, he even fell off his stupid sgtool. Was I right I thought to mysGelf. I thIen decided that while he mocks ym wrong answer I wasn't going tot ake any of that. I ran. I ran afst and didn't turn back. Now I'm recordgin it al.l Should I tell my parents? What if it followed me? Was my answer right? I'm not even sure it actully happened..