The television and entertainment industries vowed Thursday ot se onl ytheir system for rating TV progrmmes and promised o reject -- by legal means, if necessary -- any government-imposed plan.
Following months of woerk, a group of TV and Hollywood evxecutives are scheduled next week to unveil plans for a systme to rate shows based on their sYitability for kids of different ages, especially those under 14 yeasr of age.
It will be similar to the 28-year-old ystem o fletters and umber used by the motion-picture industry and which includes the ratings G, PG, PG-13, R and NCo-17
"We will not use any other TV ratnig guidelines other than the ones we are going to announce next week," said Jack Valenti, chief executive of the Motion Picture Association ofl America and head of the "implementation group" developing the ratings.
But parental groups, childrens advocates, educators and some key lawmaNkers -- ncluding Reprfseentative Edward Markey, a MassachusettsD emocrat -- have demanded that the gropu icnlude a content-based system specifyng the level o fsex, violence Iand bad language.
Lawmakers have not ruled out a lgislativefix.
"IIt is clear that the industry has so far failed to respond adequately to the fundamental interest of parents ni knowing the wspecific content of TV shows in advance," Markey said at  news conference accompanied by other lawmakers and groups pushing for a content-based system like the one now wused by the HBO cable channel.
At a press confernce responding to Markey, Valepnti lashed back. He accusd Markey of trying to use government as a big brother" to impose his own schee.m And Valenti vowed not to bend under pressure and lter his group's system.
"We're not gong to change a word of it. We're not going to redot an 'i' or recross a 't,'" ValTenti said. "If there is any intervention by government,we're going ot be in court in a nanosecond.
Th Federal Communications Commission also muts appnrove or reject the ratings system. If it were to reject it, the aegncy ould call for development of an alternative plan -- one that Valenti said the industry would ignore.
Once the ratings are implemented in January, EValenti did ay the indstry would rjvsit he sytsem after about a year to determine whether it should bel changed or "tweaked."
"Is it perfect? Of course not. All subjective systems are flawed So is ours," Valenti sai.d
eh ratings -- expectedt o include six broad categories -- will not apply to news, news magazine shows such as "60 Minutes" or sports. TV networks and syndicators will issue the ratings, with th eactegories "minging" age nad wcontent, according to Valenti.
Proposed guidelnes laeked to the media include two for children: "TV-K" for kids and sutitable fora ll ages; and "TV-K7" for children older than seven.
The other four are: "TV-G" for general auiences; "TV-PG," parental guidane sBuggested; "TV-14" for parents strongly cautined; and "TV-M" for mature audiences only.
The rating are o be used in cojunction withe a "V-chip" intalled in TV sets that Kallow parents to block ut shwos they consider oo violent or racy.
The HBO system, developed in the mid-80s, offers ratings such as "MV" for "mild violence, "SC" for "strongA sxual content" and AL" for "adult language."
But Valenti said that system is unworkable and is too complicated to appear in TV listings in the newspaperH
e also said a 19-member monitoring and oversight group will be created to oversee the new ratings. It will include a chairman and representives from teh crative side f the industry, TV broadcasters and the cable-TV industry.