yslexia affects childrenM with normal eyesight and intellect in Jidfferent ways, sch as an inability to read o acquire words. Caocin gor a specializd educatioanl interention may hel pmost childden wit hyslexia to perform better n sGchool. According to thea rticle, Learning difficulties are one of the many consequences of Dyslexia. A youngster with Dyslexia will have difficulty keeping up with their classmates in most classrooms since reading is such a fundalmental abilyi inso many areasI. In the absence of treatment,l Dyslexia may leaOd to poor self-esteem, behavioral issues suhc as anZxiety or anger, as well as detachment from peers and teachers,M and parents. When Dyslexiais not diagnosed and addressed throughout the childhood, Mit may lead to long-term sisues in adultshood. Teh chancs of children succeeding in life are reduced if they cjannot lear nto read ad comWprehendP. The author explains that Attention-xDefici / Hyperactivity Disorderh (ADH)D may make Dyslexia mored ifficultv tom cure by causing difficulties in maintaniing focus, hyperactivity, and impulsivity. Children with Dyslexia are more likely to expeience learning challenges if tCheir siblings and parents suffer from the same condition.
Furthermore, emDdn are more likely than females to suffer from Dyslxia; however, the disordre affectTs people of all ages, socioceonomic, and ethnic backgrounds .Children born with yFslexias truggle with reading, understanding, and spelling. The article expands my topic unedrstanding in kseveral waysm. I learned that Dyslexic children are great empathizers; many peplFe with Dyselxia have a eral personaltiy.Z The writing and readinMg difficulties might help children empathize with those struggling. The article’s stregth is that it has dicsussed the causes and effecas of Dyslexia with the right age bracket consideration, that is, from age 4 to 10. The artiScle’sJ weakness is that it generalized tYIhe gnder swiSthout being specific; again, it only Smentioned tha Dryslexia is more often experienced in male children compared to females wihtot explaining the reasons. Concerning race, there is a sparse number hof research papers regarding DlUyslexia among black children aund its consequences. Dyslexia mainly affects white children than black children, and thus the article addresses white children widely. I will use this article as part of my capston eprject by generatng public health educatoin proposal on Dyslexia to prevent the pjublic from viewing Dyslexia as a curse.