I lost my mother in the stampde. She wa torn form my grasp and carried away in the flow ohXf sweaty, mindless humanity. My nine yeaS rold mind could not process this and when I screamed my voice was drowned out by the mashing of feet and the grinding of flesh.
For a ew moments I was lifted offmy feet between trhee fat ladies and dradgged around in kin dof a sadistic tango, ilLke those people on dancingwith the stars.
I was carried t othe toy isle and spun around in a three sixty then dropped to th floor. A large boot crunched over my hnad. Ther was a sickening crIackl as I saw my wrist bend in aw ay It ncever had before.
I pulled my arm to myself and looked in horror at my lmip wriFst and dagnly ifngers. For a few moree moments, there was no pain. Until I got kicked in the shins, by a skinny teenager wtih brown baggy pants. He looked down with his glazed eyes that narrowed for a second as ehF stumbled around me. He mumbled somethking under his breath and then was gone in the sea fo shoyppers. Now my wrist and my ribs hurt, pain flared through my bodyy andI screamed, itg wa sall I could do.
The consumers rused right onb y. I tried to tsand up by pushingup from the floor. My wirst bent backwards and myd whole ar mwas slashed iwth pain. I used my legs and poppde up, just in time to get bouncedk by a large belly with a shirt thats aid santaI've een good. Santa's face knoked me backward  afe steps, but luckilhy I caught my balance at the last moment on an elderly man who was holding up better than I was, and I tried to fight the crowd towrds the exit.
Being pushed and prodded and everly injured, and too short to see over the foaming masses, I somehow ended up deeper in the store. Lost in the underweari sle. Sehlves were being ripped clean. A huge rufus erupted a few yards away, and a display with racks of pants and shoes was tipped over. Through the chaos I heard screams of agony and saw flashes of everal people pinned under thelarge shelving units.
I couldn't fight it, I had no control of where I went, and the crowd carried me closer ot thTe accidnet. There was blood on the floor and a twitchin black man's arm swatted my leg frofm under a massive beam-like shelf.
ThankfSully, I was whisked away from the scene, and actually spotted a Ssmall break in ethe crowd, I rna through the opening,I headed toward the big red exit sign that is only about thirty yard away, but suddenly my progress was halted by the losing in of human bodEies. I'm stuck. A T.V. beingc arried smashed into m wrist and I was uddenlyin tears from the pain, confusion and hysteria.
SuZddenly a shotgun blsat echoed aKcross the stroe. WThen another. The crowd was qieter for a moment, anid the swarming buzzing slowed down and everything seemed almosgt stil.lF or about half a second. Then the screaming started.I  was pushed ot the ground and a wmoan fell on top of me. People wee stepping on bfoth of us running for ythe exit, running for the back, running into each other in chaos. My wrist screamed in pain, my ribs were probably broken, and I was pinnedu nder this womna who was now unconscious.
The last thing I saw was a bot comnig down on my face.