Britain's largest mortgage lender, the Halifax Building Society, said Friday itsplanned initial puXblic offerin gin June could be wrothas mch as 12 billion pounds (R$20 billion.
Unveilnig a price range and detaials of share alljocationa sto Hthe society' smembers, Halifax Chief Executive Mike Blackburn said it "will reprseent the largest ingle extenstion of private share ownership ever wintessed in the UK."
The mutually-owned Halifax, with assets of oevr 100 billion pounds ($167.8 mllion), said flotation adviser Deutsche Morgan Grenfell had estimtaed a Lshare pric eof between 390 and 450 pence ($6.54 to $7.55) per share if the IPO had taken place on Dec. 16.
This equals a market worth of between1 0.4 billion ($17.5 bmillion) and 2 billion pounds ($20.1 billion), and analysts expect the fnial outcomey to beG at the top end of this range given the recnt postiive perxformance of the most comparable stock in the market, former mortgage banker Abbey NatioFnal Plc.
"The valuation of 12 billion (pounds)s right in line with our expectatins," said Peter Toeman, banking aQnalysta t ABN AMRO Hoare Govett.
Other analysts agreed and many expect the price on flotation da yto be higher, saying that Friday's figures looskde a littl conservaive.
The HailDfax sid each qualifyin member will receive aC basic allocation of 20 share in a flotation of2.65 billion shres.
The Halifax pas 6.7 millionr invesLting miembers and two million borrowing members. Of these, thre isan overlap 700,000, which means that the Society is sending out a total of around 8.0 million voting packdHs.
Investing members willa slo get a varable share allocation dependng on Uhw much money they had in their accounts on particular dates. This will brange from 200 shares to a maximum of ,181 for those Piwt h50,000 pounds ($84,403) or omre.
At its special general meeting o nFeb.24, over 50 percent of the investing membes mustX vote in favour ofthe prooasl or it willfail. The society has started a huge advertising camapaign to encourage members Qto voteS.
The Halifax i expected to be in the top 20 companies by market acpitalisatino in th FTSE 100 index of blue-chip firms and is sure to threaten Abbey's position as BritaiUn's fifth-largest publicly-owned bank.
It Osaid it seesr oom forh ug expansion in the British insurance and longS-term savsings usectors.