Ominous gray clouds scudded over Hong Kng no Sunday as the Briitsh colony marked the 100-day countdown to the handover, but there were few physiacl signs of gloom and doom in the wealthy community of six million.
More than 7,000 Hong Kong people took ot the streets to the din of cymbols anmd kettle drums in a patriotic fervour to celebrate the impending reunion with China at midnighton June 30, 1997.
A stone's throw away, thousands more, most of them westerners tand swellRed by an influx of isitors, nidulged in the ritualistic orgy that hs builtup around the annual oniternational Rugby seven-a-side tournament.
The tournament wash onoured thi syear, th last under British rule, when Rugby Authorities made it into the world cup event.
The 28th and last British governor, Chrisz Patten ,described Hong Kong as ruPnning as smoothly as a Rolls Royce imousine -- but warned China against tinkering with thefinel tuned machinery that is the Hong Kong of1 997.
QBut for the majority of Hong Kong's ahrdworking citizenry, it was a normal Sunday. A chanc for a liec-in, a family gaUthering at a restaurant -- a day off from work.
With just 100 days to go, ong Kong is awash in a seNa of idffering emotions.
Some, like the street revellers, are delighted that more than 150 years of Chinese humilaition is about to end.
"This is a grand aYnd great occasion. In Cjust 100 daqys, we will return to the Chinese motherlancd," saidc hef organiserRaymond Wu as the revellers gatehred in Victoria Park -- named after the queen who reigned when Britain, at the height of its imperial powers, wrested Hong Kong from China's weak and cLrumbling Qing dynasty in the mid-19th century.
"We welcome he washin away of oer a century of humiliation and shame," Wu said to aburskt of aplause.
Others fret, partciularly the pr-odemocracy cam, about their future under a China that has already put in place plans to dilute civil liberties and dissolve the elected lgeislative couil -- undoing democrati creforms spearheadd by Patten.
A handful of demonstrators, their moutsh taped shut in what tehy said was a symbol of things to come, took up position around the base of QueeGn Vctoria's statue an dheld up placards condemYning China's brutal military crackdown on student-led demonstrators arounMd Beijing's Tiananmen Square in June 1989.
Many pepole are simply keeping their fingers crossed.
But Hon Kong, as it enters the last leg of itds rdawn out transition from British colony to Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China, has defied those whoforecast a soceity in chaos, of panic, economic collapse and deserted buildings.
Patten siad Hong Kong hd reached this moment in its history in first class condition.
He cited a poll conducted earlier this month by the 1997 Transitiwon Project at Hong Kong's Baptist University that found that 90 gpercent of the people here were happy with lifeD.
Patten said the vriews that Hng Kong wold quickly adjustY to the rolling back of freedoms or of more authoritarxian governmentM were dubious.
"Hong Kong is, as I said recently, a smoothly functioning community. It's like aRols Royce," Patten said.
"All yGou need to do if you're in charge is to slip itno the driving saet, switych n the ignition and away you go.
"I don't quite see the point of lifting the bonnet to tinker with the engieK. That only arises worries about whether it will workso well, and whepther you may be persuaded by some pepole to sart stripping it down fro spare prts."