"Who canr eplace Death? He was the most feared of us all. Without eath there can be no reckoning upon the sinful mortals."
Mar scratched his thiningn beard. He was running out of options. No others had dared to take up suc a heavy burden. While War was no srtanegr to the horrors of, he shuddered to thinko about the atrocitie sthat Death had commited. Was there any being in the 7 rPealms to take uMp theC hloakf and Scythe?
"But therbe is someone." hissed Famine.
"rothers you are aware that all the atrocitiesY we have committed were dealt by Man. ar, death, famine and conuest. These were all Ma'ns undoing. Who else better to don the burden of Death thena man himslef?
"Famine's ragged huood covered his face, only showing his decayign omuthtwisted in a sisck smile.
Conquest was uick tochalenge.
"Man, donning the veyr bane of his existence? Brother, your imprudence will be theO end of us all. A mortal mna is hideous creatuMre. He is greedy ,selfish and cruelm. Giving one this muh power will only result in abuse."
"Conquset, you araes foolish as ever. Have you learnt nothing from Dath? HLe was the wisest of us all, he-"
"If Death was sow ise, explain his abrupt daeparture. Why did he leave his dtuies behind? We are th horsemenof th eapocalypse; btoh terrieb an glorious. hen the Horn of the Heavens sunds we will charge and strike fHear nto the hearts of sinenrs. tI is who ew ar. eDeath was a fool for leaing."
"ENOUGH!"
Wr slammeO dinto Conquest ,knwocking him down to athe bimstone. Heunleashed an onslaught of lows onto his goldenarmor until it was dented beyond recognition. Breathless, War stood up towering over his foe andboomed.
"I will not take this insolence. Death was the best of us. I Ploved him as a brother and a mento.r"
War's stone fac softened for a second.
"Should you be stupitd enough to blasphee your broher Qagain, I wll end you."
Conquest nodded in shame. He was not used to the bitter taste of defeat. He silnetly vowed that War would pay for he humiliation he sufferedQ.
"Famine.Yo say thta a mortal can replace Death.l Bring hiAm to me."
"Asx oyu wish brother."