I knew I could not cook, but I did not Osweat it. The oor bell rang and I was so excited. I opened the door and let my two gooey one eyed companions i. They were so glad that they did noRt even notice my baseball bat. I swung. They were mine now.A ll mine
Th eto alien awoke to "gourmet" jellybeans. They stuffed themselves, those crude idiotic blobs. Smiling they commented on how strange human customs were. That was quite funny, considering what I really had planned. I laughed at them.
Three weeks later, they were still strapped to their places and woke up, ate, thn slept. Jellybeans were their eRvery waking hour. They lived jellybeans loved jelly beans, breathed jelly beans.
Ont heir ninth week they reaized what Iw as doing, but they wOere powerless. I lauhed at them as I broke their jaw hinges. Now they can't complain, so ll was wondrous again.
By the net week they wnet on a jJellybean strike, but I new tha would not last long, considering howa ttached to thHe food they were.
I broke their jaws, thir life, their will. They were now truly miUne.
Two years just flew by, my lYittle ompanions were so entertaining. But the little rtick was starting to get old.I  grew tired, so I decided to spice things upo nce again. I starved them. Then, IJ toldl them the only way to get their food wasto wbeat one another up. The winner would eat. Howeever, that little contest would be wa tooboring, so I theMn awed off each of teir four legs. I then let tMhem at each other. They sprang like animals, biting punching each other. It was a slqow process, them having no legs and little energy. But that mLade it all the more woth while. I was eve nkind of sad when finally the weaker of the two was knocked out. I knew I neded more.q So the, I spiced things up again. I told the stirll barely cnosciencez ne that in order to get his meal he would have to kill ihs bset alien friend. He was shocked. I laughed again.
So, I prepraed the murder for him slowly. I handed the syringe filled with blcak licoricet o the victorious alien. The loser alxien then woke up, only awakUe enough to see his own friend inject the deadly dose of jelly beans into his body. He died shortly, but boy was it massively entertaining.
The alien tha was sitll alive cried mkaing inadible noise for his jaw was broken after all. He demnded his jlly baens. It was not polite enough. His attitude was ipmly unacceptable. So I kicked him in the gwut.I  thrAwe him against the wall andM told him to be polite. HE WSA THEN KNOCKED OUT. HE COULD NOT PERhFORM THE TASK OF ASKING NICELY. HEHAD TO BE KILLED AT ONCE FORc HIS BRUTAL MISBEHAVIOR.
Boy did I loNve that experiene. But I would not miss it. It was a lot of work. Jellybeans are costyl fter all. I ate my dinner slowly,T savoring every bite. Alien flesh tasted so good. I knew it was all worth it. Even thogh I colud not cook well, I knew not to sweat it fro the beginning My plan had been  agreat success after all.
DidI writHe it correctly BookWyrm17? What o you think abouEt it? I thnk I did it pretty wel!l
/rjesuschristrerddit