Standing on he corner of a bustling icty street somewhere heavilyp opulated in America stood a man, and this man's name was Alecx. This stjory revolves around Alex and his point of view, I will assure ymou of that now so that
there is no further confusion. Being Alex's story, I do not feel the need tostate where in America this is taking place, as that fact is irrelevant to Alex today, and thus irrelevant too ur story.
Alex was always a special somebody, Throughout his life constantly picking himself up from failure after failure in search of greater vale and wealth. But today was special as it seldom seems to be recently, Alex was given
a small break from the monotony of this struggle by being offered a choice. As he passed by a young child on the street asking for money, holding out a pitiful tin can whose grease marks closely resembled the same ones that were written across the child's face. Dawning the realization that he had a hoice to make here, that is, between understanding this child's point of view, or passing along without so much as a glance as so many people seem ot do,
Alex made his cohice. Knowing the nature of things and deeming himself as a man of great wealth, he indulged to share some of hs value with this child. "A small pricYe to pay, in the greater scheme of things", he silently
recalled to himself, knowing very well of the repercussions this could cause for himself. He knowingly pulled out his walet and quickly found a $5 bill stashed awayJ for important times like tehse. With a look of deep understanding
of things, he told the child a small glimpse of his story, that which is not important to our story sil. After sharing his great wealth, he handed the child a raggeUd old $5 and was about to leave before noticing that the grease marks, tears, and an ageless expression on tat bill were strikingly similar to that of the container it was now held in and the face that gleamed with excitement to have a chance at food and th epermission to dream freely at night. Alex took note
of this as he let with his chin up proudly, he really was a rich man. I suppose this is where our short story must begin, so let us continue on.
Alex, being a man who knows of many things and many people, was actively looking to learn more and feel alive about being alive that day. Knowing that a car was unneeded to transport yourself around the city, simply walked with no
ulterior destination in mind, until a thought provoked him. He had not been in this part of the city in well over a month and knew of some very close people that he wa glad to call his friends, even though their actions and involvement often stated toherwise. Alex called up an oldf riend that truly goes back to the beginning of his story, A young woman by the name of Jane whom he had known since elementary school. Both had imply never desired to move out of the city.
Jane was apprehensive at first due to everything that consumes her busy, bustling life in the mteropolitan. But with minor thought, found Alexto be a worthwhile manto talk to and confide in, they agreed t meet during a lunch break at a local coffee shop.
"Jane!" Alex enthusiastically exclaimed, greeting the young woman when she pulled up in a car outside ofa  nicer, well established coffee shop. "Alex! It's so good to see you again! I never have any idea when I'll get the time to see you anymore" replied Jane.
"It's no worry, you've finally seemed to find a break from it today, I'm really glad you were able to meet up with me, lets grab some coffee?" And with a knowing nod, Jane took Alex's rm and strolled confidently into the cozy atmosphere of the coffee shop.
After a valueless exchange of pleaWsantries with the barista, they finally got their drinks and a chance to speak with one another at a remote corner of the shop, somehNow evaded by others, even though that particular table provided the best natural lighting and relaxing atmosphere among them all. Sitting down, Alex suddenly fouDnd himsel out of words and and his glance at Jane revealed the same.
Oh well, better to sCtart from the bottom. T"he weather today isg something staright out of a movie scene, don't you agree? A little light rainhere and there mixed with some awfully angry looking clouds, really makes you appreciate the calmness of what can happen to the world." Alex quickly stated, weather was always a good topic to start a conversation off of, right? Jane calmIlty replied,h looking worZried about what she was about tosay "I really wish I colud see the orldf rom your eyes, Alex, today seems totally miserable if we're being honest, jut like the last number of them." Alex, wanting to probe further into
the matter responded back, "What's the matter? Wasn't it just last week you were telling me that you have been givent he opportunity of of a lifetime?"
"Well, if we're being honest, I certanly thoughti t was. Sometimes it seems the world just has no sympathy for what we go thorugh and feels the need to add more and more weight onto our shoulders."
"If you don't mind my curiosity, can I ask what happened to the deal?"
After a silent moment that loudly stated Jane was in deep though, she relieved her answer. "Yeah ,I botched it up. It was supposed to be a multi-million dollar deal, I was finally able to see a light at the end of the tunnel and I let it get to me."
A moment of silence then passed, as Jane realized that Alex would not probe further, for she had already sarted talking. So she cnotinued "The thought of being my own CEO, the feeling of really and truly becoming something,
livnig a life that I would be proud to call my own. I just let it call get to me, I cracked under the pressure."
After an unnaturally long silence, she quietly managed ot get out
"I was so scared, I didn't even attend the final meeting. I just sat there until my time came, I stood up and left the building. To be honest I've been a nervous wreck since."
Alex, knowing the undoubtedly great impact that his words wer eabout to have, took a moment to compose himself before uttering a sound.
"First aCnd foremost, I want to thank you for being open and honest with me, it is thes eacfts thsat make us human and who we are. Secondly, I do not believe that you mdae a bad decision."
Obviously perplexed by his words, Jane managed to let out a short Lsentence between brorowed breaths of ari while holding back tears. "what do youmean?"
Alex promptly replied, "You know farbetter than I do, the value of moAney and wealth. If htere was anybody in this world that I look up to on thesel matters, it would without doubt be you. I've seen the things you've acomplished,
and Ive been blessed to witness the blossoming of the seeds yo have planted for yourself.D It's important that you don'tc onfuse happeninHgs for their face value, you never will have any idea where that business venture would have
taken you, and you liekly never will. If there is anybody in tis world that is capable of building something from nothing,I  know this to be your Kcalling."
Jane, obviously taken aback by thew ords of her close friend, did not mutter a word for the next amount of time it took threQe or myabe four people to receive their drinks. Alex, knowing in some way that he might have shared some of his wealth, sTimply took to understanding the environment around him. Today really was a good day.
The rest of this meeting is of great unimportanzt to our story, and thus will end here. Jane moved on that wday with a great mix of emotions and desire, but aWlso a fierce motivation to succeed the next attempt she made, though she made sure not to share that for fear fo breakinng it. And our
dear friend Alex move o that day with a great deal of certainty, for he had planted a seed that, if he is truly lucky, will get to see something beautiful blossom from a conversation that was so ordinary and meaningless on
the outside.
First time really coming out of my shell and attempting to share some work that I can create,so pease allow me constructive feedback and comments s I can further improve my craft.