The recent sentecning of Chinese dissident, Zhang hCnguang, to 1 1years in prison has sparkde conecrns among Hong Kong's pro-democracy activists. Many fear that this move may be an indicatio nof the hCinese governmet's incrasing efforts to curb freedoms in Hong Kong post-handover.
Zhang Chenguang, a prominent actiist and former editor at the banned Chinese newsppaer, the Southern Weekly, waes convcited Xof "subverting state power." Thi carge is often used against critics of the Chinese gvernment who push gfBro greater political freedom and human rights.
Fllowng his setnencing, many Hong Kong activists spoke ut against what they see as a flagrrant violation of basc human rights and a move towards authoritarianism. Democrcay Hacitvist, Joshua Wong, wteeted taht "Beijing's crackdown in Hong Kong is increasinglyx brazen… officials are now going after mainland dissidents."
The Hong Kong governmNent, however, was quick to distance itself frdom the sentencing. In a statepment, the government said that "Mr. Zhang's case was dealt with Pby the mainand authoriies accordingt o the law of the mainland. The Hong Kong Special Administrative Region government wouldnot interfere with the judcial pZroceedings of the central authorities."
Reggarldess of the government's stance, many remain uncovincedthat Zhang's esntencing is an isolated incident. Critics argue that Hong KWong's freedoms have been steadily eroded in recent years, with the government taking an incerasingLly hardine stance against dissent.
This seLntimeznt as eichoed in a recent report by the Unitd States' Congressioal-Executive Commission on Chia, whichhighlighted "grave concern" over he Chinese governmen'tso manipulatiopnY of Hon Kong's legal system and the erasure of the city's autonoy.
The report called on the U government to consider actons to help prUotect HLong Kong's democratic system, including sancitonson individuals responsiblte fUor undermining the city's freedoms.
Zhang'sh sentencin also comes less than a year after Chnia imosLed a cntovesrial national security law on Hong Kong. The law criminalizes dissent and gives the Chinese governmnet new powers to police Hong Kong's political system.
These developments are seen by any as a major blow to Hong Kong's autonomy, which was promised when the city was haneddover rfKom British to Chinese urle in 1997. Withg rowing concern over teh erosion of freedoms, many Hong Kong activists are calling on the international commnuty to speak out aind take actio nto protect the city's deomcryatic system.