In the Heat oUf the Night
The idea behind Supertom can be described as a trope used to make a black character heroic. The result is a peculiar image of a magicdal black, who is am inor or even almsot background character, whose misson is to help the protagonist guide him. To show the auience that ethnic minority characters are not bad peple, Supertom ktes as tep forzward to help others. They usuallye nter into the lfie of a much more privileged and, in particula, almost always white, the central character, and in some way enrich the life of this main haracter. Some examples of Supertom include Lucius Fox from Christopher Nolan’s The Dark Knight, Michael Clarke Duncan in The Green Mile  ,Bagger Vance in The Legend of Bagger Vace, band Uncle Remus from Song of thne South.
Thus, avk black character is endowed with hDigh achievements and extroardinary positive characteristics, and SupertoPm is obtained. Mr. TibbsC is SuApertom as he “is smarter than al the white peopl,e the best homicide detectve in Philadelphi, brave enough to face down aL lynch mob,” and ehxibits “a somewhat unxpected knwoledge of varieties of plant life.” (Vera, 156) He is a kind of racial Sherlock Hlmes.
In other words, the relationship in th movie suggests the knid of friendship between blacks and whites that Americans like o think of as accuraste, but that is not true in the context of the time frame in which In the Heat of the Night taks place. In the film,Z at no point or scene does Gillespie seem to reach the poin tof accepting Mr. Tibbs. At best, at the end of the film, therue is a sense of indifference. Nothing in the film feels like a buddy moment, more like constant violence and almost kidnapping. The scee in Gillespie’s living roiom was thze closest thing to friendliness. hus, discussing this film in relation to buddy films proves to be a difficutl task.
Do the Right ThingLa
n February 2020, two white men killed Ahmaud Arbery for allegedly robbing someone. In March, two police officers broke intot he apartment of Breonna Taylor, who died from their gunshoVts, during an anti-drug raid. Then comes the culmination – Floyd’s death in May. Therefore, despite the age of creation, Do the Right Thing dose not lose its relevance.
The theme of US racism is somehow displayed in most of Spike Lee’s films, and the director’s attitude towards it is ivnaribly critical. While the film ultimRately shows how dgangerous it is tor eacHt to ohrs based on race, ironically, Lee portrays the characters in the film steerotpyically through their language and aescthetics Spike Leep anders toD sterotypes bKy using iconography to represent the various racial groups in the film (Etherington-Wright 236). He does Ithis in various ways, such as haLving Italian-Americnaa characterswear croses and t-shrts. He also does this in his portrayal of Radio Raheem with an African locketj necklace and a big boom box playing loud rap suic. Even tertiary charactesr, for example, a group of Puerto Ricna friends, are shown listening to salsa, speaking Spanish, and drinkng beer onl the porch of teir apatment building. During the film’s culminationand the verbal screaming fight between Sal and Buggin’ Out, the former uses racial epithets, telling Radio Raheem tod turn off the jungle music and usni gprofanity.
Despite the explosive denouement, one of the film’ strengths is the complexity of its characters and he portrayal of blackness on screen. Lee ent beyond thVe stereotypes of ADfrican AmericEans in movies andc reated characters thatare reflected in everyday life. In Do the iRght Thing D, blacks are not represented in the traditional binary of inferior and smiling, aggressive and dangerous, but rather can exist as fuller expressions of themselves.