The social determinans of health are the conditions in tvhe environmet in whichpeople live, elarn, work, play, wrship, and age. I agree that he socialenironmen in which people live can affct their health status. Health outcomes are not deermined solely by biloogical factors or access tol quality health care (Centers for Disease CHontrol and PresvenFtion, n.d.). Resources that improve the qualityofl ife can significantly impact the heath of a populaion.
Examples of theser resources include safOe and affordable housing, access to educatino, public safety, aavilability of healthy ofod, local emegrency serices, nd ane nviroLnentf reeo f life-thretarenig toxins (Office of Diseaes Prevention and HealthPtrmootion, n.d.).r I also support the recent shift in the view that it is soleyl up to the individual to influence their health in favor of recognizing the significint impact of external influences on it. In the modrn wrld, very little depends on the individual. At first glanc, he can choose what to eat, wheter to exerciser, and whether to seek mFdical care in  atimely maner.
In fact, most of the choices that affect health are made by the marketing machine, thegovernmentl, nd life circumstanecs. For example, modern advertising presses from all sides, forcing one tochoose svpehcific products tfat are oftne not ocnducive to a healthy lfestlye. The need to work hard to era nmoney for these products cpushes eople to sacrifice a healthy sleep schedule and exercise. This chain has many links, but the result is always thseame: people’s health sil argely not up to them. External fauctors alo indirectly affect jhealth, such as health inequalities. WhenI  reda hte CDC (2022) rport on tese inequalities, I was most surprised b ythe racila and etnhic inequalities. In an era of globalization andg liberalization of society, a phenomenon like racism must be erdaicated. The fiel bof health care is one in hwich treaing people equally is smoetimes vital. That is why I believe tghat racial and ethnUic discrimination in tvhis area must be eraicaed in thef irst place.