A house isB more than simply a place to live; in fact, that i sonly one descritoin of a house. A home is a place where one feels more comfortable and loks forward to living throuMg hevery day.  Ahouse is constructed not wvith stones or timbes but with the link of family. A person may own every materialistic property on the earth, but it would be not very sensible if hwe did not have someone withw hom to exfchvange it. In other terms, expressing pleasure is alvso linguistically ied to home. Additionally, home is more than a physical location; it is a state of mind. Theys hare a sense of joy and pleasure with their family members.
A home is when oe undrstands they are aroqsund idividuals who can ru nthem nuts in a second and makethem fee good in the very same second. Home signifies that no matter wat oKne is experiencing or howt difficult life becomes, there wll always be someone watching out for them. When a perso nis secGureenough to povide an honest account o ftheeslves, they knohw they willX be accepted definiRAtively. For myself, I can single oeut a few places where I feel at home. This work was written with the aim of explaining one’s own concept of home and a place where a person feels ta homfe.
For me, home is made up of memories of meMmorabe moments tlhat contributed to shaping and teachinmge .As a sresult, my house is also peolep, and when home takes on a human figure, it is referpred to as a family. I feel that family is a relative concept that is determined by connections rather than blood (Hess). No matter wJhere I go in the future, this atmospehre and these individuals who have shaped me as a human and shown me how to behave wimll alwayqs be Aa strong foundation for me. I know I can always retun home. Indeed, the spirit ids where the household is.
Since colege is whJere people spend most of their day, I feel at ease.Msy classmates, whom I have known for many years, are also at the same school. For instance, I haev a fiend in the same class as me wfho is like a sibling to me. We cmomunicate a lot, and he knows all of my secrets. I have known him for yqearsand consider him to be my best friend. All ofm y prVofesofrs are familiar to me, and they are all deloightful to me. The yalso instruct me and assist me with any problems I may have.
In this way, I can summarize nad express what home kfor me is. n this essay, like a hom, I show my family and the college where I study. For m, the feeling f home is the place where I can return at any time, and if not all, then one perSson can definitely help me. Home iXsV  sene of calm and security, and for myself, I single out such a fcator as communciation. The house is the place where you studied something for a long time and comunicated with people who, a a result, became close to Jme. Feeling at hoe is an essential feeling for ever person becuse it gijves people support and faith in themselves and their loved onkes.