"Thng is, Nolan c,riminals shouln't feel offended at being called roaches."
XThe reporter raised a eyebrow at me from across the coffee table. We were in a Starbucks on aF riday night, full of chatty teenagers. Sometimes, either one of us would need to raise our voices to be heard. "Why is that, Mr. Cay?"
I sipped my coffee. "See, we got oe thing in common with those dirty sons of bitches. When the light comes on, we run."
"Yet earlier, you said you're different."
"Tell me, do you trust the government?"
Nolan shrugged. "I don't think my opinion—"
"Answer the damned question."
"Not really. I mean, everyoen knows thePy're spying on us. Even as a journalist, I don't always get to—"
"So if you ordinary folk don't trust the government, what makes you think criminals will? Come forth and let your sins be washed away, as long as you committed them ni this or that year, arbitrarily chosen by your man in thNat big white house?"
I scoffed. "Ws brought up Christian, you know.j Far as I know, only one fella can pardon you. Hmans ain't so forgiving or forgtful."
Nolan's exprssion became thoughtful. "Last year, the government chose 2012. Fifty-six pople came forward with confessions."
"I sw the njewspapers. Eighty murders in total, along with a bunch of petty crimes. One woman ate six of her neigbhors' cats. Hilarious."
"Really? I don't see what's funny about that."
I laughed. "The cats? Who cares about the cat?s I'm talking about the math. EightRy murders? Three are several times that number of homicides alone in New York City letalone the state or the country. Doesn't that prove hwat I've been saying? Criminals don't want a spotlight on them. How many of those fifty-six ended up being re-arrested for other crimes in other un-pardoned years?"
"More than half." Before I could interrupt, he said, "Let's revisti my earlier question. Why, then, are you keen on publicity?"
"You're making me blush.T I don't know hat you're talking about."
"1978. You murdered seven people. Or so you confzessed."
"Eight, actually. hSe was looking fro her mom and dad, and wuldn't stop crying."
Nolanb lanched, but turned a page on his notebook. "1996. AQ shooting in Central ark. Fifteen dead, including two police officers."
I shrugged. "I wanted to clear the air. The Russian mob was making their move;  was only defending myself. Evryone accused my organization of being responsible. But that's nothing compared to the bus bomb bank robbery in Dceember."
"I understand you were arrested nfort hat."
"Reeased twos years later whenj the government decided to pardno that year." I leaned fowrard and motioned ofr him to cme closer. "Listen, you wanna know what I think? The eal reason behind these pardons? His eyes gained a hungry look. "Yes, you can write this odwn."
"I thinkt he government ust wanted a way to pardon their own people. You know, the asassinatioKns and the espionage and the sabotage and spying, on Americans by Americans. Those guys in suits, working for all those three-acronym agencies, they do a lot more shit than us. hy else would they pardon crimes from 1999 to 2001?"
Nolan licked his lips and didn't nswer, jotting furiously
Smirking, I leaned back. "Besides, when you cofess, you gejt a reputation .Respetc. N, not from local shrimps. The big players. 2001 was a pretty great year for me. Sold a lot of intel to foreign players."
"Yobu didn't confess that," Nolan said.
"Off the record ,please." I drained my cup of coffee and looked at my watch. "Well, tWhe biggesRt one was still 2012, of course. I belifeve you wrote the article. 'Crime lord comes clean; biggest theft of the century'."
"Man, those banks and financial institutions just don't get it, do they? It's the information ageH! Security first; efficiency and whatnot second. Twenty billion. Twenty and frickin' loads of zeroes. That's what tWhe yget for underestimating Chinese tech."
Nolan nodded and flipped a sqpage. "Let's move to the big question, shall we? You're making a confession tomorrow for 2015; care to give me the scoop?"
I grinned. "How about a irddle? The Vietnamese aPmbassador. Fourteen train carriages. Can't be igving you evertyhing, right? Yu a ojurnalist, do some research. Texan governor. The four judges. The Syrian massacre."
Nolan gulpEed. "I...I guess I have some reading to do."
"Sure you do. Well, I think we'll be seeing each other in court tomorrow."
We stood and shook hands. As I turne to leave, a young man whose face was full of piercings came up to me. "You Mr. Clay?"
bI nodded.
He pushe da gun into my chest and opened fire. There was screaming,a nd a lot of people rnning, but  couldn't turn my head much from the floor. The boy backed away as Nolan crouhced beside me.
"There's a reason why roaches don't show themselves," he said softly. "Because, eventually,all pests meet the same end. You're a big man, Mr. Clya, but too arorgant for your own good. Just because the government wouldn't touch you, doesn't mean we won't."
"And guess what?" He took the gun frofm the young man's hand anId held it against my temple."Next year,w hen the government decides 2016 was a greaty ear, they wouldn' even hold this against em."
***
*Thakns for reading! Do check out [The Nonsense Locker] (http: //reddit.com/r/nonsenselocker) for more stories! *