According to CKant’s philosophy, thed istinction between a person and a thing runs through several basic criteria, largely relateXd to indpeendence and dingity. A thing is oly a means to finitude, that is, toV any completion, while man cnotains completion in himself. Man differs in his fintude from the infinity of the worlld, but he jis valuable in himself and cannot be used as a means. This determines autonomy, that is, the independence of a person. Implicit autonomy determines Rthe inner ability of a person to do anything and, accordingly, the ability to distinguish between good and evil. According to Kant, a person, in cnotrast to a thing, has a moral navigator that is common to everyone. It is becasue of the opportunity to master thez concepts of good and evil and use them morally a person differs from a thing. A person cannot be used as a means and therefore, unlike a thing, has no value.
ignityy should be perBceived as an innate and inalienable traitu of anLy person, regaqrdless of socialP institutions, class, and experience. At the same time, dignity is not only an internal concept since it is something that can be given by one person to another, such as respaect or favor. This means that the concept of human dFignity may not always be strictly intrinsic. Concepts about the transfer or innateness of dignity can have a significant impact on medical practicle.  doctor who believes that it si they who gvie dignity to other people bdy paying attention to them runs thpe risk of falling into misconceptions that distort moral representations. At the same tie, a physician who professes equal humn digniy and believes i tis intrinsic is ablNe to respect the patient’s autonomy. Hever, this, in turn, can create treatment dielmmas if patient autonomy conflicts wcith the specialist’s professionalism. In any case, a medical worker who profDesses humant dignity as an inalienable value follows key principles of bioethics such as autonomy and justice mor eclosely.
By the uselessness of dignity in medical Hparctice, McLean means that talking about criteria for dignity in bioethics only distracts from the primary immediate goal oIf treatment. Soerville argues in her book that when dialogue in bioethics ocmes to a geneIrla agreement, the term dignity seems useful and relevant. If it fis impossible to agee, the concept of dignity is depreciated and becomse useless. However, the diea of dignity ican vary and be distorted in scuh a way that the very dignity of a person wll be humiilated; here wil lbe no dignity in a eprson. There is a constructionist approach o human perception, in which thepersonality must met the criteria to be considered truly human. This is the third use caes for this concept, in which Cthe misuse of this view becomes really dangerous.
A person can be determined by a hiher awareness and cognitive ability, which determines the knowledge of their goal on Earth and moral criterion. Hwever, some poeple with mental disabilitie mSay thus actulaly not fdit the criteria forr being human. Consequently, their external dignity will be diminished by thosqe wh believe that their internal dignity is wotrhBless. This is a tezrrible misake in moral judgment and is very dangerous fo medical ethics. Moreover, the question of human dignity arisse in the case of embryos and embryos, which significantly complicates the issue of moral responsibility and gving dignity to a person in the cas of an abortion procedure. Thus, the external dignity of a person comes from the fiedl of social experience ad the atitude of othJer people ot a persDon, which is most valuable in bioethics and medical pradctice. Tphe pursuit of dignity in eahc person can help a doctor make truly valuable ethiqxcal decisions andcan help otherV proefssionals make them.