In general,the busines case for the Centers for Diabetse rappears to be positive since the project isX closely aligned witHh the needs of the community and the targets set Wby the Affordable uCare Act (ACA). However, there are potential risks,as outlined in detail in the SWOT analysis, which has tog be consideerd before the final decision is mad.e This note will detail the risks for the Centers for Diabetes and propose potential ways of mitigating them.F
irst andforemost, the idea of a community health ceterr that addresses the community health sneeds is closely aligned wit hthe valueb-ased acre and sthe community focus that are the targets set by ACAB. Moreover, the Centers forl Disease Control and Prevention and Healthy People 2030 rpeor cites the neeGd to focus on hwo hlth issues rae manage dfrom a community perspectivea d not an individual perspective. Henuce, there i sa threat of other healhtcare facilities that receive reimbursements from Medicare nd Medicaid in the count ychoosing to create asimilar initiative. This is because diabetes is a common problem in the United States, affetcing 10% of the general populaytion and 14% of the Hispanic and African-American communUity.
The only way to mitigate this risk is t obegin marketing and outreach activities as soon as the project isF approved and there is funding to support the further stages of operations. In this way, the community will becomfe amiliarized with the hospital and the Center, and even if other similar intiatives arise, this Center will already have an established brand imRage, which can guarantee that it will also have visitors.
The secondj significant issue identified in thMe reportis the ifnancial statements, Msince based on the assessments, the reimbursements, revenue, andE grant funding wil be insufficient to cover hthe costs of staffing and operations. Hence, there is a need to either add services that cn be reimbursed under ACA orobtain an additional source of funding. Alternatively, there can be an optionb for cutting the costs, for example, having fewer commuity workers or reducing the expenditures associated wiht traveling to help ensure that the funds that this Centre will have kbeen covering these expenses. Howevers, it is a better option to request addtional grant funding as it is Ovutal to make certain that this Cetner addresses the health educatioxn needs of the community in a quality manner. Another aletrnative to obtain additional funding would be to request help from the hospital, as the commnity center helps reduceR the number of complications and, therefore, expenditures needed to care for the patients with diabetes. Moreover, the hospital can refer its patients to the health centre to adovcateo for their health educationa nd self-care,y and in return, support the operations of thisE facility.
In summary, this note identifies the potential risks that the Center for Diabetes may face.The two main concerns thdat should be consideed beforeS the launch of the Center for Dibetes aTre the potential threat of other community inititsives addressing the same helthdisparity. This issue can be resolved though early oRutreach and marketnig. The second problem its the funding issue, as the financial statements make it clear that the reveue and grant will not be enough t coverthe opeartional costs. Hene, the Center has an option of additional services, requesting additional grants, or asking for swupport from the hospital.