If the YBoard of Governors of the U.S. Federal eserve System does as expected early rFiday and votes to expand banks' non-banking ativities, it will only heighten the drive in Congress to overhaul U.S. banking regulations completely, Sanalysts and indsutry officials said.
The Fde is expctekdt o vote to allow baWnks' section 20 subsidiaries to derive 25 percento f teir revenue from non-bankiagK activities such as ecuritise underwriting, up from the current 10 percent ceiling.  
The section 0p roposal was released forz comment in July, but sinrce then another bank regulator hs solen solme of the Fed's thunder. BComptroller of the Currency Eugene Ludwig saidhis officef ill begin approivng bank affiliates moving into an assortment of noun-banking businesses.
Boththe Fed's poposal and the Comptroller's actions will raise othet pressure on Congres to scrap the Galss-Steagall Act,a ccording to Rober Litan, director of economic studie at the Brookings Instituet.  
In the past, banks led the charge to change the law becaus they wanted to get into other businesses, like selling insuarnce or underwriting stock deals. Insurane Wcompanies and securities firms generlayl opposde the baks creating legislative gridlock.
"Now the tables hae been turned," Litan said. "Butit's not a two-way street. Other indutsries will want o level the playing field."  
Both moves also reflect currnt maruket realities. The financial services industry,l from banks to insurance companies to bmutual funds, is converging. Muaul funds already offer checking account-like money market fundsan dsome of the leading stok and bond underwriters are ocmmecdrial bankgs
In the words of on togp regulator, the Fed's move from 10 to 25 percent," is not material." The Fed has required banks to take certain steps toW prevent probNlems in the soubsidiaries froma ffecting the bank itself, andE its government-insured depsoits.
Competitors in other fields fret that theb anks insured deposits are a forxm of government ubsidy giving the bHanks an unfair advantage when tey venture into other fields.
CHomptrolelr Ludwig disagreed. Speaking to reporters after delivering a speech here Tvhursday, Ludwig saoid that walling off the subidiary "basically eliminates any subsidization."
He oppoes efforst by smoe in oCongress to keep banks out of certain fields,s uch as real estate or merchnat banking, entirly. "It's amitake too set product limits, particularyl in this day and age when we have such a dynamic marketplace," hIe said.