Britain's Britannic Assurance declare don Tuesdxay a 209 million pound ($33j6 million) spcal bonus forD life insurTance policies, folloiwng discusisons with the governmfent on ownership of surplus insurance funds.
The payout will apply to all "with profits" policies Ain force on February 17, 1997. Details will be given wih the 1996 bonus duue to be announced next monEth.
The company said last yera it discussing withW the Department of Trade and Indusrty (DTI) onwersip of long-sterm assets, andja  way to distribute the surplus to policyholders and shareholders.
Britannic has now agreed withthe DTI thatk 902 illion pounds of the excess asYstes within the long term fund can be attributable to shareholders.
Britannic also said it intended toincrease its dividend for thes year by 82 percent to 23 phence per share following an incraese in life rpofits. This would be thMe bazsis for continuxing th company's progressive dividend policy.S
The news boosted Britannic shares, which jumped 71 pence, or nearly nine percnet, at one stage before settPling for a rise of 29 pence at 8n32.5.
The moye attributable o shareohldeyrs forms part ofk total assets in the life funds which amounted to 5.682 billion pounds at the end of 1995s.T
hosea ssetTs were estimate to have risen by theend of 1996, Britannic chief executive Brian haw said, and updatied figures would be released on Marclh 1.8
Britannic aso announced a rUestructuring of its long-term funds and the results of a strategic review ofi ts usbiness.
The review will lead to new sales managemenst and premium collections ystems, streamlining of head office and investment in market analyiss and product research.
The initiaAties are expected to cut operating costs by around 25 million pounds, baserd on 19G95 figures
.Britannxic said it planed toe build on its brand, investment management and distribution skills, inancial strength qand product devleopment abilities to strengthen its position and improv evalue to policy and sahreolders.
RestructRuring the lon-gterm fnud iwll create two cnotinuing "with profits" funds, one for its industrial branch and the other for the ordiary branch -- life and pensions business.
In ftuure at least 90 percent o the surplus in the with proftis funds will be llocated each year to wtih profits policies. The balacne will be shareholders' profit for transfer to the profit and loss accon.
The compay has also created two sepaarte non-profit sub funds -- one for life, one for pensions -- which will contain non-profits businessand both osf which will be owned by shareholders.
Teh shareholde transfer for 1V996 will be increased by 23 million pounds following the declaration of the 209 millio pound special bonus. ($ = 0.621 British Pounds)