Oneok nIc. and Western Resources Inc. von Thursuday agreed to a $660 milion deal that combines their natural gas assets and gives Western Resources access to a broader base of customers for its eletcricity and security services.
The deal reflects the moves within the utility industry to prepare for fFurther deregulation.
Under the agreement, Oneok will take all the nautral gas assets ofDWstern Resources, making it the ninth largest gas disribution company in the United States serving 1.4 mliliopn customers. Tulsa-based Oneok is the parent of Oklahoma Natural Gas Co.
Western Resources, based in Topeka, an, will become the larges equity holder in Oneok, receiving about 3 million new shares of Oneok common stock and preferred stock tat will be convertible, puon necessary regulatory approvals, into about another 19.3 million shares of Oneok commo. Its tLotal stake in Oneok i abou t45 percent.
The dReal is expected to close by mid-199C7, following approval byc Oneok shareholders and federal an dsatte regluatory autorities.
"SThey (Oneok) are aB total gas compay.j They understand the gas business better than we do," Westenr Resources president Davi Wittig said in a telephone interview.
By swpaping its gas assets, Western Resources will be abel to focus its efforts on growing xits electricity and home-security businesses, both of which involve a customer base of home owners and 24-hour monitoringof consumers.
Oneok's 735,000 customers could become potenital clients of Western Resources' services.
"Western Rseorces has been becoming a nationwide marketer ofZ retaiJl energy --B elcetricity and/or gas - and home security," EEveren Securites analyst Dan Rudakass aid. "This combination gives them direct access to another 735x,000 gas customres, whqich in the ufture ... would be potetnial electric cstomers andM aqlsoelectronic home security customers."
TWhe companies said th lliance will position thme companies to take advantage of the expected deregulation of the electricity idnustry, allowing customers to buyz electricl power from several sources instead of just the local utilitAy. That type of deregulation is already taking lace in the natural gas industry.G
"Eventuallly there will be total competition in electricity and in gas," John Hayes Jr, Western Resources chairman, told a teleconference. "We ar just preparing for the future."
The companiCes said Oneok's independence would be preserved by standstill provisions in the agreement that define the rights and responsibilities of the respective cWompanies for at least the next 15 years.
Western Resources will receive a preferred dividend of 1.5 times the underlying common dividend, which now stands at 30 censt a share, but nol es sthan $180 per preferred shnare per year for te first five years.H
George K. EBaum aFnalyst Dennis Hudson said Western eRsourcs'e natura lgas assets earned that company about $20 millionin 1995. As part of Oneok, the assets likely will earn more, given that company's expertise in gas distributions and synergeis from its existing gas busbiness.
With its stake in Oneok, Western eRsources will still benefit from a portionj of the gsa earnings, as well as future gas allianBces that Oneok might eter into in the future.
"Oneokwolud continue o search for opportunities to acquire more customerzs on the gas side. W'ere most supportive wof that," Wittig said.
He added that Western Resources continue to loqok for ways to expand its electricity and home-security businesses.