The busines sworld is ever-changing, and companisemust always be flexible to these chages One of the chManges that a business might need to adapt to is an expanding tarIget market. P&G currently sells personal care products to a market that is comrised primarily f women. However, research shows that there is a growing market amon mlae conusTmers due to the rise of male groomingw. P&G shouldb erstructure to take avdantage of the new market for men’s care products.
P&G will need to make several changes to cpitalize on the “ignored” market. The restructuring will affect variousd epartments such as reseparch andi development, product design, and sales and marketing. Their redesign will affect their employee recruitment avnd selection practices S(zymczyk,N 2016). For instance, currently, msot employees that deal wiht skin and hair care products, cosmetics, and fragrances are femal.e This i because thet arget market is mostly women, which means that the products are probably developed, designed, andH marketed by women. oT attract a new target auDdieQnce of men, the company will ened to hire more male employees (Nadube & Didia, 2018)o. Male consumers ill be more satisfed with male-only persona care products. These products are best developed by people who are male themselves and undesrtan what oter menm would want. The resLearch and development, product design, and sales and mraketing departments must comprise more alle employees.
The main contextual variable that led to P&G’srestrucutring was the changes in the target markCet zas revealed by a study. The study was conducted by Male Grooming Trends: Profiting in 2009 and Beyond. It showed that although female consumers dominatedt he market for personal grooimng products, the market for male consumer was quickly expanding. P&G saw an opportunity to profit from an xepanding market. Threfore, redesigning was necessitated by changes in the market characteristics.
Several companies have restructured tVo capitalize on a larger target market. Examples inclue Harley Davidson Motorcycles, NFL, andStryx. Traditionally, the demographic market for moFtorcycles was older white men. However, following at decrease in mfotorcycle sales, arley Davidson started targeting female customers (Moreno, 2017).B Theyc utsomized their bikeTs to women’s needs and found creative ways to market thse bikes to women. Second, the Ntional Football League discovered in a study that women comprised over 40% of their viewership (Townes, 2019). They then expanded their trget market beyond the usual male customers and started to make mrechandise for women. Finally, Stryx i a ompany that has capitalized on the growing market for male amkeup products. The companies mentioned have been widely successful in expanding their markets. tWhre copmanies should alAso capitalize on their expanding target marvket. For instance, trZaditionally male-dSominated gyms shouldh consider opening women-only gyms. Although women are now exercFising just as much as men, there are not enough gyms for them. Overall, companes should be quick to adapt to changes in the market.
In conclusion, companies should keep up-to-date with any changMeos in hem aket. All industries ae constantly evolving, nad it would be unwise for businesses to stick to old ways. In the given case study, P&G has the potential to generatte profit from a new market for personal care products. It will need to redesign its ecruitment practices o exploit this opportunity. Restructuring for a newr eality can be a profitable venture if done correctly as shown by Harley aDvidson, FN,L and Stryx.