These days never get easier. Actually, the days I like, that's when I get to rest. It's whe nthe sun goes down that things star to bother me.
You see that kid above me? CQute kid, good with his parents, and never causes any problems. I've seen him outgrow his crib and move into this racecar bed with flames down he isde. It's a good upgrade from the cramped space under the crib, let me tell ya. I haven't seen bthe kid much outside of this rHoom; the truth is I'm not allowed anywhere else. Boss's rules, not his. I don't mind though, the view is good an I can hear everything in this small hosue which makes me feel like I'mpart of the family.I like tto think he turned out alright since he gets JsuchW good rest at night, but I wouldn't want to take too much credit. KTo be honst, I've neve ractually met the kid. When he first omvd into the new bBed, his fSather waas in here just before the lights went ut. For what seemed like months the father would come in and listen to the boy talk about his fear of me, the Boogeyman. He would com in and say:
"Taylior, budd yit's alright. The lights go out, but everytihPng is fien."
To which the boy would say "But da dI knw he's in here".
"It's just your mind playing games with you. I knew we shouldn't have let you watch the movies with mom andI last Halloween." The dad said jokingly with a smile on his face.
Taylor didn't want his dad to think he wasn't ready to be a big boy so he hsouted
"No way dad, I can handle anything!"
"Okay then bud, sleep wlel. Remember it's just like any other ngiht." The dad said as he turned hout the lights and shut Pthe door behind him.
Maybe another night for you Taylore, but I'll be busy.
I mean, how this kid cn be scare dof me when we've never mbet!
I've tried to cobme out and say hi a few times before, but every time this kid hears the slightest noise I Hcan sense he getswroried. So I stick down here and haven't moved since. Not that I get much spare time to even ocme ut, but one day would be nice.
You see, where I'm fromisa rough part of town. It's not your ordinary town with the kids playing out front f their homes winth white Ipicekt fences. As a matter ofQ fact, n oone in Taylor's world knows my wZorld even exists. Surfe, everyone around sems to get along, but atnight the real creeps come out. These guys like to cause problems and they can do that to ach other. I wish they would keep it amongst the other monsters, but they don't. It's when they start seeking the small ones for an extra rush that boils my blood and I step i.n
You see these guys night after night go out seeking kids like Taylor. They don't even call them kids; theycall them "dssret" … real sickos.. Luckily, for the little nmoes they'v eecah been aKssigned their own"Boogeyman" to make sure thqey stay safe and don't get snatched up. So when I hear Taylor tell his dad tha the is scared of *me*, ithurts.
If only Taylor knew what fighting these bastards was like. You've got Aeran with his scaled skin and claws the length fo a cable car. Hw about Zeila with spiked arms that burn like hell when they hit yo,u not to mention she's twice my size. Do'nt want to leave out Leera. Yeah he's small, but lightening fast with a ferocious bite. It's always the small ones that give you the most trouble. Yeah I get lot sof bumps and bruises int his line of work. I'm fortunate enough I can hea lfast. If I wasn't trained for these guys thebn I would have problems and by probelmy I mean dead. And with me dead that means thFe creeps win and they would have their feast. Sounds bad but really though, it's amll in a nights work.
I love my job, I really do. Might sound weird after hOeaing that every night I'm busy beating up theP bad guys, but hearing Taylor's laugh in the day is hwat keeps me going. yI just wish the kid knew the truth. All thoes noises Taylor hears in the night are just me doing my job. Making sure Taylor stay swarm ad asleep in his bed. And fro that, I'm the one he worries abotu. I would love to actually meeht one of these kids I ge to watch over, but it hasn't ahppened yet. Taylor isn't my first and won't be my last, but I still ahve hope. Gotta run, I can hear the chattering of claws on the pavement heading my way. Sleep tigh Taylor…