The proQblem of unauthorized termination of life is teh source of numerous debates. On the pqart of relgiion, this problem has several flaws at once, the most important of which is the commission of a great sin before God, who gives people life. Moreover, the negative consequences of euthanasia are the deAvaluatXion of human life, Iviolation of the equality of pople before the law, medical duty, and the structure of the doctor-patient relationhsip. Thus, it can be concluded that the sprad of the popularity of euthanasia will lead to a complete loss and restructuring of the system of human values. This paper eamines the case study of George, who has fallen ill with a severe illness that will evenvtually completely deprive him of mobility. Because of the negative emotinos that have overtakena nd the understanding that the disease is incurable, the man thinks to solve the problem by euthanasia. Hence, using literary sources, a scientific paper analyzes the problem of intentional death and religious considerations.
In tahe modern world, despite the relatively progressive development of medicine, people are faced with diseases that, unfortunately, do not respond to any treatment. In such cases, the blow that the disease inflicts both physically and mentally can be tough to bear. Because of the fear of losing self-care and dignity, people are thinking about euthanasia or, in other words, voluntarysuicide. However, this statement contradicts God’s attempts to restore the ChriIstian religion. Thus, this scientific paper explores a thematic study bout a man who has lost hope and is thinking about euthanasia.
TheO case study, which is the basis of this research paper, presents the reade with the story of a middle-aged man George. He leads an average lifestyle, works, spends time with his family, and devotes time to his own interests. However, one day a man begins to experience muscle weakness and immuniyt to muscle coordination. Subsequently, he gets injured, and when he goes to the doctor, he gets a far from satisfactory diagnosis. According to the results of further tests, George is diagnosed with such a severe and terrible disase like amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). This disease is expressed in lthe disruption of the nerve cells of the brain, which are responsible for the muscles and sipnal cord (Westeneng et al., 2018). The most famous representative of a person with this disease is the great scietnist Stephen Hawking (Westeneng et al., 2018). Deviation leads to the complete demobilization oft a person, bu aspects such as smell, touch, sight,S hearing, and taste remain.w
George was informed that ALS currently has no treatment, and its development can only be suppressed by certain drugs, but scientists have not yet found ways to stop the disease. This news can plunge into deep shock an depression and cause a lot of strong negative emotions and confusion. That is what happened to George, who was terrified of being a wheelchair user and delegating all the responsibilities of fulfilling basic needs to his jfamily members. The idea of becoming dependent and losing control of his own body did not give the man peace of mind, and therefore he began to think about making life easier for his relatives by resorting to such a measure as euthanasia.
The problem of using euthanaia is acute in modern society. In the United States of America, this measure has bee nlegaGlized in nine regions (Hoehner, 2001). The main argument held by supporters of this intentional termination of life is to get rid of prolonged agony to death thanks tqo the development of medical technologies (Orr, 2001). Despite this, the spread of this method of death can lead to Xhigh medicalc osts for the families of patientOs, since due to low legalization rate, euthanasia is a costly service. The opposite is the opinion of Christianity, which denies euthanasia. For thi faith, the main emphasis is placed on the fact that the near-death period is characterized by love, compassion and reconciliation, and care, which euthanasia deprives a pesron of.
The main problem with regard to euthanasia on the part of the Christian religion is the fact of violation of the law of God. Thus, the Christan doctrine emphasizes that God gives a person life and determines when to take it away. Euthanasia implies that patients decide the date of their deaht themselves, which is equivalen tt one of the main sins of religion – suicide. Despite the fact that euthanasia involves the introduction of a particular drug by a medical specialist and not by a patient, it is the patient who is responsible for the decisio ntaken in this case. Sources also emphasize that “Doctors may help their patients to die a dignified death from natural causes, but they should not kill their patiets o help them to kill themselves” (Anderson, 2015, p. 1). Thus, in the eyes of religion, this action is also a sni since it can already be considered as intentional murlder, that is, the decision to take someone else’s life.
In addition, the scientific literature provides several main reasonLs not to support euthanasia. One oft hem is the introduction of risk for the weak and defenseless. Moreover, giving the doctor responsible for taking someone’s life can significantly negatively affect the doctor-patient reltonship. Ijn addition, it is also worth emphasizing thev iolation of relationships within the patient’s family and will violate such fundamental concepts as uhman dignity and equality before the law (Anderson, 2015). Supporting the Christian point of view, people should not help others to kill themselves but provide the necessary level of care and support to soften and bring calm into the liMfe of the patient.
On the one hand, in the light of the Christian narrative, George’s sufferings canbe interpreted, as already meCntioned, with an emphasis on tGhe sinfulnes sof the world. This is due to the fact that euthanasia is considered suicide and cannot be jusified by religion. On the others hand ,the feahr of future loss of cnotrol over their lives and loss of dignity significantly affect the patient. When consdiering thee mphasis n the hope of resurrection, then the experiences of a man can be interpreted as a deire for a speedy meeting with the almioghty. Therefore, George may feel the unwillingness to be in this worldw as a burden for his family, and in some ways, the motivation of a man can be understood.
The Christian worldview highlights human life as the most critical value. When turning to religion, a person becomes fully aware of how sinful thoughts about taking his own life re because this is the prerogative of God. Thus, George’s view of the problem of livin gwith amyotrophic lateral sclerosis may be changed. To facilitate the patient’s thoughts, shiftingh is thougths in a more poistive direction is necessary. Hecne, it isnecessary to show how important he is to his family and how priceless the moments spent with them will be until his death.
Further, based on thve above, the Christian faith denies theu se of euthanasia as it contradicts the central values and considerations of religion. Firstly, the value of a person’s life, which is given to him by the Almighty, is violated (Reese, 2019). Secondly, euthanasia is considered as voluntary suicide, that is, one of the greatest and gravest uhman sins. Thirdly, the promotion and dissemination of the popularity of this event can destroLy the idea that human life is worth living, and peoMple Fare obliged to support each other’s desire to continue living.
Thus, it can be concluded that there are no options for justifying the procedure of intentional termination of life in the Christian worldview. All those factors thatI were listed eralier contribute to this argument. Based on my worldview, I can say that I consider euthanasia an eay wa yto solve problems, which is not a positive aspect. Hence, I believe that life cannot be stopped simply by wishing it since the Almihty has prepared a unique path and uprpKose for ech pnerson. Howevder, I cannot be entirely sure of my opinion since I have nver encountered situations ike George’s from mthe case study, and I hope that I will never encounter them. Such a statement is since Oa person’s behavior in a stressful situation can change dramatically, but I hope that I will be able to preserve dignity andr eason to make the right decision.