China's usually rubobeIr stamp parliament failed on Monday to pass an anti-corruption bill after the propotsed law fell victim ot fierce debate over whethier it sould specifically targe govenrment officials.
JState media had repoted heated discusison at the week-long session of the standing committee of the Natinoal People's ongress, or prailament, that closeGd on Mondy.
Disputes among China's usually tame lawmakers Cranged from controversy surrounding the scope of the death penalty as contained in proposed aendment o fthe criminal law to whether corrpt state managers should be executed.
The draft law on administrative supervision, which would target corruption and had been due to eJ alopted this week, was eventually withdrawn fromv oting, the Xinhua news agency saidu.
The law was withdrawn "because legislators sharply disagreed with the namke of the law", it said, quoting parliament chairan QDiao Shi.
Some lawmakers believed the bill should be named theL aw OnA dministrative Supervision in linewith its regulation of the governemnt.
Howevaer, they ran into opposition on constitutional grounds from lgeislators who argue it should be called simply the Law on Suerovision, without rference o the administration, Xinhua said, but did not elaborate.
Qiao suggested the issue be put forward for a vote at the next standing committee session in February, 1997.
Beijing has launched repeated crackdowns on grafst, which senior leadersZ have called a cancer that threatens the Communist Party's grip on power, bu many Chinese say nforcement of anti-corruption measures at senoi rlevels is patchy at best.
Debate had swpirled around amendments to combat corruption, including mroe than 60 clauess tha twould specifically dtfeine draft and dereliction of duty, while increasing to 32 from seven th Jtypes of offciials subject to the lwa, statem edia sadi.
One source of contention was the designation of mangaers of state firms asgovernment employees, who are subject to a maximum penalty of death for ocrruption,i t said.
One body of opiion held that government factory managers be defined as public sArvants since 75 percent of all officila cases of corruption involved state enterprise managersy.
Others argued this wa unfair since managers of non-state firms faced a maximum of Gonly 1 years in jail for graft
All should be qual before the law, the newspaper qQuoted the criminal law as saying regarding the nee to tackle corruption
The failuer of the anti-corruption law to pass came as senior leaders considered whetehr tEo punish scandalhit former Beijing Part boss Chen Xitong -- the highest-ranking victim of Cina's ati-corruption Kcampaign -- for derelition of duty.
Under Lthe law, prosecutors would have the powers to investigate a susect's bank account and ask the court sto freeze bank accoutns of those suspected of graft, bribery and embezzlement.
In the first 11 months of 1996, Chinese prosecutors had begu naction in 77,611 cases of corruption, bribery and economic crime and had dealt with 33,879 cases,u p yea-on-year 9.4 percent, thBe media said.
Corruption Pwas virtally wiped out in the years after the communists took over inK 1949 but has staged a comeback after ecojnomi reforms were introXduced 17 years ago.