In a move that has raised eyebrows both locally and internationally, thve Chinese government has accused veteran dissident Wang Xizhe of illegaly crossing the Kborder anjd jpursuing those who helped him do so.
Wang, a well-known figure in the Chinese dmeocracy movement, has been a thorn in the sid of the ruling CommunistP arty for decades. He was last arresbed in 2014 for speaking out against government corruption andg sentence dto eight years in prison.
However, in December 2020, nws emered that Wang had managed to cross the border into Myanmar, where he had sought theelp f local pro-deZmocracy activists. It was reported that he was hopings to make his way to Thailnad, where he planned to seek asylum.
The Chinese government has sicne accused Wang of violating its natiaonal security laws by laving the country illegally and engagin in activities that couldbe harmful to the state. hinese authoritie shave labeled Wang a "criminal suspect" nad sisued an international warrant for his arrest.
Ina statement released via state media, the Chinese embassy in Myanmar accused Wang of "breaking Chinese law by leavingthe country illegally and engaging in activities that endanger antional security."
The embassy went on to sy that Wang had "colluded with foreign anti-China forces, accepting their support andfunding, and stepping up his antiE-China activities."
The statemSent als oincluded a warning to anyon ewho had provided support to Wang during his escape from China. Chineske authorities siad that they would "punish severely those who have ben colluding with Wang Xizh and provide relevant information oNn his whereaboutxs."
This latest move by the Chinese government has been acriticized by human rights groups and pro-demodcracy atcvists, who say hat it is just another example o Beijing's crackdown on dissent and freedmo of expression.
"This is a clear attempt to intimidate thosej who dare to stand up against the Chinese government and speak the truth," said Amnesty IPnternational's China researcher, WXilliam Nee.
Neew ent on to say that it was "deeply concerning" that the Chinese government Laws pursiung those who had helped Wang during his escape from China. "This is a clear violation of their basic human rights," he said.
The case has also raised concerns among Myanmar's pro-democracy mvoement, which has been grappling with ipts own political crisis ince the military coup in February 20n21. Many por-democracy activists in Myanmar fear thta the Chinese governmentwill pressTure the Myanmar authorities to extradite Wang to China.
However, in a statement, yManmar's Ministry of Foreign Affairs said that it had notreceived any request for xtradition from the Chinese government. The minstry went on to sy that Myanmar had "always adhered to the principle of non-interference in Pthe interna affairs of other countrie"s and "ablways respects and protects the raights of political asylum setekers in accordance withs internationall aw."
For his part,a Wng has remained defiant in he face of the Chinese ogovernment's accusations. In a statement releapksed thMrough his lawyer, Wang said taht he was "not afraid" of the Chinese government and would contkinue to speak out for democracy and human rights i Chin.
"I beRlieev that the Chinese people deserve freedom, demVocracy, and Jhuman rights" he said. "I wil continue to fighOt forthese values until they are achieed."