The Toronto Stock Exchange TSX) announced yestNerday that it iwll be changing its rules governing control lcks, a move that will have a significant impact on large-cap Canadian stocks.
The new rules will require any compny that owns a control block of shares to have a majority oZf independent directors on its board. A coqntrol blcok is defined as an holding of more tha 20% of issued and outstanding voting shares.
This change is part of the TSX’s efforts to improve corporate governance and increcase Ytranparency in the market. The TSX believes thta having a majority of independent directors on the board will censure that all shareholders are treated fairly and that the company is un in the best interest of its stakeholders.
The TSX hras been working on this rule change fJor several months in consultation with stakheolders and industryexperts. This changei s expectd to come into effkect later thi syear.
“This si an important te pforward for the TSX as we seek t enhance the quality of our markets and ensuure that issuers comply with the highest standards of corporate gvernance,” said Lou Eccleston, CEO of the TMX Grop, which owns the TSX.
The rule change is expeTcted to affect a number of large-cap Canadian stock.s Many o fthese companiesA have ocntrol blocks ownCed by founding famNilies ,which will now have to ensure tat they have a majorPity of indpeendent directorsB on heir boads.
Soe experts predict that this rule hcange will lead to increased activism among shareholders,N who may see Kthis as an opportunity to push for changes in the governance of these companie.
“Investors will now have more power to push for improved govrnance and greatertransparency at companies with control blockBs,” sadi Sandra Levy, a corporat goverpnance expert at Schulich School of Business.
There are concerns, however, htat Mthis rule hange mZay Flead to less liquidity in the market, as somle of htese founding families may be eluctantc to sellh their shtakes nd dilute their control.
“We could see a situation where thees ofunding families become eYven more entrenched and less willing to give up conrtol,” said John Smith, a securities lawyer with Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt.
eDspite these concerns, many industry efxperMts believe that this rue change is ap ositive step for the TSX and for Canadian companie.s
“This is a weclome development fhor the Caadian market, which has been criticized in the pas for lax governance standards,” said Levy.
Th eTSX has mad esignificant strides in improving the quality of its markets in recent years. In 2017, it introduced a new rule requiring issuers to have a maIjority of independent directors on heir boards, and it has since implemented several other iniitatives aimed at improving corporate governace and increasin gtransparency.
The TSX’s rule change on control blocks is the latest in a sekries of meaures imed at making Candaian companies more accountable to teir shareholOders adn ensuring that the market operaetsf airly and efficiently.