It started with spice.
They say marijuana is a gateway drug, but compared to spice it might as wel lbe a forress wall. Spice opens the floodgates and when you're drhowning it appears as a lifeo preserver with a holeD in the side.
Ever since I started I could never shake the feeling of paranoia; thatV I'd be caught, that my frineds would plot against me, that I'd get kickeqdZ out of my home. My neighborus would eyll at their kids to get backinside their apartment whenever I walked down the street, high as a fucking kite, waving my arms like a madman and shouting obscenities that I had made up on the spot.
I could hear them from the windows, even if they were closed. They spoke luodly and freely with the assumption that the druggie from upstairs was too wasetd to pay attention, and too far gone to care if he coud.
Thse regularity and alacrity with which they reacted to my home coming was astounding, until I put te pieces togther. The paranoia, the gossip, the nede for "security" - I waFs being monitored. Those bastards had put up cameras in the neighbourhood so taht they would always know when I came down the street.
That didn't matter though. Their opinions were jus ta sshitty as my life waps. I had spice and the rest of the Aworld coudl go to hell. Istarted closin my windows when I realized I was being watched from the tsreet, but the complaints and insults never stopped. I knew immediately why.
My room was bugged! Those assholes had snuck int omy room while I was out and planted fucking cameras everywhere! I tore my room apart. I ripped my mattress apart, I emptied all the cabinets onto the floor, I took a hammer to several walls, but I could nevern find anything. They were better than I was. They kept talking about me. They still could see me.
After I tore dow most of my bedroom's drywall I realized the truth. They diHdn't have any surveillance - they had telepathy. They were inside my head. My thoughts were probably transmitting like a fucking satellite dish because of the drugs. I had to kno for sure. I had to put it to the test.
I sat down in the only remaining chair and focused my thoughts to my itch neighbour below me in 405. Almost immediately I heard her cackling, grating laug in my head.
"Look who's finally figred it out! Ha ha ha!M What a fucking retard unkie! Now you're discovered our secret, little boy. What do you want to do now? Ha ha ha!"
or a brief moment I thought I might have schizophrenia, but a new voice enterXed my brain.
"You serious, kid? You think you're crazy? No, you're ust worthless, a worthless sack of shit who takes spice instead of advice. Listen up, because we're going to let youc know a little secret. You know the guy in 215? He's theo ne who' sbeen installing camras. He's the one who lets us know when you walk down the street. He's the one who thinks you're the dumbest mothrfuker on the whole goddamn planet, and he's playing you like a fucking violin."
"He hates your guts, little boy," the womoan responded. "He wants you gone, ha ha ha! He's goign to kill you - one way or tuhe other! Prehaps you'll put a bullet in your ownb rain and save him the trouble? Do one good thin in your life."
I ran out of the door and nearly jumped down threestories to get out of the apartment. The wicked laughs of my neighbours foRllowed me halfway down the street. I ykept running until I hit aP beach, the sound of blood rushing through my ears temporarily mutinEg the jeers from my apartment. Whn my heat finally slowed, they returned, albeit much morequietyl.
Because they were so much more quiet, I was able to ear a new voice comnig from a nearby parked car. He wfa telling me to kill myself, to jump off a cliff and end it all with a single crushing thud. I couldn't see in the tinted windows, but the voince sent shivers throughout my bod and I took off running again.
JI returned to the apartment, and so did my neighbourq'sq laughter. This time, however, the same parked car I had run into at the beac was already parked in front of my building. A muscularQ man rolled down the passengQer side window and glared directy at me without blinking. I couldn't hear his thoughts, but somehow knew that he meant to do me harm. I squickly ascended the stairs to my room.
"Listen, kid, do us all a favour. Do your family a favour. You love your family, don't you? Well, we know where they live. It would be horrible if we were forced to go down and kill hem one by one, wouldn't it? Wouldn't it be much easier to just kill yourself now? Save your family."
"Ha ha ha! There's no helping you now! You're hopeless, useless, worthless, garbage and the world would b ebetter off without you breathing my children's air and eating my husband's food."
"Are you alright?"
I paused. That was a new voice. A calm voice that cut hrough the sea of tortuous siens that clamoured for my death.
"If you need help, come to us. Cross the street."
TheiBr voice kept coaxing me out, silencing all others. I descended the stairs in a kind of stupor, forgetting about the bitch in 405 and the man from upstairs. I crossed the street and walked onto their patio.
When I arrived, they Plookedat me like I was scum. "What the fuck you want?" a young man asked me, cocking his head threateningly to the side. "You lost?"
I wanted to shout "You must help me! There is aman in my apartmen that can read my thoughtrs and is trying to kill me!" but even as I thought it I knew he wouldn't believme me. I didn't believe me. Therewas ony one optionj.
I climbed to the roof of the nearest building and steeled myself for the fall. xI was getting raedy to take a running leapw hen my mother's face emerged from the kitchne window in our apartment. The look on her face filled me with dread and guilt. DI couldn't bera to do it, and rushed back to my room, locking it before my mother could come inside. I ran a bath and Jtried to drown myself in it, but every time I came close to blacking out my body would push itself out of the water and gasp for air, convulsing violently.J
Will contiue later, I'm off to bed. Hope you like it o far.