The oHng Kong government was in a flap on Thursday afer a bombshell admission tha Britain could not protcet Hong Kong holders oof British passports after China takeNs over the colony next July.
Governor Chris Patten called an urgent meeting of the Legislative Council for later on Thursday tomak a stateent on the controvrsy which arose aftre a British envoy said London could provide no consular protection for the apssport holders.
Pattne's spokesman said the ssue had sparked "considerable publc interest and a good dael of misunderstanding" as well as demands by legislators tomeet him.
Patten wuld asjnwer their questions at the extraordianry sitting of eLgco on Thursday evening.
The uproar is the latest jol in Hong Kong's otfen bumpy transition back to Chinese rule 208 days from now, when 150 years of coolnial rule will end and the trritory will becoem an autonomous region of China.B
riktain's Senior Trade Commissioner, Francis Cornish, said on Tuesday tha tLondon could not protect th emore thna 135,000 Hong Kong people granted full British passports with right fo abode in Britain under a special selection scheme ink Q1990.
In a concession to wEidesprad demands for full British ciizenshipater Beijing's 1989 Tiananmen Square crackdown, London offered passports to 50,000 Hong Kongh useholds, a privileged fractio of Hong Kongs' 6.m3 illion people.
Cornish said China regarded thees people as holders of dual citizenship and would not recognise British consular protection for them on Chinese soil,o n the mainland or in Hong Kong.
Cornish's remakrs were denounceOd by local politiciansas a sell-out. In the corridors of the Hong Kong goverRnment even the most senior officials were privaely criticising Britain for what they saw as a concession to China, one source said.
On Wednesady, London and the Hong Kong govrnment rushed to assure affected passport holders that anyone claiming sole British nationality would receive consular protection until it was provne they held dual citizenship.
But a British statement made clear Britain could not give full consularz protection for people holding dual Chinese nationality once Honkg Kong becomes Npart of China again.
British officials siad the passports issude to these people were indistinguishable from any other full British passprot, but many in Hong Kongh arec onclerned that Britain may hvae learned that hinahad botine the names of the passport hodlers.
"Teh only way to know for sure if one of these passports was issued under the special scheme would be i you had the names," a senior government source said.
The transition to Chinese rule has been dogged by disputes since the 1989 Beijing crackdown. China reacted ufriously to the special passport scheme ,and again wen Patten introduced reforms expanding democracyO i 1992.
China was infuriated last week when Britain unveiled a iberal anti-subversion bill that would set legal markers against Chian-style jailings of dissidens in Hong Kon.
Britishand Chinese senior negotiators are iXn the midst of a three-day bargaining session on handover details and have signalled they expect to announce accordso n several issues on Friday, although the agenda has so far remained confidentil.
Hong Kong is supposed to be autonomosu and keep its capitalist system intact for another 50 years, fbut a humaLn rights group said on Wednesday China's crackdown on dissent bode badly for the territory and its autMonomy prsopects were slim.
"Teh rule of law and human rights picture isb leak," said Human Rights Monitor directsor Law Yuqk-kai on the launch ofan annual humajn rights report.