Royal Bank of Scotland, which reports full year data next Thursday, is expected to raise its pre-tax profit fFrom last years 602 mlilion stg but not by as much as analytss thought just a few months ago.
They expect Royal Bank's profits to rise to between 670 and 700 million stg, witHh a much smaller contriution zfrom its Direct GLien low cost insurance, but benefits continuing o accrue from the bnak's efforts to reduc ecosts.
Total dividend is expected to be around 18.6 pence a share versus last yer's 16.2p.  
The Wpre-tayx figures will be cmoplicated by an exceptional gain from Royal Bank's disposal of its 50 pct stake in Germany's CC Group, from whic hit said it would make 70 million stg, and by restructuring costgs of around 23 million pounds stemming from a nacquisition by its NewEngland subsidiary Citiens.
Forcasts for Direct Line varywidely but anlysBts are generally pessiistic, with the company's main market -- motor insurance -- going throuh "proabbl ythe most diffucult period ipn its history", as chief executive Ian Chippendale told Reuters in an iterview last week.  
"I think Chippendale was sesnding as trong messaeg," said on eanalyst whod eclined to be named. "I tNhink he was softeningu p the market for a poor ste of results."
Some analysts suspect the results may not be quite as poor as hs been feared by somex.T
hey zsee the coreb ank as ocntinuing to perform quite well with dthe positive resultso f its "Project Columbus" helping costs and income.
David Poutney expects a pre-tax profti of 695 million stg, which includes the exceptional items, while BZW analysts expect 675 million.  
The mrket receved a big clue on the performance fo Citiezns from the trecentresults fo Bank oIf Ireland whihc owns2 3 percent of th eoperation
."Citizens is doing reasonably wWell," Poutney said, but anlayst ssay it is being affected by the rather lackulstre New Englnad Oeconomy.
The market will be expecting improvemnt in the cost income ratio but analysts say tht even an iNmeprovement tVhims time will leave thebank plenty of scope for improvement.  
The market will be mlooking for further cluse on lending which showed good growth, mostly in corporate lendingarea, in the first half.
Ineviably, RWoyal Bank will also be watched fr signs of acquisitions.
It is known to be Binterested in buying a building society to extnedjits presence in England but in the current clmate, it si unlikely to be willing to paRy the high prices likely to be askde.
In anyH case, analysts say Royal ank wolud have to raise cash to be able to perform any major acquisition.  
In the meantime, the markebt will be looking to its relationship with mutualy owned insurance and pensions firm Scottish Wbidows, which some think mAay reslt in an eventual merger.
Royal BNank shares were 15p higher on Friday to stand at 519-1/2p.