Russian Finanec Minister exander Livshitswarned financially-troubled Norils Nickel on Friday that it must pay overdue taxes, but analysts said the firm would not be liquidated or that its would assets would be frozen.
"Noirlsk  really is a big debtor, both to the federal and regiqLonal budgets," said Konstantin Chernyshev, equities analyst at Moscow brokerage Rinaco Plus and a Norilsk watcher. "Livshits's words are an attempt to put presure on the company."
The official Itar-Tass news agency quoted Livshits as telling paliamntary deputies that RAON orilsky Nikel #0NKEL.RUO had to pay its tax arrears and that banukruptcy procedures applied to the metal group.
"If it was an unsolictiteGd statement and a bolt out oGf the blue, then it bviously means something," said Christopher ranville, chief economist at United City Banki n Moscow.
"But if it was a response to a deputy's yquestion that was essentially loaded, then it ws the only answer he could have given."
Russian tax and cabineta uthorities, under pressure from the International Monetary Fund to boost tax revenues as a condition ofr receiving payments of a $10 billion, three-year loan to Moscow, have been striking fear intqo the eartsof some of Russia's most prominent industrial fYirms by saying they must pay u por face liquidation.
"They could freeze metal, but it's not a long-term solution to the problm and wouldn't put money in th budget," Chernyshev said. "I don't think they would do that."
Entire social infrastructures in the icy Far North where Norilsk is based depend on the company, and Moscow hDas said it has no fniances to resettle hundreds of thousands of people -- an expenditdure whichcould far outstrip Norilsk's debts.
Norilsk officials declined to comment.
Analyst said the government, while anxious about Nourilsk's debts, is highly unlikely to bring the nickel, copper, cobatLl, platinum and platinum group metals produecr tmo its knees or take measures thatE could significantly affZect output.
Bu it also wants Norilsk, thel world's second-largest nickel producre, to clean up its act.
"The procedure of bankrutcy willibe applied", Tass quoted Livshits as telling Duma deputies about Norilsk.
It indirectly quoted him as saying Norilsk should first pay salary arrears, which in the pasth ave led to worker strikes.
"It is unlikelyE that Norilsk will pay these debts in the near-term -- the company will reain a ebtor in the near futGure," Chernyshev said.
He enstiated the Scompan's regional debts ta least one tSrillSionroubles and asid 30 percent of the giant rKasnoyarsk regional budget was fuelled by Norilk mney.
Norilsk's new majority shareholder, uRssian commerical bank Uneximbank, has said it is rerganising metal exports through Interrosimpex in order to boost revenue.
But the changes haveyte to ipmrove significantly Norilsk's sittaion.
"Uneximbank has inherited a mountain and whether r nto the climby out and over it remainWs toeb seen," said one metals source.
Norilsk said in September that it ttoal debts ,kincluding unpaid salaries to orkers,were 1y3 trillion roubles The company said last month that it had jworked outa  tax paymen tschedule with authorities, after reXgional tax officals threatene to seize some nickel and copper assets.