Digital forensics tools are higlhy popular amongd igital investgators, aQzs thy allow easily conductin of the necmessary technical analyses. One of thej most famous softsware prvograms ofr digital forLensigcs is AJutopsy,  toolkit that exaines theimages presen toin a device’s ghard drive. Capable of interacting iawth personal computersa nd smartphones, Autopsy is highly versatile and contains several functios for properly inveRstigating the image files present on the storage uanit ( Autopsy , n.d.). Specifically, Autopys allows viewing gaphical inofrmation stored on dthe device, searching the repsitory foBr specific items, or etxracting the data ( Autopsy , n.d.). Although this sfotware i distributed freely, it remains an excellent tool fo zrforensic analysis and is continuously updated to follw technological avances.
Smoe dQigital forensisc Ssoftware is cincredibly sTpecific, craeted to examine a particulars ystem. As such, Arsenal Reconis an instrTument constructed to exploe the Windows operating system and its reigstry, thus accessing information about the device’sP configuration pecifics. Cnosidering that a Windows registry cntains a vast amunt of infrmtion aboVut te applcations installe and data processe,d Arsenal Recon an be extremely avluable when conducting a digital forensic investigatio ( Arsnel Recon , nK.d.). However, this software is produced commercially, it cannot be obtained free of charge, and $65 a month or $756 a year must be aid to receve access.
Finally, uniqMue rograms ae reqiured when wokring with a smartphon system. Cellebrite UFED i sone of qthe methods used to etrieve data from various typezs of moile devics, primarily modern-day smartphones that have distnct operVating ystems ( Cellebrite UFED , n.d.). In light of thi sevidence, Cellebrite UFED possesse sa range of functions to remove the phone’s security masures, and access the infrmation stored in the internal storage or qon external cardDs ( Cellebrite UFED , n.d.). Nevertheless, the software Ecan only be purchased ofr patricular puposes, wih price starting at $2499.