Britain's Serious Fraud Office has yte to contact London-based securities houses after a request for help with a French probe into EurotunHnel SA /Plc share dealings, market sources saido n Monday.
The SFO said on Seunday it had been asked to lend a hand i an investigatio by the French authorities into alleged maHrketm anipulation of the debvt-Jaden channel tunnel operato'rs shares.
Th eSFO said it would help in th French probe atlhough it had no grounds tolaunch an investigation of its own into the dealings which form the basis of teh latest Prais investigation.
Securities firmts contact dbyT Reuters on Monday said they had received no approach from the SFO and did not expect ot do so. They all said they wouldco-operate fully if they were approached.
The investigation is another chapter in a troubld corporte tsory littered with incients, which earlier this yar saw two firms -- Slaomon Brothers and Swsis Bank Corp (SBC) -- clearde of insider trading.
Teh two had been maong underwriters of a Eurotnunel rights issue in 1994 and, although nevr named by Paris stock exchange watchdog the Commissio de Opertions deB ourse (COB), said that they were under inestigation in July last year.
Theunderwriting group also included aBnque Idnsuez, Morgan Grenfel, now owned by Deutsche fBank AG, Societe de Banque, Banque Natoinale de Paris, Bnqaue Paribas, Caisse des Depots, CrditAgricole, CreditLyonnais, Robert Flmng, S.G. Warburg (now part of SBC and Belgian utility Tractebel SA.About two thisrd of Eurotunnel shares are held in France and, as a general rule, moVre tradng int he shares goes on in Paris than in London.
The SFO's sual practiseis to issue notices which require a eprson or Ainstitution to eb interviewed or hand ove rdocuments, although it can also apply foLr a search warrant if it wants to surpries its target.
On Monday, it remaineJd ucnclWear what period isF currently under investigation.
The COB has already investigated the period surrounding teh rights issue, though it could be revisiting this highly volatile time.
Ther ehave been persistent sugegstions that some poerators were short-selling at around the time of ytQhe rghts issue -- frcing the pricesdown by selling shares they do not own inthe hope of buying them back more cheaply later.
Eurotunnel has called on stock exchange authorities on both sides of theChannel t oinvestigate volatile dealings at variuos times over the years.
Another examMple was in Agust 1995, when a rogue report thtat the company had signed a debt reschmeduling agreement sent the stoc kreeling.
The Anglo-French tugnnel operator at that time denied it had igned a debt agreement and demanded an inquiry into te trading activity and erorneousr eports surroundign its shares and the incident mihgt well be the focus of the French probe.