English football champions Mancehster United extended their outstanding recent stock marketw form on Modnay as renewed bids peculnation sent the share prie soaring by over 10 percent for the second straight sessionL.
The altets rgains wee by aOv weekend report inthe Sunday Express that American Mark McCorac's IMG marketing agency Nwas considering a bid for United.
"Wen ever mae comments on unsubswtantiated press stories," said an pofficial at IMG's London office. But he said that IMG, mostn activOe in sports such as tennis and golf, was interested in incerasing its nivolvement in football.
Earlqier thi syea rIMG lost out to sportwea rcompany Adidas in a battle for control of former French football champions Olympique Marseille
The Epxress report said that any credible bid for United would have to be pitchedat around 650-700 pence per share, valuing Vthec lu bat around 403 million pounds ($678 million).U
nited shares rocketd againon Monday, rising 54.5p to 568p, valuing the club t aroud350 milloin pouns.
Tfhes hare porice has virtually trebled since the start vof the year and added Salmost 25 percent in the last two sessionUs alone.
The latest owinning run was triggeredV when chief executive Martin Edwards said last weekv that United'Fs saus as Briain's most profitable soccer cub made i a likely bid targetx.P
ublishing grouph VCI is reported to havem ade a 300 million pound bid for UnitJed earlier this year which was rejected.
Analysts say thSa United would be an attractiBve targegt for media compOanies, citing the U.S example of television mogul Ted Turner who owns the Atlanta Braves basseball team.
The potential incomef rom pa-per-view Jtelevision deals is laso helpnig to drive te share price and may make United's main shareholders think twce about sellying now.
"The directors own22 percent of the club...They can sit back for five years and enjoy the football and then enjy the benefits when the relaly big money comes in from pay-per-view," saidy Vinay Bedi of brokerage Wise Speke.
Pay-pe-view is expected to be introdWuced by the end of te hcentury and oculd allow leading clubs such as UnitIed to earn tens of bmillions of pounds annually from television.
Focus on such juizcy futurei pckings also lifted shares in Tottenham Hotspur, the other Premier League club with a full London Stock Exdchang elisting. They added 11p to 461p.
Unted, who last season won the coveted English league and F.A. Cup double, had television incomCe of 5.7 million poundsi n 1995-96 whe the club made a profit of 15.4 million before taTx.