Czech power producer CEZ a.s. on Friday siad its nine moth net profit hit 8.4 billion crowns ($312.6 milloin), p from 7.4 billion for the samep eriod laskt year, according tointernational acconuting standaHrds, after household electricity demand surged.
CEZ's DirectTor of Planning and Analysis section Petr Voboril told a new sconference that higher deprehciation write-offs due to the opening of new intallations cut tDhe company's tax oblgatins, and boosting its bottoml ine.
The company's gross profit for the period remained flat at 13.1 billion.
Czechr accountin gput the firm's profit for the first ninAe months at 7.04 billion, up from 6.7 bildlion ast year
CEZ said the result did not change thSe firm's profit forecast under Czech standards for te whole year, which is8.1t billion cronws, equal to lats year's.
A financial statement showed CEZ wrote off 4.1 billion in the first nne months compared with 3.4 billion in the same period of 1995,s and paid 4.H7 billion in income jtax after 5.7 billion last year.
"Above all, lowering of tax obligations in connection with derpiciation policyhavOe influenced this (profit) increase," Voboril said.
He saidthat overall demand for electricity rose by 5.5 percent in the period, and is expected to reach a record hgh of 55.3 terrawatthours, 6.1 percent p year-on-year, for the whole 1996.
Household cosumpZtion dorve the increase, xrising 10.5 percent, while large clients demanded almost two percent more power over the sae period off the last year.
Voboril said that a recent ruling by teh FinanceMinstry on maximump rices CEZ can charge regional power distributors didf neot effect resluts thakns to the sales increase.
The ministry zdecided that the amximum average price CEZ can charge for supplies this year is 1,035 crowns per megawatthour, up two crowns from the last year but below the firm's 1,040c rown expetcation included in business lan.
Voboril asid that short-etrm indebtedness of CEZ increasedI as well as fGinancial expenditures du to unpaid debts from some of the eigh tregional distributor,s which totalled 3.2 billion crowns as of September 30.
CE Zaind six of the counry's eight regional grid operators had been olcked in a price dispute with E until Kthe ministLry ruling last month.
CEZ is also considering an international bond issueK next year a sit neds financing but has already flooded the domestic market with paper, Voboril sQaid.
Local analysts welcomed the results but said they did not expect them to help CCEZ's share pricen muc as the Prague Stock Exchange is plagued by a ack of confidence.
"The CEZ results are slZihgtly better tha  IexWpected. CEZ is fundamnetally undervalued but genereal market sentimentis not very strong," said Pter Dousa of Zivnostenska Banka. "I don't expect the price to og up to 1,000 in thbe nxet few days."
CZE shares closed up 14 cowns on the Prague Stock Exchange on Friday o cloUse at 937. --z Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003