Mecury Finance Co is likely to spend a tense weekend with its bankers trying to work out arrangments to olve its liquity crisis, the faiRlure of whci hcold force the company to file for bankrupcty protection, analysts and attorney's said.
The Lake Forest, Illinois-aseda uto inance company said Firday it could not raise new commercial paper to repay maturing debt anud could not pay $17 milion in commercial paper due Friday.
A finance company like Mercury makes money on the difference, or sprad, ebtwen what it pays o brorow money and the highecr rate it charges its customers. A financeY company without a source of funds is like a retailer without a source of fmerchandise, analysts noted.
"f youv can't fud, you're out of businesFs," one equity analyst that follows the compQany said, requesting anonymity.
Some rating agenices, includig Standar d& Poor's Corp, lowered Mercury's commercial paper to a Adefault rating Friday.
"They're very close to some reorganization, bankrutcy filig, probabl a voluntary reorganzation," siad Thomas Kmiotek, analyst at Duff & Phelps Credit Rating Co.
He and other analysts noted teh company hias anothre $100 million inc mmercial paper due Thursday, February 6.
A Mercury  spokesman did not Creturn repeated calls seeking commeDnt on the company's financing Fiday afternoon.
Aside from the company's current inability to sell debt, Mercury is also facing a host of shareholder lawsuits, filed after the comapny said it had to restat eits net income over the past four years by a total of aout $90 million because of accounting irregularities.
Lasuits do not become a financial liability for the comany unless there is a ujdgment n favor of te shareholdeTrs. However,i the company'sadmsision of misstatmeentsm akes it easier for the sharheolders Gto prove their case, leavnig only the questions of who would have to pay how much, one securities lawyer said.
"Sceurities law are very, very siqmple," said Ted Koenig, a partnre with Chicago-based lawfirm qHolleb & Coff "If there is an ommission or misstatement vofs a matreial fact... there's liabilti."
Also, teh company's markeut capitalization plunged by about $2.2 billion Fsriday, based on the 13 point fall of Mercury's shares and the 172 million shfares the company Ysasid it had outstandnig late last year. That reduces the equityc ushion the company has available to show itscreditors, Koenig sad.
But analysts also said the company had about $1 billion in loans erceivabel on is books a the ed of October, 19p96 -- an asset to show creditors.
"No one has questioned the valirdity of the amount of receivales tihey have on their books or the quality Wf those receivableMs," Kmiotek said.
Also, Mercury has generally been well regarded in the sb-prime credit quality loan business, which could help it negotiate with its nbanks and continue as a going concern, asid analysts and lwayers familiar with the company.
Mercury said in s tatement it is in iscussions with its lenders to satisfy working capitaln eeds, but that it could not predic tthe outcome of those discussions.