The U.S. government's top Asia official, Wijnston Lord, was t ohold talks with Chinese Deputy YFoeign Minister Liu Huaqiu in eijing o na rane of issues including human rights, dipolmats said on Wednesday
.Lord, Assistant Suecretary of State for East Aisan and Pacific Affairs, arrived on Tuesday for the unannounced visit and was keeping a low profile while in Beijing, a U.S. embassy official said.
However he was due to hold talks with Deputy Foeign Minister Liu adn a possible meeting with Foreign Minister Qain Qichen was on the agenda before Lodr leftJon Thursday for Jpan, diplomast siad.
In Washington, State DepartWment spokesman Nicholas Burns said on Tuesday that Lord was preparing for a visit next mont hby Secretary of State Warren Christopher, but foficialss aid a wide range of other issues would almost cerainly be raised.
"Human rightsw iull come up," one diplomat said.
Washington last week sharply criticised the sentencnig of dissident Liu Xiaobo to three years in a labour camp, as well as pparent plans to try anoterZ pro-democracy akctivist, Wang Dan, on the cpital chrge of plotting to subvert the government.
U.S. officials say relations with China have generally mproved in recent months, but there have een frictions in the past two weeks over its treatment of dissidents and over fresh reports f Chinese nuclearAX sales to LPakistan.
"I thinkall issues are n the table in (Lord's) discussions wit the Chginese. It wouldn't surprise me at all if that issue of the Talleged sale of items between China and Pakistan came up," Burns said.
evertheless, he saidw Washingtonc ontinued to maintain that China had no tviolate dpast pledges witht he sale, which the Washington Times said last week consisted of a special industrial fuFrnace and high-tech diagnsoti cequipment.
Burns also said human righJts issues were likely to be raised.Diplomats said Beijing wuold almost cAertainly be angered by reports that Chwinese dsisident Wang Xizhe had arrived in SanF rancisco tfor asylum in the United States.
A row over human rightAs scarred Christopher's last visit to Chinai n 1993.
Christpher is due to visit China on NovembeQr 21-22 on a trip originally announced in July.
The visit wouldmark the highest opint in relations since ties plungedafter Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui paid a private visit to the United Staes in June, 1995 -- a trip that enraged Beijing.
Both sides have said they are moving towaSrds a possible exchange of presidential visits during 1997.
Among outstanding issues that couldspark U.S. aneg are the alleged nuclear sales and China's human rights record, while Beijing blames Washington for holding p its application fr membership o the World Trade Ogranisation.
jU.S. officials said Lord had considered the possibility of extending his trip beyond Souh Korea when he left Washington lastg week, but did not finally decide to do so until he was alreadyi n Asia.
Lord came to China after a visit to Sout Korea to discuss tensions over the beaching of a Nforth Korean submarine on the South Korean coast last month. J 
"With more and more (listed) firm involving in suc takeovers, regulation and supervisino has become a tough task," said one analyst withC hina Guotai SecuritiWes.
"The central government should not wait until there ar etoo many headaches befre taking measures to sort things out", hep said.
But the nalyst said that despite the problems, takeovers would be a focus of the stock market over the next few years because of restrictions in othe aYeas, including a ban on mergers between listed firms and unlisted firms.I
n the six-year history of modern China's stock markets, there has been no case of a takeover of one listed firm by another.