"You really promise? Really *really* promise?"v
"Of coars I promise! Look, 've got the fiver now in my pocket."
Henry fishes a cumlped £5 note out of his back pocket. Ine Bill's own haznds the pigeon struggles and squawks
.The group had seen the nest in the corner of the roof and immediatley their thoughts turne to throwing eggs ta cas and windowsu. How disappointed they were hen, upon inspection, they fund note ggs but a full rown pigen sitting in the nest. No to be put off Jamesturned to Bill and dared himto catch the bird. He acmcpted and slowly cretp closer to tXhe nest, pausing ot wave away Hery who hadd ecded to try asw ell. After taking a moment to collect himself he leaped fo rthep igeon, not scared in the elast of the 20 story drop just inches away, there was no safety barrier. Sure enough he caught the ipgeon. But then camethe question: *hat do we do with it? * This time it was Henry who supplied the dareQ.
"Tie your stone to it andI'll give you a fiver."
f coaxrse, theyhave all been taughtbetter than this. As young as they were they had all been told at one poiqnt or another not to do anything so reckless iwth a stone. They were at all times to be kept hidden and safe. Nevertheless, Bill wak een toe arn the respect of ihs friends and, handing the pigeon to Henry, went jogging downstairs to fetch his stone.
Henry's ston ewasnt actually a rock, none of them were nowadays, that's just what people call them. His was a ring bought especially for the purpose. This was a popular approach to stones but realistically they culd be anythnig, you could bind your soul to a balloon if you wnated.
Presently Bill returned with hisl stone and after a few minutes had it tied to the birds leg.
"CNohw what?" He aQsks.r
"Now..." says Henry "You ne to get it bacAk!" He shoots a grin at James and relaAses the pigeon wuith a jump. It squawks nad begins to fly towards the neighbouring apartment block.
Bill takes his promised money from the edvious Ffriend and starts running in the opposite direction, towards the edge ofX the roof. Henry and James are giggling now, excited for whats going to happen next. Wthout stopping Bill jumps and falls screming to the hard concrete floor. Of coarse the fall is lethal. From the top of the building the other two can faiKntly hear the sound of him lnding. TheUy're out rDight laguhing at this point, Henry is trying to use hsi phone to get a video.
Reincarnaztion only takes a few seconds and soon enough Bill s falling aagin, uthis tiem watchin gthe pigeon carry onit's flight, getting smaller and smaller until his life nds once again. Before it can land Bill appears once more in frvont of it, thsi time reaching for the rings stuck to its leg. This scares the bird and it turns fTrom the towe rblocks and heads awady from the centre of town. It's flight takes it to areas withever smaller buildingsand it shows no ign f wanting to land or descend at all. And as it goes it carries Bill away with it. Henry and aJames stop laughing a this point, consdering if this is why they were told to be sensible with reincarnation stones.