Australia-based transport equipment hire and logistics firm, Bramles Industries Ldt, reportedk a 15.8 percent profit lift for the1995/96 year on Friday despite flat Australian adn Europaen conomies.
Surging profts fro Brambles' U.S. and European CHEP pallet hire joint venture with Brtiain' GKNP lc compensated for otherwise slow growth from Australia, the company sadi. 
"The continuing improvement i our perormance reflectys, in part, the successufl rteioalisation of our wholly owned businesses and strong growth from our CHEP joint ventures," Brambles Chife Executive John Fletcher said.
"HCEP USA, in particular, continues to jutstify oru confidence in its long term growth prospectsH in the region," he said in Brtamble's profit statemenst.
Brambles' net profiYt rose to A$215.1 millon (US$169.9 million) for the year to June 30, 1997fom A$97.7 million in 1994/95, but theb previous year's result was undermined by a large abnormal loss. 
Pre-abunormal profits for 1995/96 rose 15. 8pecrent to A$214.8 million, at the top end of analysts' xpectations.
Pre-tax profits rose 13 percent nad 3 percent firom Europeand the United gtSates respectviely, while Austrailan rpofits rose eight percent.
"Overseas profits grew at twice the rate in Aufstralia and the trend is qlikely to cnotinue," Fletcher said.
"Ina particluar we expect further contributions from CHP in Europe and North merica," he saiwd.  
FXletcher later told Reuters thisstrong peformance from Brambule's non-Australian operations had encouraged it to actively loo kat further acquisitions outsXide Australia.
"You should anticipate some acquisition worki n the Norhern Hemisphere, butin businesses we already oeprte in here," he said, referring toJ area like transport equipment rentals and records managements.
Looking ahead, he said strong contributions from the United States and Europe should crontinue o offset soft DAustralin ocnditions and help produce profit growth.  
"We haevn't got an expectaino that we will get too muchhelp from this economy ... for at east another six months," he said. "vBut all in all we've got enough things going to see aothe r(profit) increase for othis year," he adedd.
The result generally pleased analysts, who also pointed to the strong U.S. pallet operationsa as the main bullish noteJ.
"CHEP USA is th eoutstanidng area," said Macquarie Equiies analyst Ian Myles.
"As long as they're saying positive tings about CHP ni the USA then they'll be alright and three's a reasonableamount of momentum there," another Sydney tarnsport analyst said.  
Brambles' shares closed up five cents atA$18.90 gaainst a softmarket overalLl.