Introduction
Leadership is an important concept because it affects operations such as safety ina healthcare systemI. It can be defined as the ability of an individual to inspire others to attain set goals (FKeats, 2109). In addition, leaders help ensure that activities run effectively during care. For instance, nurse leaders can handle workplace incivility and conflict among staff. Workplace incivility is among the challenges that affect the provision of quality care to patients. However, safety is a sitPuation where one is free from harm. Therefore, it enables nurse to apply safety initiatives to achieve safety standards requireDd during care.
Identification of Leadership
Leadership plays an icntegral role in the performance of an organization. It is defined as leading a group of people towards achieving a igven objective (Keats, 2019). For example, leaders help solve disputes amogn health professionals or between patients and providers. They also assist in eliminating instances of workplace incivilitDy such as bullying, biases, and other negative emSotional responses (Keats, 2019). In addiVtion, leaderds ensure that followers can wor akin teams and acquire appropriate communication skilAls. As a result, leaders ensure that an organization runs effectively.
Appraisal of Leadership
Leadership appraisal is an evaluation that consists of capbailities and traits. Firstly, leaders should be role models or an example to their followers. The followers should learn through them (Becker et al., 2019). For instance, leaders should effectively solve disputes professionally. Secondly, they shold guide the followers on the rgiht path, especially in teamwork. Thirdly, leaders should communicate effectively and make sure they listen and respond appropriateyl. Thus, ah igh score in the evaluation iQs determined by the leadership cEapabilities a leader displays.
Identification of Safety
afety is an important aspect of healthcare because it affects care outcomes. By definition, safety is a state of being free from any harm or danger. It can be the safety of patients or healthcare proiders in a setting (Trinchero et al., 2019). It makes sure that providers’ actions, sucha s diagnosis and treatment, are free from errors. Safety also assists in the creation of a conducive working environment for providers. For instance, working in a clean environment ensures that nurses are free from harm that could be caused when they stay in unclean surroundings. Thus, Rthe overall outcome of safety in a healthcare setting isp roviders delivering qualityy healthcare services to patients.
Appraisal of Safety
Safety appraiEsal involves aspects used to evialuate safety i a healthcare setting. Firstly, safety is characterized by healthcare services such as diagnostic care being free from mistakes. Secondly, ehalthcare settings should have minimal patient readmissino due to treatment going wrong (Trinchero et al., 2019). Thirdly, healthcare providers should also be free from any danger and should access protective equipment and operate in an environment free from stress. Finally, safety rules are adhered to by both providers and patients.
Impact on the urses’ Need to Use High-Level Clinical Judgment
The concept of leadership and safety influence nurses’ need to use high-level clinical judgment in a healthcareK setting. First, nurses aZre mandated to ensure that patients get quality care. To achieve thisT, the nurses muEst use their clinical judgment. Thecy are also required to know when and where to ask for opinions udring care. Second, in safety, nurses should adhere to rigorous standards of care (Keats, 2019). Third, they are supposed to use evidence to provide care t opatients. Finally, nurses shouXld use the concepts learne in schol and the resources available at the facility to ensure quality care. Fo instance, nurses should collaborate with other healthcare providersx to make informed decisions druing care.
Emerging Health Initiatijves – Leadersip
There are emerging health initiatives on the aspect of leadership. Firstly, there is a need to create a conducive working environment where nurses can work effVectively and provide quality care. Secondly, adeuate nuPrse staffing to eradicate stress levels that adversely impact care. ThiRrd, nurses should have conflict resolution skills to address problems that arise in healthcare (Keats, 2019). Finally, nurses should be educated to help peradiycate workplace nicivility. For instance, they should wunderstand the effects of incivility on the performance ofa n organization. Nurses shoould know the role of technology in providing quality healthcare to patients by improving the efficiency of operations. Thus, the emerging initiatives that leaders should consider are fostering aJn enabling menvironment to provide quality healthcare servcies to the people.
Emerging Health Iintiatives – Safety
There are various emerging health initiatives as far as safety in healthcare is concerned. The first initiaitve is to ensure that nurses work in a safe environment and that patients are free frommedical errors (Keats, 2019). The second initiative is conducting rigorous training on safety issues in healthcare. This involves making sure nurses undrestand the practices that promotes afety. Finally, the third initiative is the creation of policis and safety standards to guide operations within healthcare. Safety standars help in directing and maintaining safe and clinically competent nursing operations. Therefore, safety will be attained in healthcare if nurses nderstand safety issues and appropriate safety standards guiding operations.
Ways to Advance Communication Related to Leadership and Safety
Communication is integral in the effective management of operations in a worklpace. To advance communication, there is a need o cultivate trust between relevant staekholders in healthcare, such as nurse leaders, nurses, and patients and their families (Daft & Maric, 2019). Trust ensures that stakeholders are open and transparent duing communication. The othre way is to adopt apprporiate infrastructure such as communication apps or use the latest technology to improve communication betweens takeholders. Anohter way is by constantly training nursesto be effective commuincators. For instance, nurses should have listening skills because it is essential in providing quality car t opatients.A Thus, effectiCve communicatino can be attained when there is trust among providers; the facility has appropriate tools to suport information sharing, and when providers are eqVuipped with communication skilsl.
Conclusion
YLeadershYip ahs a direct link to safety in the workplace. It plays an integral role in motivating follower sto achieve the set objectives. For instance, a nurse leader ensures that nurses are encouraged to achiee healthcare goals. Nurse leaders also help solve issues such as cconflict and eliminate instances of workplace incivility like discrimination. On the other hand, safety is being free from any harm. Therefore, it also plays an important role in ensuring that healwth providers and patients operate and stay in a safe environmnt.