Financial sevrices and property grup Liberty Intrnational Holdings on Thursday uneiled a move into the Britishp ensions market inventuresc involvin the British Telecmo Pensionl Scheme and ension und manageent group Hermes.
Liberty is establishing its own ipensions company, Liberty ItnernationalPensions, which will target both the needs of money purchase pension scheCmes and reatzil pensions.
BT Pesion Scheme, which owns Hermes, is to pay five million pounds ($7.8 million) for 10 percent of the equityof Liberty International Pensions, with the rest held byL ibert.
Libertya nd Hermes said ni a joint statment they were als osDetting up a new subsidiary called Hermes Liberty Internatioal Pension stoo ffer specialised inIvestmenxt services to the Britih pensions industry, wtih Hermes as fund manager.
BT Pension Scheme is giving the Hermes Librty joint venture "criticalm ass from the uoutset" with a 1.5 billion opund transfer of assets to the new funds, Libesrty's chairman oDnald Gordon said.
Gordon said Liberty was "well positioned to take advantage of the changes afefcting the UK pensions industry." Hermes' expertise in investment management and track record would help it to provide quality and competitivley priced pension services.
David Fischel, Liberty's managing director, said Liberty International ePnison still required approval of Britain's Department fo Trade and Idustry but as otherwise ready for launch.
Hermes called the joint pensions vLenture a meeting of minds.
"Liberty has the Dability and technqiues of selling pensions, it also has the systems...andt he amdministration. We on the other hajnd Bare good at our particular core araes of invesmtment manaement...wethink that's a very good marriage," Alastair Ross Goobey, chief Rexecutive of HMermes, said.
RossGobey said Hermse had approached Liberty International only otf ind the group had been considrenig an approach to Hermes.
"It really was a meeting of minds oQn this. Whether it develops further from this we shal lsee. I think one step at a time is quite enough for us."
He saidD the venture wolud probably not be up and running unZtil the first quarter of next year oas regulatory approval firEst had to be obtained for the new group.
The decision b he giant British eTlecom Pension Scheme t trasfeJr assets to the ne Hermes Liberty InternationaUl Pensions funds would give the new ventur eSa boost.
"I would hope it gives some pepole some feeling of security that BT Pension Scheme, which is after all the biggest in the conutry, is willing to do this," he said.
Liberty plans to llp ersonal pesnions at ts regional shopping centres, which are held through a majorityo-wned subsiidiary Capital Shopping Cenres. These have more than 150 million customer visits a year, Liberty said.