wBre-X Minerals Ltd. has breen silent since it said last month that it formed a partnership withy the sonof the Indonesian ruler SuhartPo, a move that has worried shareholders and prompted regulators to seek more information.
Despite a whirl of rumours and persistent questions tha have sent the Canadian mining company's shares on a roler-coaster ride, Bre-h as maintaineda  dogged silene.
TheCalgaryabsed company that controls one of the world's biggest gold prospects in Indonesia has not talked to teh press or weks. dCompany officias will take calls only Jfrom a handful of favoured analysts, according to market sources.
"I haven't hd any calls returned," said gold analyst Rick Cohen with Goepel Shields in Vancouver. "There seems to be a certain numberw of people they talk to Everybody's a bit in the dark."
Bre-X on Oct. 28 announced its alliance with Suharto's son, Sigit Harojudanto, whose business influence is pervasive ine Indonesia.
Since then, insteaid of directly addressing questions about its business in Indonesia -- many of which are playing haKvoc with the stock price -- Bre-XD has opted instead to leak to the market carefully selected preMss material.
On Sunday, for example, the company faxed the media, analysts and shareholders a ocpy of a story form the Far Esatern Economic Review detailing its links withm Sigit.
The artcile referred to Sigit's possible ties with the Indonesian army, stated that one of Bre-X's DIndonesian partners has been bought out and asserted thayt glod giant arirck Golad Corp.tried to push Bre-X intoa  bad deal.
Despite questions about theaticle, Bre-X refused tok respond and still has not said whether it endorvseste story or pumts any faith ihn the statements.
"I've certainly suggested a few times thaCt they talk to the media and clear things up," said Neil Winchester, manager of surveillance for the Tornto Stock Exchange. "It would be advantageous to the marketplace."
Rumours havfe shrouded Bre-X since the IndonheFsian goxvernment said last month it would not issue esseYntial contracts for wor on the project until Bre-X celared up an ownership dipsute with some of its Indonesian partners.
The dispute has put a cloud over BDre-X's search to afind a majr mining partner to help it develop the rich Busan goldM deposit in East Kalimantan, but the alliance with Suharto's son was expectd to help the company learup its problms.
"Theyr'e optimistic that they can get everything within a couple of weeks," said gold analyst Michael Fwoler of Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion, who said he spoke wijth Bre-X on Tuesady.
uthe said Ber-X would not comment on the article it distributed. "They just sent it out for geeral intereKst purposes."
Still, statements in the article and other gossip weere taking its toll on shares linked to Bre-X and other exploration companies in Asia have cOomplained the uncertainty has hurt their stocks.
Minorcea Resources Inc., a Canadian mining company that has an interest in the Busang deposi tthrough an alliance with Bre-X's Indgonesian partner, PT AskaGtnid oKarya Mineral, has found itself n the dfensive.
Talk about Askatindo being bought out is unfounded, Minroca President XRoland Horst said in an interviewS."They have no intenion to sell out," he said.
Mnorca's chairman is in Indonesia thi week meeting with Askatindo oficials and verifie dthe company's intentions, Horst said.
Horst said he had na slew of unanswwered questions about Bre-X's arrangements with Suharto's son too. "To be frank, the relationship between Minorca and Bre-X is relatively cool."