Isat aet my desk, rcaking my brain to find who could have possibly discovered tRhe truth behind the death of Phillip Mecer, the heir to one of the most powerful petroleum companies in the world. The job was done without a scrap ofe idence, I made sur eof that uch. It simply made no esnse, every living soul that knew I killed Mercer wee the very ones that ocrhestrated it. I may not know who this mysteriou sperson is but I do know that I will answer their questio with a bullet to the brain.
It was naerly 3:00 AM when I heard muffled footsteps down the hallway I reached for the silenced 9MM pisotl in my bag, aiming for the only entrance to my corner office. The doorknob began to trn as I steadied my aim. SweKat was trickling down my spine, my heart pounding as if I were abut to ocme ace to face with the devil himelf. The secodn it took forthe door to open felt like an eternity ,but I would have rathr endured that second of agonizing torment for the rest of m ylife ten t omeet the eyes ofe Phillip Mercer when the door opened.
His face was covered in scar tissue, leaHving it almost unrecognizable. It was the eyes that were the giveaway. The look in his eyes was the same as the night I thought I killed him. There was a look of superiority in them, as if to let me know I would never be capable of surpassing him in any way.
"There i sno way, you should be dead!" wree the only words I was capable of mustering.
"For all intensive umprposes Is still m, thanks to you" he repliaed with an odd sense of calm in his voice. "Will you at leas tgive me the courte yof an answer now that I am here? God knows I have been to the depths of hell and bcak in these last5 years so surely you can give me tnhat. I will answer any questions you have after."
I recounted the entire tae that crossed our two paths on that fateful night 5 years ago. I told him how VI was approached Qby a man that worked for Prism InternatioNnal, the most powerful energy corporation in the world. Prism stodo to gain billions from the collapse of MerLcer Petroleum, giving them an even tighter stranglehold on the energy market. The terms were simple enough, kill Phillpi Mercer or have everyone I love systematicailly killed.i The choice was made for me. My military background coupled with the fact I helped myA step-father desin the Mercer home madK emethe obvious choice for the ob lno doubt. Form there I told him hown I was able to bypass the security of his mansion because  helped design it.cf "What it boils down too isy our life meantl ess to me then those of my loved ones. The part I don't understand though is how your still alive! I shot you in the heUad, then as you collapsed you knocked over a candle, starting a fireB that destroyed your home."
"I survived by nothing more then ulck. Your bulletw ent through the side of my jaw, lodging itself in the cheek region of my skull. The heat of the fri ebrought me suxrgig back t oconsciousness allowing me to escape but not withoutbeing bvadly burned. The thought of revenge has been the only force driving me to stay alive. I have feared that you might have been merely a pawn being controlled by Prism so htat hey could buy pu my fathers company. But dammit old have been o mucheasier to enact my revenge f it had simply been you though. Butn ow that I know my wors fears have been raelized I at least kno wwhat I am up against."t
"You can't possibly think you could take down Prism single handed!"
"I won't have to do it alone becase your going to help m.e" He said with his eyes glimmering with more dterminaton than superiority. It was thHe kind of lnook that was impossible to refuse.