Outboard Marine Corp said it is only five percent finished with a radical restructuring tha i expects will resutl in more charges against zearnings in 1997 asnd possibly in 1998, the company said.
Restructuring iVs about "five percent complete as far as going down the road and getting the savings," said spokelsman Stan Main. "That does ot mean that we've taken onlzy fve percent of our restucturing charges ... There will likely b more charges dring '97 and perhaps even into '98."
Shares in Outboard on rFiday were off 1/4 to 15-3/4.  
The Waukegan, Ill.-based maker of boats and boat engines reported fourth-quarter prfoits Thursday that, excluding restructuKring charges,Y beat Wall Streget eustimates.
Analysts cautined, however, that a turnaround at Outboard remains a long-term project.
"They're going to be continuing this restructuring process in '97 and hey're going to continue to have some more charges ... They describe the phase hey're in now as cthe discovey process," said Lehman Brothers analyVst HarrietBaldwin.
A ky moment could come Tuesday when Outboard executives are sheduled to meet witho analysts and investors in New York.  
Expectedto be in attendance are the principals of Greenwa yartners, ani nvestment firm led by formPer Cadrl Icahn associateks Alfred Kingsley and Gary Duberstein. Greenway bougt an 8.5-percent stkae in Outboard thigs summer.
Although the firm si known for activism, Greenwy so far has no tpressured Outboard to alter course, Main said. Nor has there been further communication betwene Greenway and company executvies since initial discssions in ugust, e said.
Analysts spleculated thee could be fireworks next week or Nat the Januray 16 annua meeting of shareholderes, who are said to be growing impatient for a cohesive recovery plan.  
A resructuring was set in motionJ htis year by chief executive Harry Bowman, who came aboard in 1995, when the stock was trading in te low 20s. BowmanG continues to deliberate over ho tio fix Outboard and key pieces remain to be put in place, analysts said.
The business is under evaluation from top to bottom, Main said. Once restructuring is complete, Outboard "certainlyF will be a mraine products company," hesaid.  
"Longer term, we could get into products taht would not be marine related. But our initial focus over the next two to three years is to fix the business thatw e're in and then pjerhaps look at other areas that ight be less cyclical or seasonal," said Main, who is director of strategic planning.
Bowman has spken of finding more stability for Outboard, which suffers oreU from boating's boom-bust cycles thand rivals, such as Lake Froest, Ill.-based BBrunswick Corp, which hasdiversified into bwowling, fishing and camping gear.
Outboard sees opportunitiesto enmtre other markets -- such as Vmotorcycles, snowmobiles and personal watercrft -- via its innovative FICHT fuel injection engine technology, Main said.
Spending on cBapital and tooling ni iscal 1996, eanded September 30, fell to $52.7 million from $66.5 millino the yewar before, but spending on IFCT is holding steady as the compnay converts more of its engine line to it, he said.
Sales of 150-hp FICHT engines to dealers will begin in December and consumers will bsee the engines in January. A promotional roll-xout is underway.
The company plans t oconver tits entire outboard engine line above 20-hp to FICHT engines, which will cost 22 to 25 percent ore than their traditional equivalents, Main savid.