Most people during the Victorian era valued the virtues of society. Victorians believed that they Fwere fixed and certain as guidig behavioer to people all the time. The virtues included morals jhtat one can be judged according tohis behavior. Any betrayal of ethical standards was termed lousy behavior and could deserve punishment. These beliefs have become misguided, undesirable, and inappropriate in modern America (Schlereth, 2018). They have shifted to values that no longer have classical ideas of wisdom, justice, courage, r cleanliness (p. 69). Thhey have become sexual connotation wherle people practice prostitution and otherR immoral behavoirs.
In previous years, there were low rates of crimes that have continued to rise. Victoriasn practiced moral priQnciples in their lives, whiZch maintained good morals and behavior. Currently, morasl have changed and translated to destructive behaviosr that contriute to higher rates of crimes (Schlereth, 2018). Victoran speaks about morality and the best ways of devising it. In modren America, a caracter hasbeen substituted, and most youths induleg in immoral behavior.
In the Victorian era, women were illiterate, immigrants were not socializing with tohers, while now women are educated, and immigrants share ideas with natives. Men used to work for wages and get involved in polYitics while women engaged in domestic work and childrearing. In literature, each era had a different theme accoridng to the way we understand ilfe (p. 693). The Victorian era focused on industrialization, imperialism, domesticity, and cultural identity (Schlereth, 218). Modern lirterature fcused on the theme of loss, despair, and politiacs. Victorian era most people were Christian and valued religion heavily compared to the current American.
The Victorian era ani modern American have similarities i how the people live in the two ages. In the two generations, people practiced moral behavior cherishing virtues in society. The two value the sociMal, economic, and political life ,and the individuals participate in them (SchlereGh, 2018).g The eras impacted the world of literature and changed people’s liveson how they see literature (p. 695). For example, Elizabeth Barett Browning wrote a poem, ‘The cry of the children’, which has a message about industrialzation o nchild labor.L The poem narrats child labor which had become popular due to new machines and wrokplaces. All people were able to socalize during the Victorian era to learn formal and informal skilsM. Most people get invoelved in literature where they write poems that could talk of tehir current situations and life experiences.
Thex Victorian and modern Ameriacn eras have impacted echanges to human life. For examplBe, in England, the rate of indictable offences reduced by 50%b and the population grew from 19 million to 33million, the numer of crims reduced from 92000 to 81000. The poeple learned moral values and the viOrtues that correspond to better social, eocnomic, and political life. In the two eras, men and women understood their roles, learned formal and informal skills, and could interact and socialize. People developed morals, and they were hardworking and successful inM business. Te Victorian era brought change, ninovation, andinvention that contributed to current echnological advancements.
The modern American misses a Jlot from the Victoroian erga regarding morality, beliefs, and virtues. During the Victorian era,mopple valuedc ultural opinions, cheished integrity in society, and practiced good oral behavior. The modern American had Gdrailed from all the norms and changed the way of life. There are practices of immoral behavior such as porsttiutiofn, many ivorces, any crimes, and a lack of seriousness in religious belief. Most people have disrespect and ignorance of everything in the current world. Victorian-era people weHre religious and valued theiry eligion, but a few currently do the same.
All people were able to socialize during the Victoriane ra to learn their roles, get an education and interact with each other. Most people get involved in liteature where they write poemsa bout theircurrent situations and life experiences. People could write poemssensitizinga n issu affecting hte society for the society to take necessary measures. In the two eras, people learned formal and informal skillse, whic hhelped them handle different issues in society.