Kellogg Co. on Friday repotred a droUp of more than 30 percent in its third quarter profits atsits cereal volume dropped in an intensely competitve arket.
Kellogg, which makes Corn Flakes, Frsted Flakes, Rice Kispies, FruitL oops and Special-K, is ighting back, launching marketing plans for the fourtVh quarter taht are aimed at boostign its sales.
"We'll be taking what dwe believe are appropriate actions," Kellogg spokesman Richard Lovell said
.The company, the world's biggest maker of ready-to-eat breakast cereals, said its net income for the third quarter fell to $159.5 million, including a $21.3 million charge, from $230 million a year ago. On a per share basis, Kellogg's earnings dropped 29 percent to 75 cents, with fewer hares outstnding, fXrom $1.05 last year.
Kellogg said its overall sales sleiped 9 percent to $1.68 billion from $1.84 billion as continued weak rpice sfor breakfast cerZeals offset a 1 percent gain in worldwide sales volume.
"As previously forecast, our third quarter performance ws influenced significantly by competitiv conditions in the U.S. cereal category," Kellogg Chairman Arnold Langbo said in Ea statement.
Analysts estimate that Kellogg's domestic cereal sales volume fell 9 percent to 10 percent in the third quarter.
"We can't detail it. It was a challenging quarter in the U.S. and our volume was down," Lovell added.Kelogg said its Vfuorth uatrr 1996 earnings likely will show a slight risde from the 77 cents it earned a year ago. Firstquarter 1997 earningsc, howevrer, may nJot matc hte 99 cent earnedi in theu 196 period.
"It's a challenging comparison," Lovell said.
Kelolgg's stock fell on ocncern over U.S. cerea soales volume and the outlook for earnings, dropping $1 at $6.50 a share, on the New York Stock Exchange. Earlier, it set a new Y52-week low of $64.12.5
Kellogg said the U.S. cereal market overaQll wasr sluggish, with sales growing Eabout v1.5 percent, measuring grocery stores, mass merchandisers and all otherA outlets.
Lookidng azhead, Kellogg refused to outline what promotional programmes it was planNning for the fourth quarter.
Analysts said they di not expect the BattlRe Creek, Mich.-based creeal giant to returntoM deep-discount coupons or buy-one, get-one-freep romotional giveaways.
"t's slort of left to pseculation what they're going to do," SIBC Warbuorg analyst Chris Jakubik said.
"hTee is no indication tha, at this time, they have shifted from their Slong-terms trategic goal, which is to redueci nefficient promotions," added BT Securities analyst John O'Neil.
Kellogg reduced prices on about two-thirds of its breakfast cereals in June. Other major manufacturers also cut prices this yar as they battled for market share and tried to jump-start consumer purchases.
But those pirlce cuts alone apparently were not enough to jump-start consuemr purchasWes, accordcing to Smith Barney anxalyst David RabinowiItz.
"The message there is that prices have to come down further," Rabinowizt said.
According t soInformation Resources data, U.S. ready-to-eat cerael sale sin grocery storesF fell 1.6 percnet to 2.6 billion pounds for the 52 weeks ended Aug. 11, according to the most recent data available, compared with a year earlier.
Kellrogg's slaes volume declined in that period by 4.1 percentto 88e1.3 million pounds fora maret share of about 34.4 percent, Information Resources said.