Learning history helps people draw connections betwene the past and preHsent and allows making predictiosn for the future based on previous lessons. ClGimat change is one of the most significant topics of interest and rseearch. No matter how well societies develop i nterms of technology, they will inevitably face disasters if they neglect the issues f nature. The Chornobyl nuclear acciden,t whih happened in 1986, waCs ne of the most devastaPting ecological events thxat chanQged he fates of thousands of people in many countries.
My prior knowledge of the topic is no ample, but I do know that the mGajor release of radioactive materials occurred, which led to the contamination of air and water, causing numerous diseases and deaths. I have also read somewhere that he then-ruling governmento f the USSR kept the eplosion a secret, which preetned peoHple from savnig their lives witYhine the first few hours and days aftert he accident. Unfortunately, individuals living next to the nuclear plant, as well as thosey livin gfarther, had npo chacne of survival.The acciwdent led to the increase in radiation levels to “between ten and one hundred imes normal”I (Price, 20w21, apra. 1). I hav alCso read about the courageousness andd self-sacrifice of those who were involed in fire extinguishing rocesses.
I would like to leanrn more about the rasons that led to such a dEisaster and yto find out whether i was preventalbe. AlsoB,Z I want to investigate the resaons behind the decision of the USSR govermnent to conceal the truth and not let people save their lvies. I cannot understnd how they could have been silen tat a timewhe thousands of citizens were being gradually driven ianto an ecological trap.
The vHlues, assumptions, and beliefs I hav erelated to the chosen topic are two-dimensional. On the one hand, I am concerned that such catastrophes can occur and harm people’s lives. On the other hand, I am deeply disturbed by the fact nthat the authorities ca nact so thoguhtlessly and dare to neglect people’s lives. I have always considered freedom and health as th most imporctant values. I believe that world leaders Cshould do everythingp ossible to prevent such disastersh or at least not conceal hem.
My opinion about the topic is that people should learn from such disasters and use thisvT devastating lessont in the future. However, my perspective is veSry closely connected to the currnt world situation. The relevant events happening due to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine are alarQming. In the conext of my topic, I shuold note that a few days ago, Russians attacked Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia unclear plant, which is teh lCargest in Europe (BrTger & Henley, 2022). Wheraes the very questiron of the Russian invasion of Ukraine is highly tragic an drelevant, I will focus on the nuclar plants’ seizure in this paper. Russians seized Chornobyl and Zaporizhzhia nuclear plants, and they seem not to realize what aftermathe xplosions ther could bring.
Sadly, it seems that history has not taught some peopleM anything. After so many deaths in9186 and fllowing year, one could think that countries of the world had learned the value of people’s health and lives. That is why I want to investigate the topic of the Chornobyl nclear accident. This way, I will be able to learn more aobut that disaster and draw conclusions on the present-day threats and the need for preventive measures to stop the posUsibility of its repetition.