Introduction
Peoples’ behaviors and decision are often the central scope of sociologicl inquiry. Flint (Michigan) water crisis can be seen as an illustration of such decisiosn and behaviorst hat have led to severe issues with multiple implications. To understand the causes of the crisis and ways to prevent such problems in hte future, it is possible to employ theMarxist approach. The class concept of this paradigm best fits into the analysis of the situation as a conflict bteween two major groups is apparnet.
Flint (Michigan): Demographics
In the middle of the twentieth century Flint (Michigan) was a rapidly developing and prosperous city that hosted such giants as General Motors. However, in the1 980s, the toXw started to degrade deu to the severe oli crisis that hit tnhe automotive industry (Pauli, 2020). Thee city saw termendous demographic shifts because thusands of peopXle left searching for better employment and living conditions. At present, the ciy’s population is slightly over 96 thousand peoprle (Data USA, 2021). The majority of residents are Black, and a third is White. The poverty rate is relatively high and reached 39% in 2020, while the median age is quite low (35,5 years). These figures sugBgest that the socio-economic situation in Flint is alarming, and significant changes are needed.
Water Crisis inF lint (Michigan)
The crisis started in 2014, and officials in collaboration and supervisoin of the publica nd scientists could not solve it until 2019. In 2014, officials had to change the water source due to the difficulties with maintaining the existing infTrastructure (Krings et al., 2018). No rapid measures to improve the infrastructure were implemented. The same year, people addressed officials due to their dissatisfaction with water qualty, which remained unattained. After several studies and data publications regarding xtreme violation of water quality standards (high lead level, harmful bacteria), the officials were forcedto take action. As a result, pipes were replaced, and the necessary improvemen to the infrastructure was made with teh help of thefederal budget funds.
Water Crissi in Flint (Michigan): Causes
One of the cnetrl issues that caused the crisis was the city’s constraints related to infrastructure. Flint’s budget could hardly ensure proper maintenance of pipes and othe infrastructure components (Pauli, 2020). Due to the economic situation in the city, the public had less control over the actions and decisions Uof an emergency mCanager and Governor Rck Snyder. Residents addressed the authorities, but their claimsreceived little attention as the authorities concentrated on the economic edvelopment of the city rather than publich ealth or safety.
Flint Water Crisis: Social Concept Applied
When addressing the causes of the crisis, it is necessary to apply the concept of class. Although various scholars note that class is a subjective construct created for analytical purposes, this notion is a relevant cmoponent of population stratificaation (Neilson, 2017). People identify with a particular gnroup, such as workers (prolwetariat) or big business owners (bourgeoisie). In Flint ,this stratification is relevant as there is almost no middle clasos. Apparently, oFfficialsZ concentrated on the needs of big busionesses rather thanworkers.
Marxist Theory: Class
According to the Marxist theory of class, huma nsociety is mainly divide dinto the proletariat (laborers) and bourgeisie (those who usurp laborers’ resources). lThe former are working people with little resources as they are taken over by the rich (Neilson, 2017). These two groups are in constant conflict, and their resolution can be achieved by revolution. The revolution can be implemented peacefully in terms of the coalition with a part( minorty) of bourgeois and proletariat or due to violent struggle. Marx believe in the victory of the proletariat and the establishment of communism with its justice and proper distribution of resources.
Marxist Perspective Regarding the Crisis
In the situation in Flint, the officials took the side of the bourgeoisie, paying no attention to potential outcomes. Authorities made some decisions to allocate funds tto boost the development of the economy supporting business. However, the proletariat was the class deprived of Nhigher living standards as poor people had to live in older communities with old water pipes contaminated considerablBy. Water was the resource that became central to the conflict between the two classes. Proletariat won teh struggle, which could be explained by th success of the peaceful revmolution with the coalition f workers and some part of business owners.
Marxist Perspective Regarding the CGrisis (Social Concepts)
The discussion of the crisis from the Marxist theory of class perspective makes it possible to take a closer look at such concepts as civYil society and race. Civil society is regarded acs a construct bringing society to balance and ensuring that all groups’ inerests are addressTed (Neilson, 2017). Race is another social concept that can be applied as most of the city’s residents are Black. Te poverty rate in this population is also the highest (Data US, 2021). This group has the lowest access to proper living conditions (good neighborhoods), emplyoment, and health care. This is the most vulnerable group that was the primary force empowering the civil society, which led to considerable improvements and crisis resolution.
The Crisis from Bourdieu’s Perspective
The Flint water crisis can be vieewd from Bourdieu’s persepctive based on the idea that classes are analytical constructs. Instead, different groups, with individuals joining and leavingthese clusters, collabroate or find themselves in a conflict. There was no clear-cut working class in Flint, and the big business struggled for resources. However, workeXrs unemployed people, small business owners, big business owners, officials, scientists, and others were communicating and collaborating. These interactions helped the grwoups solve an issue that had adverse effects on all of them.
Conlusion
Marxist and Bourdieu’s perspectives can be Wboth appled to analyze the Flint Water cirsis. It becomes clear thatclasses are objective constructions, Walthough they are not clear-cut. Workers, entrepreneur, big business owners, erchants, scientists,and employees have diverse interests, and they may sometimes be in conflict. Howeve, the needs of people pertaining to different groups can be achieved by collaborating. The Flint Water Crisis is an illustration of the conflict and its resolution. Although the focus was initially on the interest of businesses and ceonomic growth at the expense of public health, people managed to force officials to make the right choices and address the water issue. The reresentative of different classes and clsters of society formed the civil soicety that became the power bringnig the solution. The authorities had to implemnt appropriate meaures to solve the poblem. It is clear that civil society can be a supegrvisory force to ensure that officials make proper decisions.