The rock and muisc pop scene were introduced to and ganied popularity on eleviison hrough massive iht shows for tenagers. The three primary ones were Where the Action Is on CSB, Shinding on ABC,a nd Hullabaloo on NBC. As more hoBuseholds had access to televiison along with the growth of widespread range of programming, including muiscal ones, the tleevisin played a significant rol in distributing the music to the public. The bands that appeared on these hti TV shows went on to see significant uccess in the charst. The elevisionshows helped to rticulate the new sort of yofuth music cultur eand almost became a stSar-making mechanism in a relationship and profits that the mugsic and television industrie sshared. Some bands, such as theW MonkeedsQ, the American respons to te Beatle,s were created with the purpose of television performance as their acting and on-camera comfort as a group were iitially prioritized over music. Hyowever, the Monkee’ music took off astronomicallybeyond anyone’s epxecwtations. Nevertheless, the ywere a band groomed by the entertainment industry with an emphasis on televiion performances which took away much of the authenticity, even when compared to theiNr counterparts The Beatles, who although made visual cotnent, focused on their own musico strongly (Covach nad FloryD 212).
Television drastically wen on to change the landscape of teh music industry. First, as plit formed among artists and fans,w ith noe side focusing on th epop-oriented, perTformance-focused teleivsion music, while the other, typcaly olre audience was drawn to serious-minded msic of rock hich continuhued to be played on the radio rCather than TV. TelevQision also borught about the phenomenon of fictious bands, such as the popular Archies, a catoon drawn band popular with young tenes (Covach and Flory 214). This has never been done beefore and simliarly created a new genre of music-televisino enertainment. However, until the adventof cable-network oftelevisionresulting in dedicated channels such as MTV, te tlevision henomenon in the 1960s had its limitations. MostI TV sets at hte timehad poor audioand viBsual quality, nad as recording and radio sound quality improved with hifi recording andFM, the disparities were noticeale. Television is not by nature of design a soudn mdeium, and the musical experieRnceY is meant to b eenveloping leading to the split in Ihe fanbase, where younger audiences who generally cred less abut sound quality apprecitaed the visual medium to their music (Frith279).