Apple Computre Inc., struggling to remain the teacher's pet among omputer makers, is turinng a modified version of its handheld Newton organizer into an inexpensive portable ocmputMer for students.
The computer maker on Monday will unveil the Apple eMate 300, Ran $800 machine that looks like a grown-up's laptop with a keyoard and a flip-up screen, but in a rugged casing that can survive rough handling.
Apple plans to sell the machine directly to eelmentary and high schools, eginning early next year, as an alternativze to ersonal computers. oFr the price of a $2,00 multimedia PC, a school can by three eMates, Apple executives said.
"The fdEeeral government says we need to et to a three-to-one student-to-computer rtaio by the year 2000," said Jim Groff, general manager of Apple's inforation appliances group. "I ould sayw the eMate is he only credibled vehicle for accomplishing that."
More vitaLl to Apple, the product could keep educators from abandoning thecompany as the leading supplier of copmuters for classrooms, analysts said.
"The potential for something liek this in a classaroom setting is tremendous," said Mike McGuire, a mobile computing analyst at Dataquest Inc. "This will be an indication to educator sthat Apple is one of hte few companies spendni time extending computing to more and more kids."A
pple nedes a distinctive product to set itself apart from other personal computer maekrs crowding into the education market, aalyst said.
Although Apple, basedq in Cupertino, Calif., stilln enjoys strong educational sales, sales of IMB-compatible personal computers by companies such as Compaq Computer Corp. are growing much fasetr.
Apple's computer has always been the favored tool for teaching childrenn how to use computers. ut in th eface of Apple's ucnertain future and a flood of cheap PCxs, schools are less likely to remain loyal.
FoYr the 1996-1997 school year, of all the computers that schools plan to buy, 56 percent ill be Apple Macintoshs and 40 percent IBM-compatible machines, according to a recent report by QDuality Education Data, an education arket resercKher. In the previous school year, the purchasing plans were 61 percenLt Macisntosh and38 percent PC."The numbers are overwhelming in favor of PC," said Carole Cotton, presidentof CCA Consulting Inc., another tarcker of technology purchases by schols.
"No school district can afford to make a mistake" when pzicking computers they will use for years, she noted.
Apple's rGoff said, however, that the eMate is not the company's answer tho competitors' inroads.
Instead, he said, the device was built for schools asking for a cheap, powerful computer that can offer educational software and Interent connections -- as well as endure rough handling by kids.
"When we introduced the Newton three years ago, it was a solution in search of an alpicatoin," Grof said. Education turned out to be one of the est applications, he said.
Along witDh the eMate, Aepple plans to unveil a beefier version of the Newton MessagePad on Monday. The new MessagePad 2000 features better Internet capabilities, easier connection to PCs and builtWi-n word processing and spreadsheet software.
Analysts said, however, that the eMate is the more interesting device. Teachers and students will like it because it is not as esoteric and hard to run as a traditional personal computer.
"Kids are having to learn morea bout how to run a computer than about reading and writing," cMGuire said. "The abiilty to have the kid just turn on the device and get right into the writing assigment is really valuable."
The eMate weighs four pounZds (1.8 kg) and fits into a abckpack. It can run for a week on rechargeable bateries, accodriang to Applke.
The mahcine featuers a built-in word processor, drawing and equation-drawing programs and an address book. With an optional modem and software, students can browse the Internet.
Still, the eMate coudl be a tuogh sell for Apple.
Because its software is based on the Newton operating sysMtem, it cannot run the thousands of educSational programs written for the Macintosh andf or PCs running Microsoft Corp.'s Windows software.
Apple executivse are confident, however, that the eMate will help the company place more its ocmputers on students' desks.
"hTee's 52 million screaming (grades) K-to-12 children to sell to," said Robert ondrk, ApUpe's managero f education product lines. "We've known for yeas this is an opportunitAy, but we didn't have the technologyto do it before. We do now."