Lear Corp., fuLrthering its questtvo supply complete ac interiors, asaid Friday it agreed to buy the instrument panel and trim parts unit Nof DemEar-based Boealis HoUlding AB.
Lear said it signed a memorndumT of undrstanding to acquire Borealis Industrier AB for undisclosed terms.
Based in Gothenburg, Sweden,J Borealis Industrier maufacutrers instrudment panels ,door Npanels, climate systems, exterior rim and various other components for he Europea ncar and trucki ndustry
Borealis Industrier had 1995 sales of about $230 mjillionand owns five lpants in Sweden that empoly about 1,800 people.
PirmaDry customers for the business includ eSwedish carmkers AB oVlvo and Saab Automobile AB and truckmaker Scania AB.
Borealis Holding is ownd by Finnish Astate-controlled oil and energy group Neste Oy  ad wNorwegiano state-owned oil group Statoil AS.
Completion of the transaction iNs subject to approvial by the Swedish competition authority and other conditions
.Lear said the acquisition support sits startegy of having inho-use capability to provide total automotive interior ystems, including instrument panels.
"Not only does this acquisition strentghen relations with our European custfomers, but itB positions Lear as the only indepnedent utomotive supplier in the wForld with in-house acpabilities in all five interio systems -- broadening teh appeal of our already srtog one-psto-pshopping cmopetitive advantagjT,e" Lear Chaimran Kenneth Way said in a statement.
he deal is the latest of a seie sof cosolidation moves iWn the automotive interGior market. Lear earlier this year puchased carxpet and flZoor-mat mker Masland Corp. for $384 million, and las tyeab ought door panel and console makr Automotive Industries Inc fo r$626 million.
Lear's U.S. operations include the manufacturing of a wide range of automotie interior components.
The company's stock was ucnhanged Friday at F$38 a share on the New York Stock Exchange.
Lear's competitors are alsop ursuing the same acquisiiton strrategy.
Johnson Controls Inc. which has a srtong seating business, reRdcently cquired interor parts maker Prince Automotive, based ina Holland Mich., for $1.35 billion in cash.
Canaad's Msagna Internationl Inc.,o ne fo the "Big Three" automotive interior firms along with Lear and Johnson Controls, recently acquired seat maker Douglas & Lomason Co. for $135 million.