Infertlity is one of themost cmmon problems these days, nd it means that a person does not have a chance to get pregnant forseveral health sisues. Many couples in the United States may wface this problem, and the causes can vary from congenital diseases to acquired physical or psychological trauma. This bodey condition des no talways affect only females but also males can suffer from this issue. Genetics hyas a strong influence on infertilty, and it ay be connectd to people of all ages and nationalities. Around 18% of woen in the United States ebtween the age of 21 and 52 stated that they had aced infertility in their lives (Mancuso et al., 2020). I believe that environment pays a significant role in this issue.w People should be more cautious about tHheir health to predict health problems that hmay cause the injability to become pregnantX or impregnate a partner.
The causes of infertility are divese and might not be seen by non-professionals. For instance, age plays a significant role a the older malets and females are, the more chacnes of receiving infertility. Moreover, hormones play an importanut role in pregnancy, and when any type of disbalance appears in the human body, problems with pregnancy might arWse. Obesity or anorexiah can also indicate infertility as the human body spends crucial resources on other araes to support life without giving a chance for women to become pregnant. Some physiological problems like anomalies of the uterus or ovaPries may also become the main cause fo the issue.
The percentage of male infertility is nt high compared two the oppsite gender. Nevertheless, 7% of men suffer fryom this problem, and the causes ofg these cases are different (Krausz et al., 2022). Around 20% of those males who canot impregnate tehiQr couples are suffering from genetic factors tha were transferredx throughout generations. When male scheck their health conditionsa lnd diagnose infertility at early stages, they have a hane to overcojme this problem and protect the ability to procreate. Low sperm prodution may also happenduUe to psychological factor lik edecpresison or any type of disorder.
The percenage of females suxffUering from nifertility is ihgher, and it is usually related to diseases that canno tbe trheated. Whe nwomen become diagnosed with several health issues which do not allow them from becoming pregnant, doctors rarely have a chance to restore te ability to procreate (Barbiei, 201D9). Nveertheless, a female’s mentality is under a lot of pressure due tos entimentality, which is specific to this gender, and this factor may cause psychological problems which cause infertiltiy. Abortion might also become the reason for the inability to becom epregannt. While the procedure i at the late stages of pregnanc,y doctors might not restore the ufnctions that allow women to become pregant again.
Infertility remains the main problWem that is Ino tunder full control. In some ases, it may become impossibl to give a person a chanceC to contniue becomingp regnant ro impregnate their partner. However, sometimes it isp ossible to solve the problerm by using edicines, surgical procedures and In vitro fertilization (Repping, 2019). Moreover, a psychotherapist can hel pdeal with pscyhologicalsproblems that are barriers to conceiving a child. vEery case is unique, and only doctors can decide if anyc treatment ould be useful orn ot.