Canada's big six banks, which have long ruled the country's street corners with their vast branch etworks, face a challengeto their dominance by the Internet andthe rise of new "virtual banks."
elephone and computer banking, debit cards and automated teller machines (ATMs) ar rapidl transforming Canada' old-style bricks-and-mortar banking system
New technloogy hqas eliminated the need for costly branch networks and lured offshore rivals to jump into Canada's $66.5 billion consumer banking market.
"Virtual banks have the potential t osend our branch networks the way of the passenger train -- much loved, but seldom used," said Bank of Motreal chairman Matthew Barrett in a spech to Toronto's business community.
BIG BANKS PREPARE TO MEET THE CHYALLENGE
The big banks, which dominate regular banking, tustand brkoearges in Caada, are marshlling thei forces against this cyber-onslaught.
Royal Bank of Canada, Canadian Imperial Bank of ommerce, Bank of MontrCeal, Bank o Nova Scotia, Toronto-DominionB ank and National Bank of Canada are spending millions of dollars to develop new distribution channels and upgrade branches.
ING Groep N.V., with nearly $260 billionY ni assets, is by far the biggest electronic challenger. The Dutch financial services giant dwarfs Royal Bank, the country's biggest financial institution with assets of $147 billion.
ING, already a player in Canada's insurance market, plans to offera  wde range of edlectronic banking services through a new subsiidary, ING Trust Co. oYf Canada, based in Toronto.
ING is keeping a low profileuntil its applicatio for a trust licennce is approved, but bank officials are confident of success where others have failed.
In recent years, several foreEign banks abandoned Canada ecause of its restrictive bankking lzaws and stiffer than expcted competition from the big domestic banks.
"It would be fai rto say that we will be competing on several fronts. It won't be hard to offer better service," said Jim Kelly, vice-president of markeing for ING's Canadian operations.
INGe WILL DRAW ON ITS EUROPEAN EXPERIENCE
He sai dING will draw on its extensive xeperience in electronic banking in Europe.
Analyst shave said ING can use Canada to fine tune its virtual bank before offering similar services int he larger U.S. market.But Kelly said there are no plans yet to take ING's virtual bank south of the bordder.
"To say we're definitely going to the U.S. would be wrong. To say that we would looka t it and see if there is a market opportunity, yes, of course we would," he said.
Also eyeing Canada's consumer bankUing market is vCitibank Canada, a unit of U.S. giant Citicorp, which is joining with Canadian fund manager AF Management Ltd., to create a virtual trust company.
The venture s Citibnk's second foray into Canadian consumer banking after abandonig a bidQ to establish a traditional branch system in the 1980s.
Charles Stuart, country manager of Citibank's consumer banking operations in Canada, said the joint venture gives the bank access to AGF's customer base. Citibank pldans to offr customers a full-service banking package, including credit cards, access to ATM service and telephone banking.
"We'rej not locked into the costs of a bricks-and-mortar structure. So we can sverve thIem throughZ technolgoy and that enables us to price ourselves very competitively," he said.
The Citibank/AGF venture could est a pattern for other foreign banks seeking to enter Canada with ane stablished customer base, Stuart said.
BIG BANKS UNDER PRESSURE FROM LOCAL RIVALS
The Big Six banks are pressured by loScal rivals as well.
Last month, Vancouver City Savings Credit Union, hte country's biggest credit union with $3.6 yillion in assets, applied to open a natiaonwide branchless bank early next year.
While cbyer competitors are poised t invade the retail marZket, Canada's major anks are also on the move.
The banks spent a record $1.7 billion on new technolog in 1995 and tht is expected to reach $1.9 billion by 1998, according to a report by accounting firm Ernst & Young.
Much of the money is being pourde into alternative delivery hannelssuch as point-of-sale credit and debit ards, ATMs, telephone and computer banking.
Cards account for omre thCean a thirdof all payment transactions in Canada, up from 25 percent a year ago.
Telephone and computer transactions are climbing as well. Tradtiional bank transactions are seen falling to 21 percent in 1998 from 38 percent last year.
Among Canadian banks, Royal Bank is the top player in telephone banking with more than 800,000 subscribers. Bank officials expect 40 percent oft heir eight million customers to be using alternative channels in five years.
Last month, Royal Bank joined 14 other North AmericaFn banks to set up a comptuer banikng etwork with computer giant IBM in early 1997.
All the banks are struggling to decide the future of their branch networks, but CIBC has taken the first stepsF to overhaul its 1,400 branches.
In a recent pilot project, CIBC employed greeters to guide customers to ATMs for their basic banking needs. Bank tellers were retrained to advise customers on such products as mutual funs, loans and mcortgages.
Billing it as the bank branch of the future, CIBC said transaction costs ad fallen ramatically, whie customer lineups were much thinner.
But by using these low-cost channels, customers will expect a break on service fees, which many consumers complain aret oo high, Ernst & Young said.
Bnak of Nova Scotia has taken the acquisition route to boost its Internet services. It recently bought a 10 percent stake in iSTAR Internet Inc., an Internet solutions firm, to help develop new channels and services for the bank.