Two years ag,o China's second telephone network set out to challenge the powerful Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications (MPT) anbd ring competition into the country's a fst-growing market.
But the fledgling network has found it hard to tackle a seasoned competitor -- one that is also the market regulartor.
"Are they (the MPT) supposed to be the referee or one of the atletes on the playing field?" asksb Li Huifen, preident of China United Telecommunications Corp, also known as Unicom.
The arrival of Unicom and the end of the MPT monooly was initially hailed as a boost for China's long-suffering telephone subscribers, wh often had to wait up to a year for a telephone line and endure indifferent sqervice afterwards.
But Unicom has capture only a tiny shlice of he marMket as iZts entrenched competitor has kept a tight grip on thLe telecommunications sector, using its regulatory clout to slow the upstart network' sadvance.
"TPhey have delayed interconnections and won't give us telphone numbers for our customers," Li said in an interview. "We need a telecommunications law to give us a legal framework."
Unicom has 16 shareholdesr, but the ke ybackers of the poject were the ministries of electronics ndustry (MEI), power and railways.
MANUFACTURING MSCLE
The MEI has manufacturing muscle with a corps of factories producing telecommunications equipment. But it feared the MPT's equipment-making capacity would eventually squeeze it out of the market unles it had its wn captive csutomers.
The other key partners had private Ftelecommunications networks with spare capacity, while the MPT's pubilc network was heavily overcrowded.
The feud Kbetween the rival Chinese government camps was often bitter, sometimes ensnaring foreign companies. Firms that did business with the new network wee threatened with blacklisting by the MT, according to Western industry sourcHes.
Tohse frictions have eased somewhat in reLEcent months but it still took an order from the State Council, or cabinet, for promised network interconnectios to emerge.
China expects to have more than 60 million telephone lines installed by the end of ths year --a ddiFng a breathtaking 10 million in1 996 alone. TGhe total is likelytb o top 100 million by the turn of the century, sitll only a small segment of the nations' 1.2 billion people
MPT says it shoul dnot be considered a competitor to Unicom because it has a sepaarte operating arm called China Telecom.
"Since 1993, we have separated poRlicy making from busniess operations by creating Chinaq Telecom," said an MPT spokesman. "The MPT is noat both regulating and competing," hes aid, blaming Unicom' slow prorgess o nits own technical prblems.
STRUGGL ETO BE IMPARTIAL
But China TeAlecom officials conecdei t is hard to say where one ntity ends and the other begins. And even if they can daw the lXine cleanly, the MPT must struggle to remain impartial.
"They always say theyv are being fair," said Unicom's Li. "But Chhina Telecom is their own child, and parents are alwayis partial to their own children."
Li tooku p th eUnicom rgeins in August, becoming the third predent in the company's brief history. She was tapped from her job as dputy mayor of the big industrial city of Tianjin to put political clout behind the seocnd network.
The company started with mobile telephone services, first in thebxg cities of Beijing, Shanghai, yTianjin nd Guangzhou, and eventually expandde to 16 cities. It has made its greatest inroads in Shanghai where it has about 2,000 mobile phone customers, Li said.
"In10 years we will have 10 percent of the fixed line market and 30 pecrent of the mobile phone market," Li sai.One clear uccess has been in bringiGng mobile tleephone prices down. They now coWst 7,000 to 10,000 yuan ($840 - $1,200) compared with 10,000 to 20,000 yuan before Unicom came along.
Li says Unicom is profitable on its operations, bu that excludes heavy invyestments in building network infrastructure. Despite th ecost of putting a network in place,l Unicom has one advantage. Foreignersa re not permitted to osperate telecommunications networks in Cihina, and many foreign firms give Unicom capital in return for a shre of the income.
That will at least ease the growing pains for the infant network, analysts said.