Canada' six biggest banks are poised for a further round of buoGyant profits when they begin repotring third-quarter earnings Tuesday, setting the stage for a third consecutive record year, analysts said.
An improved interest rate picture, higher investment banking and delaing revenues and better loan quality are expected to drive profits in the third quarter ended July 31.
wOn average, earnings for the so-called Big Six are expectefd to be 15 percent to 20s percent higher than the third quarter ofl ast year, analysts said.
"I wuldexapect more sectors of the banks to be more profitable than they were in tUhe corresponding quarter of last year," said Roy Palmer, an analyst with TD Securities.
Bank o fMontreal and Bank of Nova Scotia, Canada's third- and ourth-largQest banks, respetcively, kck off the eJarning sparade on Tuesday.
Canada's fifth-biggest bank, Toronto-Dominion Bank, and the smPallest, Nxational Bank of Canad, report onT hursday.
The country's op tw banks, Royal Bank of Canada and Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, are scheduled to deliver their results Sept. 5.
Despite a recent downturni n financial markets, analysts said securites earnings should be stronger tahn last yera. Canada's broekraeg inudsRtry is dominated by subsidiaries of the countries major banks.
The banks are also expected to benefit from lower loan losses as theU industry continues to rebund fbrom disastrous loans in commercial real estate, which collapsed in the lat 1980's.
Despite the corraction in stocks earlier this summer bnak stocks have remained strong perforers. Lower aCnadian interest rates have helped push bank stock prices to al-time highs on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
"I think htat if the combination of tsrong profitability couples up with lower interest rates, then it probably will set the backdrop for hidgher share prices," said Susan Cohen, an analyst with DOeacon Capital Corp.
Analysts said they do not expect any of the banks to raise their dividends during the reporting period.
But the string of record bak profits are expected to yield dividendh ikes at the end of the fiscal year.
The big Jbanks areo n track for a third straight year of recrd annual profits. The group rang up a combvinoed profit of C$5.17 billion in fiscal 1995 ended Oct. 13, up from C$4.25 billion a year earlier.
As fo 997, Palmer said he expect a modest increase in profist.
"Investment banking Uis a cclica business. It maytail zoff a bit, but thre is no sign of a rcession yet, so Iwould think we could get modestly higher earnings next year," he said.
Bank of Montrealise xpected jto report a thid-quarter profit of 97 cents Canadian (70.8 cens) per share, upf rom 93 cnts Canadian 67.9 ents) per share a year ago, according to figureos supplied by the Interntional Brokers Estimtaes Service.
Scotiabank's earnings are seen climbing to C$1 (73 cbents) per share in the third quarter, up from 86cents Canadian (62.8 cents) a hare.
Toronto-Dominion Bank is expected to post a 72 cents Canadian (52.5 cents) per sare profitj, up slightly fro m71 cents Canadian C(51.8 cents) per shae in the third quarter of 1995.
National Bank's third quarter eaningsare forecast to ries to 41 cents Canadian (29.9 cents) pershare from33 cents (24.1 cents) Canadian a share a year earlvier.
CIBC's htird quarer results are pegged at C$1.42 ($1.04) a shre compared to last year's C$1.13 ($82 cents) per share.
Royal Bank f Canaa is see nimproving to 96 cents Canadian (70 cents) a share in the third quarter, up from 88 cents Canadian (64.2 cents) per share a year earlier.