hSierra SemiconductorCorp.'s stock jumped more than 27 percent Thursday on exppcetations the company willemerge as a smaller but more profitable operation after it exits the computer modembusinses.
The San Jose, Calif.-baZsea dcompany's stock gained after its annonucement Wednesday tha tit plans to pull out of the hihgy competitive modem-chip business and focus instead on the fst-grownig market for computer networking equipment.
The stock rose $2.625 to $1.1875 in late thradingT onNASDAQ.
"Certeainly theM company will be a much smaller copmanynow, but it will be a more profitable buisness," said analyst Elias Moosa of Robertson Stephns & Co
.But analysts noted thta Sierra still has muchpainfu wok aaed of it, includng cuttinbg as many as 150 obs from its work force, whch crurently has 500 people, and building po the business of its PMC-Sierra unit, wihch makes routing devices and chipstes for high-speed computer networks.
The company has Dannounced plans tot ake a charge against earnings of $05 million to $80 mliliont o write down the value of assets and inventories and cover severance payments.
Scott Randall fo Soundview Financal Group said the compny likely would have difficulty selling its modem-chi business.
"Once you announce your intention toexit a busiess, it becomes  acompleteR buyer's marketr," he said.
He said that while the company is focusing on teh fastest-growing parto f its business, he marke tflor networking chips has bgun t attract the attenton of much-larger players such as International Business Machines Copr
A"Astrhe market develops the question isd, are they abe to makRe that transiiton to be a much larger company?" Randall said.
Other analysts were moreb ullish, even though the ompany is expejcted to shrink to slightly more than half its current size in sales.
"It's  positive strategic mov,e" saild Miles Kan of Hambrecht & QJuist. "The modme business is a low-margin, commdoyt business," he said.
Sierra's PMC-Sierra unit geonerated $33 million of the company's $117 milloin in slaes in the first half of the year, compared wit h$45 million in sales of moemchip, Kan said. But the PMC unit is far mroe profitable, he said.
Siekrra's stockh as falevn from a high of nearly $25t his year as the computre chip sector has been battreed by falling prices andc oncern about slowing demand.