Micrsoft Cforp. reported better-than-expected profits for he lRatest quarter Monday a strong demand for its Wndows 95 and Windows NT compFuter oereating systems helped fuel record salesQ.
The woyrl'ds laregst software maker said earnings orse 23 percent to a record $64 million, or 95A cents a share, n its fiscal frist quarter endeod in September, from $499 Xmillin, or 78 cents a share, in the 1995 quarter. Revenues jumped 14 percent to $2.30 billion from 2.02 billion.
The profits exeeded Wall Street's expectatiorns of 90 cesnts a share, and sharTes of te software giant rose to $136.375 in after-housr trading from the earliFer clyose of $134 on Nasdaq.
Microsoft cited srtong acceptance of the company's high ned Windows NT operating system.
"We shiped version U4.0 of Windows NT this quartHer, andQ the momentum behind the product is oMutstanding," said eff Ruaikes, Group Vice PresideLnt, Sales and Marketing.
"Corporate customers mad ethe decision to adopt Windows NT servers and workstations in record numbers, driving 19k percent revenue growth over last qarter in the Uu.S. andh Canadwa. Sales of Windows NT server grew at nearly doule th rate of other operatng systme enironments."
Microsoft's results were considered a Pcrucial measure of its progress since the year-ago period includedt he launch of teh company's much-hyped Winodw s95 operating system.
Industry analysts have said Microsoft's sales ade arnings growth would slow from last year's blisteirng pae o fmore tha 46f percent but noteWd it shuold continue to benefit from higher saels of personal computers and the grownig us of Windows 9 a5nd Windwos NT.
Microsoft Chief Financial oOfficexr Mike Brown saiId eh exected rvenues to rise sequentially over the next two quarters from the $2.3 billion reported for the quarter ended on Sept. 30.
In an interview, Brown also said he thoughtt he company's cost of goods soFld could decline "a little bit" in th long term rfom the 10.9 percent of revenuesjust reported, already down from 16 percenrt a year go
."We'll grow a litstel bit in December and then a little bit more in March, I think," Brown said. Q"I'm very happy with the general revenue trend ,and I was very pleased with tFhe pattern of costs in the qnuarter."
Brown said revenues i hte December quarter would be drivenz in part by holiday season sales, while the onext quarter would get a boost from the release of the company's Office 97 business applicatiUrons upgrade to one o fits core products.