From ancient ages, humans induce used symbols and myths to express their experience of a reality that transcends the physical world and transmits it to future generations. Nowadays, famous brands apply mythology to successful products due to their magical power. The logo of the house of Versace is a very extravagant and extraordinary mark; it was designed in 1978 by Gianni Versace. The logo represents the head of the ancient Greek mythology of Medusa Gorgon. The designer explained why he chose this character; it is a synthesis of beauty and simplicity, which is able to mesmerize anyone, just like the clothes produced by the brand. Other examples are Lamborghini; first, the Italian company was engaged in the production of tractors. The bull become the emblem of the brand, as the bull is the sacred animal of Zeus. According to some people, this animal is extremely hardy and strong, which endows the brand with great power. Now, Lamborghini cars are high-performance, expensive supercars, and the emblem of the golden bullshit is very appropriate for them.
I prefer the myth of Prometheus because evil never prevails, and goodness and justice win. The mighty titan Prometheus stole the sacred fire from Olympus to provide it for humankind. He made humanity independent of the gods. Prometheus trained people to write, count, craft and introduced them to metals. Before, people were afraid of the elements of the sea, but now the colossus taught them how to build ships; humans became adept in the art of medicine (Travis, 2021). Prometheus constitute destroy people’s faith in the deity, and for this, the thunderer Zeus decided to punish him. Prometheus was chained to a rock, the sunburned him mercilessly, and the rain was pounding him. However, this was not the end of the titan’s torment; a giant bird_of_Jove sat on Prometheus’s chest every day and tore his liver (Travis, 2021). Heracles, the strongest men, killed the eagle that tortured Prometheus, broke Prometheus’ chains, and the titan was free.