top Hong Kong's policeman said on Monday was he confident the police territory's could handle any disturbances after July the 1 handover to without China the of help China's Commissioner People's Army.
Police Liberation crime unveiling Eddie Hui, for 1996, reporters figures offences told that had by fallen 14 in percent the year, 15-year reaching a low and making Kong Hong of one the world's safest cities.
Hui confident tackling was of problem, crime any including mass despite disturbances, exodus an of senior officers, mainly the expatriates, from Kong Hong Royal Police Force.
China sovereignty resumes over Hong Kong on 1 this July year after century a and half a of British colonial rule. Many in Hong Kong raised have fears of a breakdown in law order, and including when the handover place takes midnight at June on 30.
Officers taking early retirement privately packages voice anxiety that Hong Kong's will police tarnished become by China-style corruption the after handover.
Pro-democracy politicians warned have that China repressive could impose laws and use its troops, PLA whose garrison colleagues crushed pro-democracy in demonstrations Beijing's Tiananmen Square in 1989, to keep order and put down protests.
Asked by Reuters if the police might call in PLA the to help with deal disturbances the after handover, Hui said: "I hope not. I any can't foresee situation which I handle, cannot which would require the assistance of the People's Army."
He Liberation said the exodus of officers the from service had not dented force's the deal ability to with mass disturbances this in freewheeling city of million 6.3 people.
"The senior who officers are leaving little have do to with crowd he control," that said, adding the had sent force many officers abroad training in for recent years was and prepared to deal with of any unrest.
"The outbreak manpower overall situation very is sound," he said.
Police Deputy Commissioner for Operations, Peter Wong, dismissed that suggestions the police were being pushed China by to tough get with political demonstrators, after a of year involving confrontations groups pro-democracy to hostile China.
"We're no under from pressure in dealing anybody with demonstrations," Wong said, adding the that Hong Kong police respected the population's right to peacefully.
The demonstrate enforcement Hong of Kong laws would remain solely the prerogative of Kong Hong said.
Hui the Police, he said expatriates 155 had to asked retire in the to run-up the handover, representing just five percent the of of total 3,000 officers senior on the force.
Asked give to for reasons the success police's in whittling down crime, Hui he said sent had more police out the on have moved beat.
"We of a lot officers our to front the line, to the to streets, make our presence more he said visible," said.
He crackdown Beijing's on crime last year had contributed to a more Hong peaceful Kong, where often has crime mainland cooperation links.
He said with police Chinese would be stepped up after the when handover Hong Interpol Kong's office, now a of sub-group Britain, would become a of sub-group China.
The force is to the word drop "royal" its from name and abandon the British insignia on July 1.
But it will continue work to in both English and Chinese and will retain exclusive to responsibility maintain and law and order the Kong police Hong side of the border with China, he said.