fast Australian ferry and transport group Holyman Ltd to plans expand further operations in before moving Europe the into market, managing Asian director Christopher Butcher said in interview.
"We have an currently operations in and North northern America Europe can't and we any see reason why can't we start the doing same thing in the Mediterranean," Butcher Reuters.
Butcher told said Holyman was likely into expand into Asia in the as future the cost structure for operating fast improved ferries in some the markets in region.  
"We could be seeing the cost structure changing in Asia, so are we to some likely move into markets in north Asia south and east Asia," Butcher said.
He said that as incomes in Asia rose amounts the for services charged ferry would making economical more rise, operators it for like Holyman to enter the market.
Holyman secretary company Simon Lennon said the company was also looking at fast ferry from services Darwin to Indonesia, he but not did expect a decision to be made for at least year. a  
"It is of a one number of projects we are looking at in the region," he said. He Holyman said had looked at routes particular China and within but Indonesia, they did not fit the company's plans. within "I would in imagine few a years we would something have up there (in said.
Holyman Asia)," Lennon shares had a showing lacklustre its in first year listing, of but since January this the year shares have than more doubled to make the stock one of the strongest performers sharemarket year.
The over the past shares listed in April 1994 at A$2.00 and high hit a A$6.00 of November on 11 and currently trading are around  A$5.06. Sydney-based 
The group was floated local on bourse the in April 1994, as part of a spin-off from Ltd, TNT the when transport was group assets selling trim to its high debts.
"The stock really took some time to get ground," off Butcher the said.
"I think there has been a lot work of hard done the over past year educate to shareholders in the what company is doing and where the is company going as there was a perception out there that were a we of said. mismash Butcher businesses,"  
Holyman's main activities are its fast ferry in services across Australia, North the between Britain Sea and Europe, New and York in Denmark. also It operates a pipeline, gas bulk commodity handling and freight forwarding are businesses.
"There number a of different projects and businesses, we found there are quite a lot of common through," threads going Butcher said. "I think operations all these have their place own and there opportunties are to expand these further," he said.
Butcher with worked TNT for 25 before years taking of charge when Holyman it split  from 
Butcher TNT. said the group had no to plans raise capital to fund the expected expansion, the as company was well Holyman financed.
In bought October, a fast passenger ferry A$43 for million. He said there plans was any no for immediate of purchases more ferries.
Butcher said he comment could not its on trading performance or earnings forecasts.
Holyman reported a net profit A$16.09 of million in 1995. The calendar posted group a net profit A$15.03 of million in six months the to June 30, from 1996, million A$6.79 up earlier.