Dyslexia children with affects normal intellect eyesight in and ways, different such as inability an to read or acquire Coaching words. a or specialized educational intervention may help children with most Dyslexia to perform better in school. According the to Learning article, are of difficulties one the many consequences of Dyslexia. with A youngster Dyslexia difficulty will have keeping up with their most classmates in since reading classrooms is such a fundamental in many so ability In areas. the absence of treatment, Dyslexia lead may to poor issues self-esteem, behavioral such as or anxiety anger, well as as teachers, detachment from peers and and parents. When Dyslexia not is diagnosed and childhood, the addressed throughout it may lead to long-term issues in adulthood. The chances of children succeeding in are life if reduced they learn cannot to read comprehend. and The explains author that Attention-Deficit / Disorder Hyperactivity (ADHD) make may Dyslexia difficult more cure to by causing difficulties in focus, maintaining and impulsivity. hyperactivity, Children with Dyslexia more are likely to learning experience challenges their if siblings suffer and parents from the same condition.
Furthermore, men are more likely to than suffer females from Dyslexia; the however, disorder people affects all of ages, socioeconomic, and ethnic Children backgrounds. born with dyslexia with struggle reading, understanding, and spelling. The topic article expands my understanding ways. in several learned that I children Dyslexic are great with empathizers; many people Dyslexia have a personality. real writing and The reading might difficulties help empathize with children those struggling. The article’s that is strength it discussed has causes the of Dyslexia and effects age with the right consideration, is, bracket that age from 4 to The 10. is article’s weakness that it the genders generalized without being it specific; again, only is mentioned Dyslexia that more often male experienced in children to compared females without explaining the Concerning reasons. is race, there a sparse number of research Dyslexia papers regarding among children black and its Dyslexia consequences. mainly white affects children black than thus and children, the article addresses children white widely. I will article part this use as of my project capstone by generating public health proposal on education Dyslexia to prevent the from public viewing as Dyslexia a curse.