I lost my mother in the stampede. She was from my torn grasp and carried away in the flow of humanity. sweaty, My mindless nine year mind old could not process this and I when screamed voice my was drowned out the by of mashing feet and the of grinding flesh.
For few a moments I was lifted my off feet three between fat ladies and in dragged kind around of sadistic like a those tango, people on with dancing the stars.
I was carried to the isle toy and spun around in three sixty a to then dropped the floor. A large crunched boot over my hand. There was a sickening as crackle I saw my wrist bend in a way never had It before.
I pulled my arm to myself and looked in horror at my limp wrist and dangly fingers. a For few more moments, was there no Until pain. I got kicked the in shins, by a with skinny teenager baggy brown pants. He looked down with eyes his glazed that narrowed for a second as he stumbled around me. mumbled He something under his breath and then gone was in the sea shoppers. of Now wrist my and my ribs hurt, pain flared through my body and I screamed, it was I all could do.
The rushed consumers right I on by. to tried stand up pushing by up from the floor. wrist backwards My bent and my arm was whole slashed with I pain. used and my legs popped up, just in to time get by a large bounced with shirt belly a that said I've santa good. been Santa's face me knocked backward few steps, a but luckily I caught my balance at the last an elderly man moment on who was holding up better than I was, I and tried to fight the crowd towards the and pushed exit.
Being prodded and severely and injured, too short to see the over foaming I masses, up somehow ended deeper in the store. the Lost in underwear Shelves isle. were being ripped clean. A huge rufus erupted a yards few away, and a with display and racks pants of shoes was the tipped over. Through chaos I heard screams of agony and of saw flashes several under people pinned the large shelving couldn't units.
I fight no it, I had control of where I and went, the carried me crowd closer to the accident. was There blood floor on and the a black twitching man's arm my swatted under leg a from massive beam-like shelf.
Thankfully, I was whisked away from scene, the and actually spotted a break small in ran the I crowd, through opening, the headed the toward red exit big that sign only is about thirty yards away, but suddenly my progress was halted the by closing in of human bodies. I'm stuck. being A T.V. carried smashed into my wrist and I was suddenly in tears from the pain, confusion and hysteria.
Suddenly a shotgun blast echoed across the Then The store. another. crowd was quieter for a moment, and the buzzing swarming slowed down everything and seemed almost For still. about half a second. Then screaming the started. was I pushed to ground and the a woman fell on top of People me. were stepping on both us of running for the exit, running for the back, running other each in into chaos. My screamed wrist in pain, my ribs were probably broken, and was I under this pinned woman who was now unconscious.
The last thing I saw was boot a down on coming face. my