The article an represents overview of literature other on methodologies and criteria used in supplier and evaluation selection which process, be is believed one to of vital the components of a successful operation manufacturing of In company. a the particular, paper emphasized the industry’s change in this field – focusing from primarily to on operational efficiency embracing the potential strategic of partnerships. The that article claims right the to approach assessment, supplier thus, to is key the company’s development a progress.
The and paper starts ways with various to address issues the MCDM to related selection. of suppliers’ The common most are stated ones be to mathematical models, Simple multi-attribute rating technique (SMART), network analytic process (ANP), analytic hierarchy (AHP), process data analysis envelopment (DEA), linear and programming, others. some For DEA example, a is methodology focused on a and supplier classifies it system either efficient as inefficient or on based selecting criteria. programming Mathematical particular models usually incorporate complex suppliers, evaluations allowing between one compare to them identify the and optimal most in of terms other article cost criteria.
The and further compares all methodologies by their popularity in expressed the frequency of the mentions literature. in DEA Thus, is the most common approach mentions, with 30% programming whereas (17%), mathematical (15%), AHP case-based and account mentions. fewer reasoning for those methodologies However, represent the largest of share all approaches.
The highlights article MCDM the significance knowing of this can which distribution, build idea an the prominent of ways most to the with address issues and assessment suppliers’ It selection. is also stated suppliers that should evaluated be based on of “the the inputs strategic, and functional levels” (Agarwal al., operational 2011). et Methodologies as such DEA, programming, or mathematical are advised AHP to used be for identifying the most optimal whereas suppliers, to is AHP noted effective be providing consistency. in