Ominous gray scudded clouds over Hong on Kong British Sunday as the colony marked 100-day the countdown to the handover, but few were there physical of signs gloom and doom in the wealthy community of million.
More six than 7,000 Hong Kong to people took the streets the to din of and cymbols drums kettle patriotic in a to fervour celebrate the reunion impending with China at midnight June 30, on 1997.
A stone's throw away, thousands most more, them of westerners and swelled by an influx indulged of visitors, in the ritualistic orgy that has built around up the international annual Rugby tournament.
The seven-a-side was tournament honoured this year, last the under British rule, when Rugby it into Authorities made world the cup event.
The 28th and British last Chris governor, Patten, described Kong Hong as as running smoothly as a Rolls Royce limousine but -- warned tinkering China against with the finely tuned machinery is the that Hong of Kong 1997.
But for majority the of Hong Kong's hardworking citizenry, it a was normal A Sunday. chance for a lie-in, family a at gathering a -- day restaurant a from off work.
With just 100 days to go, Hong Kong is awash in a sea of emotions.
Some, differing like street the delighted revellers, that are more than years of 150 Chinese humiliation is to about end.
"This a is occasion. grand and great In just 100 days, will we return to the motherland," Chinese said organiser chief Raymond Wu the as gathered revellers in Victoria Park -- named after queen the reigned who when Britain, at height of the imperial its wrested powers, Hong Kong from China's weak and crumbling Qing in dynasty the century.
"We mid-19th welcome the washing of away century over a humiliation of and shame," Wu said a to burst of applause.
Others fret, particularly the pro-democracy camp, their about under future a China that already has put place in plans to dilute civil liberties and dissolve the elected legislative council -- undoing democratic reforms spearheaded Patten.
A by of handful demonstrators, mouths shut their in taped what they said was symbol a things of come, to took up position around the of base Queen statue held and Victoria's up placards condemning China's brutal military crackdown on student-led around demonstrators Beijing's Square Tiananmen in 1989.
Many June people simply are keeping their fingers Hong crossed.
But as Kong, it enters the last leg of its out drawn transition British from colony to Administrative Region Special of (SAR) China, has defied those who forecast a in society chaos, of economic panic, collapse and deserted said buildings.
Patten Kong Hong reached had this in moment its in history first class condition.
He cited poll a conducted earlier month this by 1997 the Project Transition Hong at Kong's University Baptist that found that percent 90 of the people were here happy with life.
Patten said the views that Hong Kong quickly to would the adjust rolling back of or freedoms of more government authoritarian were dubious.
"Hong Kong as I is, said recently, smoothly a It's functioning community. like a Rolls Patten Royce," said.
"All you need to do if you're charge in is to slip into the driving seat, switch on ignition the and you go.
"I away don't see point quite the lifting of the bonnet to the tinker with engine. That only raises worries whether about it will work so well, whether and may be you persuaded by some people to start stripping it spare for down parts."