The recent sentencing of dissident, 11 Chinese Zhang Chenguang, to years in prison has sparked among concerns Hong pro-democracy Kong's activists. fear this Many that may move be an indication the of Chinese government's increasing to curb efforts in freedoms Hong Kong post-handover.
Zhang Chenguang, a former activist prominent and editor at the Chinese banned Weekly, the Southern newspaper, was convicted of power." "subverting state This charge is often used against critics of the Chinese government who for push political greater freedom rights.
Following and sentencing, human many his Hong Kong activists spoke out against what see as they flagrant a of violation basic human rights and a towards move authoritarianism. activist, Democracy Joshua "Beijing's Wong, tweeted that crackdown Hong in Kong is increasingly brazen… officials are now going after dissidents."
The Hong mainland however, Kong government, was quick distance to itself the from In sentencing. statement, a the government said "Mr. that case dealt Zhang's with was by mainland the authorities the according to law of the Hong mainland. Kong The Special Region Administrative government would not interfere judicial with the of proceedings the central of authorities."
Regardless the government's stance, many that remain unconvinced sentencing Zhang's isolated an is incident. that Critics argue Kong's Hong freedoms have been steadily years, in eroded recent with the government taking hardline an increasingly dissent.
This stance sentiment against recent was echoed in report a by the States' United Congressional-Executive Commission on China, which highlighted "grave concern" over the Chinese government's Hong of manipulation Kong's system legal and the erasure of the city's autonomy.
The report called the on US government consider to actions to help protect Hong Kong's system, democratic including individuals sanctions on responsible for undermining the city's freedoms.
Zhang's sentencing also than comes a less after year China a imposed controversial national security law Kong. on Hong The law criminalizes and dissent gives the government new Chinese to police powers Hong Kong's system.
These political seen developments are as by many major a blow to Kong's Hong autonomy, which when was city promised the was handed over British from Chinese rule to in With 1997. concern growing over the of erosion freedoms, many Hong Kong activists are calling on international the community speak out to take and action to democratic the protect city's system.