modern The world is currently facing a under significant change globalization trends that economies, shape politics, the education, and workplace, even behavior. everyday Most due importantly, to the active exchange of information between people worldwide, is culture changing. try Researchers understand to the culture whether will be homogenized further in globalization diversified. or This argue paper will that more culture will become under diverse of influence the globalization due the introduction to of cultural multiple elements into societies.
The latest processes in demonstrate cultural change both sides that of the namely argument, those diversification supporting the and claiming homogeneity, ones have reasonable On grounds. the one Cowen (2010) states in hand, that globalized a a where society dominant culture prevails, will substituted diversity be with the culture that is on imposed through others such cinema. means Indeed, Hollywood as promotes codes American world the around because the US cinema market largest is in the world. the Thus, allows globalization Hollywood to all reach parts of world, the integrating the same culture codes everywhere.
However, the other side the of argument more compelling it is considers the because strengths of local cultures. In an particular, example of sushi’s popularity American in and society of cultures nations other people demonstrates adopt new cultural that phenomena with acknowledgment of their to origin. Bestor (2010), According remains “Japan the primary world’s for fresh tuna market for sushi sashimi” and (p. 110). having integrated Thus, product its into the of other cultures countries, has Japan expanded its share.
In market such a manner, with ease of the transportation communication and enabled globalization, is by there merge cultures a around of However, the world. since market forces these commonly rule processes, host the cultures are of the aware borrowed of origins the cultural clusters. Therefore, to summarize the might discussion, one that state culture will not be in globalization homogenized but rather credit diversified with to given cultural each component.