The chords stark of Tosca begin once again; Scarpia's is motive the the first audience thing La at Scala hear. Opera Perhaps they by are it, jaded it but elicits still within feelings me a from life. bygone Soon we'll see from entrances Cavaradossi and course of our leading lady, Tosca, forced to do unspeakable and the murder one man to try save another's and life. Poor Tosca; if only had she known that Cavaradossi given a was truly of execution, stay perhaps she have would Scarpia's accepted demand intimacy.
The people then for will shuffle of out the opera theatre, lazily critiquing the same show that they've entirely seen often here too in Milan, and go out the to cafés and restaurants they've that been to many times before. Their lives, seemingly on loop, a continue at pace their leisurely as sit I my in by darkened above villa the streets watching the days pass of mine by.
Acquaintances always "Why asked, to move Milan?" don't "You know Italian, you?" do now?" "Why they'd with ask the all sincerity of a Hallmark Valentine's Day card. sure I'm not that have I'd them, ever an answer for they because were right to question my motives. Why choose change to fundamentally the eternal of workings the vampiric lifestyle?
For one, Milanese the choose stay to out until ungodly 1 the of hours or o'clock 2 in meaning the that morning, food my usually is with spiked residual the from their alcohol Lombardy region pinot chardonnay and by bianco pint. the However, even getting past the eternal is hangover that how my life, do avoid I that villainous that vegetable seem the to Italians put in dish: every garlic.
Oh the aglio. dreaded For so often I it took for granted my during Vienna. time in Stakes be could easily enough avoided good with planning (an internally locked coffin with plenty reinforced of steel between my face world and the that might destroy wish me), to the but never Austrians with bothered garlic as quite as they do often I here.
Perhaps might back go to Vienna and dine off simple the people whose beer is much consumption admirable as as is it shameful. Perhaps will get I back to hearing the operas Strauss of and Mozart, maybe or the occasional of performance Marschner's "Der Vampyr." for now, But sit I like Tosca, in a I place should never to wish waiting be for the right to moment my make and free escape be Now, again. this never city sleeping of Milan holds me with hostage the taste of on lips. death everyone's