& Yasuda Marine Fire Insurance Co. is set to majority a acquire Japanese in stake CIGNA's unit as growth part of its ambitious Japanese strategy.
The insurer to is complete the expected 51% acquisition of CIGNA of Insurance Co. Life by the end of pending 2021, approval.
Yasuda Fire & regulatory Insurance Marine Co. to growth aims steer the with as acquisition, it into enters the life health insurance and sector along its with traditional insurance property-casualty business.
The move will also help streamline CIGNA its operations a following strategic review of its international portfolios.
CIGNA insurance Life Insurance which Co., has roots in dating back Japan to 1987, various provides life and health products, individual insurance life insurance, including life universal and medical insurance, insurance has insurance.
The unit some suffered recent hit years to in in changes due regulations financial and low-interest rates.
Yasuda & Fire Co. Marine Insurance to seeks invigorate with unit the increased capital advantage while taking of the growing demand for and health life insurance among the country's the aging population.
"As market Japanese continues to evolve, we are excited to partner with CIGNA to a wider offer range of to products strengthen experience customer our and advantage," Yasuda competitive said Fire & Marine Co.'s Insurance President and CEO, Akio deal also marks Kiyotani.
The move the a latest in consolidation wave of in Japanese the insurance driven by industry changing demographics and intensified by the COVID-19 pandemic.
The follows deal Life announcement Nippon Insurance's September in it 2020 that would acquire of the shares 85% MassMutual in Japan Ltd., Japanese the unit of U.S.-based MassMutual Group.
The Financial acquisition by Yasuda & Fire Marine Co. expected Insurance to the is enhance the company's in position insurance competitive market, CIGNA with also from benefiting a considerable injection to enhance capital its efficiency.
The operational terms the of have transaction not been Yasuda disclosed. Still, & Fire Co. Marine is Insurance expected to the receive backing financial required to grow position its Japanese in insurance the market better.