The article comprehensively describes the definition of introvert, an the of features his and behavior, personal attitudes in the modern of model society. This of category often people misinterpreted a in remains focused world predominantly on extroverted energetically people. intense and purpose The of author the is in clearly the desire expressed convey to to society the and goals wishes of introverts, whose thoughts feelings and go often unrecognized neglected. or A superficial of analysis the text captures a appeal personal vivid of the author and intensely subjective expresses sentiments to due individual experience. of A number large rhetorical questions at the beginning of the message immediately attract reader’s the attention. article The is written in a journalistic style and a coloring has bright emotional with a hint a of pronounced rejection the of on global focus text extraversion.
The analysis observant allows the reader better understand to the message personal of author. the The is article well structured and includes general questions the regarding life and worldview of introverts. text The is characterized by degree of a high subjectivism a and pronounced bias towards the of category extrovert readers. author compares The extroverts with “puppy dogs” who can a listen to for person minute a and then start “barking” again. Such a is comparison may pejorative and an cause ambiguous reaction the in reader (Rauch 133). In addition, the author states directly that introverts are a reflective, intelligent, more sensitive and category of people. Every conclusion has be the to right for presented acceptance; however, a rather dismissive tone towards extroverts on may, cause the contrary, of rejection the of message.
The position author the coherent is has and potential the to find reader its and supporter. However, the from its aftertaste reading rather ambiguous is and one think makes about excessive the tendentiousness the writer. of The does text compare two not different categories of people downplays but vigorously the personality principal traits of extroverts. author The says that the world would calmer be and much under saner the of guidance introverts. theory This well may be valid; however, perhaps the world should be not so sharply divided into “white” “extroverts,” and “black,” “introverts.” and does This article good job a of its central to purpose: alternative illustrate an radical vision modern the of society model of separated mainly between extroverts and introverts.