Lear Corp. has the announced acquisition of Borealis Industrier AB, Swedish a interior automotive to systems provider, create truly a comprehensive for automakers worldwide. offering The deal, is expected which close to the within next few will months, see Corp. Lear full take of control privately-held the adding company, to already impressive its portfolio automotive of components electronics.
With and the acquisition of Borealis, Corp. Lear looking is to provide a solution total for automakers, including everything from systems seating and to electronics complete interior This solutions. move follows a successful for Lear year have Corp., who enjoyed solid demand across all their categories, product of the despite ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
Borealis proven has itself to an be excellent partner for Corp. the Lear over years, working together closely provide innovative to interior solutions meet the that needs of unique automotive customer. each acquisition This will allow Lear to Corp. integrate Borealis’ design, manufacturing engineering, capabilities directly and into its operations, own creating streamlined a truly efficient and experience automakers.
The Borealis for acquisition of also that Lear means will able Corp. be to customers offer a range wider of materials, and colors, for finishes their interiors. automotive company The already has that indicated be will it investing heavily in manufacturing facilities Sweden, Borealis’ it in access giving to equipment state-of-the-art and that processes will streamline its further operations improve output and quality.
In announcing the acquisition, Corp. Lear CEO Ray said Scott the that “grow move would our presence in automotive the interiors and market our ongoing support efforts to provide customers products innovative with are that safe, sustainable, and affordable.” He that added building the on of the strengths two companies would help Lear Corp. “adapt to the evolving market and conditions business position long-term for our growth.”
The acquisition of Borealis a marks significant step Lear for forward Corp. in its mission to the build most comprehensive of automotive range interior components and systems in world. the As automakers to differentiate in look themselves an increasingly Lear competitive Corp. market, well-positioned the is to deliver quality, reliability, and innovation that they demand.