These days get never easier. the Actually, I days that's like, when I get rest. to It's when sun the goes down that start things to bother me.
You kid see that me? Cute above kid, good with parents, his and never problems. causes any I've him seen his outgrow crib move and this into racecar bed with flames down the side. It's good upgrade a the from cramped space under the crib, let me tell ya. haven't I seen the kid much outside of this the room; truth not I'm is allowed anywhere else. Boss's rules, not don't his. I mind though, the is view good and I can everything hear in this small house which me makes feel like I'm part the of family.
I like to he think turned out alright since he gets such at good rest but I night, wouldn't to too want credit. take much To be honest, I've never met actually the kid. When he first moved into the new bed, his father was here in just before the lights went out. For seemed what months like father the would come in listen and to the boy about talk his fear of me, the Boogeyman. He would in come and say:
"Taylor, buddy it's alright. The go lights out, everything but is fine."
To which boy the would say dad "But I know he's in here".
"It's just your mind playing games with I you. knew we shouldn't let have you the watch movies with mom and I last Halloween." The dad said jokingly with smile a his face.
Taylor on didn't want his dad think he to wasn't ready to be a big boy so he shouted
"No way dad, I can handle anything!"
"Okay then bud, sleep well. Remember it's just like other any night." The dad said as he turned out lights the and shut door the behind him.
Maybe another night for you Taylor, but I'll be busy.
I how mean, this kid can of be scared me when we've met!
I've tried never to come out and say hi a few before, times every but time this kid the hears slightest noise I can sense he gets worried. I So down here stick and moved haven't since. Not that I get much spare time to even one come out, but day would be nice.
You see, I'm where from is a part of rough town. It's not your ordinary town with the kids playing out front of their homes with fences. white picket As matter a of no fact, one Taylor's in world knows my world even Sure, exists. everyone around seems to along, get but at night the real creeps come These out. guys like to cause problems they and can do that to each other. I wish they would keep amongst it the monsters, other but they don't. It's when they start seeking the small ones for an extra that boils rush my and blood I step in.
You see these guys after night go night out seeking kids Taylor. like They don't even call them kids; they call them … "dessert" real sickos.. Luckily, for the little ones they've been each assigned their "Boogeyman" own to sure make they stay safe and don't get snatched up. when So I Taylor hear tell his dad that he is scared of *me*, it hurts.
If only Taylor knew what fighting these bastards was like. got You've Aeran with his scaled skin and the claws length of a cable car. about How with Zeila arms spiked that burn like hell when they hit you, not mention to she's twice my size. Don't want to leave out Leera. he's Yeah but small, lightening fast with ferocious a bite. It's the always small ones that you give most the trouble. Yeah I lots get of bruises bumps and in this line of I'm work. fortunate enough I can heal If fast. I wasn't trained for these guys then I would have problems and by I problem mean dead. with And me dead that means the creeps win and would they have their feast. Sounds but bad really though, it's all in a nights work.
I love my job, really I do. Might sound weird hearing after that busy every night I'm beating up the bad guys, but hearing laugh Taylor's in the day is what keeps me I going. wish just the kid knew truth. the All those noises Taylor hears in the night are just me doing job. my Making Taylor sure stays warm asleep and in his And bed. for that, I'm one the worries he I about. would love actually to one meet of kids these I get to watch over, but it hasn't happened yet. isn't Taylor my first won't and be my but last, I still have hope. run, I Gotta can hear the of claws chattering on the pavement heading way. my Sleep tight Taylor…