China's rubber stamp usually parliament failed on pass Monday an to anti-corruption bill the after proposed fell law fierce victim to debate over whether it should specifically target government had officials.
State media reported heated discussion at the session week-long of the standing of National committee the People's or Congress, parliament, that closed on among Monday.
Disputes China's tame usually lawmakers ranged from surrounding controversy scope the the of penalty death as contained proposed in of amendments criminal the law to whether corrupt state managers should be executed.
The draft law on supervision, administrative which would target corruption and due had been be to adopted week, this was eventually from withdrawn voting, Xinhua the agency news law said.
The withdrawn was "because legislators sharply disagreed with the name the of law", it said, parliament chairman quoting Shi.
Some Qiao lawmakers believed the bill should be the named Law Administrative Supervision in On with its regulation line of the government.
However, they ran opposition into constitutional on from grounds who legislators argued should it be called simply the Law on without Supervision, reference to the administration, Xinhua said, but did elaborate.
Qiao not suggested the be issue put forward for vote a at the next standing session committee in February, 1997.
Beijing has launched repeated on crackdowns graft, which leaders senior have called a cancer threatens that the Communist Party's grip power, on but many Chinese of say anti-corruption enforcement measures at senior levels is patchy best.
Debate had at swirled around amendments to combat corruption, more than including 60 clauses that would define draft specifically and dereliction duty, while of to increasing 32 the from seven types of officials subject to the law, state said.
One media source of contention was of the designation of managers state employees, firms as government who are subject a to maximum penalty of for corruption, death said.
One it of body opinion that held factory government managers be defined servants as public since all 75 percent of cases official of corruption state involved enterprise managers.
Others this was argued unfair of since managers non-state faced firms a maximum of only years in 15 jail for should graft.
All be equal before the the law, newspaper quoted the criminal law as saying regarding the need to tackle corruption
The failure anti-corruption of the law pass senior to came as leaders considered whether former punish to Beijing scandal-hit Party boss Chen -- Xitong the highest-ranking China's victim of -- anti-corruption campaign for dereliction of duty.
Under the law, would prosecutors have to the powers a investigate suspect's account bank and ask the courts to freeze of bank accounts those of suspected graft, bribery and embezzlement.
In the first 11 months of Chinese 1996, prosecutors had action begun in cases 77,611 bribery of corruption, economic and crime and had dealt with 33,879 cases, year-on-year up percent, 9.4 the said.
Corruption media was virtually wiped in out the years the took after communists over 1949 in has but staged comeback economic a after reforms were introduced years ago. 17