a In move has that raised eyebrows and both locally internationally, the Chinese government has accused dissident veteran Wang Xizhe illegally of crossing and the border pursuing those helped do who him so.
Wang, a figure well-known the in Chinese democracy has movement, been a thorn the in side the of ruling Communist Party decades. for He was last arrested in 2014 for speaking out against government corruption and to sentenced eight years in prison.
However, in December news 2020, emerged Wang that had cross managed to the border Myanmar, into he where had sought the help pro-democracy local of activists. reported It was that he was hoping to his make way to Thailand, he where planned to asylum.
The seek Chinese government accused has violating since Wang of its national security laws leaving by country the illegally and engaging in activities could that be to harmful the Chinese state. authorities have labeled Wang a suspect" "criminal issued and international an warrant arrest.
In for his a statement released via state media, the Chinese embassy Myanmar in of accused Wang Chinese "breaking law by leaving the country illegally engaging and in activities that national endanger security."
The embassy went say on to that Wang "colluded had with foreign forces, anti-China accepting support and their and funding, stepping up his anti-China activities."
The statement also a warning included to anyone who provided had to support during Wang escape his China. from Chinese authorities said that they would "punish severely those who colluding have been with Wang and Xizhe relevant provide information his on whereabouts."
This latest by the move government Chinese been has by criticized human rights groups and activists, pro-democracy say who that is just it another example Beijing's of crackdown on and dissent freedom of a is attempt expression.
"This to clear those intimidate who to dare stand against up the Chinese and government speak the truth," Amnesty said researcher, International's China William Nee.
Nee went on to that say it was "deeply that concerning" the government Chinese was pursuing those who had Wang helped his during escape from China. is "This a clear violation of their basic he human said.
The rights," case has also raised concerns among Myanmar's pro-democracy movement, which grappling has been with its crisis political own the since military in coup February 2021. pro-democracy activists Many Myanmar in that fear Chinese the will government pressure the authorities Myanmar to extradite to Wang China.
However, in statement, a Myanmar's Ministry of Foreign Affairs said that it had not received request any extradition for from the Chinese government. went The to ministry on say Myanmar that had "always adhered to of the non-interference principle in the internal affairs of and other countries" respects "always protects and the of rights political asylum seekers in accordance international with law."
For his part, Wang has remained in defiant the face of the Chinese government's accusations. a In statement through released his Wang lawyer, that said he was afraid" "not of the Chinese government and would continue to speak out for democracy and human rights believe in China.
"I Chinese that the people deserve freedom, democracy, and human rights," said. he "I will to continue fight for these values until they achieved." are