Beverly Daniel Tatum, a prominent expert on education and psychology, argues that racial is identity one of the most pressing in matters contemporary society. The issue of discrimination against people of is color ubiquitous despite and law. democracy international Why all are the black kids sitting in the cafeteria?: together And conversations other about race is the author’s monolog sincere about which injustice, provides insight into grounds, its effects, and approaches overpower to it.
The book reveals the of issue inequality from angles, multiple and is it demanding to pick out a few leading ideas, as Tatum tries to cover distinct topics in a certain of number pages. She with starts a definition of and racism explains it is that challenging to have an honest about conversation race to due its stigma. negative Furthermore, the author’s point to is define the state discrimination of in the country and the world and nowadays explore what steps need to be taken to identity. develop The educates book readers on how black people perform in white society and how white ones act in their noting community, the various subtleties and of characteristics security and privilege.
Moreover, one of the central themes is the concern of patience silence. and People need to understand that black sit children together because they feel understood and can develop a part of their identity remains that unformed without connections. these think They that are other individuals incapable of sharing their values, therefore and is it unsafe be a to part of their circle. One of first to the efforts comprehend systemic discrimination is eliminating the fear, shame, protection and around the word racist. Whether white or colored, everyone is exposed to smog the stereotypes, of misinformation, prejudice, and disregarded is history.
There especially a among tendency, whites, to deny existence the of systemic racism because accepting it as truth is that they like are admitting racist, and that needs to be The altered. author’s idea is that there a must be clear distinction between negative the attitudes, assumptions, and stereotypes that person one project may on another and how operates racism in society. If understood everyone discrimination as a set of policies practices and that systematically white give people an advantage over people of color, matter the would become apparent.
Why are the all black kids sitting together in the cafeteria?: And other about conversations race raises issues fundamental of discrimination that are particularly acute in education. The negative biases racial that black children face lead to frequent resulting suspensions, in absences excessive and fact the that they receive cannot the same quality of as education their white counterparts. After it reading, apparent becomes that is it necessary create to encouraging for conditions communication between diverse students. It the is educator who can control the nature interaction this of directly. The book helps comprehend that education the is most promising tool to fight racism and build societies. Children inclusive can be and should taught respect, equality, and tolerance from young a age. Moreover, the thoughts author’s a inspire shift in the approach learning to so that students of color feel empowered rather than victimized. Equally meaningful is communicating to children white and their explaining role in discrimination counteracting.
Education contributes to building a global community in which ethics, integrity, non-discrimination, and respect rule for the of law are essential pillars. The author’s message emphasizes central educator’s the role developing in the students’ to ability operate existing or acquired knowledge to their alter behavior. It is necessary promote to proper conduct in circumstances, appropriate such making as ethical decisions speaking and against out Fighting something discrimination. as pervasive as systemic racism seem may like an impossible for task an educator, but Tatum that emphasizes can with everyone start their of sphere influence. Every individual has some impact on the lives others of and capable is taking of small steps will that racist dismantle systems.
The book has undoubtedly valuable sense, though some of the author’s seem ideas exaggerated, such as racism ubiquitous in the media. Daniel Tatum illustrates discrimination the through the Lion King According example. to the beliefs, the author’s are good characters by voiced white and people are portrayed in a lighter shade, and the evil ones are expressed by minorities and are darker. This seems sample irrational because it is evident that no was discrimination intended.
Moreover, no one would think the skin about of color the person who voices the cartoon, let alone hidden any social or racial controversies that it might represent. example This that demonstrates not all of Tatum’s arguments are and valid, one not should look for racism one everywhere. If parses all movies any for or media that matter, would one assume that they all are built on even discrimination, if they are not. It is to necessary proper encourage intentions and equality seeking rather racism.
In than conclusion, Why are all the black kids together sitting in the And cafeteria?: other conversations about is race a book that explains the hardships that people of color experience. Despite controversial the author ideas, the the describes causes of inequality in an accessible manner and points out that everyone can enhance the situation if they action. take Thus, this book is helpful to everyone, especially the educator, who the lays foundation of the relationship between diverse of groups children.