Royal Bank of Scotland, which reports year full next data Thursday, is to expected raise its pre-tax profit from last 602 year's million stg but not as by much thought as analysts just a few months Royal ago.
They profits expect Bank's rise to to between 670 700 and million with a stg, much smaller contribution Direct from Line low its cost insurance, but benefits continuing to accrue bank's from the efforts costs.
Total to reduce dividend is to expected be around 18.6 pence a share versus last year's 16.2p.  pre-tax 
The will figures be by exceptional complicated an gain from Royal Bank's its disposal of stake 50 Germany's in pct CC Group, from which it said it would make 70 million stg, by and costs restructuring of around 23 million pounds stemming an from acquisition its by England New subsidiary Citizens.
Forecasts Direct for Line vary widely but analysts are generally pessimistic, company's with main the -- market -- motor insurance going "probably through the most diffucult in period its history", as executive chief told Reuters Ian Chippendale in an interview last week.  
"I think Chippendale was sending a strong one said message," analyst be who declined to named. think "I he was softening the up for market a set poor of suspect analysts results."
Some may the not results quite be poor as as hs been feared by some.
They the see bank core to as continuing quite perform well with the positive results its of "Project helping Columbus" Poutney costs and income.
David expects a profit of pre-tax 695 million stg, which includes exceptional the items, BZW while expect 675 analysts  million. 
The market a received big clue on the performance of Citizens the from results recent of of Ireland which 23 Bank percent owns the of operation.
"Citizens is doing well," reasonably said, Poutney but analysts say it is being affected by rather the New lacklustre England economy.
The market will in be expecting improvement the cost ratio income analysts but say that an even this improvement will leave the time plenty of bank scope for  improvement. 
The will market be looking further for clues which on showed good lending growth, mostly in corporate lending area, in first the half.
Inevitably, Royal Bank will also be for watched of signs acquisitions.
It is to known be interested in buying a to building society extend in presence its but England the in climate, current is unlikely be it to willing to pay the prices high likely to be asked.
In case, any analysts say Royal Bank would have to cash to raise able be to perform major any acquisition.  meantime, 
In the the market will be looking its to relationship owned with mutually and insurance pensions firm Scottish Widows, which some think may result in eventual an merger.
Royal Bank shares were 15p higher on to Friday stand 519-1/2p. at