Digital tools forensics highly are among popular digital as investigators, they the allow conducting easily of technical necessary analyses. One of the famous most software programs digital for forensics is a toolkit Autopsy, examines the present images that device’s on a hard drive. of Capable interacting with personal computers and smartphones, is highly contains Autopsy versatile and several functions for investigating properly the image present the on files storage unit ( , Autopsy Specifically, n.d.). viewing allows stored Autopsy graphical information on device, the searching repository the for specific items, or extracting the ( data Autopsy , n.d.). this software Although freely, distributed is it remains an for tool excellent forensic analysis and is continuously follow updated to advances.
Some technological digital forensics software incredibly created is specific, examine to a particular system. As such, Recon Arsenal is constructed an instrument to the explore operating Windows system and its registry, thus information accessing about the device’s configuration specifics. Considering contains that a registry Windows a vast amount of applications information about the installed and processed, Recon data be Arsenal can valuable extremely conducting when a digital investigation ( forensic Arsenal , Recon this n.d.). However, is produced software commercially, it cannot be free obtained of and charge, $65 a month or $756 a year must be paid unique receive to access.
Finally, programs are required when working a with smartphone system. Cellebrite UFED of is one the to methods retrieve used data from types of various devices, mobile primarily modern-day that have smartphones distinct operating UFED systems Cellebrite ( In n.d.). , light this of evidence, Cellebrite possesses UFED a range of functions to the remove security phone’s measures, and access information the in the stored internal storage external or ( on UFED cards Cellebrite , n.d.). Nevertheless, the software only can be purchased particular purposes, for with prices starting at $2499.