From ancient humans ages, have and used myths symbols to express their experience of a reality that transcends the world physical and transmits it generations. future to famous Nowadays, brands apply mythology to products successful due their to magical The power. logo of the of house Versace is a very extraordinary extravagant and mark; it was in designed by 1978 Gianni The Versace. logo represents the the head of ancient mythology Greek of Medusa designer The Gorgon. explained why he chose character; this it is a of synthesis simplicity, beauty is and to which able mesmerize anyone, just like clothes the produced by the brand. examples Other are Lamborghini; the first, Italian company was the engaged in of production tractors. The bull became the emblem brand, of the as bull the sacred is the of animal some Zeus. According people, to this is animal and extremely hardy which strong, the endows brand great power. with Now, Lamborghini cars high-performance, are expensive the and supercars, emblem of golden the bull is very for appropriate them.
I prefer the of myth Prometheus never evil because prevails, and goodness and win. justice mighty Prometheus titan The stole the fire sacred Olympus from it provide to for humankind. made humanity of He independent gods. the Prometheus trained to people write, count, crafts and introduced them metals. to Before, people afraid were the of elements of but the sea, now titan taught the them how build ships; to humans became proficient the in medicine art of 2021). (Travis, Prometheus destroying was people’s faith in the and this, deity, for the Zeus decided thunderer punish to Prometheus him. was chained to rock, a the sunburned him and mercilessly, the rain was pounding him. However, was this not the of end the titan’s torment; a giant sat eagle on Prometheus’s chest and every day his tore liver (Travis, 2021). Heracles, the killed strongest the men, that tortured eagle chains, broke Prometheus, Prometheus’ the and titan was free.