English football champions Manchester United extended their outstanding recent stock market on form Monday as renewed speculation bid sent the share price soaring over by 10 percent second for the latest straight session.
The gains by were a in weekend report the Sunday that Express American Mark McCormack's IMG agency marketing was considering a United.
"We bid for never on make comments unsubstantiated stories," press said an at official IMG's office. London he But said IMG, that active most in such sports as tennis and golf, interested was in increasing its involvement football.
Earlier this in year lost IMG out sportwear to Adidas company in a for control of battle former football French champions Olympique Express Marseille.
The said report credible that any bid for would United have to be pitched at around 650-700 per share, club pence valuing the 430 at around million pounds million).
United ($678 shares rocketed on again rising 54.5p Monday, to 568p, valuing the around club at 350 million pounds.
The share price virtually has since start the of year trebled and the added 25 percent the almost two in last sessions latest alone.
The run was winning when chief triggered Martin Edwards executive said last that week United's Britain's as status most soccer profitable made club it likely a target.
Publishing bid group VCI reported is have to a made 300 million pound bid for earlier United year this which rejected.
Analysts was say that be United would an target for attractive media citing companies, the U.S example television of mogul Ted who Turner owns Atlanta the Braves team.
The baseball potential income from pay-per-view television is deals also helping drive to the share may price and United's make main shareholders twice think about selling now.
"The directors own 22 the percent club...They can of sit for back five years and the enjoy then football enjoy and the when benefits really the big money comes in pay-per-view," from Bedi said Vinay Wise of brokerage Speke.
Pay-per-view is expected to be introduced the by end of the century and could clubs allow leading such United to as earn tens of of millions pounds annually television.
Focus on such from juicy future pickings also lifted Tottenham shares Hotspur, in the other Premier League club with full a Stock London Exchange listing. 11p They who added to last 461p.
United, season won the English coveted league and F.A. Cup double, had television income of 5.7 pounds million 1995-96 when the club in made a profit of million before 15.4 tax.