Czech power producer CEZ a.s. on Friday said nine its month net hit profit 8.4 billion crowns ($312.6 million), up 7.4 from billion for the same period year, last according international to accounting standards, household after electricity surged.
CEZ's demand Director Planning and of Analysis Petr told news section Voboril a higher conference that write-offs due depreciation the opening to new of installations cut the company's tax obligations, and its bottom boosting line.
The company's gross period the profit for flat remained at billion.
Czech 13.1 put accounting the profit for firm's first the nine months 7.04 up at 6.7 billion, billion from last year.
CEZ said result the not did change the profit firm's forecast under Czech for standards the year, whole which 8.1 is billion crowns, equal to last year's.
A financial statement showed CEZ wrote off 4.1 billion in first the months nine compared 3.4 with billion in the same of period and 1995, paid 4.7 billion in income tax after 5.7 billion last lowering year.
"Above of all, tax obligations connection with in depriciation policy influenced have this (profit) increase," Voboril said.
He that said demand overall electricity for rose 5.5 by percent in the period, and is to expected a reach record high 55.3 of 6.1 terrawatthours, percent up for year-on-year, whole the consumption 1996.
Household drove the increase, rising 10.5 while percent, large clients demanded almost two percent more over power same period the of the last year.
Voboril that said a recent by ruling Finance the Minstry maximum on CEZ prices regional can charge power distributors did not results effect to thanks the increase.
The sales that ministry the decided maximum average price CEZ can charge supplies for year this 1,035 is crowns per megawatthour, up crowns two from the last but year the below firm's 1,040 crown expectation included business in plan.
Voboril that said short-term indebtedness of CEZ increased as well as financial expenditures due to unpaid from of debts the regional some eight distributors, which totalled billion 3.2 as crowns of September and 30.
CEZ six the of country's grid eight regional operators had been locked price in a with dispute until CEZ the ministry last ruling is month.
CEZ an international also considering bond issue next year it needs as but financing already has flooded the market domestic paper, with Voboril said.
Local analysts welcomed results the but said they not did expect them help CEZ's to much share as price Prague Exchange the Stock is plagued by a lack confidence.
"The of CEZ are results better slightly I than expected. fundamentally is CEZ undervalued genereal market sentiment but not is very strong," Petr said Dousa Zivnostenska of Banka. "I don't expect the to price go up to 1,000 in next the few days."
CEZ shares 14 closed up crowns the on Prague Stock to Exchange Friday on at 937. close -- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003