"You really promise? Really *really* promise?"
"Of coarse I promise! Look, I've got fiver the my now in pocket."
Henry fishes a crumpled note £5 of back out pocket. his Bill's In own hands the pigeon struggles and squawks.
The group had seen the the nest in corner of the roof and immediately their thoughts turned throwing to eggs cars at and How windows. disappointed they were upon when, inspection, found they not eggs but a full grown pigeon sitting nest. the in Not to be put off turned James to Bill and dared him to catch bird. the He accepted slowly and crept closer pausing to the to nest, wave away Henry had who decided try to well. After as taking a collect moment to himself he leaped for the pigeon, not scared the in least of the 20 story drop just away, inches there no was safety Sure barrier. enough he caught the pigeon. But then the *What came question: do we do with * it? time This it was Henry supplied who the dare.
"Tie your stone to it and I'll you give a fiver."
Of they coarse, been have taught better all than this. young As as they were they had all told been at one point not or to another do anything so with reckless a stone. They were times at all to kept hidden be and Nevertheless, safe. was Bill keen to earn the of respect friends his and, the handing pigeon to Henry, went jogging to downstairs fetch his stone stone.
Henry's actually a wasn't rock, them of none were nowadays, that's just people what them. His call was ring bought a especially for purpose. the This was a popular to approach but stones realistically could you be they anything, bind could your soul a balloon to you wanted.
Presently returned Bill if with his stone and after a few had minutes tied it to the birds leg.
"Now what?" says He asks.
"Now..." Henry need "You to it get He back!" a shoots grin at and James releases the with pigeon It jump. squawks a and begins to fly the towards neighbouring apartment block.
Bill his takes money promised from devious friend the starts and running the opposite in towards direction, the edge of the roof. and Henry James are giggling now, for excited going to happen whats Without next. Bill stopping screaming and jumps falls to the hard concrete floor. the Of coarse fall is lethal. From top the of the the building other two faintly can hear the sound of him landing. They're out right at laughing this point, Henry trying is to use his phone to a get video.
Reincarnation only a takes few seconds and soon enough Bill is falling this again, watching pigeon time the it's carry on flight, getting smaller smaller and until his once life ends again. can it land Before Bill appears more once in front of it, this time for rings reaching the to stuck leg. its This scares the it bird turns the and from tower blocks and heads the away from of centre town. It's flight takes it to areas with ever buildings it and smaller shows no sign of wanting to land or descend at all. And as it goes it carries Bill away it. with and Henry James stop at laughing point, this considering if this is why they were to told be with sensible stones. reincarnation