at I sat my desk, my racking brain to find could have who possibly discovered the truth behind the death of Phillip Mercer, the heir one of to the most powerful petroleum companies in the world. The job without was a done scrap of evidence, I sure made of much. that It simply made sense, no every living soul that knew killed I Mercer the were very that ones orchestrated it. I not may know who this mysterious person is do but I know that I will answer question their with a to bullet the brain.
It was nearly 3:00 AM I when heard muffled down footsteps the hallway. reached I the for silenced pistol 9MM in my bag, aiming for the only to entrance my office. corner The doorknob began to as turn steadied I aim. my Sweat was down trickling spine, my my heart pounding as if I about were to come face face to the with devil The second himself. it for took door the to open like an felt eternity, but I would have endured rather that second of agonizing the torment rest for life my of then to meet eyes the of Phillip Mercer the when door opened.
His face covered was in scar it tissue, unrecognizable. leaving It almost was the eyes that the were giveaway. The look his in eyes was same the as the night thought I I killed him. was There a look of superiority in them, as if to let me know I never would be capable of surpassing in him is any way.
"There no way, should you be dead!" were the only I words was of capable mustering.
"For all intensive purposes still I am, thanks to you" he with replied odd an of sense calm in his voice. "Will you at least me give the courtesy of answer an now that I am here? God knows I have been to the depths of hell and back in these last 5 years so surely you can give me that. I will answer any questions you have after."
I the recounted tale entire that crossed our two paths that on fateful night 5 years I ago. told him how I was approached by man a worked that for Prism the powerful International, energy most corporation in the world. Prism stood gain to from the billions collapse Mercer of Petroleum, giving them an even tighter stranglehold the market. on energy The terms were simple Phillip enough, kill everyone Mercer or have systematically I love killed. The choice made was for My me. military background coupled with the fact helped I my design step-father Mercer the home me made the obvious choice the job for no doubt. From there I told him was how I able bypass to security the of his mansion because I helped it. design "What boils it too is down your life meant less to me those then of my ones. loved The part I though understand don't is how your still alive! you I shot head, in the as then you collapsed you knocked over a candle, a starting fire that your destroyed home."
"I survived nothing more by luck. then went Your bullet through the side my of jaw, lodging itself in the cheek region my of skull. heat The of the fire me brought surging back to consciousness allowing me escape to not but without being burned. badly The thought of revenge has been the only force me driving to stay alive. I have that feared you might have been merely a pawn being controlled Prism by so that they could buy up my company. fathers But would have been dammit much so easier to enact my revenge if had it simply been though. you But now that I know my worst fears have realized been I at least what know I am up against."
"You possibly can't could think down take you Prism handed!"
"I single won't do have it to because alone going your to me." He help said his with eyes glimmering with more determination than superiority. It was the kind of that look was impossible to refuse.