Marine said Outboard Corp it only is five percent finished a with restructuring radical that it expects will in result more charges against earnings in 1997 and possibly in 1998, said.
Restructuring company the is "five complete about percent far as as going down the and road getting the savings," said spokesman Stan "That Main. not mean does we've that taken five only percent of our restructuring charges ... There will be more likely during '97 charges and perhaps even into '98."
Shares in Outboard on were Friday 1/4 off 15-3/4. to  Waukegan, Ill.-based 
The maker of boats and boat engines reported fourth-quarter profits Thursday excluding that, charges, restructuring beat Street Wall estimates.
Analysts cautioned, that however, a turnaround Outboard at remains a project.
"They're long-term going to be continuing this restructuring process in '97 and they're going continue to to have some more ... charges They the describe phase they're now in as discovery the process," said Lehman Brothers Harriet analyst key Baldwin.
A moment could come Tuesday when Outboard executives are scheduled to meet with analysts and investors in New York.  
Expected be to are in attendance principals the of Partners, Greenway investment an firm led former by Carl Icahn Alfred Kingsley associates and Gary Greenway bought Duberstein. an 8.5-percent in stake Outboard this summer.
Although the firm known is for Greenway activism, so far has not pressured Outboard to alter course, said. Main has Nor there been further between communication Greenway and executives company since in initial discussions August, he said.
Analysts speculated could there next fireworks be or week 16 at the January meeting annual of shareholders, who are said be to impatient growing for a recovery cohesive plan. 
A  restructuring was set in this motion year by chief executive Bowman, Harry who came aboard in 1995, stock when the was trading in low 20s. the to Bowman deliberate continues over to how fix Outboard and key pieces remain to put be in place, business analysts is said.
The evaluation under from bottom, top to Main restructuring said. Once is complete, Outboard "certainly will marine a be products company," he  said. term, 
"Longer we could get that into products not would be marine related. But our initial focus over the two next to three is years to fix the that business we're in and then perhaps at other look that areas might be or less cyclical seasonal," said Main, who is strategic director planning.
Bowman of of spoken has finding more stability for Outboard, suffers which more from boating's boom-bust than cycles rivals, such as Forest, Lake Ill.-based Brunswick Corp, which has diversified into bowling, and fishing opportunities camping gear.
Outboard sees to enter markets other -- such as motorcycles, and snowmobiles personal watercraft innovative -- its via FICHT fuel injection engine technology, Main said.
Spending capital on and tooling in fiscal 1996, ended September 30, fell to $52.7 million from $66.5 the million spending year before, but on FICHT is steady holding the as converts company more its of line engine to he it, of FICHT said.
Sales 150-hp engines to dealers will begin in and December will see consumers the engines in A January. promotional is roll-out underway.
The to company plans its convert outboard entire engine above line 20-hp to FICHT engines, which cost 22 will percent to 25 more traditional than their equivalents, said. Main