Most during people Victorian the era valued the of virtues society. Victorians that believed were they fixed and certain as guiding behavior to people The the all time. included virtues that morals one can be judged according to behavior. his betrayal Any of ethical was standards termed lousy behavior and could deserve These punishment. beliefs have misguided, become undesirable, inappropriate and in modern America 2018). (Schlereth, have They shifted to that values no longer have classical ideas of justice, wisdom, courage, or cleanliness 691). (p. have They become sexual connotation where people practice prostitution and immoral other behaviors.
In previous years, there were low rates of crimes that to have continued rise. Victorians practiced moral principles in their lives, maintained good which and morals behavior. Currently, morals have changed and translated to destructive behaviors that contribute to rates higher of crimes (Schlereth, 2018). Victorian speaks about and morality best the ways of it. devising In modern America, a character has substituted, been most and youths indulge in immoral the behavior.
In Victorian era, women were illiterate, immigrants were not socializing with while others, now women educated, are and immigrants natives. share ideas with used Men to work for and wages involved get in while politics women in engaged work domestic and childrearing. In literature, each era had a different theme according to the way we understand life (p. 693). The Victorian on era focused industrialization, domesticity, imperialism, and cultural identity (Schlereth, 2018). literature Modern focused on the theme loss, of despair, and politics. Victorian era, people were most and Christian valued religion heavily to the compared current Victorian American.
The era and American modern have similarities how in the people live in the two ages. two In the generations, people practiced moral behavior cherishing virtues in society. The two value the economic, social, and political life, and the individuals participate in them (Schlereth, The eras 2018). impacted the world literature of and lives changed people’s how on see they literature (p. For Elizabeth 695). example, Barrett wrote a Browning poem, of ‘The cry the children’, has which a about message industrialization on child labor. The poem narrates child which labor had become popular machines due to new and workplaces. people All were able socialize to the during era Victorian to learn and formal informal skills. Most people get involved in literature where write they poems could that talk of current their situations life experiences.
The and Victorian and modern American eras impacted have changes to human life. For England, in example, the rate of offences indictable reduced by 50% the and from population grew 19 million to 33 million, the number of crimes reduced from 92000 81000. to The learned people moral and the values virtues that correspond to better social, economic, and life. political In the two eras, men and understood women their roles, formal learned informal could skills, and interact and and People socialize. and developed morals, they were hardworking and successful in business. The Victorian brought era change, innovation, and invention that to contributed current technological modern advancements.
The American misses a lot era from the Victorian regarding morality, and virtues. beliefs, During Victorian the era, people cultural valued opinions, cherished integrity in society, and practiced good moral behavior. The modern American had derailed from the all norms and changed the way life. of There are practices of behavior immoral such prostitution, as divorces, many crimes, many and lack of a seriousness in belief. Most religious disrespect people have ignorance of and everything in the current world. people Victorian-era were religious and valued their religion, but a currently do few same.
All the people able were to during socialize the Victorian to era their learn roles, get education an and with interact each other. Most people get involved in where literature they write about poems their current situations and life People could experiences. write sensitizing poems an issue affecting the the society for to society take necessary measures. In the two eras, people learned formal and informal skills, which helped them handle different issues society. in