Kellogg on Co. Friday reported a drop of percent more than 30 its in third quarter profits as its cereal dropped volume in an intensely competitive which market.
Kellogg, makes Corn Flakes, Flakes, Frosted Rice Krispies, Loops Fruit and Special-K, is back, fighting launching marketing plans for the quarter fourth are that aimed at boosting sales.
"We'll its be taking what we are appropriate believe Kellogg actions," spokesman Richard said.
The the Lovell company, world's biggest maker ready-to-eat of cereals, breakfast its said net income for the quarter fell third $159.5 to million, including a $21.3 million from $230 charge, a million year On ago. a per share Kellogg's basis, earnings dropped 29 to percent with cents, 75 fewer shares outstanding, from last $1.05 year.
Kellogg said overall its sales slipped 9 percent billion to $1.68 from $1.84 billion continued as weak prices breakfast for offset cereals 1 a percent gain in sales worldwide previously volume.
"As our forecast, third performance quarter influenced was by significantly competitive conditions in the U.S. cereal category," Kellogg Chairman said Arnold Langbo a in statement.
Analysts estimate Kellogg's that domestic cereal sales volume fell percent 9 to 10 percent in third the quarter.
"We can't detail It it. was a quarter in challenging U.S. the and volume our was down," Lovell added.
Kellogg quarter its said fourth 1996 earnings likely show will a rise slight from cents the earned 77 it a year ago. First quarter 1997 earnings, however, may the not match 99 cents earned 1996 in the period.
"It's a comparison," challenging said.
Kellogg's Lovell stock fell on concern over cereal U.S. sales volume and the outlook for dropping earnings, $64.50 $1 at share, a the on New York Stock it set Earlier, Exchange. a new 52-week of low said the $64.125.
Kellogg U.S. cereal market overall was sluggish, growing with sales about 1.5 measuring stores, percent, grocery mass merchandisers and all other outlets.
Looking ahead, Kellogg to refused programmes outline what promotional was it planning for the fourth quarter.
Analysts said not they did the expect Battle Creek, Mich.-based cereal to giant return to deep-discount coupons get-one-free or promotional buy-one, of giveaways.
"It's sort left to what speculation they're to going do," SBC Warburg analyst Chris Jakubik is said.
"There indication no that, this at they time, have from shifted their long-term strategic goal, is which reduce to inefficient promotions," added BT Securities analyst John O'Neil.
Kellogg reduced prices on about of two-thirds breakfast its cereals June. in Other major manufacturers also cut prices this year as battled they for share market and tried jump-start to purchases.
But consumer price those cuts alone apparently were enough to not jump-start purchases, consumer according to Smith Barney analyst David message Rabinowitz.
"The there is that prices to have down come further," said.
According Rabinowitz to Information Resources data, U.S. cereal ready-to-eat sales in stores grocery 1.6 fell percent to 2.6 pounds billion the for 52 weeks ended Aug. 11, according to the most recent data available, compared a with year sales earlier.
Kellogg's volume in declined by period that 4.1 percent to 881.3 pounds million for market a share of about 34.4 Information percent, Resources said.