rock The and pop music scene were to and introduced gained on popularity television through massive hit for The shows teenagers. three ones primary were Where Action Is the CBS, Shinding on on ABC, and Hullabaloo NBC. on more households As had access to televisions along the with growth of widespread range programming, of including musical television ones, the played a role significant in the distributing to music the public. The bands that on appeared these hit to TV shows went see on significant success the in The charts. television shows helped to the articulate sort new of music youth culture and became almost a star-making mechanism in a and relationship profits that and the industries music television shared. bands, Some such as the Monkees, the response American to the Beatles, were created the with television of purpose as performance their acting and on-camera comfort a as group were initially over prioritized music. However, the Monkees’ music took off beyond astronomically expectations. anyone’s a they were Nevertheless, band groomed the by industry with entertainment emphasis on an performances television which took away much of the authenticity, even when compared to their counterparts The Beatles, who made although visual content, on focused their music strongly (Covach own and 212).
Television Flory drastically on went to change the landscape of the music industry. First, split a artists formed among with fans, and side one on focusing the pop-oriented, television performance-focused music, while the typically other, was older audience to drawn serious-minded which music of rock to continued be on played the rather TV. radio also than Television about the brought phenomenon of fictious bands, as the such Archies, popular a drawn cartoon popular band young with (Covach teens Flory and has 214). never been This done and before similarly created a genre new music-television of However, entertainment. until the advent cable-network of of resulting television such MTV, in channels dedicated as the phenomenon television in the had limitations. 1960s its Most TV at sets the poor had time audio and visual and as quality, recording and sound quality radio with improved hi-fi and recording FM, the were disparities noticeable. is not Television by nature design a sound of medium, and the experience musical be is meant to enveloping the leading to the split fanbase, in where audiences younger who generally cared less about sound quality appreciated the visual to medium their music 279). (Frith