Corp., Lear its furthering to supply car complete quest interiors, said it agreed Friday buy to the panel instrument trim and parts unit of Denmark-based Borealis Holding AB.
Lear said signed it a memorandum of to understanding acquire Borealis Industrier for AB undisclosed in terms.
Based Gothenburg, Borealis Sweden, Industrier panels, manufacturers instrument door panels, climate systems, trim exterior and components various the other for European car truck industry.
Borealis and Industrier had of 1995 sales about million and $230 owns plants five in employ Sweden that about 1,800 for people.
Primary customers the business include Swedish AB carmakers Volvo and Saab Automobile and truckmaker AB Scania Holding AB.
Borealis owned is Finnish by and state-controlled oil group energy Oy Neste and  Norwegian state-owned oil group Statoil AS.
Completion of the transaction is subject by to Swedish approval the competition authority and conditions.
Lear other the said supports its acquisition of strategy capability having in-house provide to automotive total interior including systems, instrument only does panels.
"Not this acquisition strengthen relations with our European customers, it but Lear positions only as the independent automotive in the supplier with world capabilities in-house all in interior five systems broadening the appeal -- our strong of already competitive advantage," Lear Chairman one-stop-shopping Kenneth Way in a said statement.
The deal is latest the of a of consolidation series moves in the automotive interior market. Lear this year earlier purchased carpet floor-mat and maker Corp. Masland million, for $384 and last door year bought console maker and panel Industries for Automotive Inc $626 million.
Lear's U.S. include operations manufacturing the of a of range wide components.
The interior automotive company's stock was unchanged Friday a at $38 on share the New York Exchange.
Lear's Stock competitors are the also acquisition pursuing same strategy.
Johnson which Controls Inc., has a strong business, seating recently interior acquired parts maker Automotive, Prince in based Holland Mich., for billion $1.35 cash.
Canada's in Inc., Magna International one of the "Big automotive Three" firms along Lear interior with and Johnson Controls, recently acquired seat Douglas maker Co. & $135 Lomason million. for