Sierra Semiconductor Corp.'s stock jumped more than 27 percent Thursday expectations the on company will emerge smaller a as more but profitable operation after it computer the exits modem business.
The San Jose, Calif.-based gained stock company's after its Wednesday it announcement plans that to pull out of highly the competitive and modem-chip business instead focus fast-growing on the market for computer equipment.
The networking stock $2.625 rose to $11.875 in late trading NASDAQ.
"Certainly on the company be a will company much smaller but now, it will be profitable a more business," said analyst Moosa Elias Robertson of Stephens Co.
But & analysts noted Sierra that has still much work painful of ahead cutting it, as including many as jobs 150 from its which work force, currently has 500 people, and building up the of business its which unit, PMC-Sierra makes routing devices and chipsets for high-speed computer networks.
The has company announced to plans take a charge of against earnings $50 million to million $80 write to value down the of and assets and inventories severance cover payments.
Scott of Randall Soundview Financial Group said company the would likely difficulty have its selling modem-chip business.
"Once you to your announce intention exit a it business, becomes a complete buyer's he market," said that said.
He while the is company focusing fastest-growing on the of part its business, the for market chips networking to has begun attract attention of the much-larger players as such Business Machines International Corp
"As market develops the the question are is, they to make able that transition to be much a larger company?" Randall said.
Other more analysts were bullish, even though company the to is expected slightly shrink to more than its size half current in a move," sales.
"It's positive strategic said Miles Kan of Hambrecht & Quist. "The modem business is low-margin, a business," commodity he said.
Sierra's PMC-Sierra generated $33 unit million of the $117 company's million in sales the first in half of the with year, compared million in $45 sales modem of chips, Kan said. But PMC the is unit far more he profitable, said.
Sierra's from stock has fallen a high this nearly of $25 year as computer chip the sector has been by prices battered falling and about concern slowing demand.