Australian fast ferry and transport group Holyman Ltd plans to further expand operations in Europe before moving into the Asian market, managing director Butcher Christopher said in an interview.
"We currently have operations in North America and northern Europe and we can't see any reason why we can't start doing same the thing in the Mediterranean," Butcher told Reuters.
Butcher said Holyman was likely into expand into Asia in the future as the cost structure for operating fast ferries improved in some markets in the region.  
"We could be the seeing cost structure changing in Asia, so we are likely to move into some markets in north Asia and south east Asia," Butcher said.
He said that as incomes rose in Asia the amounts charged for ferry services would rise, making it more economical for operators like Holyman to enter market.
Holyman the company Simon secretary Lennon said the company was also looking at fast ferry services from Darwin to Indonesia, but he did not expect a decision to be made for at least a year.  
"It is one of a number of projects we are at looking in the region," he said. He said Holyman had looked at routes particular within China and Indonesia, but they did not fit within the plans. company's "I would imagine in a few years we would have something up there (in Asia)," Lennon said.
Holyman shares had a lacklustre showing in its first year of listing, but since January this year the shares have than more doubled to make the stock one of strongest the sharemarket performers over the past year.
The shares listed in April 1994 at A$2.00 and hit a high of A$6.00 on November 11 and are currently trading around A$5.06.  
The Sydney-based group was floated the on local bourse in April 1994, as of part a spin-off from TNT when Ltd, the transport group was selling assets to trim its high debts.
"The stock really took some time to off get the ground," Butcher said.
"I think there has been a lot of hard work done over the past year educate to shareholders in what the company is doing and where the company is going as there was a perception out there that we were a mismash of businesses," Butcher said.  
Holyman's main activities its are fast ferry services in Australia, across the North Sea between Britain and Europe, New York and in Denmark. It also operates gas a pipeline, bulk commodity handling and freight forwarding businesses.
"There are a number of different projects and businesses, we found there are quite a lot common of threads going through," Butcher said. "I think these operations all their have own place and are there opportunties to expand these further," he said.
Butcher worked with TNT for 25 years before taking charge of Holyman when it split from TNT.  
Butcher said the group had no plans to raise capital to fund the expected expansion, as the company was well financed.
In October, Holyman bought a fast ferry passenger for A$43 million. He said there was no plans for any immediate purchases of more ferries.
Butcher said he could not comment its on trading performance or earnings forecasts.
Holyman reported a net profit of A$16.09 million in calendar 1995. The group posted a net profit of A$15.03 million in the six months to June 30, 1996, up A$6.79 from million earlier.