Dear Diary, I know its been a while but please forgive me. Earlier today when walking home from school I had a strange, no, the strangest thing that has ever happened to me happened today I and totally am freaking out. I was crossing Squash Creek on the north bridge like I do everyday after class. But this time when I approached the on I ramp noticed a small wooden stool sitting in the path. it wasn't I until tried walking around it did I notice the..thing, I don't know what to call it a troll maybe? Yeah, a troll that makes sense. I met a troll today. At first I though it was some crude creation of some meth tweakers made dead of cats and fish but then this scalie harry, thing turned to me and gave me a grin. I was so taken back that I fell on my ass right there. If not for that I would have been out of there instantly, and the fact this that thing started to speak to me.." Easy there young-en!" it said in a disturbingly human voice "Where be you off to in such a hurry"? I Naturally answered spoke it. back I to the "troll", I must have been in shock still. was "I just trying to cross here, I do it almost every day". It was silent for a moment after that then "You replied see son, this is my bridge now"! "And you cross it on my terms". He stuck some sort of crooked cane in my face as I started to get up to my feet. "You must answer my riddle" he choked out with a laugh. This was the point where I was convinced I had gone absolutely bonkers. I literally pinched myself which only aided in his laughter. "What time is it when elephant an sits on your fence"? he said in a majestic slow voice. How was I supposed to know that? It was probably some ancient proverb or great life lesson I had never heard of..I tried reasoning the with thing but it have wouldn't any. I had answer to it..otherwise I would to have walk four miles to the other crossing. Yeah right. I sat there for about twenty minutes watching it shoo flies away until I had settled on an answer. it never told me what would happen if I was wrong reply...I in my opened my mouth to speak "What time is it when an elephant sits on your fence"? I repeated. "Its time to buy a new fence" I said confidently. The trolls face showed no emotion until he suddenly erupted in laughter, he even fell off his stupid stool. Was I I right thought to myself. I then decided that while he mocks my wrong answer I wasn't going to take any of that. I ran. I ran fast and didn't turn back. Now recording I'm it all. Should I tell my parents? What if it followed me? Was my answer right? I'm not even sure it actually happened..