article The represents an overview of other literature on methodologies and criteria used in supplier evaluation and selection process, which is believed to be one of the vital components of a successful operation of a manufacturing In company. particular, the paper emphasized the change industry’s in this field – from focusing primarily on operational efficiency embracing to the potential of strategic The article partnerships. claims that right the approach to supplier assessment, thus, is the key to a company’s development and progress.
The paper starts with ways various to address the issues related to MCDM of suppliers’ selection. The most common ones are stated to be mathematical models, Simple rating multi-attribute technique (SMART), analytic network process (ANP), analytic hierarchy (AHP), process data envelopment analysis (DEA), linear programming, and some others. For example, DEA is a methodology focused on a supplier system and classifies it either as efficient or inefficient based on selecting particular criteria. Mathematical programming models usually incorporate complex evaluations between suppliers, allowing one to compare them and identify the most optimal terms in cost of and other criteria.
The article further compares all by their methodologies popularity expressed in the frequency of mentions in the literature. Thus, DEA is the most common approach with 30% mentions, whereas programming mathematical (17%), AHP (15%), and case-based reasoning for account fewer mentions. However, those methodologies represent the largest share of all MCDM approaches.
The article highlights the of significance knowing this distribution, which can build idea an of the most prominent ways to address the issues with suppliers’ assessment and selection. It is also stated that should suppliers be evaluated based on “the inputs of the strategic, and functional operational levels” (Agarwal et al., 2011). Methodologies such as DEA, mathematical programming, or AHP are advised to be used for identifying the most optimal suppliers, whereas AHP is noted to be effective providing in consistency.