"Who can replace Death? He was the most feared of us all. Without Death can there be no reckoning upon the sinful mortals."
War scratched his thinning He beard. running was out of options. No others had dared to take up such a heavy burden. While War was no stranger to the horrors of, he shuddered to think about the atrocities that Death had committed. Was there any being in the 7 realms take to up the and Cloak Scythe?
"But is there someone." hissed Famine.
"Brothers you are aware all that the atrocities we have committed were dealt by War, Man. death, famine and conquest. These were all Man's Who undoing. else better to don the burden of Death then a man himself?"
Famine's ragged hood his covered face, only showing his decaying mouth twisted in a sick smile.
Conquest was quick to challenge.
"Man, donning the very bane of his existence? Brother, your imprudence will be the end of all. us A mortal is man hideous creature. is He greedy, selfish cruel. and Giving one this much power will only result in abuse."
"Conquest, you as are foolish as ever. Have you learnt from nothing Death? He the was wisest of us all, he-"
"If Death was so wise, his explain abrupt departure. Why did he leave his duties behind? We are the horsemen of the apocalypse; both terrible and glorious. When the Horn the of Heavens sounds we will charge strike and fear into the hearts of sinners. It is who we are. Death was a fool for leaving."
"ENOUGH!"
War slammed into Conquest, knocking down him to the brimstone. He unleashed an onslaught of blows onto his golden armor it until was dented beyond recognition. War Breathless, up stood towering over his foe and boomed.
"I will not take this insolence. Death was the best of us. I loved him as a brother and a mentor."
War's stone face softened for a second.
"Should you be enough stupid to blaspheme our brother again, I will end you."
Conquest nodded in shame. He was not used to the bitter taste of defeat. He silently vowed that War would pay for the humiliation he suffered.
"Famine. You say that a mortal can replace Death. Bring him to me."
"As you wish brother."