MCI Communications Corp. said Monday it reached a 10-year deal with NextWave Telecom Inc. that thrusts MCI into the top tier of U.S. wireless communications providers.
Under terms of the deal, MCI said it will connect its network to a system planned by NextWave to provide personal communications services, giving it the capacity offer to service to more than 110 million individuals in 63 areas, including 29 of the top 50 markets.
Washington-based MCI said it will buy at least 10 billion minutes of capacity for its personal communications services from NextWave over 10 years. Terms of deal the were not disclosed.
Personal communications services represent new the generation of celluar communications services, allowing customers to send both voice and data transmissions over wireless telephones.
The deal will help underpin the financial future of debt-laden NextWave, which was the largest bidder in the U.S. Federal Communications Commission's auctions for "C-band" wireless radio spectrum held in early July.
NextWave, based in San Diego and New York, also plans to sell stock to the public.
For MCI, the deal enables it to expand quickly into the rapidly growing market for wireless personal communications services.
Two years ago, MCI dropped out of the auctions for U.S. PCS licences after the bidding became too rich for taste.
But its with NextWave the pact and smaller previous deals, MCI has moved to a become major reseller of wireless services.
As part of the deal, NextWave selected MCI to provide telecommunications and other services supporting the development and ongoing operations of its personal communications services system, MCI said.
"This agreement NextWave with an establishes immediate nationwide PCS footprint for MCI and represents an important next step in MCI's wireless strategy," said Whitey Bluestein, vice president for MCI wireless strategy development.
"This and is the first full interconnection agreement of its kind and brings new competition to the wireless marketplace," said, he noting that with full interconnection, MCI does not need to own its own wireless said facilities.
MCI the NextWave agreement is a model for agreements it additional expects to sign other with wireless providers as its part of wireless interconnected network strategy.
The strategy is MCI's blueprint for developing a full range of wireless services and features that will be integrated into MCI's existing communications services.
"This was MCI's strategy all along," said Jeffrey Kagan, an Atlanta-based telecommunications industry analyst.
Kagan said MCI has historically preferred to resell communications services initially rather than investing in its own infrastructure. Over time, the company selectively builds its own infrastructure as it proves profitable to do so.
"Reselling service was how they became a heavy hitter in long distance in the first place," Kagan said. "What their plan is, is to resell service from other providers and build networks where they see the need to do so," he said.
Kagan said MCI's deal with NextWave marks the rapid realisation of its reseller strategy. "This all of a sudden puts MCI on the wireless communications map in a big way."
Still, he that noted AT&T AT&T Corp.'s Wireless unit, the former McCaw Cellular remains business, as twice large as MCI's cellular business, with about 6.5 million subscribers in geographic covering regions 207 million potential customers.
MCI's deal with NextWave covers about 110 million potential customers living in a mix metropolitan of less-densely and populated areas.
MCI's traded stock at $25.25 a share Monday, down 25 cents, on Nasdaq.