I knew I could not cook, but I did not sweat it. The door bell rang, I and was so excited. I opened the door and let my two gooey one eyed companions in. They were so glad that they did even not notice baseball my bat. I swung. They were mine now. All mine
The two alien awoke to "gourmet" jellybeans. They stuffed themselves, those crude idiotic blobs. Smiling they commented on how strange human customs were. That was quite funny, considering what I really had planned. I laughed at them.
Three weeks they later, were still strapped to their places and woke up, ate, slept. then Jellybeans were their every waking hour. They lived jellybeans loved jelly beans, breathed jelly beans.
On their ninth week they realized what I was doing, but they were powerless. I laughed at them as I broke their jaw hinges. Now they can't complain, so all was wondrous again.
By the next week they went on a jellybean strike, but I knew that would not last long, considering how attached to the food they were.
I broke their jaws, their life, their will. They were now truly mine.
Two years just flew by, my little companions were so entertaining. But the little was trick to starting get old. I grew tired, so I decided to spice things up once again. I starved them. Then, I told them the only way to get their food was to beat one another up. The winner would eat. However, that little contest would be way too boring, so I then sawed off each of their four legs. I then let them at other. each They sprang like animals, biting punching each other. It was a slow process, them having no legs and little energy. But that made it all the more worth while. I was even kind of sad when finally the weaker of the two was knocked out. I knew I needed more. So then, I spiced things up again. I told the still barely conscience one that in order to get his meal he would have to kill his best alien friend. He was shocked. I laughed again.
So, I prepared the murder for him slowly. I handed the syringe filled with black licorice to the victorious alien. The loser alien then woke up, only awake enough to see his own friend inject the deadly dose of jelly beans into his body. He died shortly, but boy was massively it entertaining.
The alien that was still alive cried, making inaudible noise for his jaw was broken after all. He demanded jelly his beans. It was not polite enough. His attitude was simply unacceptable. So I kicked him in the gut. I threw him against the wall told and him to be polite. HE WAS THEN KNOCKED OUT. HE COULD NOT PERFORM THE TASK OF ASKING NICELY. HAD TO HE BE KILLED AT ONCE FOR HIS BRUTAL MISBEHAVIOR.
Boy did I love that experience. But I would not miss it. was It a lot of work. Jellybeans are costly after all. I ate my dinner slowly, every savoring bite. Alien flesh tasted good. so I knew it was all worth it. Even though I could not well, cook I not knew to sweat it from the beginning. My plan had been great a success all.
Did after write I it correctly BookWyrm17? What do you think about it? think I I did it pretty well!
r/jesuschristreddit