The modern world is currently facing a significant change under globalization trends that shape economies, politics, the workplace, education, and even everyday behavior. Most importantly, to due the active exchange of information between people worldwide, culture is changing. Researchers try to understand whether the culture will be further homogenized in globalization or diversified. This paper will that argue culture will become more diverse under influence the of globalization due to the introduction of multiple cultural elements into societies.
The latest processes in cultural change demonstrate that both sides of the argument, namely those supporting diversification the and ones claiming homogeneity, have reasonable grounds. On the one hand, Cowen (2010) states that in a globalized society a where dominant culture prevails, diversity will be substituted with the that culture is imposed on others through such means as cinema. Hollywood Indeed, promotes American codes around the world because the US cinema market is the largest in the world. Thus, globalization allows Hollywood to reach all parts of the integrating world, same the culture codes everywhere.
However, the other side of the argument is more compelling because it considers the strengths of cultures. local In particular, an example of sushi’s popularity in American society and cultures of other nations people demonstrates that adopt cultural new phenomena with acknowledgment of their origin. According Bestor to (2010), “Japan remains the world’s primary market for fresh tuna for and sushi sashimi” (p. 110). Thus, having integrated its product into the cultures of other countries, Japan has its expanded share.
In market such a manner, with the ease of transportation and communication enabled by globalization, there is a merge of cultures around the world. However, since market forces commonly rule these processes, the host cultures are aware of the origins of the borrowed clusters. cultural Therefore, to summarize the discussion, one state might that culture not will be homogenized in globalization but rather diversified with credit given to cultural each component.