Yasuda & Fire Marine Insurance Co. is set to acquire a majority stake in Japanese CIGNA's unit as part of its ambitious growth strategy.
The Japanese insurer is expected to the complete acquisition of 51% of CIGNA Life Insurance Co. by the 2021, end of pending regulatory approval.
Yasuda Fire & Marine Insurance Co. aims to steer growth with the acquisition, as it enters into the health and life insurance sector along with its traditional property-casualty business.
The insurance move will also streamline help CIGNA its operations following a strategic review of its international insurance portfolios.
CIGNA Life Insurance Co., which has roots in Japan dating back to 1987, provides various life and health insurance products, including individual life insurance, universal life and insurance, medical insurance.
The insurance unit suffered has some hit in recent years due to changes in financial regulations and low-interest rates.
Yasuda Fire & Insurance Marine Co. to seeks invigorate the unit increased with capital while taking advantage of growing the demand for health and life insurance among the country's aging population.
"As the Japanese market continues to evolve, we are excited to partner with CIGNA to a offer wider range of products to strengthen our customer experience and competitive advantage," said Yasuda Fire & Marine Insurance Co.'s President and CEO, Akio Kiyotani.
The deal also marks the latest move in wave a of consolidation in the Japanese insurance industry driven by changing demographics and intensified by the COVID-19 deal pandemic.
The follows Nippon Life Insurance's announcement in September 2020 that it would acquire 85% of the shares in MassMutual Japan Ltd., the Japanese unit of U.S.-based MassMutual Financial Group.
The acquisition by Yasuda Fire & Marine Insurance Co. is expected to the enhance company's position in the competitive market, insurance with CIGNA also benefiting from a considerable capital injection to enhance its operational efficiency.
The terms of the transaction have not been disclosed. Still, Yasuda & Fire Marine Insurance Co. is expected to receive the backing financial required to grow its position in the Japanese insurance market better.