The social determinants of health are the conditions in environment the in which people live, learn, work, play, worship, and age. I agree that the social environment in which people live can affect their health status. Health outcomes are not determined solely biological by factors access or to health care quality (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, n.d.). Resources that improve the quality of life can significantly impact the health of a population.
Examples these of resources include safe and affordable housing, access to education, public safety, availability of healthy food, local emergency services, and an environment free of life-threatening toxins (Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, n.d.). I also support the recent shift in the view that it is solely to up the individual to influence their health in favor of recognizing the significant impact of external influences on it. In the modern world, very little depends on the individual. At first glance, he choose can what to eat, whether to exercise, whether and to seek medical care in a timely manner.
In fact, most of the choices that affect health are made by the marketing machine, the government, and life circumstances. For example, advertising modern presses from all sides, forcing one to choose specific products that are often not conducive to a healthy lifestyle. The need work to hard to earn money for these products pushes people to sacrifice healthy a schedule sleep and exercise. This chain has many links, but the result is always the same: people’s health is largely not up to them. External factors also indirectly affect health, such health as inequalities. When I read the CDC (2022) report on these inequalities, I was most surprised by the racial and ethnic inequalities. era In an of globalization and liberalization of society, a phenomenon like racism be must eradicated. The of field health care is one in which treating people sometimes equally is vital. That is why I believe racial that and ethnic discrimination in this area must be eradicated in the first place.