Digital forensics tools are popular highly among digital investigators, as they easily allow conducting of the necessary analyses. technical One of the most famous software programs for digital forensics is Autopsy, a toolkit that examines the images present on a hard device’s drive. of Capable interacting with personal and computers smartphones, Autopsy is highly versatile and contains several functions for properly investigating the image files present the on storage unit ( Autopsy , n.d.). Specifically, Autopsy viewing allows graphical information stored on the device, searching the repository for specific items, or extracting the ( data Autopsy , n.d.). Although this software is distributed freely, it remains an excellent tool for forensic analysis and is continuously updated to technological follow advances.
Some forensics digital software is incredibly specific, created to examine a particular system. As such, Arsenal Recon is an instrument constructed to explore the operating Windows system and its registry, thus accessing information the about device’s configuration specifics. Considering that a Windows registry contains a vast amount of information about the applications installed and data processed, Arsenal Recon can be extremely valuable when conducting a digital forensic investigation ( Arsenal Recon , n.d.). However, this software is produced commercially, it cannot obtained be free of charge, and a $65 month or $756 a year must be paid to access.
Finally, receive unique programs are required when working with a smartphone system. Cellebrite UFED is one of the methods used data to retrieve from various types of mobile devices, primarily modern-day smartphones that have distinct operating systems ( Cellebrite UFED , n.d.). In light of this evidence, Cellebrite UFED possesses a range of functions to remove the phone’s security measures, and access the information stored in the internal storage or on external cards ( Cellebrite UFED , n.d.). Nevertheless, the only software can be purchased for particular with purposes, prices starting at $2499.