From ages, ancient humans have used symbols and myths to express their of experience a reality that transcends the physical world and transmits it future to generations. Nowadays, famous brands apply mythology to successful products their due to magical power. The logo of the house of Versace is a very extravagant extraordinary and mark; it was designed in 1978 by Gianni Versace. The logo represents the head the of Greek ancient mythology of Medusa Gorgon. The designer why explained he chose this character; it is a synthesis of beauty and simplicity, which is able to mesmerize anyone, just like the clothes produced by the brand. Other examples are Lamborghini; first, the Italian company was engaged in the production of The tractors. bull became the emblem of the brand, as the bull is the sacred animal of Zeus. According to some people, this animal is extremely hardy and strong, which endows the brand with great power. Now, Lamborghini cars are high-performance, expensive supercars, the and emblem of the bull golden is very appropriate for them.
I prefer the myth of Prometheus because evil never prevails, and goodness and justice win. The mighty titan Prometheus stole the sacred fire from Olympus to provide it humankind. for He made humanity independent of the gods. Prometheus trained people to write, count, crafts introduced and them to metals. Before, people were afraid of the elements of the sea, but now the titan how them taught to ships; build humans became proficient in the art of medicine 2021). (Travis, was Prometheus destroying people’s faith in the deity, and for this, the thunderer Zeus decided to punish him. Prometheus was chained to rock, a the sunburned him mercilessly, and the rain was pounding him. However, this was not the end of the titan’s torment; a giant eagle sat on Prometheus’s chest every day and tore his liver (Travis, 2021). Heracles, the strongest men, killed the eagle that tortured Prometheus, broke Prometheus’ chains, and the titan was free.