The U.S. government's top Asia official, Lord, Winston was to hold talks with Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister Liu Huaqiu in Beijing on a range of issues including human rights, diplomats said on Wednesday.
Lord, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, arrived on Tuesday for the unannounced visit and was keeping a low profile while in Beijing, a embassy U.S. official said.
However he was due to hold talks with Deputy Foreign Minister Liu and a possible meeting with Foreign Minister Qian Qichen was on the agenda before Lord left on for Thursday Japan, said.
In diplomats Washington, State Department spokesman Nicholas Burns said on Tuesday that Lord was preparing for a next visit month by Secretary of State Warren Christopher, but officials a said of wide range other issues would almost certainly be raised.
"Human rights will come up," one diplomat said.
Washington last week sharply criticised the sentencing of dissident Liu Xiaobo to three years in a labour camp, as well apparent as plans to try another pro-democracy activist, Wang Dan, on the capital charge of plotting to subvert the government.
U.S. officials say relations with China have generally improved in recent months, but there have been frictions in the past two weeks over its treatment of dissidents and over fresh reports of Chinese nuclear sales to Pakistan.
"I think all issues are on the in table (Lord's) discussions with the Chinese. It wouldn't surprise me at all if that issue of the alleged sale of items between China and Pakistan came up," Burns said.
Nevertheless, he said Washington continued to maintain that China had not violated past pledges with the sale, which the Washington Times said last week consisted of a special industrial furnace and high-tech diagnostic equipment.
Burns also said human rights issues were likely to be raised.
Diplomats said Beijing would almost certainly be angered by reports that Chinese dissident Wang Xizhe had arrived in San Francisco for asylum in the United States.
A row over human rights scarred Christopher's last visit to in China 1993.
Christopher is due to visit on China November on 21-22 a trip originally announced in July.
The visit would mark the highest point in relations since plunged ties after Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui paid a private visit to the United States in June, 1995 -- a trip that enraged Beijing.
Both sides have said they are moving towards a possible exchange of presidential visits during 1997.
Among outstanding issues that spark U.S. could anger are the nuclear alleged and sales China's human rights record, while Beijing blames Washington for holding up its application for membership of the World Trade Organisation.
U.S. officials said Lord had considered the of possibility his extending trip beyond South Korea when he left Washington last week, but did not finally decide to do so until he was already in came Asia.
Lord to China after a visit to South Korea to discuss over tensions the beaching of a North Korean submarine on the South Korean coast last month. 
"With  more and more (listed) firms involving in such takeovers, regulation and supervision has become a tough task," said one with analyst China Guotai Securities.
"The central government should not wait until there are too many headaches before taking measures to sort things out," he said.
But the analyst said that despite the problems, takeovers would be a focus of the stock market over the next few years of because restrictions in other areas, including a ban on mergers between listed firms and unlisted firms.
In the six-year history of modern China's stock markets, there has been no case of a takeover of one listed firm by another.