Outboard Marine Corp said it is only five percent finished with a radical restructuring that it expects will result in more charges against earnings in 1997 and possibly in 1998, the company said.
Restructuring is about "five complete percent as far as going down the road getting and the savings," said spokesman Stan Main. "That does not mean that we've taken only five percent of our restructuring charges ... There will likely be more charges during '97 and perhaps even into '98."
Shares in Outboard Friday on were off 1/4 to 15-3/4.  
The Waukegan, Ill.-based maker of and boats boat engines reported fourth-quarter profits Thursday that, excluding restructuring charges, beat Wall Street estimates.
Analysts cautioned, however, that a turnaround at Outboard remains a long-term project.
"They're going to be continuing this restructuring process in '97 and they're going to continue to have some more charges ... They describe the phase they're in now as the discovery said process," Lehman Brothers analyst Harriet Baldwin.
A key moment could come Tuesday when executives Outboard are scheduled to meet with analysts and investors in New York.  
Expected to be in attendance are the principals of Greenway Partners, an investment firm led by former Carl Icahn associates Alfred and Kingsley Gary Greenway Duberstein. bought an 8.5-percent stake Outboard in this summer.
Although the firm is known for activism, Greenway so far has not pressured Outboard to alter course, Main said. Nor has there been further communication between Greenway and company executives since initial discussions in August, he said.
Analysts speculated there could be fireworks next week or at the January 16 annual meeting of shareholders, who are said to be growing impatient for a cohesive recovery plan.  
A restructuring was set in motion this year by chief executive Harry Bowman, who came aboard in 1995, when the stock was trading in the low Bowman 20s. continues to deliberate over to how fix Outboard and key pieces remain to be put in place, analysts said.
The business under is evaluation from top to bottom, Main said. Once restructuring is complete, Outboard will "certainly be a marine products company," he said.  
"Longer term, we get could into that products would not be marine related. But our initial focus over the next two to three years is to fix the business that we're in and then perhaps look at areas other that might be less cyclical or seasonal," said Main, who is director of strategic planning.
Bowman has spoken of finding more stability for Outboard, which suffers more from boating's boom-bust cycles than rivals, such as Lake Forest, Ill.-based Brunswick Corp, which has diversified into bowling, and fishing camping gear.
Outboard sees to opportunities enter other markets -- such as motorcycles, snowmobiles and personal watercraft -- via its innovative FICHT fuel injection engine technology, Main said.
Spending on capital tooling and in fiscal 1996, ended September 30, fell to $52.7 million from $66.5 million year the before, but spending on FICHT is holding steady as the company converts more of its engine line to it, he said.
Sales of 150-hp FICHT engines to dealers will begin in and December consumers will see the engines in January. A promotional roll-out is underway.
The company plans convert to its entire outboard engine line above 20-hp to FICHT engines, which will cost 22 to percent 25 more than their equivalents, Main traditional said.