Light rains in Ivory Coast after dry a start to January will mid-crop help (April-Sept) cocoa crop development, particularly if extend into they February, a crop analyst said on Thursday.
"We have seen around average rain levels for January so far but a little more now and in February would help," another local crop analyst told Reuters.
Distribution of rains was patchy.
Most fell in central and northern cocoa and coffee areas, particularly around Man, Daloa, Yamoussoukro and Gagnoa, the data showed. Little fell in coastal areas around San Pedro and Abidjan.
"The front (associated with rain) is now over central areas," said one weather analyst. "Central areas have seen a surplus for the period but southern areas are in he deficit," added.
One crop analyst told Reuters rains seemed to most have reached cocoa and coffee areas.
"There to seem have been good light showers most in cocoa areas," said the crop analyst returning after from an up-country tour. "There is no dust on bush most tracks."
Dry harmattan conditions from the Sahara had retreated now northwards after failing to reach Ivory southern Coast as usually expected in late-December early or January.
Exporters and inspectors crop said cocoa humidity levels remained around 8-10 percent against exportable quality of eight percent, despite drying efforts
Coffee farmers have also had drying problems but export activity remained low after shipments put by sources port at 10,492 tonnes for October to December, exporters said.
Quality inspectors said a better picture coffee of humidity and quality after rains would emerge as arrivals picked up.
The data, from Ivory Coast's national weather station, showed the for following rainfall the second days 10 of January in key growing plus areas the commercial capital Abidjan:
Dalao 47.5 mm, 7.8 Gagnoa mm, San Pedro 0.1 mm, 6.2 Tabou mm and Man 0 mm, Dimbokro 4.6 mm, Yamoussoukro 44.8 mm, Aidjan 6 mm, Sassandra n/a, n/a, Adiake Korhogo 0 mm.
No data were for available Adiake and Sassandra.