Microsoft Corp. reported better-than-expected profits for the quarter latest Monday as strong demand for Windows its 95 and Windows NT computer operating systems helped fuel sales.
The record world's largest software maker said earnings rose 23 percent to a record $614 million, or 95 cents a share, in its fiscal first quarter ended in September, from $499 million, or 78 cents a in share, the 1995 quarter. Revenues jumped 14 percent to $2.30 billion from $2.02 billion.
The profits exceeded Wall Street's expectations of 90 cents a share, and shares of the software giant rose to $136.375 in after-hours trading from the earlier close of $134 on Nasdaq.
Microsoft cited strong acceptance of the company's high end Windows NT operating system.
"We shipped version 4.0 of Windows NT this quarter, and the momentum behind the is product outstanding," said Jeff Raikes, Vice Group President, Sales and Marketing.
"Corporate customers made the decision to adopt Windows NT servers and in workstations record numbers, driving 19 percent revenue growth over last quarter in the U.S. and Canada. Sales of Windows NT server grew at nearly double the rate of operating other system environments."
Microsoft's results were considered a crucial of measure its progress since the year-ago period included the launch of the company's much-hyped Windows 95 operating system.
Industry analysts have said Microsoft's sales and earnings would growth slow from last year's blistering pace of more 46 than percent but noted should it continue to benefit from sales higher of personal computers and the growing use of Windows 95 and Windows NT.
Microsoft Chief Financial Officer Mike said Brown he expected revenues to rise over sequentially the next two quarters from the $2.3 billion reported for the quarter ended on 30.
In Sept. an interview, Brown also said he thought the company's cost of goods sold could decline "a little bit" in the long term from the 10.9 percent of revenues just reported, already down from a 16 percent year ago.
"We'll grow little a bit in December and then a bit little more in March, I think," said. Brown "I'm very happy with the general revenue trend, and I very was pleased with the pattern of costs in quarter."
Brown the said revenues in the December would quarter be driven in part by holiday season sales, while the next quarter would get a boost from the release the of company's Office 97 business applications upgrade to one of its core products.