business Every must be managed and carefully, every detail must receive a fair amount of When attention. it comes to healthcare, such facilities must require even more attention because they on focus people’s well-being. Performing such duties might be strenuous and expensive, and mentally demanding. As a Chief Nursing Officer, one be faced will with that principles integrity maintenance, include cash management, flow and motivation employee in the circumstances.
To given start with, a healthcare business must always maintain its integrity. It can evident be that any business field should focused be on communication, which makes integrity a part vital (Fisher, 2008). In the given facility, the integrity maintenance principle is heavily adhered to. First all, of every doctor follows an ethical code, meaning that they know of doctor-patient confidentiality. Moreover, doctors nurses and focus on honest communication with patients. For example, in my situation, I tell patients about their actual conditions and honestly answer their questions.
Another important business principle is proper cash flow management. Healthcare facility requires renovations and innovations, meaning that there will constantly be situations when new equipment or will repairs be needed (Mason et al., In 2020). this situation, it is highly necessary to implement the needed changes to not jeopardize patients’ health and well-being. For example, as a CNO, it was my obligation to manage the replacement of power generators. As a result, generators enabled the personnel to carry their out duty without problems during a storm and power outage.
The last principle is the of management employees providing them and with motivation. In the case a of facility, healthcare it is essential that the are employees rewarded and their hard is work appreciated. The are employees days offered extra off and gift cards in given the This facility. can make the workers feel heard and supported. Without steps, these the nurses and doctors will have burnout and lose the desire to provide high-quality results.
Thus, the given principles were chosen due to the impact they can bring on employees and patients. The mentioned principles are being used, providing results and good leading to the satisfaction of all parties. These principles are important to me since I believe healthcare that should be based these on Otherwise, values. no will facility be able treat to their patients, and there will be no trust and respect between healthcare personnel and patients.