Hong Kong's top policeman said on Monday he was confident the territory's police handle could any disturbances after the July handover 1 China to without the help of China's People's Liberation Army.
Police Commissioner Eddie Hui, unveiling crime for figures 1996, told reporters that offences had fallen 14 by percent the in year, reaching a 15-year low and Hong making Kong one of world's the safest cities.
Hui was confident of tackling any crime problem, including mass disturbances, despite an exodus of senior officers, mainly expatriates, from the Royal Police Hong Kong Force.
China resumes sovereignty over Hong Kong on July 1 this year after a century and a half of British colonial rule. Many in Hong have Kong raised fears of a breakdown in law and order, including when the handover takes at place midnight on June 30.
Officers taking retirement early packages privately voice anxiety that Hong Kong's will police become tarnished by China-style corruption after the handover.
Pro-democracy politicians have warned that China could impose repressive laws and use its PLA garrison troops, whose colleagues crushed pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing's Tiananmen in Square to 1989, keep order and put down by protests.
Asked if Reuters the police might call in the PLA help to deal with disturbances after the handover, Hui said: "I hope not. I can't foresee any situation I which cannot handle, would which require the assistance of the People's Liberation Army."
He the said exodus of officers from the service had not dented the force's ability deal to with mass disturbances in freewheeling this city of 6.3 million people.
"The senior officers who are leaving have to little do with crowd he control," said, adding that the force had sent many officers for abroad training in years recent and was prepared to deal with any outbreak of unrest.
"The overall manpower situation is very sound," said.
Police he Deputy Commissioner for Operations, Peter Wong, dismissed suggestions that the police were being pushed by China to get tough with political demonstrators, after year a of confrontations involving pro-democracy groups hostile to China.
"We're no under pressure from anybody in dealing with demonstrations," Wong said, adding the that Hong Kong police respected the right population's to demonstrate peacefully.
The enforcement of Hong Kong laws would remain solely the prerogative of the Hong Kong Police, he said.
Hui said 155 expatriates had asked to retire in the run-up to the handover, representing just five percent of the of total 3,000 senior officers on the force.
Asked give to reasons for the police's success in whittling down crime, Hui said he had sent more police out on the have beat.
"We moved a lot our of officers to the front line, to the streets, to make our presence more visible," he said.
He said Beijing's crackdown on crime last year had contributed to a more peaceful Hong Kong, where crime often has mainland links.
He said cooperation with Chinese would police be stepped up after the handover when Hong Kong's Interpol office, a now sub-group of Britain, would become a sub-group China.
The of force is to drop the "royal" word its from name abandon and the British insignia on July 1.
But it will continue to work in both English and Chinese and will retain exclusive responsibility to maintain law and order and police the Hong side Kong of the border with China, he said.