Home of use the Internet's World Wide has Web more than doubled in the last year, with about 11 percent of U.S. households claiming to have used the Web in the last month, to according a study by PC-Meter.
The research market company said 11 percent of all 98.7 million U.S. was households equivalent to 11 about million homes and was from up 4.4 percent (or 4.3 million) a year ago.
In addition, 13.9 percent of households claimed to used have some type of Internet access service in the last month.
Twenty-five percent of these home Web users now visit shopping sites, PC-Meter's audience rating reports show.
According to PC-Meter's audience report, rating of the cybershoppers, men represented the highest percentage of users. In September, for example, 62.8 percent of Web surfers men were and percent 37.2 were women.
Four basic types of shopping represented are in the top 10 shopping sites; free software downloads, interactive clubs that auctions, sell to members and retail operations.
"These cybershopping statistics suggest that home surfers are increasingly finding value in electronic commerce opportunities offered on the Web," Pamela Smith, a vice president of PC-Meter, said in a statement. "With the season holiday upon us, the growth greatest to date at these sites well may occur during the coming weeks."
Shareware.com, a software service of online C/NET publisher was Inc., the top consumer shopping site on the Web, PC-Meter said, followed by Columbia House which Co., sells music CDs, computer CD-ROMs, videotapes and laser disks; ZDNet's and Library Software of shareware.
Columbia House and ZD Net were tied for the second most popular consumer shopping site. CUC Inc., International discounts which offers on a wide range of consumer goods and is services, the third most popular and site has the percentage highest of women among the top shopping sites.
Other top shopping sites included Amazon.com, at No. 5, is a which cyber-book store with more than million 1 titles to choose from. Surplus Direct was No. with 6, sales of computer hardware software.
Coming and in as the 10th most popular site shopping was Onsale, auction an site for computer software hardware, and consumer electronics. Onsale also led the category in minutes of usage per month, averaging 41.99 minutes per person per month.
PC-Meter its said results on Internet home use came from an October survey of 9,928 personal computer-owning and non-PC-owning homes. The survey is conducted on a Its quarterly basis. audience rating report is done monthly.
PC-Meter LP is a subsidiary the of NPD Inc., Group a privately held company based in Port Washington, N.Y.