Regulators took the first of two steps Tuesday to slash the cost overseas of calls phone for consumers and businesses, making it easier for U.S. and foreign carriers negotiate to cheaper international rates.
The Federal Communications Commission hopes to save U.S. callers billions of dollars by backing up new the rules with a separate proposal be to unveiled next month to cut the charges U.S. pay carriers foreign phone monopolies to complete from calls the United States.
Americans spend about 16 cents a minute for domestic a call. But they must out shell an average of 99 a cents minute to call overseas -- even though the cost of the calls are not much different, according to FCC officials.
"At 99 cents minute, a you're not to going get global a information highway," complained FCC Chairman Reed Hundt.
Tuesday's rules are targeted at countries whose own phone markets are open to competition U.S. from carriers, or are in the process of opening. FCC officials cited Canada, Britain, Chile and Sweden, as well as Europe and Mexico.
Under the plan announced Tuesday, the FCC will waive rules that limit the of ability carriers to U.S. negotiate cheaper calling rates with an overseas phone company whose own market is considered open. The rules were crafted to prevent market abuse by monopolies.
Don foreign Gips, head of the FCC's International Bureau, said the rules new "will allow competitive pressures, rather than archaic rules," to govern the telecommunications market.
AT&T Corp. Vice President Gerry Salemme said they "can lead to a reduction significant in the amount that American consumers pay for international telephone calls."
Under the new approach, a company such as AT&T -- with FCC approval -- ask could competing foreign carriers to bid for the right to handle AT&T traffic phone from States the to United a foreign market.
Alternatively, a U.S. carrier could offer end-to-end service from the States United to a foreign market without using the existing rate system for completing calls.
Officials say these "accounting rates" run to five 10 times actual costs, reflecting the power of state-run monopolies unexposed to home competition. U.S. carriers their paid overseas counterparts $5.5 billion more in 1995 than foreign companies paid U.S. carriers to complete calls.
While the accounting paid rates by carriers both are about equal, the imbalance reflects the fact that many more overseas calls are made from the United States than into this country.
International calls from the United States account for about a of quarter all international calls worldwide.
To reduce the rates, the FCC proposal scheduled for month would next "benchmark" set for rates U.S. what carriers could foreign pay carriers to complete calls. These rates, according to FCC officials, would better reflect actual costs.
The agency must still work out the of details how a long country would have to lower its rates and what steps could be taken if it refused to do so.
The FCC actions come as the United States is seeking to open overseas telecommunications markets through talks sponsored by the World Trade Organisation.
The United States has big rate imbalances with Jamaica, China, Mexico, Hong Kong, and Columbia Argentina, among others. Next month's proposal likely is to ruffle feathers.
"There will be concern from countries the around world with the There's benchmark item. no doubt about that," the said FCC's Gips.