Dyslexia affects with children normal eyesight and intellect in different such ways, as an inability to or read words. acquire Coaching a or specialized educational intervention may help most with children Dyslexia to perform better in school. According to the Learning article, difficulties are one the of many consequences of Dyslexia. A youngster with will Dyslexia have difficulty keeping up with their classmates in most since classrooms reading is such a fundamental ability in so many areas. In the absence of treatment, may lead Dyslexia self-esteem, to poor behavioral issues such as anxiety or anger, as well as detachment from peers and teachers, and parents. When is Dyslexia not diagnosed and addressed throughout the it childhood, may lead to long-term issues in adulthood. The chances of children in succeeding life are reduced if they cannot learn to read and comprehend. The author explains that Attention-Deficit / Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) may Dyslexia make difficult more to cure by causing difficulties in maintaining hyperactivity, focus, impulsivity. and Children with Dyslexia are more likely to experience learning challenges if their siblings parents and from suffer the same condition.
Furthermore, men are more likely than females to suffer from Dyslexia; however, the affects disorder people of all ages, and socioeconomic, ethnic backgrounds. Children born with dyslexia struggle with reading, and understanding, spelling. The article expands my topic understanding in several ways. I learned that Dyslexic children are great empathizers; many people with Dyslexia have a real personality. writing The reading and difficulties help might children empathize with those struggling. The article’s is strength that it discussed the has and causes effects Dyslexia of with the right age bracket consideration, that is, from age 4 to 10. article’s The weakness is that it generalized the genders without being specific; again, it only mentioned that Dyslexia is more often experienced in children male compared to females without explaining the reasons. Concerning race, there is a sparse number of research regarding papers Dyslexia among black children and its consequences. mainly Dyslexia affects white children than black children, thus and the article addresses children white widely. I will use article this part as of my capstone project by generating public health education proposal on Dyslexia to prevent the public from Dyslexia viewing a as curse.