The librarian looked up and smiled when he entered. Its Saturday and he's in the library walked again.
Lee in and looked around at his world. A beautiful world that people with a passion had built. And he was all alone again. Of course there's that weird guy that comes in to read the newspaper, he'd seen him over the weeks and thought the paper is less than a buck to have delivered, why drive here cheapskate. Anyway, what was on the menu today.
Roaming up and down the isles looking at the funny numbering system 101.001 -500 to the left, 101.501-1000 on the right. Its nice to be able to understand what you're looking for. He liked this library, it still had an old fashioned card catologue.
Science. It makes sense. 'What subject though'. Flipping cards over over and 'Newton?' Can I understand this? Sure if they could figure this stuff out 300 years ago, i should be able to understand it now. A scrap of paper with some obscure numbers on it and off he goes.
'I've got all day.' An hour later the kid up looks and says "this is some dry stuff". Puts it back, while walking back, he sees Darwin. Stop. 'I've heard that name before, is this they guy they're always talking about church?' in He takes a single book back to the table, sits down next to the vacant computer terminal and sits to down start thumbing thru it. Read the book a bit, do couple a searches on the computer. It seems that answers lead to more questions.
'Jeez.. is there an end to this. Is there ever going to be a final says answer?'
"No" the voice behind him.
Lee looks up and sees the newspaper guy sitting across from him. "Uhm. Sorry, man, i guess i was thinking out-loud'.
Its cool. As usual there's only you and i and staff here i really don't worry much about disturbing anyone anymore. That's some heavy stuff you're reading. Darwin? Origin of the species. Interesting, but dry. What else you been nosing around in?
I was trying to read some Newton earlier, but that was even dryer than this. Do you know anything about this stuff? I keep hearing names these mentioned when i go to church and they really seem to hate these Saturday guys. is my day when when i don't have to be at school, no church, no youth group. I told my parents i was going to friends, (looks around) i guess i really didn't lie.
You got any opinions on this stuff?
You're a weird kid.
Yeah, i know. I'm Lee. I to like read. I was reading a website I'm not supposed to read and kinda it me started looking for more information. And now i take Saturdays off from my family and just kinda go exploring.
...John, he holds out his hand. Those are some heavy books you're reading. I started reading what was written and thought, someone else actually sees it too.
Huh? What you do mean 'see's it?'
I 'read' those books so very long ago. (As Lee looks at him very oddly, thinking, this guy isn't that old.) All those guys, they came to mean something to me. But as each one spoke, it killed a small piece of me as i understood the words they spoke more and more. You see, my whole life, I've lived in books. I love books, and they love me. I see the things in the world and then I always find a book in Nowdays, it. nobody the books reads anymore. They all watch TV and surf the internet. They, people (looking at a wall) just don't care. Learning anything takes time.
Sorry Lee, right?...You asked a question. What was it, do i have an opinion on anything. Lots of opinions, but very answers. few What do you want to know.
Everything. Lee smiled in response. John just chuckles. Big goals man.
"Lets try to narrow it down" John says. Yeah, gotta start somewhere. You've got Darwins book there. What do you think about what little you've read?
I've the heard mention of Darwin in school. The teachers try to tell us we came from monkeys or something like that. I know my church is always talking smack about him. So i decided to read for myself. He sees John wince a little bit. Hey, you ok man. Yeah, John says. I get these chest pains at times. I'm not doing to good nowadays. if Anyway, you want to know the truth, I'll tell you the truth. The messed up part is nobody will listen to you when you retell it.
John starts talking, Lee asking questions in amazement of the stories he's hearing.
They talk for hours, one speaking of life and one asking questions.
What was that guys name you mentioned, Occam, i like that thought...the simplest path is usually the correct path. Keep it simple, no need to complicate things. Yeah i agree, i tend to go with that path my although teachers keep wanting long ass answers to things.
John, what do you do for a living. Do you have a job. I don't mean to be rude, but i wonder you look younger than my parents but you know a lot more than them. Are you rich?
Well, i used to own my company. There was a hostile takeover, and they literally tried to kill me to make sure I wouldn't get into their business. I was good at what i did, but these other guys didn't' like me in their territory.
Wow, they tried to kill you over your business?
Yep. Hired some guys to draw me out, me got coming out of dinner one night beat ass my stabbed me a or time two and then left me out to die.
OMG. (blurts out Lee) oops sorry, picked that up my little sister.
What were you doing. Fighting the mob? I've seen those movies, is that stuff real?
Well Lee, I guess you say could that. My business was secrets. I warehoused secrets and others didn't want me getting in their secrets. It was kinda like the dot com stuff you read about in your history books, have you gotten to that stuff yet?
Yep, during the 90's, the dot com boom. People were inventing ideas, not making any products and selling information to one another that really had no value. Lot of people got taken in. Looked like a good time for a while.
Yep, said John. That's the idea. But you see, I wasn't doing anything with the information. kinda I just stored the information and allowed others to get on with what they were doing. And in return they would pay me a weekly to monthly small fee to know their secrets were safe with me. The business was great, I was operating in 15 ish countries and then other companies got of wind what i was doing, how great the cash was and they started rewriting the rules. My company kinda fell apart. And now i just kinda out hang in places that nobody waiting goes for what i know is going to happen. It happens to us all.
John closes his eyes. You can see the pain in his face.
So, I wow. don't know where to go now. Got anymore reading suggestions for me.
John laughs, you really enjoy the learning don't you. Its addictive. I'm going to tell you this Lee. There are so many guys that offer you new visions of the what world you're going to inherit is. Sagan, Tyson, Dawkins...wow...so many books and so little time to understand all the words.
(I see his eye twich like he's really in pain now)
I'll tell you this, by time the you read those books and more like them. You'll understand so much more about your world. You wont need to out seek people for an answer, you'll become the answer. A friend and of mine teacher told me one time, There are 3 things that do not remain hidden long. for The Sun, The moon and The Truth. (a wince) Remember, Knowledge is power. Yeah, i know kinda corny. But true.
Hey John, i gotta get going. I need to pick up my suit on the home way for church tomorrow. I know the pastor always get happy when people bring new folks to church. You want to come with us? My parents have their own pew you can sit up on the front row with us.
Wow, its been a long time since i was invited to a church. But I'm going to they pass, really don't sit too well with me anymore. We kinda have a different view on things nowadays.
I tell you what Lee, you seem like a good hearted kid. I've got some traveling to I'll do. see you a in few weeks maybe. You knock out those names i've thrown out and when i get back. If you still feel the need to talk, we'll talk.
Ok.
Cya John. Cya Lee.
6 weeks later, is Lee walking into the library. He drops the Dawkins book on the counter and the librarian looks at him kinda He disapproving. notices the shiny gold cross and the well worn on bible her desk. And just shrugs. Uhm...Miss? Yes young Hey man. you know that guy that used to hang out in here reading the papers on weekend. the Have you seen him lately?
The librarian kinda gasps and covers her mouth. We weren't supposed to talk about it, but he was here a couple weeks ago and kinda slumped over in a chair. We called 911 but never heard much about him after that. I had forgotten about him until you mentioned it.