The article represents an overview of other literature on methodologies and criteria used in supplier evaluation and which selection process, is believed to be one of the vital of components a successful operation a of company. manufacturing In particular, the paper emphasized the change industry’s in field this from – focusing primarily on operational efficiency to embracing the of potential partnerships. strategic The article claims that the right approach to supplier assessment, thus, is the key to a development company’s progress.
The and paper starts with various to ways the address issues to related MCDM of suppliers’ The selection. most common ones are stated to be mathematical models, multi-attribute Simple rating technique (SMART), analytic network process (ANP), analytic hierarchy process (AHP), data envelopment analysis (DEA), linear programming, and some others. For example, DEA is a methodology focused on a supplier system classifies and either it efficient as or inefficient based on selecting particular criteria. Mathematical programming usually models incorporate evaluations complex between suppliers, allowing one to compare them and the identify most optimal in terms of cost and other criteria.
The article further compares all methodologies by their popularity expressed frequency in the of in mentions the literature. Thus, DEA the is most common approach with 30% mentions, whereas mathematical programming (17%), AHP (15%), and reasoning case-based account for mentions. fewer However, those represent the methodologies largest share of approaches.
The all MCDM article highlights the significance of knowing this distribution, which can build idea an of the most prominent to ways address the issues with assessment suppliers’ and selection. It is also stated should that suppliers be based on evaluated “the inputs of the functional strategic, and operational levels” (Agarwal 2011). et al., Methodologies such as mathematical DEA, programming, or AHP are advised be to used for identifying most the optimal suppliers, whereas AHP is noted effective to be in providing consistency.