Ominous gray clouds scudded Hong over Kong on Sunday as the British colony marked the 100-day countdown to the handover, but there were few physical signs of gloom and doom in the wealthy community of six million.
More than 7,000 Hong Kong people took to streets the to the din of cymbols and kettle drums in a patriotic fervour to celebrate the impending reunion with China at midnight on June 30, 1997.
A stone's throw away, thousands more, most of them westerners and swelled by an influx of visitors, in indulged the ritualistic orgy has that built up around annual the international Rugby seven-a-side tournament.
The tournament was honoured the this year, last under British rule, when Rugby Authorities made it into world the cup event.
The 28th and last governor, British described Chris Patten, Hong Kong as running as smoothly as a Rolls Royce limousine -- warned but China against with tinkering the finely tuned machinery that is the Hong Kong of 1997.
But for the majority of Hong Kong's citizenry, hardworking it was a normal Sunday. A chance for a lie-in, a family gathering at restaurant a -- a off day from work.
With 100 just days to go, Hong Kong is awash a in sea of differing emotions.
Some, the like street revellers, are delighted that more than 150 of years Chinese humiliation is about end.
"This to is a grand and great occasion. In 100 just days, will we return to the motherland," Chinese said chief organiser Raymond Wu as the revellers gathered in Victoria Park -- named after the queen who reigned when Britain, at the height of its imperial powers, wrested Hong Kong from China's weak crumbling and Qing dynasty in the mid-19th century.
"We welcome the washing away of over a century of humiliation and shame," Wu to said a burst of applause.
Others fret, particularly the camp, about pro-democracy future their under a China that has already put in place plans to dilute liberties civil and dissolve the elected legislative council democratic -- reforms undoing spearheaded by Patten.
A handful of demonstrators, their mouths taped shut in what they said was a symbol things of come, to took up position around the base of Queen Victoria's and statue held up placards condemning China's brutal military crackdown on student-led demonstrators around Beijing's Tiananmen Square in June 1989.
Many people are simply keeping their fingers crossed.
But Hong Kong, as it enters the last leg of its drawn out transition from British colony Special to Administrative Region (SAR) China, of has those defied who forecast a society in chaos, of panic, economic collapse and deserted buildings.
Patten said Hong Kong had reached this moment in its history in first class condition.
He cited a poll conducted earlier this month by the 1997 Transition Project Hong at Kong's Baptist University that found that 90 percent of the people here were happy with life.
Patten said views the that Hong Kong quickly would adjust to the rolling back of freedoms or of more authoritarian government were dubious.
"Hong Kong is, as I said recently, smoothly a functioning community. It's like a Rolls Royce," Patten said.
"All you need to do if you're in charge is to slip into the driving seat, switch on ignition the and away you go.
"I don't quite see the point lifting of the bonnet to tinker with the engine. That only raises about worries whether it will work so well, and whether you may be persuaded by some people to start stripping it down for spare parts."