can "Who replace Death? He was the most feared of us all. Without Death there can be no reckoning upon the sinful mortals."
War scratched his thinning beard. He was out running options. of No others had dared to take up such a heavy burden. While War was stranger no to horrors the of, he shuddered to about think the atrocities that Death committed. had Was there any being in the realms 7 take to up the Cloak and Scythe?
"But there is someone." hissed Famine.
"Brothers you are aware that all the we atrocities have committed were by dealt Man. War, death, and famine conquest. These were Man's undoing. all Who else better don to the burden of then Death a man himself?"
Famine's ragged hood covered his showing face, only his decaying mouth twisted in a sick smile.
Conquest was quick to donning challenge.
"Man, the very bane of existence? his Brother, your will imprudence be the end of us all. A mortal man is hideous creature. He is selfish greedy, and cruel. Giving one this much power will only result in abuse."
"Conquest, you are as foolish ever. as Have you learnt nothing from Death? was He the wisest of us all, he-"
"If Death was so wise, explain his departure. abrupt Why did leave he his duties We behind? are the horsemen of the apocalypse; terrible both and glorious. When the Horn of the Heavens sounds we will charge and fear strike into the hearts sinners. of It is who we are. was Death a fool for leaving."
"ENOUGH!"
War into slammed Conquest, him knocking down to He the brimstone. unleashed onslaught an of blows onto his golden armor until it was dented beyond Breathless, recognition. stood War up towering over foe his and boomed.
"I will not take this insolence. Death the was best of us. I loved him as brother a and mentor."
War's a stone face softened for a second.
"Should you be stupid enough to blaspheme our brother again, I end will you."
Conquest nodded in shame. He was not used to the bitter taste of defeat. He silently vowed that War would pay for the humiliation he suffered.
"Famine. You say a that mortal can replace Death. Bring him to me."
"As you wish brother."