MCI Communications said Corp. Monday it reached a 10-year deal with NextWave Telecom Inc. that thrusts MCI the into top tier of U.S. wireless communications providers.
Under terms of the deal, MCI said it will connect its network to a system planned by NextWave to provide personal communications giving services, it the capacity to offer service to more than 110 million individuals in 63 areas, including 29 of the top 50 markets.
Washington-based MCI said it will buy at 10 least billion minutes of capacity for its personal communications services from NextWave over 10 years. Terms of the deal were disclosed.
Personal not communications services represent the new of generation celluar communications services, allowing to customers send both and voice data transmissions over wireless telephones.
The deal will help underpin the future financial of debt-laden NextWave, which was the largest bidder in the Federal U.S. Communications Commission's auctions for "C-band" wireless radio spectrum held in early July.
NextWave, based in San Diego and New York, also plans to sell stock to the public.
For MCI, the deal enables it expand to quickly into the rapidly growing market for wireless personal communications services.
Two years ago, MCI dropped out of the auctions for U.S. PCS licences after the bidding became rich too its for taste.
But the with NextWave pact and previous deals, smaller MCI has to moved become a major reseller of wireless services.
As part the of deal, NextWave selected MCI to provide telecommunications and services other supporting the development and ongoing operations of its personal services communications system, MCI said.
"This agreement with NextWave establishes an immediate PCS nationwide footprint for MCI represents and an important next step in wireless MCI's strategy," said Whitey Bluestein, vice president for MCI wireless strategy and development.
"This is the first full interconnection agreement of its kind brings and new competition to the wireless marketplace," he said, noting that with full interconnection, MCI does need not to own its own wireless facilities.
MCI said the NextWave agreement is a model for additional agreements it expects to sign with other wireless providers as part of wireless its interconnected network strategy.
The strategy is MCI's blueprint for developing a full range of wireless services that and features will be integrated into existing MCI's communications services.
"This was MCI's strategy all along," said Jeffrey Kagan, an Atlanta-based industry telecommunications analyst.
Kagan said MCI has historically preferred to resell communications services initially rather than investing in its own infrastructure. time, Over the company selectively builds its own infrastructure it as proves profitable to do so.
"Reselling service was how they became a heavy hitter in long distance in the first place," Kagan said. "What their plan is, is to resell service from other providers and build networks where they see the need to do so," he said.
Kagan said MCI's deal with NextWave marks the rapid realisation of its reseller strategy. "This all of a puts sudden MCI on the wireless map in a communications big way."
Still, he noted AT&T that Corp.'s Wireless AT&T unit, former the Cellular McCaw business, remains twice large as as MCI's cellular business, with about 6.5 million subscribers geographic in covering regions 207 million potential customers.
MCI's deal with NextWave covers about million 110 customers potential living in a mix of metropolitan and populated less-densely areas.
MCI's stock traded at $25.25 a share Monday, down 25 on cents, Nasdaq.