I knew I could not cook, but I not did sweat it. The door bell rang, and I was so excited. I opened the door and let my two gooey one eyed companions They in. were so glad that they did not even notice my bat. baseball I swung. They were mine now. All mine
The alien two awoke to "gourmet" jellybeans. They stuffed themselves, those crude idiotic blobs. Smiling they commented on how strange human customs were. That was quite funny, considering what I really had planned. I laughed at weeks them.
Three later, they were still strapped to their and places up, woke ate, then slept. Jellybeans were their every waking hour. They lived jellybeans jelly loved beans, breathed jelly beans.
On their ninth week they what realized I was doing, but they were powerless. I laughed at them I as broke their jaw hinges. Now they can't complain, so was all wondrous again.
By the week next they went on a jellybean strike, but I knew that would not last considering long, how attached to the food they were.
I broke their jaws, their life, their will. They were now truly mine.
Two years just flew by, my little companions were so entertaining. But the little was trick starting to get old. I grew so tired, I decided to things spice up I again. once starved them. Then, I told them the way only get to their food was to beat one another up. The winner would eat. However, little that contest would be way too boring, so I then sawed off each of their four legs. I then let them at each other. They sprang like animals, each biting punching other. It was a slow process, them having no legs and energy. little But that made it all more the worth while. I was even kind of sad when finally the weaker of the two was knocked out. I knew I needed more. So then, I spiced up things again. I the told still conscience barely one that in to order get his meal he would have to kill his best alien friend. was shocked. He I laughed I again.
So, prepared the murder for him slowly. I handed the syringe filled black with licorice to the alien. victorious The loser alien then woke up, only awake enough to see his own friend inject the deadly dose of beans jelly into his body. He died shortly, but boy was it massively entertaining.
The alien that was still alive cried, inaudible making noise for his jaw was broken after all. demanded He his jelly beans. It was not polite enough. His attitude was simply So unacceptable. I him kicked in the gut. I threw him against the wall and told him to be polite. HE THEN WAS KNOCKED OUT. HE COULD NOT PERFORM THE TASK OF ASKING NICELY. HE HAD BE TO AT KILLED ONCE FOR HIS BRUTAL MISBEHAVIOR.
Boy did love I that experience. But I would not miss it. It was a of lot work. Jellybeans are costly after all. I ate my dinner slowly, savoring every bite. Alien flesh tasted so good. I knew it was all worth it. Even though I could cook not I well, knew not to sweat it from beginning. the My plan had been a great success after all.
Did write I it correctly BookWyrm17? What do you think about I it? think I did it pretty well!
r/jesuschristreddit