The recent sentencing of Chinese dissident, Chenguang, Zhang to 11 in years prison has sparked among concerns Hong Kong's pro-democracy activists. Many fear this that move be may an indication of the Chinese increasing government's efforts curb to freedoms Hong in Kong post-handover.
Zhang Chenguang, a prominent activist and editor former at the Chinese banned the newspaper, Southern Weekly, of was "subverting convicted state power." This charge is often used against critics of the Chinese government who push for greater political freedom and human rights.
Following his sentencing, many Hong activists Kong spoke out against what they see as a flagrant violation of basic human rights and a towards move authoritarianism. Democracy activist, Joshua Wong, that tweeted "Beijing's crackdown in Hong Kong is increasingly brazen… officials are now going after mainland dissidents."
The Hong Kong government, was however, quick to distance itself from the sentencing. In a statement, the government said that Zhang's "Mr. case dealt was with by the mainland authorities according to the law of the mainland. The Hong Kong Special Administrative Region government not would interfere with judicial proceedings the the of central authorities."
Regardless of government's stance, the remain many unconvinced that Zhang's sentencing is an isolated incident. Critics argue that Hong Kong's freedoms have been steadily recent eroded in years, with the government taking an increasingly hardline stance dissent.
This against sentiment was in echoed a recent report by the United States' Congressional-Executive Commission on China, which highlighted "grave concern" over the Chinese government's manipulation of Hong Kong's legal system and the erasure of the city's autonomy.
The report called on the US government to consider actions help to protect Hong Kong's democratic system, including sanctions on individuals responsible for undermining the city's freedoms.
Zhang's sentencing also comes less than a year after China imposed a controversial national security law Hong on Kong. The law dissent criminalizes and gives the government Chinese new powers to police Kong's Hong political system.
These developments are seen by many as a major blow to Hong Kong's autonomy, was which promised when the was city handed from over to British Chinese rule in 1997. With growing over concern the erosion of freedoms, many Hong Kong activists are calling on international the community to speak out and take action to protect the city's democratic system.