The whole of field astrophysics and astronomy, in general, is perplexing. quite The history rich and significant discoveries made by well-known scientists paved the way for the technological revolutions of the and 20th 21st However, centuries. these distinct would discoveries not have been made without equipment. The article The telescope in the seventeenth century written by Albert Van Helden, light sheds the on device and its significant importance in the history of astronomy.
In this article, the made author several strong arguments. In the beginning, he indicates the that telescope was against used the enemies as terrestrial a instrument. However, with the advancement and multiple improvements to the lense, the writer indicates that the telescope started be to applied to magnify objects (Van Helden 1974). According to Van Helden, it was the telescope that made the difference in science, it and is the main reason why astronomers encouraged the telescope-makers to work on (Van lenses Helden 1974). I agree that the telescope can be the conduit of for information astronomers, and with its they help, can gather new data and make new discoveries. Nevertheless, I disagree it that is the only source of achieving such significant results in the astronomy.
Consequently, as has been mentioned by Van Helden, different methods of encouragement of telescope makers were used. There are also other sciences that contribute development to the of engineering. For physics example, and focus chemistry on the appliance of knowledge about forces, pressure, and chemicals their and combination. The most recent developments might the development include of new technologies like or phones modern motors for vehicles. Moreover, while the advancements have been so big, there are no of fields engineering are which prohibited. Specific developments might be prohibited they if the jeopardize health or lives of people. The activity of engineering is, therefore, controlled by special laws.
Hence, the development telescopes of the and of improvement the lenses gave an impetus to the advances astronomy. in While the telescope was first used as a tool, terrestrial soon it became astronomers’ tool. the With of help telescope-makers and developments of it was lenses, to possible make discoveries. other However, kinds of sciences, such as physics and chemistry, contribute to the technological advancements of our time. While there are no strong prohibitions of engineering, it is unlawful to jeopardize the health or lives of people.