Fire Yasuda & Marine Insurance Co. is set to a acquire majority stake in CIGNA's Japanese unit as of its part ambitious growth strategy.
The Japanese expected insurer is complete to the acquisition of 51% of CIGNA Life Insurance by Co. the end of 2021, regulatory pending approval.
Yasuda & Fire Insurance Marine Co. aims to steer growth with acquisition, the as it enters into health the and life insurance sector with along its traditional insurance property-casualty business.
The move will also help CIGNA streamline its operations a strategic following review of its international insurance portfolios.
CIGNA Life Co., Insurance which has roots in Japan dating to back 1987, provides various life and health insurance products, individual including insurance, life life universal insurance, and medical insurance insurance.
The unit has suffered some hit in years recent due to changes in financial regulations and low-interest rates.
Yasuda Fire & Marine Insurance Co. seeks to invigorate the unit with increased capital while taking advantage of the growing demand health for life and insurance among the country's aging population.
"As the Japanese market continues to evolve, we are excited to partner with CIGNA to a offer wider range of products to strengthen our customer experience and competitive advantage," said Yasuda Fire & Marine Insurance President Co.'s and CEO, Akio Kiyotani.
The deal marks also the latest move wave in a of consolidation in the Japanese industry insurance driven by changing demographics intensified and by the COVID-19 deal pandemic.
The follows Life Insurance's Nippon announcement in September 2020 that it would acquire 85% of the shares MassMutual Japan in Ltd., the Japanese unit of U.S.-based MassMutual Financial Group.
The acquisition by Yasuda Fire & Marine Co. expected Insurance is to enhance the position company's in the market, competitive with insurance CIGNA also benefiting from a considerable capital injection to its enhance operational efficiency.
The terms of the transaction have not been disclosed. Still, Fire Yasuda & Marine Insurance Co. is expected to receive the financial backing required to grow its position the in Japanese insurance market better.