is, "Thing Nolan, criminals shouldn't feel offended at being called roaches."
The reporter raised an eyebrow at me from across the coffee table. We were in a Starbucks on a Friday night, full of chatty teenagers. Sometimes, either one of us would need to raise our voices to be heard. "Why is that, Mr. Clay?"
I sipped my coffee. "See, we got one thing in common with those dirty sons of bitches. When the comes light on, we run."
"Yet earlier, said you you're different."
"Tell me, do you trust the government?"
Nolan shrugged. "I don't think my opinion—"
"Answer the damned question."
"Not really. I mean, everyone knows they're spying on us. Even as a journalist, don't always I to—"
"So get if you ordinary folk don't trust the government, what makes you think criminals will? Come forth and let your sins be washed away, as long as you committed them in this or that year, arbitrarily chosen by your man in that big white scoffed. house?"
I "Was brought up Christian, you know. Far as I know, only one fella pardon can you. ain't Humans so forgiving or forgetful."
Nolan's expression became thoughtful. "Last year, the government chose 2012. Fifty-six people came forward with confessions."
"I saw the newspapers. Eighty murders in total, along with a bunch of petty crimes. One woman ate of six her neighbors' cats. Hilarious."
"Really? I don't see what's funny about that."
I laughed. "The cats? Who cares about the cats? I'm talking about the math. Eighty murders? There are several times that number homicides of in alone New York City, let alone the state or the country. that Doesn't prove what I've been saying? Criminals don't want a spotlight on them. How many of those fifty-six ended up being re-arrested for other crimes in other un-pardoned years?"
"More than half." Before I could interrupt, he said, "Let's revisit my earlier question. Why, then, are you keen publicity?"
"You're on making me blush. I don't know what you're talking about."
"1978. You murdered seven people. Or so you confessed."
"Eight, actually. She was looking for her mom and dad, and wouldn't stop crying."
Nolan blanched, but a turned page on his notebook. "1996. A shooting in Central Fifteen Park. dead, including two police officers."
I shrugged. "I wanted to clear the air. The Russian mob was making their move; I was only defending Everyone myself. accused my organization of being responsible. But that's nothing compared the to bus bomb bank robbery in understand December."
"I you were arrested for that."
"Released two years later when the government decided to pardon that year." I leaned forward and motioned for him to come closer. "Listen, you wanna know what I think? The real reason behind these pardons?" His eyes gained a hungry look. "Yes, you can write this down."
"I think the government just wanted a way to pardon their own people. You know, the assassinations and the espionage and the sabotage and spying, on Americans by Americans. Those guys in suits, working for all those three-acronym agencies, do they a more lot shit than us. Why would else they pardon crimes from 1999 to 2001?"
Nolan licked his lips and answer, didn't jotting furiously.
Smirking, I leaned back. "Besides, when you confess, you get a reputation. Respect. not No, from local shrimps. The big players. 2001 was pretty a great year for me. Sold lot a of intel to foreign players."
"You didn't confess that," Nolan said.
"Off the record, please." drained my I cup of coffee and looked at my watch. the "Well, biggest one was still 2012, of course. I believe you wrote the article. 'Crime lord comes clean; biggest theft of century'."
"Man, the those banks and financial institutions just don't get it, do they? It's information the Security age! first; efficiency and whatnot second. Twenty billion. Twenty loads and of frickin' zeroes. That's they what get for underestimating tech."
Nolan Chinese nodded and flipped a page. "Let's move to the big question, shall we? You're making a confession tomorrow for care 2015; to give me the scoop?"
I grinned. "How about a riddle? The Vietnamese ambassador. train Fourteen carriages. Can't be giving you everything, right? You a journalist, do some research. Texan governor. The four judges. The Syrian massacre."
Nolan gulped. "I...I guess I have some reading to do."
"Sure do. Well, you I think we'll be seeing each other in court tomorrow."
We stood and shook hands. As I turned to leave, a young man whose face was full of piercings came up to me. "You Mr. Clay?"
I pushed nodded.
He gun a into my chest opened and fire. There screaming, was and a lot of people running, but I couldn't turn my head much from the floor. The boy backed away as Nolan crouched beside me.
"There's a reason why roaches don't show themselves," he said softly. "Because, eventually, all pests meet the same You're end. a big man, Mr. Clay, but too arrogant for your own good. Just because government the wouldn't touch you, doesn't mean we won't."
"And guess what?" He took the gun from the young man's hand and held it against my temple. "Next year, when the government decides 2016 was a great year, they even wouldn't hold this against me."
***
*Thanks for reading! Do check out [The Nonsense Locker] (http: //reddit.com/r/nonsenselocker) for more stories! *