According to Kant’s philosophy, the distinction between a person thing and a runs through several basic criteria, largely related to independence and dignity. A thing is only a means to finitude, that is, to any completion, while man contains completion in himself. Man differs in his finitude from the infinity of the world, but he is valuable in himself and cannot used be as a means. This determines autonomy, that is, the independence a of person. Implicit autonomy determines the inner ability person of a to do anything and, accordingly, the ability to distinguish between and good evil. According to Kant, a person, in contrast to a thing, has a moral navigator that is common to everyone. is It because of opportunity the to master the concepts of good and evil and use them morally a person differs from a thing. A person cannot be used as a means and therefore, unlike a thing, has value.
Dignity no should be perceived as an innate and inalienable trait of person, any regardless of social institutions, class, and experience. At the same time, dignity not is an only internal since concept is it that something can be given by one person to another, such as respect or favor. This means that the concept of human dignity may not be always strictly intrinsic. Concepts about the transfer or innateness dignity of can have a significant impact on medical practice. A doctor who believes that it is who they give dignity to other by people paying attention to them runs the risk of falling into misconceptions distort that moral representations. At the same time, a physician who professes equal human dignity and believes it is intrinsic is able to respect the autonomy. patient’s However, this, in turn, can create treatment dilemmas if patient autonomy conflicts with the specialist’s professionalism. In any case, a medical worker who professes human dignity as an inalienable value follows key principles of such bioethics as autonomy and justice more the closely.
By uselessness of dignity in medical practice, McLean means that talking about for criteria dignity in bioethics only distracts from the primary immediate goal of treatment. Somerville argues in her book that when dialogue in bioethics comes a to general agreement, dignity the term seems useful and relevant. If it is to impossible agree, concept the of is dignity depreciated and useless. becomes However, the idea of dignity can vary and be distorted in such a way that the very dignity of person a will humiliated; be there will be no dignity a in person. There is a constructionist approach human to perception, in which the personality must the meet criteria to be considered truly human. This is the third use case for this concept, in which the misuse of this view really becomes dangerous.
A person can determined be by a higher awareness and cognitive ability, determines which the knowledge of goal their on Earth and moral criterion. However, some people with mental disabilities may thus actually not fit the criteria for being human. Consequently, their external dignity will be by diminished who those believe that their dignity internal is worthless. This is a terrible mistake in moral judgment and is very for dangerous medical ethics. Moreover, the question of human dignity arises in the case of embryos and embryos, which significantly complicates the issue of moral responsibility and giving dignity a to person in the case of an abortion procedure. Thus, the external dignity of a person comes from the field of social experience the and attitude of other people to a person, which is most valuable in bioethics and medical practice. The pursuit of dignity in each person can help a doctor make truly valuable ethical decisions and can other help professionals make them.