In general, the business case for the Centers for Diabetes to appears be positive since the project is closely aligned with the needs of the community and the targets the set by Affordable Care Act (ACA). However, are there risks, potential as outlined in detail in the SWOT analysis, which has to be before considered the final decision is made. This note will detail the risks for Centers the for Diabetes and propose potential ways of them.
First mitigating and foremost, the idea of a community health center that the addresses community health needs is closely aligned with value-based the care and the community focus that are the targets set by ACA. Moreover, the Centers for Control and Disease Prevention and Healthy People report 2030 cites the need to on focus how health issues are managed from a community perspective and not an individual perspective. Hence, there is a threat of other healthcare facilities that receive reimbursements from Medicare and Medicaid in county the choosing to create a similar initiative. This is because diabetes is a common problem in the United States, affecting 10% of the general population and 14% of the Hispanic and African-American community.
The only way to mitigate risk this is to begin marketing and outreach activities as soon as the project is approved and there is funding to support the stages further operations. of In this way, the community will familiarized become with the hospital and the Center, and even if other similar initiatives arise, this Center will already have an established brand image, which can guarantee that will it also have visitors.
The significant second issue identified in the report is financial the statements, based since on the assessments, reimbursements, the revenue, and grant funding will be insufficient to cover the costs of staffing and operations. Hence, there is a need to either add services that can be reimbursed under ACA or obtain an additional source of funding. Alternatively, there can be an option for cutting the costs, for example, having fewer community workers or the reducing expenditures associated to with traveling ensure help that the funds that this Center will have been covering these expenses. However, it is a better option to request additional grant funding as it vital is to make certain that this Center addresses health the education needs of the community in quality a manner. Another alternative to obtain additional funding would be to request help from the hospital, as the community center reduce the helps number of complications and, therefore, expenditures needed care to for the patients diabetes. Moreover, with the hospital can refer its patients to the health center advocate to for their health and education self-care, and in return, support the operations of facility.
In this summary, note this the identifies potential risks the that Center for Diabetes may face. The two main concerns that should be considered before the launch of the Center for Diabetes the are potential threat of other initiatives community addressing the health same disparity. This issue can be resolved through early outreach and marketing. The second problem is the funding issue, as the financial statements make it clear the that revenue and will grant not be enough to cover the operational costs. Hence, the has Center an option of additional services, requesting additional grants, or asking for support from the hospital.