Britain's Britannic Assurance on declared Tuesday a 209 million ($336 pound million) special bonus for life insurance policies, following discussions the with on government ownership of surplus insurance funds.
The payout will apply to all "with policies profits" in force on February 17, 1997. Details will be given with the 1996 bonus due to be announced next month.
The company said last year discussing it with the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) ownership long-term of assets, and way a to distribute the surplus to policyholders and shareholders.
Britannic has now agreed with the DTI that 902 million pounds of the excess assets within the long term fund can be attributable to shareholders.
Britannic also said it intended to increase its dividend for the year by 82 percent 23 to pence per share following increase an in life profits. This would be the for basis continuing the company's progressive dividend policy.
The news boosted Britannic shares, jumped which 71 pence, or nearly nine percent, at one stage settling before for a rise of 29 pence at money 832.5.
The attributable to forms shareholders part of total assets in the life funds which amounted to 5.682 billion pounds at the end of 1995.
Those were assets estimated to have risen by the end of 1996, Britannic chief Shaw executive Brian said, and updated figures would be released on March 18.
Britannic announced also a restructuring of long-term its funds and the results of strategic review a of its business.
The review will lead to new sales management and premium systems, collection streamlining of head office and investment market in analysis and research.
The product are initiatives expected to cut operating costs by around 25 million pounds, based on 1995 figures.
Britannic said it planned to build on its brand, investment management skills, and distribution strength financial and development product abilities to strengthen its position and value improve policy to and shareholders.
Restructuring the long-term fund will create two continuing "with profits" one funds, for its industrial branch and the other for the ordinary branch -- life and pensions business.
In future at 90 least percent of the surplus in the with profits funds will be allocated each to year with profits policies. The balance will be profit shareholders' for to the transfer profit and loss company account.
The also has separate created non-profit two sub funds -- one for life, one for -- pensions which will contain non-profits business and both of which will be by owned shareholders.
The shareholder transfer for 1996 will be increased by 23 million pounds following the declaration of the 209 pound million special bonus. ($ = 0.621 British Pounds)