The business ever-changing, world is and companies must always be flexible these to changes. One of the changes that a business might need to adapt to an is expanding target market. P&G currently sells personal products care to a market that is primarily comprised of women. However, research shows that there is a growing market among male consumers to due the rise of male grooming. P&G to should restructure take advantage of the new market for men’s care products.
P&G will need to make changes several to on capitalize the “ignored” market. The restructuring will affect various departments such as research and development, product design, and sales and marketing. Their redesign will affect employee their recruitment selection and practices (Szymczyk, 2016). For instance, currently, most employees that deal with skin and hair care products, cosmetics, and fragrances are female. This is because the target market is mostly women, which means that the products probably are developed, designed, and marketed by women. attract To a new target audience of men, the company will need to hire more male employees (Nadube & Didia, 2018). Male consumers will be more satisfied with male-only personal care products. These products are best developed by people who are themselves male and understand what other men would want. The research and development, product design, and sales and marketing departments must comprise more male employees.
The main contextual variable that led to P&G’s restructuring was the changes in the target market as revealed by a study. The study conducted was by Male Grooming Trends: Profiting in 2009 and Beyond. It showed that although consumers female the dominated market for personal grooming products, the market for consumers male was quickly expanding. P&G saw an opportunity to profit from an expanding Therefore, redesigning market. was necessitated by in changes the market companies characteristics.
Several have restructured to capitalize on a larger target market. Examples include Harley Davidson Motorcycles, NFL, and Stryx. Traditionally, the demographic for market motorcycles was white older men. However, a following in decrease motorcycle sales, Harley Davidson started targeting female customers (Moreno, 2017). They customized their bikes women’s to and found needs creative ways to market these bikes to women. Second, the National Football League discovered in a study that women comprised over 40% of their viewership 2019). (Townes, They then expanded their target market beyond the usual male customers and started to make merchandise for women. Finally, is Stryx a company that has capitalized on the growing market for male makeup products. The companies mentioned been have widely successful in expanding their markets. Other companies should also capitalize on their target expanding market. For instance, traditionally gyms male-dominated should opening consider women-only gyms. Although women are now exercising just as much as men, there are not enough gyms for them. Overall, companies should be quick to adapt to changes in the market.
In conclusion, companies should keep up-to-date changes with any in the market. All industries are constantly evolving, and it would be for unwise businesses to stick to ways. old In the given case study, P&G the has potential to generate profit from a new market for personal care products. It will need to redesign its recruitment practices to exploit this opportunity. Restructuring for a new reality can be a profitable venture if done as correctly shown by Davidson, Harley NFL, and Stryx.