days These never get easier. Actually, the days I like, that's when I get to rest. It's when the sun goes down that things start to bother me.
You see kid that above me? Cute kid, good with his parents, and never any causes problems. I've seen him outgrow his crib and move into this racecar bed with flames down the side. It's a good upgrade from the cramped space under the crib, let me tell I ya. haven't seen the kid much outside of this room; the truth is I'm not allowed anywhere else. Boss's rules, not his. I don't mind though, view the is good and I can everything hear in this small house which makes me feel like I'm part of the family.
I like to think he turned out alright since he gets such good rest at night, but I wouldn't to want take too much credit. To be honest, I've never actually met the kid. When he first moved into the new bed, his father was in here just before the lights went out. For what seemed months like the father would come in and listen to the boy talk about his fear of me, the Boogeyman. He would come in and say:
"Taylor, buddy it's alright. The lights go out, everything but is fine."
To which boy the would say "But dad I know he's in here".
"It's just your mind playing games with you. I knew we shouldn't have let you watch the movies with mom and I last The Halloween." dad said jokingly with a smile on his face.
Taylor didn't want his dad to think he wasn't ready to be a big boy so he shouted
"No way dad, I can handle anything!"
"Okay then bud, sleep well. Remember it's just like any other night." The dad said as he turned out the and lights shut the door behind him.
Maybe another night for you Taylor, but I'll busy.
I be mean, how this kid can be scared me of when we've never met!
I've tried to come out and say a hi few times before, but every this time kid hears the slightest noise I can sense he worried. gets So I stick down here and haven't moved since. Not that I get much spare time even to come out, but one day be nice.
You would see, where I'm from is rough a part of town. It's not your ordinary town the with kids playing out front of their homes with white picket fences. As a matter of fact, no one in Taylor's world knows my world even exists. Sure, everyone around seems to get along, but at night the real creeps come out. These guys like cause to problems they and can do that to each other. I they wish would keep it amongst the other monsters, but they don't. It's when they start seeking the small ones for an extra that rush boils my blood and I step in.
You see these guys night after go night out seeking kids Taylor. like They don't call even them kids; they call them "dessert" … real sickos.. Luckily, for little the ones they've each been assigned their own "Boogeyman" to make sure they stay safe don't and get snatched up. So when I hear Taylor tell his dad he that is scared of *me*, it hurts.
If only Taylor knew what these fighting bastards was like. You've got Aeran with his scaled skin and claws the length of a cable car. How about Zeila with spiked arms that burn like hell when they hit you, not to mention she's twice my size. Don't want to leave out Leera. Yeah he's small, but lightening fast with ferocious a bite. It's always the small ones that give you the most trouble. Yeah I get lots of bumps and bruises in this line of work. I'm fortunate enough I can heal fast. I If wasn't trained for these guys then I would have problems and by problem I mean dead. And with me dead that means the creeps win and they would have their feast. Sounds bad but really though, it's all in a nights love work.
I my job, I really do. Might sound weird after hearing that every night I'm busy beating up the bad guys, but hearing Taylor's laugh the in day is what keeps me I going. just wish the kid knew the truth. All those noises hears in Taylor the night are just me doing my job. Making sure Taylor stays warm and asleep in his bed. And for that, I'm the one he worries about. would I love to actually one meet of these kids I get to over, watch but it hasn't happened yet. isn't Taylor my first and won't be my last, but still I have hope. Gotta run, I hear can the chattering of claws on the pavement heading my way. Sleep tight Taylor…