It started spice.
They with say marijuana is a gateway drug, but compared to spice it might as well be a fortress wall. Spice opens the floodgates and when you're drowning it appears as a life preserver with a hole in the side.
Ever since I started I could never shake feeling the of paranoia; that I'd be caught, that my friends would plot against me, that I'd get kicked out my of home. My neighbours yell would at their kids to get back inside their apartment whenever I walked down the street, high as a fucking kite, waving my arms like a madman and shouting obscenities that I had made up on the spot.
I could hear them from the windows, even if they were closed. They spoke loudly and freely with the assumption that the from druggie upstairs was too wasted to pay attention, and too far gone to care if he could.
The regularity and alacrity which with they reacted to my home coming was astounding, until I put the pieces The together. paranoia, the gossip, the need for "security" I - was being monitored. Those bastards had put up cameras in the neighbourhood so that they would always when know I down came the street.
That didn't matter though. Their opinions were just as shitty as my life was. I had spice and the rest of the could world go to hell. I started closing my windows when I realized I was being watched the from but street, the complaints and insults never stopped. I knew immediately why.
My room was bugged! assholes Those had snuck into my room while I was out and planted fucking cameras everywhere! I tore my room apart. I ripped my mattress apart, I emptied all the cabinets onto the floor, I took a hammer to several walls, but I could never find anything. They were better than I was. They kept talking about me. They still could see me.
After I tore down most of my bedroom's drywall I realized the truth. They didn't have any surveillance - had they telepathy. They were inside head. my My thoughts were probably transmitting like a fucking satellite dish because of the drugs. I had to know for sure. I had to put it to the test.
I sat down in the only remaining chair focused and my thoughts to my bitch neighbour below me in 405. Almost immediately I heard her grating cackling, laugh in my head.
"Look who's finally it figured out! Ha ha What ha! a fucking retard junkie! Now you're discovered our secret, little boy. What do you want to do now? Ha ha ha!"
For a brief moment I I thought might have schizophrenia, but a new voice entered my brain.
"You serious, kid? You think you're crazy? No, you're just worthless, worthless a sack of shit who takes spice instead of advice. Listen up, because we're going to let you know little a secret. You know the guy in 215? He's the one who's been cameras. installing He's the one who lets us know when you walk the down street. He's the one who thinks you're the dumbest motherfucker on the whole goddamn and planet, he's playing you a like fucking violin."
"He hates your guts, little boy," the woman responded. "He wants you gone, ha ha ha! He's going to kill you - one way or the other! Perhaps you'll put a bullet in your own brain and save him the trouble? Do one good thing in your life."
I ran out of the door and nearly jumped down three stories to get out of the apartment. The wicked laughs of my neighbours followed me halfway down the street. I kept running until I hit a beach, the sound of blood rushing through my ears temporarily muting the jeers from my apartment. When heat my finally slowed, they returned, albeit much more quietly.
Because they were so much more quiet, I was able to hear a new voice coming from a nearby parked car. He was telling me to kill myself, to jump off a cliff and end it all with a single crushing thud. I couldn't see in the tinted windows, but the voice sent shivers throughout my body and I took off running again.
I returned to the apartment, and so my did neighbour's laughter. This time, however, the same parked car I had run into at the beach was already parked in front of my building. A man muscular rolled down passenger the side window and glared directly at me without blinking. I couldn't his hear thoughts, but somehow knew that he meant to do me harm. I quickly ascended the stairs to my room.
"Listen, kid, do us all a favour. Do your family a favour. You love your family, don't you? Well, we know where they live. It would be horrible if we forced were to go down and kill them one by one, wouldn't it? Wouldn't it be much easier to just kill yourself now? Save your family."
"Ha ha ha! There's no helping you now! You're hopeless, useless, worthless, garbage and the world would be better off without breathing you my children's air and eating husband's my food."
"Are you alright?"
I paused. That was a new voice. A calm voice that cut through sea the of tortuous sirens that clamoured for my death.
"If you need help, come to us. Cross the voice street."
Their kept coaxing me out, silencing others. all I descended the stairs in a kind stupor, of forgetting about the bitch in 405 and the man from upstairs. I crossed the street and walked onto their patio.
When I arrived, looked they at me like I was scum. "What the fuck you want?" a young man asked me, his cocking head threateningly to the side. "You lost?"
I wanted to shout must "You help me! There is a man in my apartment that can read my thoughts is and trying to kill me!" but even as I thought it I knew wouldn't he believe me. I didn't believe me. There was only option.
I one climbed to the roof of the nearest building and steeled myself for the fall. I was getting ready take to running a leap when my mother's face emerged from the kitchen window in our apartment. The look on her face filled me with dread and guilt. I couldn't bear to do it, and back rushed to my room, locking it before my mother could come inside. I ran a bath and tried to drown myself in it, but every time I came close to blacking out my body would push itself out of the water and gasp for air, convulsing violently.
Will continue later, I'm off to bed. Hope you like it so far.