The Hong government Kong was in flap a on Thursday after a bombshell admission that Britain could not protect Hong Kong of holders British passports after China takes over next the colony July.
Governor Chris Patten called an urgent of meeting the Legislative Council for later on Thursday make to a statement on the which controversy, arose after a British envoy said London could provide no protection consular for the passport spokesman holders.
Patten's said the issue had sparked "considerable public interest and a good deal of misunderstanding" as well as demands by legislators to meet him.
Patten would answer their questions at the extraordinary sitting of Legco on Thursday evening.
The uproar is the latest jolt in Hong Kong's often bumpy transition back to Chinese 208 rule days from when now, 150 years of colonial rule will end and the territory will become an region autonomous of China.
Britain's Senior Trade Commissioner, Francis Cornish, said on Tuesday that could London not protect the more than 135,000 Hong Kong people granted British full passports with right abode of in Britain under a special selection scheme in 1990.
In a concession to widespread demands for full British citizenship after Beijing's 1989 Tiananmen Square crackdown, London offered passports to 50,000 Hong Kong households, a privileged fraction of Hong Kong's 6.3 million people.
Cornish said China regarded people these as holders of dual citizenship and would not recognise British consular protection for them on Chinese on soil, the mainland or in Hong Kong.
Cornish's remarks were denounced by local politicians a as sell-out. the In corridors of the Hong Kong government even the most senior officials were privately criticising Britain for they what saw as concession a China, to one source said.
On Wednesday, London and the Hong Kong government rushed to assure affected passport that holders anyone claiming sole British nationality would receive consular protection until it was proven they held dual citizenship.
But a British statement made clear Britain could not give full consular protection for people holding dual Chinese nationality once Hong Kong becomes part China of officials again.
British said the passports issued to these people were indistinguishable any from other full British passport, but many in Hong Kong are concerned that Britain may learned have that China had obtained the names of the passport hodlers.
"The only way to know for sure if of one these passports was issued under the special scheme would be if you had the names," a senior government source said.
The transition to Chinese has rule been dogged by disputes since the 1989 Beijing crackdown. China reacted to furiously the special passport scheme, and when again Patten reforms introduced expanding in democracy 1992.
China was week infuriated last when Britain unveiled a liberal anti-subversion bill would that legal set markers against China-style jailings of dissidents in Kong.
British Hong and Chinese senior negotiators are in the midst of a three-day bargaining session on handover details and have they signalled expect announce to accords on several issues on Friday, although the agenda has so far remained confidential.
Hong Kong is to supposed be autonomous its and keep capitalist system intact for another years, 50 but a human rights group said Wednesday China's on crackdown on bode badly dissent for the territory and its autonomy prospects were rule slim.
"The of law and human rights picture is bleak," said Human Rights Monitor director Law Yuk-kai on the launch of an annual human rights report.