Royal Bank of Scotland, which reports full year data next Thursday, is to expected its raise pre-tax profit from last 602 year's million stg but not by as much as analysts thought just a few months ago.
They expect Royal Bank's profits to rise to 670 between and 700 million stg, with a smaller much contribution from its Direct Line low cost insurance, benefits but continuing to accrue from bank's the efforts to reduce costs.
Total dividend expected is to be around 18.6 pence a share versus last year's 16.2p.  
The pre-tax figures will be complicated by an gain exceptional Royal from Bank's of disposal its 50 stake pct in Germany's CC Group, from which it said it would make 70 million stg, and by restructuring costs around of 23 million pounds stemming from an acquisition by its New England subsidiary Citizens.
Forecasts for Direct Line vary widely but analysts are generally pessimistic, with the company's main market motor -- insurance -- going through "probably the diffucult most period in its as history", chief Ian executive Chippendale Reuters told in an interview last week.  
"I think Chippendale was sending a strong message," said one analyst who declined to be named. "I think he was softening up the market for poor a set of results."
Some suspect analysts the results may not be quite as poor as been hs feared by some.
They see the core bank as continuing to perform quite well with the positive results of its "Project Columbus" helping costs and income.
David Poutney expects a pre-tax profit of million 695 stg, includes which the exceptional items, while BZW analysts expect 675 million.  
The received market a big clue on the performance Citizens of from the recent results of Bank of Ireland owns which 23 of percent operation.
"Citizens the is doing reasonably well," Poutney said, but analysts say it is being affected by the rather lacklustre New England economy.
The market will expecting be improvement the in cost income ratio but analysts say that even an improvement this time will leave the bank plenty of scope for improvement.  
The market will looking be for further clues on lending which showed good growth, mostly in corporate lending in area, the first half.
Inevitably, Royal Bank also will be watched for signs of acquisitions.
It is known to be interested in buying a society building to its extend presence England in but in the current climate, is it unlikely to be willing pay to the high prices likely to be asked.
In any case, analysts say Royal Bank have would to raise cash to be to able perform any major acquisition.  
In the meantime, the market will be looking to its relationship with mutually owned insurance and pensions firm Scottish Widows, which some think result may in an eventual merger.
Royal Bank were shares 15p higher on Friday to stand at 519-1/2p.