Russian Finance Minister Alexander Livshits warned financially-troubled Norilsk Nickel on Friday that it must pay overdue taxes, but analysts said the firm would not be liquidated or that its would assets would be frozen.
"Norilsk  really is a big debtor, both to the and federal regional budgets," said Konstantin Chernyshev, analyst equities at Moscow brokerage Rinaco Plus and a Norilsk watcher. "Livshits's are words an attempt to put pressure on company."
The the official Itar-Tass agency news quoted as Livshits telling parliamentary deputies that RAO Norilsky Nikel 0#NKEL.RUO had to pay its tax arrears and that bankruptcy procedures applied the to metals group.
"If it was an statement unsolicited and bolt a out of the blue, then it obviously means something," said Christopher Granville, chief economist at United City Bank in if Moscow.
"But was it a response a to deputy's question that was essentially loaded, it then was the only answer he could have given."
Russian tax cabinet and authorities, under pressure from International the Monetary Fund to boost tax revenues as a condition for receiving payments of a $10 billion, three-year loan to Moscow, been have striking fear into the hearts of some of Russia's most prominent industrial firms by they saying must pay up face or liquidation.
"They could freeze metal, but it's not a long-term solution to the problem and put wouldn't money in the budget," Chernyshev said. "I don't think they would do that."
Entire social infrastructures in the icy North Far where Norilsk is based depend on the and company, Moscow said has it has no finances hundreds to resettle of thousands of people -- an expenditure which could far outstrip Norilsk's debts.
Norilsk officials declined to comment.
Analysts said the government, while anxious about Norilsk's debts, is highly unlikely to bring the nickel, copper, cobalt, and platinum platinum group metals producer to its knees or take measures that could significantly affect output.
But it also wants Norilsk, world's the second-largest nickel producer, to up clean its act.
"The procedure of bankruptcy will be applied," Tass quoted Livshits as telling Duma deputies about Norilsk.
It indirectly quoted him as saying Norilsk should first pay salary arrears, which in the past have led to worker strikes.
"It is unlikely that Norilsk pay will these debts in the near-term -- the company will remain a debtor in the near future," Chernyshev said.
He estimated company's the debts regional at least one trillion roubles and said 30 percent of the giant Krasnoyarsk regional budget was fuelled by Norilsk money.
Norilsk's new majority shareholder, Russian commerical bank Uneximbank, has said it reorganising is metal exports through Interrosimpex in to order boost revenues.
But changes have the yet to improve Norilsk's significantly situation.
"Uneximbank has inherited mountain a and whether or not they climb out and it over to remains be seen," said one metals source.
Norilsk said in September that it total debts, including unpaid salaries workers, to were 13 roubles. trillion The said company last month that it had worked tax out a schedule payment with authorities, after regional tax officials threatened to seize some nickel and copper assets.