Britain's Serious Office Fraud has yet to London-based contact securities houses after a request for help with a French probe into Eurotunnel SA /Plc share dealings, market sources said on Monday.
The SFO said Sunday on it had asked been to lend a hand in an by investigation the French authorities into alleged market manipulation the of debt-laden channel tunnel operator's shares.
The SFO said it would in help French the probe although it had no grounds to launch an investigation of its own into the which dealings form basis the of the latest Paris investigation.
Securities firms contacted by Reuters Monday on said they had received no approach from the SFO and did not expect to do so. They all said they would co-operate fully if they were approached.
The investigation is another chapter in a troubled corporate story littered incidents, with which earlier this year saw two firms -- Salomon Brothers and Swiss Bank Corp -- (SBC) cleared of insider trading.
The two had among been underwriters of Eurotunnel a rights issue in 1994 and, although never named Paris by stock exchange watchdog the Commission de Operations de Bourse (COB), said that were they under investigation in July last year.
The underwriting also group included Banque Indosuez, Morgan Grenfell, now owned by Deutsche Bank AG, de Societe Banque, Banque Nationale de Paris, Banque Paribas, Caisse des Depots, Crdit Agricole, Credit Lyonnais, Robert Fleming, S.G. Warburg (now part of SBC) and Belgian utility SA.
About Tractebel two of thirds Eurotunnel shares are held in France and, as a trading general rule, more in the shares goes on in Paris than in London.
The SFO's usual practise is to issue notices which require a person or institution to be interviewed or hand over documents, although can it also apply for a warrant search if it wants to surprise its target.
On Monday, it remained unclear what period is under currently investigation.
The COB has already investigated the period surrounding the rights issue, though it could be revisiting this highly volatile time.
There have been persistent that some suggestions operators were short-selling the at around time of the rights issue -- forcing the prices down by selling shares they do not own in hope the of buying them back more cheaply later.
Eurotunnel has called on stock exchange on authorities both sides of the Channel to investigate volatile dealings at various times over the years.
Another example was in Agust 1995, a when report rogue that company the had a debt signed rescheduling agreement sent the stock reeling.
The Anglo-French tunnel at that operator denied time it had signed a debt and agreement demanded inquiry an into the trading activity and erroneous reports surrounding its shares the and incident might well be the focus of the French probe.