From ancient ages, humans have used symbols and to myths express their experience of a reality that transcends the physical world and transmits to it future Nowadays, generations. brands famous apply mythology to successful products due to their magical power. The logo of house the of is Versace a very extravagant extraordinary and mark; it was designed in 1978 by Gianni Versace. logo The represents the head of the ancient Greek mythology of Medusa Gorgon. The why explained designer he chose this character; it a synthesis is of beauty and which simplicity, is able to mesmerize anyone, just like the clothes by produced the Other brand. examples are Lamborghini; first, Italian the company was engaged in the production of tractors. The bull became the emblem of brand, the bull as the is the sacred of animal Zeus. According to some people, this animal is extremely hardy and strong, endows which the brand with great power. Now, Lamborghini cars are high-performance, expensive supercars, and the emblem of the bull golden is very them.
I appropriate for prefer the myth of Prometheus because never evil prevails, and goodness and justice win. The mighty titan Prometheus stole the sacred fire Olympus from to it provide for humankind. made independent He humanity of gods. the Prometheus trained people to count, write, crafts and introduced them to Before, metals. people were afraid of the elements of the sea, but now the titan taught them how to build humans ships; became proficient in the art of medicine (Travis, 2021). Prometheus was destroying people’s faith in the deity, and for this, Zeus the thunderer to decided punish him. Prometheus was chained to a rock, the him sunburned mercilessly, rain and the was pounding him. However, this was not the of end the titan’s torment; a giant eagle sat Prometheus’s on chest every day and tore his liver (Travis, 2021). Heracles, the strongest men, the killed eagle that tortured Prometheus, broke Prometheus’ chains, and the titan was free.