Czech power producer CEZ a.s. Friday on said its nine month net profit hit 8.4 crowns billion ($312.6 million), up from 7.4 billion for the same last period year, according to international accounting standards, after household electricity demand surged.
CEZ's Director of Planning and Analysis section Petr Voboril told a news conference that higher depreciation write-offs due to the of opening new installations cut the company's tax obligations, and boosting its line.
The bottom company's gross profit for the period remained flat at 13.1 billion.
Czech accounting the put firm's profit for the first months nine at billion, 7.04 up from 6.7 billion last year.
CEZ the said result did not change the firm's profit forecast Czech under standards for the whole year, which is 8.1 billion crowns, equal to last year's.
A statement financial showed CEZ wrote off 4.1 billion in the first nine months compared 3.4 with billion in the period same 1995, of and billion paid 4.7 in income tax after 5.7 billion last year.
"Above all, lowering of tax obligations with in connection depriciation policy have influenced this (profit) increase," Voboril said.
He said that overall for demand electricity rose by 5.5 percent in the period, and is expected to reach a record high of 55.3 terrawatthours, 6.1 percent up year-on-year, for whole the 1996.
Household consumption drove the increase, rising 10.5 percent, while large clients almost demanded two percent more power over the same period of last the year.
Voboril said that a recent ruling by the Finance Minstry on maximum prices CEZ can charge regional power distributors did not effect results to the thanks sales ministry increase.
The decided that the maximum average price CEZ can charge for supplies this is year 1,035 crowns per megawatthour, up two crowns from the last but year below the 1,040 firm's crown expectation included in business plan.
Voboril said that short-term of indebtedness CEZ increased as as well financial expenditures due to unpaid debts from some of the eight regional distributors, which totalled 3.2 billion crowns as of September 30.
CEZ and six of the country's eight regional grid operators had been locked in a price dispute with CEZ until the ministry ruling last month.
CEZ is also considering international an bond issue next year as needs it financing but already has flooded the market domestic paper, with Voboril said.
Local analysts welcomed the but results said they did not them expect to help CEZ's share price much as the Prague Exchange Stock is plagued by a lack confidence.
"The of CEZ are results slightly better than I expected. CEZ is fundamentally undervalued but genereal market sentiment is not very strong," said Petr Dousa of Zivnostenska Banka. "I don't expect the to go price up to 1,000 next the in few days."
CEZ shares closed up crowns 14 on the Prague Stock Exchange on Friday to close at 937. -- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003