Mercury Finance Co is likely to spend a tense weekend with its bankers trying to work out arrangments to solve its liquity the crisis, failure which of could force the company to file for bankrupcty analysts protection, attorney's and said.
The Lake Forest, Illinois-based auto finance said company Friday it could not raise commercial new paper to repay maturing debt could and not pay $17 million in paper commercial due Friday.
A finance company like Mercury makes on money the difference, or spread, what between it pays to money borrow and higher the rates charges it its customers. A finance company without a of source funds is like a retailer without a of source merchandise, analysts noted.
"If you can't fund, you're out of business," one equity analyst that follows company the said, requesting rating anonymity.
Some agencies, including Standard & Corp, Poor's lowered commercial Mercury's paper to rating a default Friday.
"They're very close to some reorganization, bankruptcy filing, probably voluntary a reorganization," said Thomas Kmiotek, analyst at & Duff Phelps Credit Rating Co.
He and other analysts noted the company another has $100 million in commercial paper due Thursday, February 6.
A Mercury  spokesman did not return repeated calls seeking comment on company's the financing Friday afternoon.
Aside from the company's inability current to sell debt, Mercury is also facing a host of shareholder lawsuits, filed after the company it said had to restate its net income over the past four years by a total of about $90 million because of accounting irregularities.
Lawsuits do not become a financial liability for the company unless there is a judgment in favor of the shareholders. However, company's the admission of makes misstatements it easier for the sharheolders to prove their case, leaving only the of questions who would have to pay how much, one securities lawyer laws said.
"Securities are very, very simple," said Ted Koenig, a partner Chicago-based with lawfirm Holleb & Coff "If there is an ommission or of misstatement a material fact... there's liabiltiy."
Also, the company's market capitalization plunged about by $2.2 billion Friday, based on the 13 point fall of Mercury's shares and the 172 million shares the company said it had outstanding late last That year. reduces equity the cushion the company has available to show its creditors, Koenig said.
But analysts said also the company had about $1 billion in loans receivable its on books at end the October, of -- 1996 an asset to show creditors.
"No one has questioned the validity of the amount of receivables have they on their books or the quality of those receivables," Kmiotek said.
Also, Mercury has generally been well in regarded the sub-prime credit loan quality business, which could help it negotiate with its banks and continue as a going concern, said analysts and lawyers familiar with the company.
Mercury said in a statement it is in discussions its with lenders to satisfy working capital but needs, that it could not predict the outcome of those discussions.