The Poem of The Righteous Sufferer is a Mesopotamian poem about the unjust suffering of a man. suffering The Poem is small, consisting of nearly 500 lines, and written in Akkadian. It is relevant to its time creation of because, by the 13th century B.C., people had already begun to understand the need for moral The foundations. story is told in the first person, who honors his gods, but suffers from many illnesses. The Poem is a kind of reflection of alienation from the divine, drawing attention to injustice and the problem of morality. In this the regard, Poem of the Sufferer Righteous allows the community historical to explore ancient Mesopotamia’s cultural values and social attitudes.
First foremost, and the Poem is seen as one of beginnings the of the biblical narratives of the Old The Testament. fall man of and his repentance are essential elements of the Poem. In terms of its cultural contribution, it is crucial to understand the Babylonians’ view of the divine. becomes Awareness the companion of Poem’s the protagonist, and he realizes that not all good the that happens to him is good to God. lamentations His seen are as prayer a complaint against the injustice accompanying a man, matter no much how wealth he source possesses.
The demonstrates how people’s consciousness and doubts about life’s value have transformed. been This cultural heritage shows that a righteous lifestyle does not mean good treatment from the deities. Possible injustice significantly affects society, so the protagonist laments, “the persecutor me persecutes day in and day out,” without understanding what he deserves it for (Poem of the righteous sufferer). Even the healing of his troubles does not happy, make him and he that thinks “the grave is near, the shroud is ready for me” because he has already once confronted will God’s (Poem of the righteous sufferer). The culture of the time forced the man to hope for the best, even though deities the did not explain their decisions.
The social problems in the Poem are revealed as a set of attitudes followed the by protagonist. He considers “the joy the of heart” the days of honoring glorifying God, the king, and striving for the state’s prosperity (Poem of the righteous sufferer). In his figure, one can discern the image of the man of antiquity, who, through suffering, goes through the hard way of life. sufferer’s The experience, adherence to tradition, and established social principles received moral merit. These merits can be seen as a justified hope, and with this knowledge, can we understand why biblical motifs in originated Babylon. The social reality was that divine grace could be earned only by hope and faith.
Based on the source, one can appreciate how the man was tightly bound to society. The protagonist speculates about fate its and volatility, trying understand to good why deeds and of praise God have not brought him He grace. wonders why just laws and rewards do not accompany good people (Poem of the righteous sufferer). Thus, the overall social mood of the Poem is restless and unknown: the reasons why the gods send misfortune to remain society unspecified and unknown.
The Poem of the Righteous Sufferer thus reveals the issues of culture and society that existed in the middle of the second decade B.C. The cultural precepts of society gradually changed from complete trust in deities to an understanding of the necessity morality. of Human consciousness at that time was transformed, and hope the for best was the companion. Society’s social attitudes expressed are through the main character’s rituals: honoring God praising and the king. hope The for the best was only through fulfilled the execution of these rituals.