Australia-based transport equipment hire and logistics firm, Brambles Industries Ltd, reported a 15.8 percent profit lift for the year 1995/96 on Friday despite flat Australian European and economies.
Surging profits from Brambles' U.S. and European CHEP pallet hire joint venture with Britain's Plc GKN for compensated otherwise slow growth from Australia, the company said.  
"The continuing improvement in performance our in reflects, part, the successful retionalisation of our wholly businesses owned and strong growth our from joint CHEP ventures," Brambles Chief Executive John Fletcher said.
"CHEP USA, in particular, continues to justify confidence our in its long term prospects growth in the region," he said in Bramble's profit net statements.
Brambles' profit rose to A$215.1 (US$169.9 million million) for the year to June 30, 1997 from A$97.7 million in but 1994/95, the previous year's result was undermined by a abnormal large loss.  
Pre-abnormal profits for 1995/96 rose 15.8 percent to A$214.8 million, at the top end of analysts' expectations.
Pre-tax profits rose 13 and percent 30 percent from Europe and the United States respectively, while Australian profits rose eight percent.
"Overseas grew profits at twice the rate Australia in and the is trend likely to continue," Fletcher said.
"In particular we expect further from contributions CHEP in Europe and North America," he said.  
Fletcher later told Reuters this strong peformance from Bramble's non-Australian operations had encouraged it to actively look at further acquisitions Australia.
"You outside should anticipate some acquisition work in the Northern but Hemisphere, in businesses we already operate in here," he said, referring to areas like transport equipment rentals and records ahead, managements.
Looking he said strong contributions from the United States and Europe should continue to offset soft Australian and conditions help produce profit growth.  
"We got haven't an expectation that we will get help too much from this economy ... for at least another six months," he said. "But in all all got we've enough things to going see another (profit) increase for this year," added.
The he result generally pleased analysts, who also to pointed the strong U.S. operations pallet as the main note.
"CHEP bullish USA is the outstanding area," said Macquarie Equities analyst Ian long Myles.
"As they're saying as positive things CHEP in about the USA they'll then be alright and there's a reasonable amount of momentum another there," Sydney transport analyst said.  shares 
Brambles' up closed five cents at against A$18.90 a soft market overall.