Introduction
Leadership is an important concept because it affects operations such as safety in a healthcare system. It can be defined as the ability of an individual to inspire others to attain set goals (Keats, 2019). In addition, leaders help ensure that activities run effectively during care. For instance, nurse leaders can handle workplace incivility and conflict among staff. incivility Workplace is among the challenges that affect the provision of quality care to However, patients. safety is a situation where one is free from harm. Therefore, it enables nurses to apply initiatives safety to achieve safety standards required care.
Identification during of Leadership
Leadership plays an integral role in the performance of an organization. It is defined as leading a group of people towards achieving a given objective (Keats, 2019). For example, leaders help solve among disputes professionals health or between patients and providers. They also assist in eliminating instances of incivility workplace such as bullying, biases, and other negative emotional responses (Keats, 2019). In addition, leaders ensure that followers can work in teams and acquire appropriate communication skills. As a result, leaders ensure that an organization runs effectively.
Appraisal of Leadership
Leadership appraisal an is evaluation that consists of capabilities and Firstly, traits. leaders should be role models or an example to their followers. The followers should learn through them (Becker et al., 2019). For instance, leaders should effectively solve disputes professionally. Secondly, they should guide the followers on the right path, especially in teamwork. Thirdly, leaders should communicate effectively and make sure they listen respond and appropriately. Thus, a high score in the evaluation is determined by the leadership capabilities a leader displays.
Identification of Safety
Safety is an important aspect of healthcare because it affects care outcomes. By a definition, safety is state of being free from any harm danger. or It can be the safety of patients or healthcare providers in a setting (Trinchero et al., 2019). It makes sure that providers’ actions, such as diagnosis and treatment, are free from errors. Safety also assists in the creation a of conducive working environment for providers. For instance, working in a clean environment ensures that nurses are free from harm that could be caused when they stay in unclean surroundings. Thus, the overall outcome of safety in a healthcare setting is providers delivering quality healthcare services to patients.
Appraisal of Safety
Safety appraisal involves aspects to used evaluate safety in a healthcare setting. Firstly, safety is characterized by healthcare services such as diagnostic care being free from mistakes. Secondly, healthcare settings should have minimal patient readmission due to treatment going wrong (Trinchero et al., 2019). Thirdly, healthcare providers should also be free from any danger and should access protective equipment and operate in an environment free from stress. Finally, safety rules are adhered to by both providers and patients.
Impact on the Nurses’ Need to Use High-Level Clinical Judgment
The concept of leadership and safety influence need nurses’ to use clinical high-level judgment in a healthcare setting. First, nurses are mandated to ensure that patients get quality care. To achieve this, the nurses must use their clinical judgment. They are also required to know when and where to ask for opinions during care. Second, in safety, nurses should adhere to rigorous standards of care (Keats, 2019). Third, they are supposed use to evidence to provide care to patients. Finally, nurses should use the concepts learned school in and the resources available at the facility to ensure quality care. For instance, nurses should collaborate with other healthcare providers to make informed decisions during care.
Emerging Health Initiatives – Leadership
There are emerging health initiatives on the aspect of leadership. Firstly, there is a need to create a conducive working environment where nurses can work and effectively provide care. quality Secondly, nurse staffing adequate to eradicate stress levels that adversely impact care. Third, nurses should have resolution conflict skills to address problems that arise in healthcare (Keats, 2019). Finally, nurses should be educated to help eradicate workplace incivility. For instance, they should the understand of effects incivility on the performance of an organization. Nurses should know the role of technology in providing quality healthcare to patients by improving the efficiency of operations. Thus, the emerging initiatives that leaders should consider are fostering an enabling environment to provide quality healthcare services to the people.
Emerging Health Initiatives – Safety
There are various emerging health as initiatives far as safety in is healthcare concerned. The first initiative is to that ensure nurses work in a safe environment and patients that are free from medical errors (Keats, 2019). The second initiative is conducting training rigorous on safety issues in healthcare. This involves making sure nurses understand the practices that promote safety. the Finally, third is initiative the creation policies of safety and standards to guide operations within healthcare. Safety standards help in directing and maintaining safe and clinically nursing competent operations. Therefore, safety will be attained in healthcare if nurses understand safety issues and appropriate safety standards guiding operations.
Ways to Advance Communication Related to Leadership and Safety
Communication is integral in the effective management of operations in a workplace. To advance communication, there is a need to cultivate trust between relevant stakeholders in healthcare, such as nurse leaders, nurses, patients and and their families (Daft Marcic, & 2019). Trust ensures that stakeholders are open and transparent during The communication. other way is to adopt appropriate infrastructure such as communication apps or use the latest technology to improve between communication stakeholders. Another way is by constantly training nurses be to effective communicators. For instance, nurses should listening have skills because it is essential in providing quality care to patients. Thus, effective communication can be attained when there is trust among providers; the facility has appropriate support tools to information sharing, and providers when are equipped with communication skills.
Conclusion
Leadership has a direct link to safety in the workplace. It plays an integral role in followers motivating to achieve the set objectives. For instance, a nurse leader ensures that nurses encouraged are to achieve healthcare goals. Nurse leaders also help solve issues such as conflict and instances eliminate of workplace incivility like discrimination. On the other hand, safety is being free from any harm. Therefore, it also plays an important role in ensuring that providers health and patients operate and stay in a safe environment.