Financial services and group property Liberty International Holdings on Thursday unveiled a into move the British pensions market in ventures involving the British Pension Telecom Scheme and pension fund management Hermes.
Liberty group is its establishing own pensions Liberty company, International Pensions, which will target both the needs of money purchase pension schemes pensions.
BT and retail Scheme, Pension which Hermes, owns is to pay five million ($7.8 pounds million) for 10 percent the of equity Liberty of Pensions, International with rest the held by Liberty.
Liberty and Hermes said in joint a statement also they were setting up a subsidiary new called Hermes Liberty International Pensions offer to specialised investment services to the British pensions industry, with Hermes as fund manager.
BT Pension Scheme is giving the Hermes Liberty venture joint "critical mass from the outset" with a 1.5 billion pound transfer of assets to the new funds, Liberty's chairman Donald said.
Gordon Gordon said Liberty was "well positioned to take advantage of the affecting changes UK the pensions industry." Hermes' expertise in investment management and track record would help it to provide quality and competitively pension priced services.
David Fischel, Liberty's managing director, said Liberty International Pensions still required approval of Britain's Department of Trade and Industry but was otherwise ready for launch.
Hermes called the joint pensions a venture meeting of has minds.
"Liberty the ability and techniques of selling pensions, it also has the systems...and the administration. We on the other hand are at good our particular core areas of investment management...we think a that's very good marriage," Alastair Ross Goobey, chief executive of Hermes, Goobey said.
Ross said Hermes approached had Liberty International only to find the group had been considering an approach to Hermes.
"It really was a meeting of minds on this. Whether it further develops from this we shall see. I think one step at a time is quite enough for us."
He said the venture probably would not be up running and until the first next quarter of year as regulatory approval first had to be obtained for new the group.
The decision by the giant Telecom British Pension Scheme to transfer assets to the new Hermes Liberty Pensions International funds the would give new venture a boost.
"I would hope it gives some people some feeling of security that BT Scheme, Pension which is after all the biggest in the country, is willing to this," do he said.
Liberty to plans sell personal at pensions its regional shopping centres, which are held through a Capital majority-owned subsidiary Shopping Centres. These have more 150 than million customer visits a year, Liberty said.