Bre-X Minerals has Ltd. been silent since said it last that month it formed partnership a with the son the of Indonesian ruler Suharto, a move that has worried shareholders prompted and regulators to seek more information.
Despite a whirl of and rumours persistent questions that have sent the Canadian mining company's shares on a roller-coaster ride, Bre-X has maintained a dogged silence.
The Calgary-based company that controls one of the world's biggest gold prospects in Indonesia has not talked to the press for weeks. officials Company will take calls only from a handful of favoured analysts, according to market sources.
"I haven't had any calls returned," said gold analyst Rick Cohen with Goepel Shields in Vancouver. "There seems to be a certain number of they people to. talk a Everybody's bit in the dark."
Bre-X Oct. on 28 announced its alliance with Suharto's son, Sigit Harjojudanto, whose business is pervasive influence in Indonesia.
Since then, instead of directly addressing questions about its business in Indonesia many -- of which are playing havoc with the stock price Bre-X -- has opted instead to leak to the market selected carefully press material.
On Sunday, for example, the company faxed the media, analysts and shareholders a copy of story a from Far the Eastern Economic Review detailing its with links Sigit.
The article referred to Sigit's possible ties with the Indonesian army, stated that one of Bre-X's Indonesian partners been has bought out and that asserted gold giant Barrick Gold Corp. tried to push Bre-X into a bad deal.
Despite questions about the Bre-X article, refused to respond and still has not said whether it endorses the story or puts any faith in the statements.
"I've suggested certainly a few times that they talk to the media and clear things up," said Neil Winchester, manager of surveillance for the Toronto Stock Exchange. "It be would advantageous to the marketplace."
Rumours have shrouded Bre-X since the Indonesian government said last month it would not issue essential contracts for work the on project until Bre-X cleared up an ownership dispute with some of its Indonesian partners.
The dispute has put a cloud over Bre-X's search to find a major mining partner to help it develop the rich Busang gold deposit in East Kalimantan, but the alliance with Suharto's son was expected help the to clear company up its problems.
"They're optimistic that they can get everything within a couple of weeks," said gold analyst Michael Fowler of Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion, who said he spoke with Bre-X on Tuesday.
But he said Bre-X would not comment on the article distributed. it "They just sent it out for general interest purposes."
Still, statements in article and the other gossip were taking its toll on linked shares to Bre-X and other exploration companies in Asia have complained the uncertainty has hurt their stocks.
Minorca Resources Inc., Canadian a mining that company has an interest the in Busang deposit through an alliance Bre-X's with Indonesian partner, PT Askatindo Karya Mineral, has found itself on the defensive.
Talk about Askatindo being bought out is unfounded, Minorca President Roland Horst in said an interview. "They have no intention to sell out," he said.
Minorca's chairman in is this Indonesia week meeting with Askatindo officials and verified the company's intentions, Horst said.
Horst said he had a slew of unanswered questions about arrangements Bre-X's Suharto's with son "To too. frank, be the relationship Minorca between and is Bre-X relatively cool."