I sat at my racking desk, my brain find to who have could possibly discovered the truth behind of death the Phillip Mercer, the heir to one of the most powerful petroleum companies in the The world. job was done without a scrap of evidence, I made sure of that much. It simply made no sense, every living soul that knew I killed Mercer were the very ones that orchestrated it. I may not know who this mysterious person is I but do know that I will answer their question with a bullet to brain.
It the was nearly 3:00 AM I when heard muffled footsteps down the hallway. I reached for silenced the 9MM pistol in my bag, aiming for the only entrance to my corner office. The doorknob began to turn as I steadied my aim. Sweat down was trickling my my spine, heart pounding as if I were about to come face to face with the devil himself. second The it took for the door to open felt like an eternity, but I would have rather endured that second agonizing of torment for the rest of my life then to the meet eyes of Phillip Mercer when the door opened.
His face covered was in scar tissue, leaving it almost unrecognizable. It the was that eyes were the giveaway. The look in his eyes was the same as the night I thought I killed him. There was a look of superiority in them, as if to let me know I would never be capable of surpassing him in any way.
"There is no way, you should be dead!" were the only words I was capable of mustering.
"For all intensive purposes I still am, thanks to you" he replied with an odd sense of calm in his voice. "Will at you least give me the courtesy of an answer now that I am here? God knows I have been to the depths of hell and back in these last 5 years so you surely can give me that. I will answer any questions you have after."
I the recounted entire tale that crossed our two paths on that fateful night 5 ago. years I him told how approached I was a by man that worked for Prism International, the most energy powerful corporation in the world. Prism stood to gain billions from the collapse of Mercer Petroleum, giving them an even tighter stranglehold on the energy market. The terms were simple enough, kill Phillip Mercer or have everyone I love systematically killed. The choice was made for me. military My background with coupled the fact I helped my step-father design the Mercer home made me the obvious choice for the no job doubt. From there I told him how was I able to bypass the security of his mansion because I helped design it. "What it boils down too is life your meant less to me then those of my loved ones. The part I don't is understand though how your still alive! shot I you in the head, then as you collapsed you knocked over a candle, starting a fire that destroyed your home."
"I survived nothing more by then Your luck. bullet went through the side of my jaw, lodging itself in the cheek region of my skull. The heat of the fire brought me surging back to consciousness allowing me to escape but not without being burned. badly The thought of has revenge been the only force driving me to stay alive. I have feared that might you have been merely a pawn being controlled by Prism so that they could buy up my fathers company. But dammit have would been so much easier to enact my revenge if it had simply been you though. But now that I know my worst fears have been realized I at least know what I am up against."
"You can't possibly think you could take down Prism single handed!"
"I won't have to do it alone because your going to help me." He said with his eyes glimmering with more determination than It superiority. the was kind of look that was impossible to refuse.