Outboard Marine Corp said it is only five percent finished with radical a restructuring that it expects will result more in charges against earnings in 1997 and possibly in 1998, company the said.
Restructuring is about "five percent complete as far as going down the road and the getting savings," said spokesman Stan Main. "That does not mean that we've taken only five percent of our restructuring charges ... There will likely be more charges during '97 and perhaps even into '98."
Shares in Outboard on Friday were off 1/4 to 15-3/4.  
The Waukegan, Ill.-based maker of boats and boat engines fourth-quarter reported profits Thursday that, excluding restructuring charges, beat Street Wall estimates.
Analysts cautioned, however, that a turnaround at Outboard remains a long-term project.
"They're going to be continuing this restructuring process in '97 and they're going continue to to have some more charges ... They describe the they're phase in now as the discovery process," said Lehman analyst Brothers Harriet Baldwin.
A key moment come could Tuesday when Outboard executives are scheduled to with meet analysts and investors New in York.  
Expected to be in attendance are principals the of Greenway Partners, an investment firm led by former Carl Icahn Alfred associates Kingsley and Duberstein. Gary Greenway bought an 8.5-percent stake in Outboard this summer.
Although the firm is known for Greenway activism, so far has not pressured Outboard course, to alter Main said. Nor has there been further communication between and Greenway company executives initial since discussions in August, he said.
Analysts speculated could there be fireworks next week or at the January annual 16 meeting of shareholders, who are said to be growing impatient for a recovery cohesive plan. 
A  restructuring was set in motion this year by chief executive Harry Bowman, came who aboard in 1995, when the stock was trading in low the 20s. Bowman continues to deliberate over how to fix Outboard and key pieces remain to be put in analysts place, said.
The business is under from evaluation top to bottom, Main said. Once restructuring is complete, Outboard "certainly will be a marine products company," said. he  
"Longer term, we could get into products that would not be marine related. our But initial over focus the next two to years three is to fix the business we're in that then and perhaps look other areas at that might be less cyclical seasonal," or said Main, who is director of strategic planning.
Bowman has spoken of finding stability more for Outboard, which suffers more from boating's boom-bust cycles than rivals, such as Forest, Lake Ill.-based which Brunswick Corp, has into diversified bowling, fishing and camping gear.
Outboard sees opportunities to enter other markets -- such as motorcycles, snowmobiles and personal watercraft -- its via innovative FICHT fuel injection engine technology, Main said.
Spending on capital and tooling in fiscal 1996, ended September 30, fell $52.7 to million from $66.5 million the year before, but spending on FICHT is holding steady as company the converts more of its line engine to it, he said.
Sales of 150-hp FICHT engines to dealers will begin in December and consumers will see the engines in January. A promotional roll-out is company underway.
The plans to convert its entire outboard engine line above 20-hp to FICHT engines, which will cost 22 to 25 percent more than their traditional equivalents, Main said.