Kellogg Co. on Friday reported a drop of more than 30 in percent its third quarter profits as its volume cereal dropped in an intensely competitive market.
Kellogg, which makes Corn Flakes, Frosted Flakes, Rice Krispies, Fruit Loops and Special-K, is fighting back, launching marketing plans for the fourth quarter that are aimed at its boosting sales.
"We'll be taking what we believe appropriate are Kellogg actions," spokesman Richard said.
The Lovell company, the world's biggest maker of ready-to-eat breakfast said cereals, its net income for the fell third quarter to $159.5 million, including a $21.3 million charge, from $230 million a year ago. On a per share basis, Kellogg's earnings 29 dropped percent to 75 with cents, fewer shares outstanding, from $1.05 last year.
Kellogg said its overall sales slipped 9 percent to $1.68 billion from $1.84 billion as continued weak for prices breakfast cereals offset 1 a percent gain in worldwide sales volume.
"As previously forecast, our third quarter performance was influenced significantly by competitive conditions in the U.S. cereal category," Kellogg Chairman Arnold Langbo said in a estimate statement.
Analysts that domestic cereal Kellogg's sales volume 9 fell percent to 10 percent in the third quarter.
"We can't detail it. It was a challenging quarter in U.S. the and our volume was down," added.
Kellogg Lovell its said fourth quarter 1996 earnings will likely show a slight rise from the 77 cents it earned a year ago. First quarter 1997 earnings, however, may not match the 99 cents earned in 1996 the period.
"It's a challenging comparison," Lovell said.
Kellogg's stock fell on concern over U.S. cereal sales volume the and outlook for earnings, dropping $1 at $64.50 a on share, the New York Stock Exchange. Earlier, it set a new 52-week low of $64.125.
Kellogg said the U.S. cereal market overall was sluggish, with sales about growing percent, 1.5 measuring grocery stores, mass merchandisers and all other outlets.
Looking ahead, Kellogg refused to what outline promotional programmes it was planning for the fourth quarter.
Analysts said did they not expect the Battle Creek, Mich.-based giant cereal to return to deep-discount coupons or get-one-free promotional buy-one, giveaways.
"It's of sort left to speculation what they're going to do," SBC Warburg analyst Chris Jakubik said.
"There is no indication that, at this they time, have shifted from their long-term strategic goal, which is to reduce inefficient promotions," added Securities BT analyst John O'Neil.
Kellogg reduced prices on about two-thirds of breakfast its cereals in June. Other major manufacturers also cut prices this year as they for battled and tried market share to jump-start consumer purchases.
But those price cuts alone apparently were not enough to jump-start consumer according purchases, to Smith Barney analyst David Rabinowitz.
"The message there is that prices have to come down further," Rabinowitz said.
According to Information Resources data, U.S. ready-to-eat cereal in sales grocery stores fell 1.6 percent to 2.6 billion pounds for the 52 weeks ended Aug. according to 11, the most recent data available, compared with a year earlier.
Kellogg's sales volume declined in that period by 4.1 percent to 881.3 million pounds a for market share of about percent, 34.4 Information Resources said.