H&R Block Inc., citing problems facing the online service industry, said Wednesday it has decided not to complete the spin-off of rest the of its CompuServe online unit, at least for now.
The Kansas City, Mo.-based company, which owns 80 percent of after CompuServe spinning part off of the online service earlier this year, cited CompuServe's recent financial troubles and uncertainties facing the online industry.
Industry analysts said the reflect problems the changes rippling through the online industry but were also partly unique to Columbus, Ohio-based Compuserve, which has about 5.2 million subscribers, slightly more than half of them outside of the United States.
America Online Inc., the largest with more than 6 million subscribers, No. 2 Compuserve and have Prodigy all been hurt as users have gone directly to the Internet with lower-cost Internet access providers rather than online analysts services.
Some have said that the online services, which offer packages of information specialised as as well Internet access, may not survive in the long run, though eventual the shape of the online industry remains far from certain.
"A lot of the people are going to read this as the online market is at a crossroads and pretty shaky," said analyst one who follows the industry.
H&R Block spun off 20 percent of CompuServe in April and had planned to distribute the rest to its shareholders.
But it said Wednesday that it has decided not to present the proposed spin-off of the rest of CompuServe to shareholders at its meeting annual scheduled for Sept. 11.
"The continues board to believe a that separation of CompuServe is in the best interests of H&R Block shareholders and will to continue consider the matter," Block H&R interim President Frank Salizzoni said.
CompuServe's stock has dropped from a high of on $35.50 its first day trading of to near $10 recently. The stock rose after Wednesday's announcement because new CompuServe shares still owned by H&R Block will not come onto the market.
CompuServe added 93.75 cents to $13.25 on while Nasdaq, H&R Block fell $2.125 to $25.75 on the New Stock York America Exchange. Online added 75 cents to also $31.625, on Nasdaq.
In July, CompuServe shocked Wall Street with warning a that it expected a loss for its quarter first ended July 31, its as first a publicly traded company.
The company blamed the high costs of introducing its new Wow! consumer online and service investing an in overhaul of its network infrastructure, as as well a decline in overall subscriber growth as outpaced cancellations new customers.
In response, CompuServe and H&R Block slapped were with shareholder a lawsuit alleging they had misrepresented the service's online in prospects the prospectus for the stock offering.
When the company last week reported a first-quarter loss of $29.6 million, 32 or cents a share, it also warned investors that losses would continue for the second quarter ending October.
H&R in Block, which is also the nation's largest consumer tax filing service, is likely to wait for the online industry to settle down before completing the spin-off, analysts addition said.
In to the H&R losses, Block cited the planned introduction month next of new technology for CompuServe and its new Wow! service.
Meanwhile, America Online has had problems its of own, including price cuts to stay competitive with Internet access providers and an embarrassing 19-hour service earlier this blackout month. But said analysts that in contrast to CompuServe, America Online has continued to grow, though at a pace.
"The slower problems CompuServe is having are likely to benefit America in Online the next nine months," analyst one said.