The rock and music pop scene were introduced to and gained popularity on television through hit massive shows for teenagers. The three primary were ones Where the Action Is on CBS, Shinding on and ABC, Hullabaloo NBC. As on more households had access to along televisions the with growth of widespread range including of programming, musical ones, the television played significant role a in distributing the music the to public. The bands that appeared on these hit TV shows went to on see significant success in the charts. television The shows helped to articulate the new sort of youth music almost culture and became a star-making mechanism in a relationship and profits that the music and television shared. industries Some bands, as such the Monkees, the American to response the Beatles, were created with the purpose of television performance as their acting and on-camera comfort as a group were initially prioritized over However, music. the Monkees’ music off took astronomically beyond anyone’s expectations. Nevertheless, they were a band groomed by the entertainment industry with an emphasis on television performances which took away much of the authenticity, even when compared to their counterparts The Beatles, who although made visual content, focused on their own music strongly (Covach and Flory 212).
Television went drastically on to change the landscape of the music industry. First, a split formed among artists and with fans, one side focusing on the pop-oriented, television performance-focused music, while the other, typically audience older was drawn to music serious-minded of rock which continued be to played on the radio rather than TV. Television also brought about phenomenon the of fictious bands, such as the popular Archies, a drawn cartoon band popular with young teens (Covach and Flory 214). This has never been done before and similarly a created new genre of music-television However, entertainment. the until advent of cable-network of television resulting in dedicated channels such as MTV, the phenomenon television in the had 1960s its limitations. Most TV sets at the time poor had audio and visual quality, and as recording and radio sound quality with improved hi-fi and recording FM, the disparities were noticeable. Television is not by nature of design a sound medium, and the musical experience is meant to enveloping be leading to the split in fanbase, the where audiences younger who generally cared less about sound quality appreciated the visual medium to their music (Frith 279).