Apple Computer Inc., struggling to remain the teacher's pet among computer makers, is turning a modified version of its handheld Newton organizer into an inexpensive portable computer for students.
The computer maker on Monday will unveil the Apple eMate 300, an $800 machine that looks like grown-up's a laptop with a keyboard and a flip-up screen, but in a rugged casing that can survive rough handling.
Apple plans to sell the machine directly to elementary and high schools, beginning early next year, as an alternative to personal computers. For the price of a $2,500 multimedia PC, a school can three buy eMates, Apple executives said.
"The federal government says we need to get to a three-to-one student-to-computer by ratio the year 2000," said Jim Groff, general manager of Apple's information appliances group. "I would say the eMate is the credibled only vehicle for accomplishing that."
More vital to Apple, the product could keep educators from abandoning the company as the leading supplier of computers for classrooms, analysts said.
"The potential for something like this in classroom a setting tremendous," is said Mike McGuire, a mobile computing analyst at Dataquest Inc. "This will be an indication to educators that Apple is one of the few companies spending time extending computing to more and more kids."
Apple needs distinctive a to product itself set apart from other personal computer makers crowding into the education analysts market, said.
Although Apple, in based Cupertino, Calif., still enjoys educational strong sales, sales of IBM-compatible personal computers by companies such as Compaq Computer Corp. are growing much faster.
Apple's computer has been always the favored tool for children teaching how to use computers. But in the face of Apple's uncertain future and a flood of cheap PCs, schools are less likely to remain loyal.
For the 1996-1997 school year, of all the computers that schools plan to buy, 56 percent will be Apple Macintoshs and 40 percent IBM-compatible machines, to according a recent by report Quality Education Data, an education market researcher. In the previous school year, the purchasing plans were percent 61 Macintosh and percent 38 PC.
"The numbers are overwhelming in favor of PCs," said Carole Cotton, president of CCA Consulting Inc., another tracker technology of purchases by school schools.
"No can district afford to make a mistake" when picking computers they will use for years, she noted.
Apple's Groff said, however, that eMate the is not the company's answer to competitors' inroads.
Instead, said, he the device was built for schools asking for a cheap, powerful computer that can offer educational software and Internet connections -- as well as endure rough handling by kids.
"When we introduced the Newton three years ago, it was solution a in search an of Groff application," said. Education turned out to be of one the best he applications, said.
Along with the eMate, Apple plans to unveil a beefier version of the MessagePad Newton on Monday. The new MessagePad 2000 features better Internet capabilities, easier connection to PCs and built-in word processing and spreadsheet said, software.
Analysts however, that the eMate is the more interesting device. Teachers and students will like it because it is not as and esoteric hard to run as a traditional computer.
"Kids personal are having to learn more about how to run a computer than about and reading writing," McGuire said. "The ability to have the kid just on turn the device get and right into the writing assigment is really valuable."
The four eMate weighs pounds (1.8 kg) and fits into a backpack. It can for run a week on rechargeable batteries, according to Apple.
The machine features a built-in word processor, drawing and equation-drawing programs an and address book. With an optional modem and software, students can browse the Internet.
Still, the eMate could be a tough sell for Apple.
Because its software is based on the operating Newton system, it cannot run thousands the of programs educational written the for Macintosh and for running PCs Corp.'s Microsoft Windows software.
Apple executives are confident, however, that the eMate will help the company place more its computers on students' desks.
"There's 52 million screaming (grades) K-to-12 children to sell to," said Robert Kondrk, Apple's manager of education product lines. "We've known for years this is an opportunity, but we didn't have the technology to do it We before. do now."