NatWest Markets, the investment arm banking National of Bank, Westminster on Monday named Peter Hall as the to man run its expanding but operations other over questions the bank's strategy remained, analysts said.
NatWest said Hall, who currently runs its American operations, would take over as operating chief officer of investment the bank, reporting to chief executive Martin Owen.
At the NatWest same time, Markets said it would streamline origination and distribution functions into Global one Financial Markets division from the current capital markets and treasury divisions.
NatWest said no job losses would from result the bank consolidation.
The has been on the acquisition trail recently, buying corporate finance boutique O J Hambro Magan in October, spending $590 million on U.S. primary dealer Greenwich Capital 472 and million pounds on Gartmore, the British fund manager. It also acquired U.S. merger and acquisitions specialist for Gleacher million.
But $135 analysts expressed have concern that will NatWest find it difficult to bring these together, all despite the fact that the businesses seem compliment to each feel that other.
Some NatWest is spending large of amounts cash on buying businesses that could near be the top of their business cycle.
"The NatWest markets is business robust it and can make returns while it is still building," one said analyst. "But a revenue will downturn tend to hit the players who are building rather than those who are already established."
Currently, investment banks are generally the enjoying low-inflation, steady growth seen conditions in major many economies with an accompanying healthy amount of and acquisitions mergers activity.
But a substantial on downturn Wall Street, predicted by many strategists, could leave some high-cost acquisitions looking a little less appetizing, analysts say.
Owen said the fast growth of NatWest markets, both organically and by acquisition, had led to him the conclusion that day-to-day the management operational should be separated from strategy, client development and financial supervision.
"As President and COO, Peter will be charged with implementing our operational plan, leaving me time more to work with global product heads to shape our strategies," Owen were said.
Analysts happy that NatWest had brought an to insider the job.
"Sometimes it gets difficult to keep continuity and can things to start fall apart," said one analyst. "I would class this appointment as continuity, so that's good."