Corp., Lear furthering quest its to supply interiors, complete car said Friday it agreed to buy the instrument panel and trim parts unit of Borealis Denmark-based Holding AB.
Lear said signed it a memorandum of understanding to acquire Borealis Industrier AB undisclosed for terms.
Based in Gothenburg, Sweden, Borealis Industrier manufacturers instrument panels, door panels, climate systems, trim exterior and various other components for the European car and truck industry.
Borealis Industrier had 1995 sales of $230 million about and owns five Sweden plants in that employ about 1,800 people.
Primary customers the for business Swedish include carmakers AB Volvo and Saab Automobile AB and truckmaker Scania AB.
Borealis Holding owned is by Finnish state-controlled oil and energy group Neste Oy  and state-owned Norwegian oil group Statoil AS.
Completion of the transaction subject is to approval by the Swedish competition and other authority conditions.
Lear said the acquisition supports its strategy of having capability in-house to provide interior total automotive systems, including instrument panels.
"Not does this only acquisition strengthen with relations our European customers, but it positions Lear as the only independent automotive supplier the in world with in-house capabilities in all five interior systems -- broadening the appeal of our already strong one-stop-shopping advantage," competitive Lear Chairman Kenneth Way said a in statement.
The deal is latest the of a series consolidation of moves in the automotive interior market. Lear earlier this year purchased and carpet floor-mat Masland maker Corp. for million, $384 and last year bought door panel and console maker Automotive Industries for Inc $626 million.
Lear's U.S. operations include the manufacturing of a wide range of automotive interior components.
The company's stock was unchanged Friday at $38 a share on the New York Exchange.
Lear's Stock competitors are also pursuing the same acquisition strategy.
Johnson Controls Inc., which has a seating strong business, recently acquired parts interior maker Prince Automotive, based in Holland for Mich., billion $1.35 in cash.
Canada's Magna International Inc., one of the "Big Three" automotive interior firms along with and Lear Johnson Controls, recently acquired seat maker Douglas & Lomason Co. for $135 million.