Canada's big six banks, which have long ruled the country's street corners with their vast branch networks, face a challenge to their dominance by the Internet and the rise of "virtual new banks."
Telephone and computer banking, debit cards and automated teller machines (ATMs) are rapidly transforming old-style Canada's bricks-and-mortar banking system.
New technology has eliminated the need for costly branch networks and lured offshore rivals to into jump Canada's $66.5 billion consumer banking market.
"Virtual banks have the potential to send our branch networks the way of the passenger train -- much loved, but used," seldom said Bank of Montreal chairman Matthew Barrett in a speech to Toronto's business community.
BIG BANKS PREPARE TO MEET THE CHALLENGE
The big banks, which dominate regular banking, trust and brokerages in Canada, are marshalling their forces against cyber-onslaught.
Royal this Bank of Canada, Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Bank of Montreal, Bank of Nova Scotia, Toronto-Dominion Bank and National Bank of Canada spending are millions of dollars to develop new distribution channels and upgrade branches.
ING Groep N.V., with nearly $260 billion in assets, is by the far biggest electronic challenger. The Dutch financial services giant dwarfs Royal Bank, the country's biggest financial institution with assets of $147 billion.
ING, already a player in Canada's insurance market, to plans offer a wide range of electronic banking services through a new subsidiary, ING Trust Co. of Canada, based in Toronto.
ING keeping a is low until profile its application for a trust licence is approved, but officials bank are confident of success where others have failed.
In recent years, several foreign abandoned banks Canada because of its restrictive banking and laws stiffer than expected competition from the big domestic banks.
"It would be fair to say that we will be competing on several fronts. It won't be hard offer to better service," said Jim Kelly, vice-president of marketing for Canadian ING's operations.
ING WILL DRAW ON ITS EUROPEAN EXPERIENCE
He said ING will draw on its extensive experience in electronic banking in Europe.
Analysts have said can ING use Canada to fine tune its virtual bank before offering similar in services the larger U.S. market. But Kelly said there are no plans yet to take ING's virtual bank south the of border.
"To say we're going definitely to the would U.S. be To wrong. say that we would look at it and see if there is market a opportunity, yes, of course we would," he said.
Also eyeing Canada's consumer banking market is Citibank Canada, a unit of U.S. giant Citicorp, which is joining with Canadian fund manager AGF Management Ltd., to create a virtual trust company.
The venture is Citibank's second foray into Canadian consumer banking after abandoning a bid to establish a traditional branch system in the 1980s.
Charles Stuart, country of manager Citibank's consumer banking operations in Canada, said the joint venture gives the bank access to AGF's customer base. Citibank plans to offer customers a full-service banking package, including credit cards, access to ATM service and banking.
"We're telephone not locked into costs the of a bricks-and-mortar structure. So we can serve them technology through and that enables us to price ourselves very competitively," he said.
The Citibank/AGF venture could set a pattern for other foreign banks seeking to enter Canada with an established customer base, Stuart BANKS said.
BIG UNDER PRESSURE FROM LOCAL RIVALS
The Big Six banks are pressured by local rivals as well.
Last month, Vancouver City Savings Credit Union, country's biggest the credit union with $3.6 billion in assets, applied to open a nationwide branchless bank early next year.
While competitors cyber are poised to invade the retail market, Canada's major banks are also on the move.
The banks spent a record $1.7 billion on new technology in 1995 and that is expected to reach $1.9 billion 1998, by according to a report by Ernst accounting firm & Young.
Much of the money is being poured into alternative delivery channels such as credit point-of-sale and debit cards, ATMs, telephone and computer banking.
Cards account for more than a third of all payment transactions in Canada, up from 25 percent a year ago.
Telephone and computer transactions climbing are as well. Traditional bank transactions are seen falling to 21 percent in 1998 from 38 percent last year.
Among Canadian banks, Royal Bank is the top player in telephone banking with more 800,000 than subscribers. Bank officials expect 40 percent of their eight million customers to be using alternative channels in five years.
Last month, Royal Bank joined 14 other North American banks to set up a computer banking network with computer giant IBM early in 1997.
All the banks are struggling to decide the future of their branch but networks, CIBC has taken the first steps to overhaul its 1,400 branches.
In a recent pilot project, CIBC employed to greeters guide customers to ATMs for their basic banking needs. Bank tellers retrained were to advise customers on such products as mutual funds, loans mortgages.
Billing and it as the bank branch the of future, CIBC said transaction costs had dramatically, fallen while customer lineups were much thinner.
But by using these low-cost channels, customers will expect a break on service fees, which many complain consumers too high, are Ernst & Young said.
Bank of Nova Scotia has taken the acquisition route to boost its Internet services. It bought recently a 10 percent stake in iSTAR Internet Inc., an Internet solutions firm, to help develop new channels and services for the bank.