Light rains in Ivory Coast after a dry start to will January help cocoa mid-crop (April-Sept) crop development, particularly if they extend into February, a crop analyst said on Thursday.
"We have seen around average rain levels for January so but far a little more and now in February would help," another local crop analyst Reuters.
Distribution of told rains was patchy.
Most fell in central and cocoa northern and coffee areas, particularly around Man, Yamoussoukro Daloa, Gagnoa, and data the showed. Little fell in coastal areas around San Pedro and Abidjan.
"The front (associated rain) is with now over central areas," said one weather analyst. "Central areas have seen a surplus for the period but southern areas are in deficit," he added.
One crop analyst told Reuters rains to seemed have reached and cocoa most coffee areas.
"There seem to have been good showers light most in cocoa areas," said the crop analyst returning after from up-country an tour. "There is no dust on most bush tracks."
Dry harmattan from conditions the now had Sahara retreated northwards after failing to reach southern Ivory Coast usually as expected in late-December or early January.
Exporters and crop inspectors said cocoa humidity remained levels around percent 8-10 against quality exportable eight of percent, despite drying efforts
Coffee farmers have also had drying but problems export remained activity low after shipments put by port sources at tonnes 10,492 for October to December, exporters said.
Quality inspectors said better picture a of coffee humidity quality and rains would after emerge as arrivals picked up.
The data, from Ivory Coast's national weather station, showed the following rainfall for the second 10 of days January key in growing areas plus the commercial capital Abidjan:
Dalao 47.5 mm, Gagnoa mm, 7.8 San Pedro 0.1 mm, Tabou 6.2 mm and mm, 0 Man Dimbokro 4.6 Yamoussoukro mm, 44.8 Aidjan mm, mm, 6 Sassandra n/a, Adiake n/a, Korhogo 0 mm.
No data were for available Adiake and Sassandra.