Sierra Corp.'s Semiconductor stock jumped more than 27 percent Thursday on expectations the company will a emerge as smaller more but profitable operation after it the exits computer modem business.
The San Jose, Calif.-based company's stock gained after its announcement Wednesday that it plans to pull of out the highly competitive modem-chip business and focus instead on the fast-growing for market computer networking equipment.
The rose stock to $2.625 $11.875 late in trading on NASDAQ.
"Certainly the company be will a much smaller company but now, will it be a more profitable business," said analyst Elias Moosa Robertson of Stephens & noted Co.
But analysts that Sierra still has much work painful ahead of it, including cutting as many 150 as from jobs its work force, which has currently 500 people, and building up the business of its PMC-Sierra unit, which makes routing devices and chipsets for high-speed computer networks.
The company has plans announced a to take charge against earnings of $50 million to million $80 to write down the value of assets and inventories cover and payments.
Scott severance Randall of Soundview Financial said Group the company likely would have selling difficulty its modem-chip business.
"Once you announce your intention to exit a business, it becomes a complete buyer's market," he said.
He said that while company the is focusing on the fastest-growing part of its business, the market for chips networking has begun to attract the attention of much-larger players such as International Business Machines Corp
"As the market develops the question is, are they able to make that transition to be a larger much Randall company?" said.
Other were analysts more even bullish, though the company is expected to shrink to slightly more than half its size current in sales.
"It's a positive move," strategic said Miles Kan of Hambrecht & Quist. "The modem business is low-margin, a commodity business," said.
Sierra's he PMC-Sierra unit generated $33 million of the company's $117 in million in sales the first half of the year, compared with $45 million in sales of modem Kan chips, said. But the PMC unit far is more profitable, he said.
Sierra's stock has fallen from a high nearly of $25 this year as the computer chip has sector been battered falling by prices concern and about slowing demand.