Microsoft Corp. better-than-expected reported profits for latest the quarter Monday as strong demand for its Windows 95 and Windows NT computer operating systems helped fuel record sales.
The world's largest software maker said 23 rose earnings percent to a record $614 million, or 95 cents a share, in its fiscal first quarter ended in September, from $499 or million, 78 cents a share, in the 1995 quarter. Revenues jumped 14 percent to $2.30 billion from $2.02 billion.
The profits exceeded Wall Street's expectations of 90 cents a share, and shares of the software giant rose to $136.375 in trading after-hours from earlier close the of $134 on Nasdaq.
Microsoft cited acceptance strong of the company's end high Windows NT operating system.
"We shipped version 4.0 of Windows NT this quarter, and the momentum behind the product is outstanding," said Jeff Raikes, Group Vice President, Sales and Marketing.
"Corporate customers made the decision to adopt Windows NT and servers workstations in record numbers, driving 19 percent revenue over growth quarter last in the U.S. and Sales Canada. Windows of NT server grew at nearly double the of rate other operating system environments."
Microsoft's were results considered a crucial measure of its progress since the period year-ago included the launch of the company's much-hyped Windows 95 operating analysts system.
Industry said have Microsoft's sales and earnings growth would from slow last blistering year's pace of more than 46 percent but noted it should to continue benefit from sales higher personal of and computers the growing use Windows of 95 and Windows NT.
Microsoft Chief Financial Officer Brown Mike said he revenues expected to rise sequentially over the next two quarters from the $2.3 billion reported for the quarter ended on 30.
In Sept. an interview, Brown also said thought he the company's cost goods of sold could decline "a little bit" in the long term from the 10.9 percent revenues of just already reported, down from 16 percent a ago.
"We'll year a grow little bit in December then and a little bit more in I March, Brown think," said. "I'm very happy with the general revenue trend, and I was very pleased with the pattern costs in of the quarter."
Brown revenues said in the December quarter would be driven in part holiday by season sales, while the next quarter would get a from boost the release of the company's Office 97 business upgrade applications to one of its core products.