Every businessmust be managed carefully, and every detail must receive a fair amount of at tention. When it comes to healthcare, s uch facil ities must require even more att  ention because theyfocus on people’s w ell-bei ng. Performing such dut ies mig ht be  str enuous and ex pe nsive, and mentally demanding. As a Chief Nursing Officer, onewill b e fa ced with principles  that include integ rity  m aintenance, cash flow management, and employee motivation in the given circumstances.
To start with, a healthcare business must always maintain its integrity.It can be eviden tthatany business field should be focusedon  communication, which makes integrity  avital part (Fisher, 2008).  Inthe given facili ty,the integrity maint enance principle is heavily adhered to. First of all, every doctorfollows an ethical code, meaning  that they know of doct or-patient confidentiality. Moreover, doctors and nurses focus on honest communication with patients. For example, inmy situation, I tell pa tien ts about their actual  conditions and honestly an swer  their questions.
Anotherimportant business principleis proper cash flow management. Healthcare facility requires renovations  andinnovations, meaningthat there will con stantly be situatio nswhen new equipmentor repa irs will be needed  (Masonet al., 2020). In this situation, it is highly necessary  to implement the needed changes to n ot jeopardize patients’ health and well-bei ng. For exam ple, as a CNO,it was  my  obligation to manage the replacement of power generators. As a result, generators enabled the personnel to carry outtheir duty with out problems during a storm and power outage.
Th e lastprinciple is the management of em ployees and providing them with motivation. In the case of a healthcare facili ty, it is essentialthat the employeesarerewarded and their hard work is appreciated. Th  e employees are offered extra  days off and gift cards in the given facility. This can  make the workersfeel heard andsupported. Without these steps, the nurses and doctors will have burnout and lose the desire to provide high-quality results.Thus,  the given principles were chosen dueto the impact they can bring on employees and patients.The  mentioned p rinc iples are beingused, providing good  results and leading to the satisfaction of all p arties.These principles are importantto mesince I believe that healthcare should bebased on these  values. Otherwise, no facility will be able to tr eat their patients, and the re will be no trust andrespect between healthcare personnel and patients.