Chronic pain is still considered tobe an e xtreme is sueamong at least 8% ofthe reside nts of prog  ressive countries. The introduction of the study describes the apparent link between pain anddemoralization. Chronic pain isalways accompanied by negative emotional experiences andblocks a person’s ability to receive joy and satisfactionfrom life. The research investigates the development of depression and anxiety among patients  receivi ng pharmaceutical opioids and medical marijuana (MM) as severe painkillers. It compares the efficacy of prescriptions and examines the possibility of post-treatment depression.
There is currently asevere lack of information about the eff ects of opiates. They manage pain successfully, but the past few decades indicated the growing concern regardingopiate abuse in forms of overdose and addiction. A moremanageable and safer alternative might be medical marijuana. However, the legal status and novelty of this drug do not allow finding a large number of  studies on its effectiveness. Specifically, it con cerns the emotional condition of patients experiencing chronic pain. This research paper aims to analyze levels of depression and anxiety among people receiving therapy by comparing the effects of pharmaceutical opioids  and MM.
The study was conducted in the formof collection and analysis of statisticaldata. Participants were recruited for six months at two major pain relie f centers in Isr ael. Theresearchers used The Depression Module of the Patient Health Questionnaire and the Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale to interview participants, evaluate their answers, and conductthe study. To specifically evaluate and compare the probabili ties of depression or anxiety among the diverse groups, the study used multiple logistic regression analysis and chose medical marijuana as the contro l group.
This type of  studyis the most revealing and inclusive, as it contains direct responses from a large number of part icipants. All tools in the form of questionnaires and scales have already been used and proved their efficacy  for collecting analytical data. It helps to systematize and classify distinctkinds of information for subsequent uncomplicated services.Thus, researchers can compare the effects of medications on patients of diverse age groups, backgrounds, physical conditions,  emotional states, and so on.
The analysis of any human reaction has a high potential of subjectiveness and bias, especially regarding people in severe pain and unstable emotional condition. Perhaps some patients tend to exag gerate their depressive state or vice versa, de-emphasize serious difficulties. Because the survey responses were thoroughly anonymous, the researcherswere unable to carefully analyze each patient’s reaction  and compare it to the actua l states of co ndition. More accurate answers could be obtain ed by professional psychologists via personalcommunication and behavioral analysis. However, this method of research is way more resource-intensive and energy-co nsuming.
Participants were recruited for six months at  two major pain relief centers in Israel. All patients experienced chronic pain for at least 3 months. The study included 890 participants, of which 474(59%)were treated solely with opioids, 329 (41%) were treated with MM, and 77 (8 .6%) acquired both (Fein gold et al., 2017). The remaining ten participants who did not receive pharmaceutical opioids and medical marijuana were withdrawn from the analysis in the re search.Therefore,  itis not possible to comprehensively compare patients taking medications with those who do  not.
The study conducted a correlation typeof research with variable measures. It evaluated the interdependence of various factors that affecte d the physical and emotional condition ofpatients experiencing chronic pain. For example, the survey showedthat the ratio of female patients was remarka bly higher in the opiates group compared to the MM group. Inturn, people on opiate s were more likely to report major depressive  disorders.
The questio nnaires used different variable measures to  collect information. For example, it included comprehensive socio-demographic data: gender, age, country, type of residence (urban/rural), years of education, and employment status. Patients were also askedabout their medical history over the years and the current presence o f any severe diseases such as heartfailure , diabetes, arthritis, and so on. Thethird measure of thequestionnaire was indicated by informa tion on any twelve-month and lifetime drug and alcohol consumption. In addition,the record included a pain measurement scale from 0 to 10 to evaluate discomfort feelings during the last month.
Among all participants in the study, 42.2% suffered from depression, and 37% experienced excessive anxiety. The plurality of depressive disorders among patients in  the opiates, medical marijuana, and mixed OPMM groups numbered 57.1%, 22.3%, and 51.4%, respectiv ely. The plurality of anxiety contained 48.4% among OP pati ents, 21.5% among MM patients, and 38.7% among OPMM participants. Patients who took strong opiates were tended to  place their pain on a scaleof 9 to 10 (Feingold et al., 2017). They were also anguished em otionally and reacted radically  negatively to almost all survey questions. Patients who took only MM or mixed medications co urse had a significantly more s table emotional state and coped with pain more manageable.
One ofthe major limitations is the insufficiently high response rate, 57% instead of 70% (Feingoldetal., 2017). It can be fairly explainedby the weak focus of respondents who have overcome severe painsensations and depressiveepisodes. It isnot clear how to use th  ese statistics, as they still may be relevant for the overall analysis.