Hong Kong's top policeman said on Monday he was confidentthet errito ry's policecould handle any disturbances afterthe July 1 handoverto China without the help of China's People's Liberation Army.
Police Commissioner Eddie Hui, unveiling crime figures for 19  96, told reporters that offences had fallen by 14 percent in the  yea r, reaching a 15-yearlow and makingHongKong one of the world's safest cities.
Hui was confident oftackling any crime problem, including mass dist urbances, despite an exodus of senior officers, mainly expatriates, from the Royal  Hong Kong Police Force.
China resumessovereignty over Hong Kongon July 1 this year after a century and a half of Br itish colonial rule. Many in Hong Kong have raised fears of a bre akdown in law and order, including whenthehandover takes place at  midnight on June 30.
Officers taking early reti rement packages privately voice anxiety that Hong Kong's policewillbecome tarnished by China-style corruption after the handover.
Pro-democracypoliti cians have warned that Chi na could impose repressive laws and use its PLA garrison troops, whose colleagues crushed pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing 's Tiananmen Square in 1989, to keep orderand put down protests.Asked by Reuters if thepolice might call in the PLAto help deal with disturbances after the handover, Hui s aid: "I hopenot. I can't foresee anysituation which I  cannot handle, which would require the assist ance of the People'sLiberation Army."
He said the exodus of officers fromthe service had n ot dented theforce' s ability to deal with mass disturbance s in this freewheeling city of6.3 million people.
"The  se nior officers who are leaving have  litt le to do withcrowdcontrol," hesaid, adding that the force had sent manyofficer s abroad for t rainingin recent years and was prepa red to  deal with anyoutbre ak of unrest.
"The overall manpower situation is very sound," he said.
Police Deputy Commissioner  for Operations, Pet er Wong, dismissed suggestionsthat the police were   being pushed by China to get tough with political demonstrators, after a year of confrontation s invol ving pro-democracy grou pshostile to China.
"We're under nopressure from anybody in dealing with demonstrations," Won g said, adding that the Hong Kong police respected the population'sright to demonstrate peacefully.
The enforcement of Hong Kong laws would remain solely the prerogative of the Hong Kong Police, he said.
Hui said 155 expatriates had asked to retire in the run-up to the handover, repr esenting  just five percent ofthe total of 3,000 senior o fficers on the force.
Asked to give reasons for the police's success in whittling down crime, Huisaid  he had sent more police out on the beat.
"We have moved  a lot of our officers to the front line, to the streets, to make our presence more visible," he said.
He said Beijing's crackdown on crime last year had contributed to a morepeaceful Hong Kong, where crime often hasmainland links.
He said cooperationwith Chinese police would be stepped up afterthe handover when Hong Kong's Interpol office, nowa sub-group o f Britain, wouldbecome a sub-groupof China.
The force is t o drop the word "royal"  from its name and abandon the British insignia on July 1.
But it wil l continue to work in both English and Chinese and will retain exclusive responsibilityto maintain law and order and police the Hong Kong  side of t he border with China, hesaid.