Home use o f the Internet's World Wide Web has more than doubled in the lastyear, with about 11 percent of U.S. householdsclaiming to have used the Web in the last  month, according to a study by PC -Meter.
The market resea rch company said 11 percen t of all 98.7 million U.S. households wasequivalent to about 11 million homes andwasup fr om 4.4 percent (or 4.3 million) a year  ago.
In addition, 13.9 percent ofhouseholds claimedto have used some type of I nternet  accessservice in  the last month.
Twe nty-five percent ofthese home Web u sers now visitshopping site s, PC-Meter's audience rating reports show.
Ac cording toPC-Meter's audience rating report, of the cybershoppers,men represented thehighest percentage of users.In September, for  example, 62.8 percent of Web surfers were   men and 37.2 percent were women.
Four basictypes of shopping are represented inthe top 10 shopping sites; freesoftware downloads, interactive auctions,  clubs that sell to members and retail operations.
"These cybershopping statistics suggest thathome surfers are increasingly finding value in electronic commerce opportunities offered on the Web," Pamela Smith, a vice president of PC-Meter, said in a statement. "With the holiday season upon us, the greatest growthto date at thesesites may well occurduring the co ming weeks."
Sharew are.com, a softwa re service of online publisher C/NET Inc. , was the top consumer shopping site on the Web, PC-Meter said, followed by Columbia House Co., which sells m usi c CDs, computer CD-ROMs,videotapes and laser disks; and ZDNet'sSoftware Library of shareware.Columbia House and ZD Net were tied for the second most popul ar consumer shopping sit e. CUC International Inc.,wh ich offers discounts onawide range of consumer go ods and services,is the third mostpopular site and h asthe highe st percentage of womenamong the top shopping sites.
Other  topshopping sites included Amazon.com, at No. 5,  which is a cyber-bookstore with more than 1 milliontitles to choose from. Surplus Direct was No. 6, with salesof computer hardware and software.
Coming in as the 10th mo st popula r shopping site was Onsale, an auction sitefor computer hardware, software and consumer electronics. Onsale also led the category in minutes of usage per month,  averaging 41.99minutes per person per month.PC-Meter  saidits results on home Internet usecame from anOctober survey o f 9,928personal comput er-owning and non-PC-o wning homes.The survey is  cond ucted on a quart erly  basis. It s audience rating report is done monthly.
PC-MeterLP is a subsidiary ofthe NPD Group Inc., a privatelyheld company based in Port Washington, N.Y.