Regulatorstook the first of two steps Tuesday to slash the cost of overseas phone calls for consumers andbusinesses, making it easier for U.S. and foreign carriers to negotiate cheaper international rates.
The Federal Communications Comm ission hopes to save U.S. callers billions of dollars by backing up thenewrules with a separate proposal to be unveiled n ext month  tocut the charge s U.S. carriers pay fo reign phone monopolies to complete calls from the United States.
Americans  spend about 16 cents aminute for a domestic ca ll. But they must shell out an average of 99 cents a minute to call overseas --even  though the cost of the calls are not much different, according  to FCC officials.
"At 99 cents aminute, you're not going to get aglobalinformation highway," complained FCC Chairman Reed Hundt.
Tuesday'srules  are targeted at countries whose o wn phonemarkets are open t o competitionfromU.S.carriers, or are in the  process  of opening. FCC officials cited Canada, Britain, Chile and Sweden, as well as Eu rope and Mexico.
Under the plan announced Tuesday,the FCCwill waive rules th at limit the abilityof U.S. carr iers to negotiate cheaper c allingrates with an overseas phone company whose own market is considered open. The rules were crafted to prevent market abuse by foreign monopolies.
Don Gips, head of the FCC's International Bureau, said the new rules "will  allow competitive pressures, rather th an archaic rules," to govern the telecommunications market.
AT&T Corp. Vice President Gerry Salemmesaid they "can lead to a significant reduction in the  amount that American consumers pay for internationaltelephone calls."
Under the new approach,a company such as AT&T -- with FCC approval -- could ask competing foreign carriersto bid for the  rig ht to handle AT&T phonetraffic from the Uni ted States to a foreignmarket.
Alternatively, a U.S. carrier could offer end- to-end service from the United States to a foreign market without using the  existingrate system for completing calls.
Officials say thes e "accounting rates" run fiveto 10 times act ual costs, reflecting the power of state-run monopolies unexposed to home competition. U.S. carriers paid their overseas counterparts $5.5 billion more in 1995 than foreign companies paid U.S. carrier s to complete calls.
While theaccounting rates paid byboth carriers are about equal, the imbalance reflectsthe fact that many mor e overseas calls aremade f rom the United States than i nto this count ry.
Internationa l calls from the United States account for about a qua rter of all international calls worldwide.To reduce the rates, the FCC propo sal scheduled for next month would set "benchmark" rates for what U.S. carriers could pay foreign c arriers to complete calls. These rates, according to FCC officials, would better reflect actual costs.
The agency must still workout thed etails of how long a country would have to lower its rates and what steps could be taken if it refu sedto do so.
The FCCactions come as the U nited States is seeking to openoverseas  telecommunications markets through talks sponsored by theW orld Trade Organisation.
The United States has big rate imba lances with China, Jamaica, Mexico, Hong K ong, Columbia andArgentina, among others. Nex t month's proposal islikely to ruffl e feathers.
"Th ere will be concer n from countries around the world with the benchmarkitem. There's no doubt about that ,"sa id the FCC's Gips.