It was a warm summer day and I was outfor a stroll.I saw them on the otherside, walking down the sidewalk, two by two. I didn't pay much attention u  ntil they passed under the glow of the gaslamp. Never had Iseen such an pair of opposites! For the brief time they walked under it, the light illuminated the pair. The man's limbs and head were covered in scars! What Ihad mis taken for a b eard was a mass of scars! His arms and legs were so densely overrun thatI had thought it a coat and trousers! The woman had black hair, long and straight, as if it were manufactured st ring by string. But her skin is what shocked me, even great er than the man! It had the most exquisitecomplexion, almost translucent inthe  light, and I saw nary a  flaw on it.  Ilooked  to my own marred hands, although compared to that man, it was a blessing; as I worried, small cuts formed on my arm. It began to sting as  my sweat seepedinto my fresh wounds. Not wanting more scars, I shook my negative thoug htsand ran to the couple.
"Sir,"  I exclaimed, "Excuse my frankness sir, but I must inquiry, how  is it that  your wife is so beautiful, yet youare so…."
The man and woman looked at  each other, she turned away, blushing, and he laughed raucously.
"Hid eous?" as kedtheman between laughs.
"N-n-o," I stam mered, embarrassedby myrudeness.
"Don't worry," he said, putting his arm around my shoulder, "Iget it all the time."
"Myapologies sir, but how, inthis world, did your wife manage to keep from scarring ?"
"W ell, you see," he said witha wink, "she's not my wife, but my dau ghter."
Iwas taken aback. "Still….How?"
"Well, she's not entirelyflawless. She can't tell a joke and her cooking's lousy! Takes after her mother Iguess!"
Laughing, he said, "Take a look at her finger."
I peered at the daughter,she offered her right hand and I saw a thin bright streak of red on her index finger.
The man pulled m e in, "I'm gonna tell you a story."
"Long ago, when I was married, I swore never to have kids. I didn't want any children to be born  into this world, so that was that. But my wife had otherplans, and so my daughter was born. I fell in love with her and swore to devote my life to her. As she grew, though, I began to worry. 'How would I protectherfrom the world?'So I set out to every doctor, physician, and scientist I could find, asking for  a cure. Of course, if there was a cure already,  no one would be like this."
He cleared his throat, took a deep breath, and continued.
"On one particular visit t o a doctor, I had my daughter with me and upon exiting the bui lding, I met a man dressed all in  black.
I immediately thought, 'This must bethe devil' and turned heel back into the building.
' W ait,' the man in black said, 'I can save your daughter.'
I was skepticaland scoffed, 'What for my soul?'
He replied, 'I am bored with just bartering with souls, I am more interes ted in it's durab ility.' The devil continued, giggling,  'You see,  I do have the power to stopyour daughter's sc arring, but I 'm nota very  charitable person.''What do you want?' I asked.
'I want you to partake in a very simple wager,' he said, 'Yourdaughter won't get scars, but *you* will; more specifically, very scar your  daughter gets will betransferr ed to yo u. If you can  manage  this wager, you keep your soul, if not, well, you know what will happen."'
I was dumbstruck that he took the deal,  and that he mana ged to last this long.
"And so,"the man continued, "I agreed and the devil pricked mine and my daughters finger to seal the deal. So she grew up and I took the blows. Puberty was a rough time. Child ren can be so  cruel. But that scar on her finger was the lastone she'd ever get,  I hadsure of that."
I was amazed at this man's love forhisdaughter and his willpower. How much pain di d he have to endure? Every scar on his body seemed to pul sate as I wondered this.I asked, "Do you ever regret it? Yourdeal with the devil?"
He replied with a smile, "Notatall."