Australian fastferry and transport group Holyman Ltdplans to further expand operations in Europe before moving into theAsian market, managing director Christopher Butcher said in an interview.
"We currently have operations inNorth America and northern Europe and we can'tsee anyreason why w e can't startdoing the same thingin the Mediterranean," Butchertold Reuters.
Butcher saidH olyman was likely  into expand into Asia in the future as the cost structure for operating fast ferries improved in some markets inthe region.  
"We could be seeing the cost  struct ure changing in Asia, so we are likely to move into some markets innorth Asia and south east Asia," Butcher said.
He said that asincomes rose in Asia the amountscharged for ferry services would rise, making it more economicalfor operators likeHolymant oenter  the market.
Holyman company secretary Simon Lennon said the company wasalso looking at fast ferry services from Darwin to Indonesia, buthe did not expect a  decision to bemade for atleast a year.  
"It isone of a number of projects we are looking at in the region,"he said. He s aid Holyman had looked  at particular routes withinChina and Indonesi a,  but they did not fit within the company's plans. "I would imagine in a few years we would hav e s omething up there (in Asia)," Lennon said.
Holyman shares had a lacklustre showing in its first  year of listing, but sinceJanuary this year the  shares have  more than doubled to make the stock one of the strongest sharemarket perf ormers over the past year.
The shares lis ted in April 1994 at A$2.00 and hit a high of A$6.00 on November 11 and are  cur re ntly trading around A$5.06.  
The Sydney-bas ed group was fl oated on the local bourse in Apri l 1994,  as part of a spin-off  from TNT Ltd, when the t ransport group was selling assets to trim its high debts.
"The stock really took some time to get off the ground,"Butcher said.
"I think there has been a lot of hard work done  over the past year to educate shareholders in what t he company is doing a nd where the company is g oingas there was aperception out there thatwe were a mismashofbusines ses," Butcher said. 
Holyman's main activities are its fastferry services in Australia, acros s the North Seabetween Britain and Europe, New  York and in Denmark. It alsooperates a gas pipeline, bulk commodity handling and freight forwarding businesses.
 "There are a number of d ifferent projects and businesses,  we f ound thereare quitea lot of common threads going thro ugh," Butcher said. "I think these operations all have their own p lace and there are opportunties toexpand these  further,"  he said.
Butcher wor ked with TNT for  25 years before taking charge of Holyman when it split from TNT.  
Butcher said the group  had no plans to raise capital to fund the expected expansion,  as the company was well financed.
In October, Holyman bought a fastpassengerferry for A$43  million. He said there was n o plans for a ny immediate purchases ofmore ferries.
B utcher said he could not comment on its trading performance or earnings forecasts.
Holymanreported a net profit of A$16.09 million in calendar 1995. The group posted a net profit of A$15.03 million in the six months to June 30, 1996, up from A$6.79 million earlier.