Genetics are such a strange thing, such a bizarre coincidence of DNA andtraits.Take me for example. I have a very unique genome. Immutable, my doctor calls it. Appar ently that means that even when bitten by a vampire, attacked by a werew olf, or even  cursed bymagic, I remain huma n. Stubbornly so, in fact.I'm nearly 1400 years old, yet another strange trait of my immut able genome. My cells replicate perfectly, giving me a theoretical immortality and I don't really get sick. Like I said, genetics  are funny. When Iwas  born, I remember being treated as a freak, someone strange and different. My doctors took a lot of blood and tissue s amples, and I remember spending a lot of time with n eedles in me . Thenof course, came the  Upheaval.
It started about fifty years after I was born, and it continued for nearly three centuries. Mankind slowly wen t extinct, our place taken by the supernatural creaturesof legends. No one really knows howit started, but it began in Europe. Vampiresand Werewolves emerged and began killing and turning everyone they could find. Then came theFomor, the Seelie and Unseelie, and all the other Gloaming creatures. By the end, every human hadbeen turnedor killed, except one. I was kept as a science experiment by one of the vampire lords, a man namedKristoff, who continually subjected me to new methods of turning me. He was actually pretty chill about the whole thing, goingout ofhis way tomake surethat I w asn't harmed by his experiments.
Kristoff had enemies though, and eventually he was killed, hishousehol d liberated. Thi nking I was one of his  house, I was cast out into the world, the last humanleft. Finding  a jobwas easy, since themajority ofthe new species wer e nocturnal, jobs that needed to be done throu ghout the da y werein high suppl y. I work as a solar panel tech, keeping a massive farm of panels working for the Unse elie Court. They could handle the day, but they pre ferred the night,  and they hate diron and steel, meaning it was difficult for them  to manage their solar farms. Enterme, their werewolf tech. I'm not really a werewolf, but it means I get a three day paid vacation e very month at the full moon, a vacation Iuse to go fishing.
The Unseelie are actually pretty great bosses, definitely mi srepresented in human literature. They have a ton of rules, and they apply toworkers, meaningI get paid excellently and I have a great benefitspackage. Mydoctor, working with patient confidentiali  ty, knows I amhuman, and helps me manage. He files reports saying I'm a werewolf and he's been super helpful getting me mealsthat are balanced, sneaking  mesupplements to ass ist my  meat-filled diet. Basically, he's my rock. Fortunately for me, he's a Elder Fae, and is more  immortal than I am, so I don't have to worry about a new doctor every hundred years or so.
He's been fascinated by my genome, just like Kristoff was,and I do my best to make sure he has lots of samples.I figurekeeping him happy  isthe least I can do. As the world's oldest and  o nlyhuman, I keep my head down and watch as the wor ld changes. When the Upheaval first happened,the technology level dropped signi ficantly, until the supernatural creatures began  to understand humanity's technology. Now, my Fae doctor takes MRIs, uses 3D Holo Matrices to plot  my genome, and does scans using long w ave light scans.Not only did the supernatural creatures understand our technology,theyalso resumedour expansion. Now, nearly 1400 years later, the Earth is a utopia, each race well-representedandwell-treated. As a human born in the the late 1900s, I wake up everyd ay fascinated by how the world has changed. Floating citi es, space travel, and eve n flying cars, have now become the norm.
All in all then, this world's not so bad. I make a goodliving,  I have lots  of friends, and I recently startedseeing an Uns eelie Fae, a girl named Mashian, who's even older than I am. I've even been thinking of sharing my secret with her, so hopefully she's okay dating a human. Anyway, that's life in135 8 A.U. It's different that I expected when I was a kid, but it's not bad. Not bad at all.