Dear Diary, Iknow its been a while but please forgive me. Earliertoday when walking home from school I had a strange, no,the strangest thing that hasever happened to mehappened today and  Iam totally freaking out. I was crossingSquash Creek on the north bridge like I do everyday after class. But thistime  when I approached the on ramp I noticed a small wooden stool sitting inthe path. it wasn't un til I tried walking around it did I notice the..thing, I don'tknow what tocall it a troll maybe?   Yeah, a troll that makes sen s e. I met a troll today . Atfirst I though it was some crude creation ofsome meth tweakers made of dead catsan dfish but then this harry, scaliething turned to me and gaveme a grin. I was s o taken back that Ifellon my ass  right there. If not for that I wouldhave been out ofthere instantly, and the fact thatthis thing started to spea k  to me.." Easy there young-en!" it said in a d isturbingly human voice "Where be you off to in such a hurry"? NaturallyI answered it. Ispokebackto the "troll", I mus t have been  in shock still. "I was just trying to  crosshere, I do it almost every day". It was silentfor a moment after that then replied "You see son, this is mybridge now"! "And you cross it on my terms". Hestuck s ome sort of crooked cane in my face as I  started to get up to my feet. "You must answer my riddle " he choked outwith a laugh. This was thepoint where I was convinced I had gone absolutely bon  kers.  I literally pinched myself which only aided in his laughter. "What time is it when an elephant sits onyou r fence"? he said in aslow majestic voice.How was I suppose dtoknow that? It was probably some ancient proverb or great life lesson I had never heard of..I tried reasoning with the thing but it wouldn't have any. I had toanswer it..otherwise I would have to walk four miles to th eother crossing. Yeah right. I sat there for about twenty m inutes watching it shoo flies awayunt il I h ad settled  on an answer. itnever told m e what  would happen if I was wrong in my reply...I opened my mout  h to speak "What t ime is it when an elephant sits on  your fence"?  I r epeated. "Its time to buy a new fence" I said con fidently. The trolls face showedno emotion until he suddenly erupted in laughter, heeven fell off his stupid stool. Was I right I though t to myself. I then decided that  while he mocks my wrong answer I wasn't going  to take any of that.I ran. I ran fast and didn't turnback. Now I'm recording it all.  Should I tell my parents? What if it followedme? Was myanswer right? I'm not even sure it actually h appened ..