The television and entertainment industriesvowed Thursday to use only their system  for r ati ng TV programmes and promised to  reject -- by legal means, if necessary -- any government-imposed plan.
Following months of  work, a group ofTV andHollywood executives a re scheduled next week to unveil plans for a system to rate shows based on their suitability for kids of different ages,especially those under 14 yearsof age.
It will be similar to the 28-year-old system of  letters and numbers used by the moti on-picture  industry and which includes the ratings G, PG, PG-13, R and NC-17.
"We will not use any other TV rating guidelines other than the oneswe are going to announcenext week," said Jack Valenti, chief executive  of the Motion Picture Association of America andhead of the "implementation  group" developing the ratings.
Bu t parental groups, children's advocates, educators and some key lawmakers -- including  Representative Edward Markey, a Massachu setts Democrat -- have demanded that the group include acontent-based system specifying the level of sex, violence and bad language.
Lawmakers  have not ruled out a legisla tive fix."It isclear that the industry has so far f ailed to  respond adequately to the fundamental interest of parents in knowing the specific content of TV shows in advance," Marke y said at a news conference accompanied byother lawmakers and groups pushingfor a content-based system like the one nowused by the HBO cable channel.
At  a press conference responding to Markey, Valenti lashed back. He accused Markey of trying touse governm ent as a"big brother" to impose his own scheme. And Valenti vowed not to ben dunder press ure and alter his group's system.
" We're not going to changea word of it. We're  not going to redot an 'i' or recross a 't,'" Valenti said. "If there isany intervention by government, we're goingto be in court in a nanosecond."
Th e Federal Communications Commission alsomust approve  or reject the  ratings system. If it were to rejectit, the agencycould cal l fordevelopment of analternative plan -- one that Valenti said the industry would ignore.
Once the ratings are im plemented in January, Valenti did say the industry would revisit thesystem after about a year to determine whether it should be  changed or "tweaked."
"Is it  perfect? Of course not. All subjective systems are flawed. So is ours," Valenti said.
Theratings -- expected to include six broad categories --will not apply to news, news magazine shows such as "60 Minutes" or sports.TV networks and syndicators will issue the ratings, with the categories"mingling" ageand content, a ccording toValenti.
Proposedguidelines leakedto the media include two forchildren: "TV-K" for kids and suitable for all ages; and "TV-K7" for children  olderthan seven.
The other four are: "TV-G" forgeneral audiences; "TV-PG," parental guidance suggested; "TV-14" for p arents stronglycautioned; and "TV-M" for mature audiences only.
The ra ting are to be used inconjunction with a "V-chip" installed in TVsets that allow parents to block out shows the  y considerto o violentor racy.
The HBO system,developed in the mid-80s, off ers ratingssuch as "MV" for "mild violence," "SC"  for  "strong sexual content" and"AL" for "adult language."
But Valenti said that system is unw orka ble and is too complicated to appear in TV listings in the newspaper.
Healso said a 1 9-member monitoring and oversight group will be  created to  oversee the new ratings. It will includeachairman and representives from the creative side of the industry, TV broadcaster s and the cable-TV industry.