Dyslexia affects children with n ormal eyesight and intell ect  in different ways,suchas an  inability to read ora cquire w ords. Coaching or  a specialized educationa lintervention  may help most children with Dyslexia to perform better in school. According to the article, Learning difficulties are one ofthe many consequences of Dyslexia. A youngster with Dyslexia willhave difficulty keeping up with their classmatesin most classrooms since reading is such a fundamental ability in so many areas. In the absen ce of treatm ent, Dyslexia may lead topoor self-esteem,behavioral issuessuc h as anxietyoranger, as well as d etachment frompeers and teachers, and parents. When Dyslexia is not diagnosedand  addressed throughout the  childhood, itmay lead to long-term issues in adulthood. The chances of children s ucceeding inlife are reduced if they cannotlearn tore ad and compr ehend. The author explains  that Attention-Deficit  /Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) may make Dyslexia more difficult to cure by causing difficulties in maintaining focus, hyperactivity, and impulsivity. Children with Dyslexia a re more likely t  o experience learning challenges if their siblings and parents suffer from the same condition.
Furthermore, men are more likely than femalesto suffer fromDyslexia;however, the disorder affectspeople of all ages,socioecon omic, and ethnic backgrounds.Children born with dyslexia struggle with reading, understanding, and spelling. Thearticle expands my topic understanding in several ways.I learnedthat Dyslexic children are grea t empathizers; manypeople with  Dyslexi a hav e a real personality. The  writing and reading difficulties might help children empathize with those struggling. The arti cle’s strength is that it has discussed the causes and effects of Dyslexiawi th the right age bra cket cons ideration, that is, fromage 4to 10.Thearticle’s weaknes s is that it generalized the genders without being sp ecific; again, it only mentionedthat Dyslexia is mo re  often experienced in male children compare d to females without explaining the reasons .Concerni ngrace, there isa spar senumb er of researchpapers regarding Dysl exia amongblack childrenanditsconseq uences. Dyslexia mainly affects white children than black children, and thus the article addresses white children widely. I will use this article as part ofmy capstone project by generating public health education proposal on Dyslexia to preventthe public from viewing Dyslexia asacurse.