I lost my mother in the stampede. She was torn from my gra sp and carried away in the flow of sweaty, mindless humanity. My nine yearold mind could not process thisand when I screamed my voic e was drownedout by the mashing of feet and the grinding offlesh.
For a few moments Iwas lifte d off my feet betweenthree fat ladi es and dragged around in  kind of as adistic tango, like those people on dancing with the stars.
I wa s carried to the toy isle and spun around in a three sixty then dropped to the floor. A large boot crunched over my hand. Therewasa sickening crackle as I saw my wrist bend in a way It never had before.
I pulled my arm to myself and looked in hor ror atmy limp wristand dangly fingers. For a few mor e  moments, there was nopain. Until I got kicked in the shins, by a skinny teenager with brownbaggy  pants. He looked down with his glazedeyes that narrowedfora second ashe stumbled around me. He mumbledsomething under his breath and then was gone in  the sea of sh o ppers. Now my wrist and my ribs hurt, painflared through my bodyand I screamed, it was all I c ould do.
Theconsum ers rushed righton by. I tried to standup by pushing up fr om the floor. My wrist bent ba ckwards and my who le arm was slashed with pain. Iused my legs and popped up, ju st in time to get bounced  by a large bellywith a shirt that said santa I'vebeen good. Santa's face knocked me backward a few steps, but luckily I caught my balance at the last moment on a nelderly man who was holding up bettert han I was, and I tried to fight the crowd towards the exit.
Being pushed and prodded and severely injured, and too shortto see over thefoaming masses, I somehow ended updeeper in  the store. Lost in the underwear isle. Shelveswere being  ripped clean. A huge rufus erupted a few yards away, and a display with racks of pants and shoes was tipped over. Through the ch aos I heard screams of agonyand saw flashes of several people pinned  under the large shelvingunits.
I couldn't fightit, I had no control of where I went, and the crowd carried me closerto the acciden t. There was blood onthe floor and a twitching black man's arm swatted my leg from u nder a massive beam-like shelf.
Thankfully, I was whisked awayfrom the scene,and actually spotted a  small break inthe crowd, I ran through the opening,headed toward the big red exitsignthat isonlyabout thirty yards away, but suddenly my progress was halted byth e closing in of human bodies.  I'm stuck. AT.V. being carried smashed intomy wrist and I was suddenly in t ears from the pain, confusion and hysteria.Suddenl y a shotgun blast echoed acrossthe store. Th en another. The crowd was quieter fora moment, and the swarming buzzing slowed down and everything seemed almost still. For about halfa second. Then the screaming started. I was pushed to the ground and a woman fell on top of me. Peop l e were stepping on both  of us running for the exit,running for the back, running into each other in chaos. My wrist screamed in  pain, my ribswere probably broken, and I was pinned under this woman who was nowunconscious.
The last thing I saw was a boot com ingdown on my face.