The article represents an overview of other literature on methodologies and cr iteria used in supplier evaluation  and selection proce ss, which is believed to be oneof the vital com ponents ofa success ful ope ration o f a manufacturing company. In particular,the paperemphasized the industry’s change in this field – from focusing primarily on operational efficiency to embracing the pot ential of strategic partnerships.The article claims that theright approach to supplier assessment, thus, ist he key to a company’s development and progress.
The paperstarts  with va riousways to address theissues r  elated to MCDM ofsuppliers’selection. The mostco mmon onesare stated tobe mathematical mode ls, Simplemulti-attribute rating technique (SMART), analyticnetwork process  (ANP), analytic hierarchy process (AHP), data envelopment analysi s (DEA),linear prog ramming, andsome others. For example, DEA isa methodology focused ona supplier system and classifies it either as efficient or inefficient based onselecting particular criter ia. Mathematical programmi ng models us ually in corporatecomplex evaluations between suppli ers, allowingone to compare them and identify themost optimal in terms of cost and other criteria.
The article further c ompares all methodolo gies by their popularityexpressed in  the fre quency of mentionsin the literature. Thus, DEA is the mostcommon approach with 30%  men  tions, whereas mathematical programming (17%),AHP (15%), andcase-based reasoning account for fewer mentions. However, those methodologiesreprese nt the largest share of all MCDM approaches.The article highlights th e significance of knowing this distribution,whichcan build an idea of t hemost prominent way s to addressthe issues with suppliers’ assessment an d selection. It is alsostated that suppliers should be evaluated based o n “the  inputs of the strateg ic,functional and operationallevels” (Agarwal et al., 2011).Methodologies such as DEA, mathematical programm ing, or AHP areadvised to be used for identifying themo  st op timal suppliers, whereas AHPis notedto be eff ective in  prov idingconsistency.