Omin ous gray clouds scudded over Hong Kong on Sunday as the British colony mar ked the 100-day countdo wnto the handover, but there were few physicalsigns of gloom and doom in the wealthy community of   six million.
More than 7,000 HongKong peopletook to the streets to the din of cymbols and kettle drums ina patriotic f ervour to celebrate theimpending reunion with Ch ina at midnight on Ju ne 3 0, 1997.
A stone's throw away, thousands more, most of them westerners and swelled by an influx ofvisitors, indulged in th  e ritualistic orgy that has built uparoundth e annualinternational Rugby seven-a-side tournament.
Thetou rnament was honoured thisyear, the last underBritish rule, whe n Rugby Authorities made it into the world cup  event.
The 28th andlast British governor, Chris Patten, described Hong Kong asrunn ing as smoothly as a Rolls Royce limo usine -- but warned China against tink ering with the finely tuned machinery that isthe Hong Kong of 1997.
Butfor the majority of Hong Kong'shardworking citizenry, it was  a normal  Sunday. A chance for a lie-in, a family gathering at a restaurant -- a day off from work.
With just 100 days t o go, Hong Kong is awash in a seaof differingemotions.
Some, like the street revellers,are delighted that more than 150 years of Chinese humiliationis about to end.
"This is a grand andgreat occasion. Injust 100 days, we will return to  the Chinese motherland," said chief o rganiser Raymond Wu as the revellers gathered in Victoria Park --  named  after the queen who reigned when Br itain,at the height of its imperial powers, wrested Hong Kong from China's weak andcrumbling Qing dynasty in the mid-19th century.
"We welcome the washing away of over a century of humiliat ion and shame," Wu said to aburst of applause.Othersfret, parti cularly the pro-democracy camp, about their f u ture under a China that has already put in place plans to dilutecivil liberties and dissolve the elected legislative council -- undoing democratic reforms spearheaded by Patten.
A han dful of demonstrators, their mouthstaped shut inwhat they said was a symbol of things to come,took up posit ion around the base of Queen Victoria's statue and h eld up placards co ndemning Ch ina's brutal military crackdown  onst udent-led demonstrators aroundBeijing's Tiananmen Square in June 1989.
Many people are simplykeeping their fingers crossed.
ButHong Kong, as itenters the  last leg of its drawn out transitionfrom B ritish colony to Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China, has def iedthose who forecasta society in chaos, of panic, economic collapse and deserted buildings.
Patten said Hong Kong had reached this moment in it s history in first class condition.
He cited a poll conducted earlier this month by the 1997 Transition Project at Hong Kong's BaptistUniversity that found that 90 percent of the people here were happy withlife.
Patten s aid the views that Hong Kong wouldquickly adjust to th e rolling back of freedoms or of more authoritarian gov ernment were dubious.
"Hong Kong is, as I said rec ently, a smoothly functioning community. It'slike a Rolls Royce," Patten said.
"All you need to do if you're in charge is to slip into the driving seat, switch on the ignition and away yo u go .
"Idon't quite see the point of liftin g the bonnet to tinker with the engine. That only raises  worries about whether it w ill work so well, and whether you maybe persu aded by some people to startst ripping it down for spare parts."