"Who can replace Death? He was the most feared of us all. Witho ut Death there can be no reckoning upon  the sinf ul mortals."
War scratched his thinning beard. H e wa s running out of options. No others ha d daredto takeup such a heavy burden. While War was nostranger to the horrors of, he shuddered to think abou t the atroci ties th atDeathhad  committed. Was there any being in the7 realms totake up the Cloak and Scythe?" But there is someone ." hisse d Famine.
"Brothers you are aware that all the atrocities we hav ec ommitted were dealt by Man.War, death, famine and conquest . These were all Man'sundoing.  Who e lse better to dont he burden of Deaththen a man himself?"
Famine'sragged hood covered his face, onlyshowing his decaying mouth twisted  in a sick smile.
Conques t was quick to challenge."Man, donning the very bane of his existence?Brother, your imp  rudence willbe the end of us all. A mortal manis  hideous creature.He is greedy, selfishand cruel. Giving one this muchpower will only resultin abuse."
"Conquest, yo u are as foolish asever. Haveyoulearnt nothing from Death? He wasthe wisest ofus all,he-"
"If Death  was so wise, explain his abrupt depar ture. Why did he l eave his duties behind?We are the horsemen of the apocalypse;  both terrible and glorious. When the Horn of theHeavenssounds we  will charge and strike fear into the hearts of sinners. It is  who we are. Death wasa fool  f or leaving."
"ENOUGH!"
War slammed into Conquest,knocking him down to  the brimstone. He u nlea shed an onslaught of blows onto his golden armor until it was dented beyond recogni tion. Breathless, Warstood up towering ov er his foe and boomed. 
"Iwill not takethis insolence. Death was the bestof us. I loved him as a brother and a mentor."
War's stone fa ce softened for a second."Shouldyou be st upid enough toblaspheme our brother again, I will end you."
Conquestnodd ed in shame. He was notused to the bitter tasteof defeat. He silently vowed that Warwould pay for thehumiliation hesuffered."Famine. You saythat amortal can replaceDeath. Bringhimto me." 
"As you wish brother."