I knew I could not  cook, but I did not sweat it. The door bell rang, andI was so excited. I opened the door and  let my twogooey  one eyed companions in. They were soglad that they did not evennotice my baseballbat. I swung. They were mine now. All mine
The two alien awoke to"gou rmet" jellybeans. They stuffed themselves, those crude idiotic blobs. Smiling they commented on how strange huma n customs were. That was quite funny, considering what I really had planned. I laughed at them.
Three weeks later, they  werestill strapped to their  places and  woke up, ate, then sle pt. Jellybeans were their every waking hour. They lived jellybeans loved jelly beans , breathed jellybeans.
On the i r ninth week th ey realiz ed what I was doing, but they were powerless. I  laughed at  them asI broke their jaw hinges. Now they can't com plain, so allwas wondrousagain.
By the next week they  went on a jellybean strike, but I knew that wouldno t last long, considering how attached to the foodthey were.
I broke  th eir  jaws, their life, their will. Theywere now truly mine.
Two yea rs just flew by , my litt le companions were soentertaining.But the little tri ck was starting to get old. I grew tired, so I decided to spice things up once again. I starved  them. Then, Itold them the only wayto get their food was to beatone another up. The winner would eat. However, that little contes t would be way too bori ng, so I  then sawed off each of the ir fo ur legs. I then let them at each other. They sprang like animals, biting punching  each other. It was a slow process, them having no legs and little energy. But that m ade it al l the more worth while. I was even kind of sad when finally the weaker of the two was knocked out. I knew I needed more. So then, I spiced things upagain.I told the still barelyconscience one that in order to get his meal he would have to kill hisbest alien friend. He was shocked. I laughed again.
So, I prepared the murderfor him slowly. I handed the syringefilled with black licorice to thevictorious alien. The loser alien then wokeup, only awake enough tosee his own friend inject the deadly dose of jelly beans into his body. He died shortly, butboy was itmassive ly entertaining.
The alien that was  still alive  cried, making inaudible noise for his jaw was broken afterall. He demanded his jelly beans. It was not polite enough. His attitude was simplyunacceptable. So I kicked him in the gut. I threw him agains t the wall and told him to be polite. HE WAS THEN KNOCKEDOUT. HE COULDNOT PERFORM THE TASK OFASKING NICELY. HE H AD TO BE KILLED AT ONC E FOR HIS BRUTALMISBEHAVIOR.
Boy did I lovethat experience. But I would not mi ss it. It was  a lot ofwork. Jellybeans are costly after all. I ate my dinner  slowly, savoring everybite. Ali en flesh tasted so good. I knew itwas all worth i t.  Eventhough I could not cook well, I knew not to sweat it from the beginning. My plan had been a great success after all.
DidI write itcorrectly BookWyrm17? What do you think about i t? I think I did it p retty well!
r/jesuschristreddit