Standing onthe corner of a bustling city street somewhere heavily populated i n America stood a man, and this man's name was Alex. This storyrevolves around Alex and his point of view, I will assure you of that now so that
there is nofurther confusion. Being Alex'sstory, I do not feel the need to state where in Americathis i s taking place,as that fact is irrele vant to Alex today, andthusirrelevant to our story.
Alex was always a special somebody, Throughout his life constantly picking himse lf up from failure after failure in search ofgreater value and wealth. But today was special as it seldom seems to be recently, Alex was given
a small break fromthe monotony of this struggle by being offered a choice. As he passed by a young child onthe street asking for money, holding out a pitiful tin can whose grease marks closely rese mbled the same ones that were written across the child's face. Dawning the realization that  he had a choice to make here , that is, between understanding this child's point of view, or passing along without so much as a glance as so many people seem to do,
Alex made his choice. Knowing the nature of things and deeming himse lf as a man of great wealth, he indulged to share some of his value with this child. "A small price to pay, in the greater scheme of thin gs", he silently
recalledto himself, knowing very well of the repercussi ons this could cause for himself. He knowingly pulled out his wallet and quickly found a $5 bill stashed away for important  times like th ese.With a look of deep understanding
of thin gs, he told the child a small glimpse of his story, that which is not important to our story still.After sharing h is great wealth, he handed the child a ragged old $5 and was about to leave before noticing that thegrease marks, tears, and an ageless expression on that bill were strikingly similar to that of the container it was now held in and the face that gleamed with excitement to have a chance at food and the permission to dream freely at night. Alex took note
of this as he left with his chin up proudly, he reallywas a rich man. I suppose this is whereour short story must begin, so let us c ontinue  o n.
Al ex, being a man who knows of many things and  many people, was actively looking to learn more and feel alive about  being alive that day. Knowing that a car was unneeded to transport yourself around the city, simply walked with no
ulterior destination in mind, untila thought provoked him. He had notbeen in this partof the city i n well over a month and knew of some very close people that he was glad to call his frie nds, even thoughtheir actions and involvement often stated otherwise. Alex called up an old friend that trulygoes back to the beginning of his story, A young woman by the name of Jane whom he had known since elementary school. Both had simply never desired to move out of the city.
Jane was apprehensive at first due to everything that consumes her busy, bustling life in the metropolitan. But with  minor thought, found Alex to be a wor thwhile man to tal k to and confide in, they agreed to meet during a lunch break ata local coffee shop.
"Jane!" Alex enthusiastically exclaimed, greetingthe young woman when she pulled up in a car outside of a nicer, well established coffee shop. "Alex! It's so good to see you again! I never have any idea when I'll get the time to see you anymore" replied Jane.
"It's no worry, you've finally seemed tofind a break from it today, I'm really glad you were able to meet up with me, lets grab some coffee?" And with a knowing nod, Jane took Alex's arm and strolled confidently into the cozy atmosphere of the coffee shop.
After a valueless exchange of pleasantries with the barista, they finally got their drinks and a chance to speak with one another at a remote corner of the shop, somehow evaded by others, even though that particular table provided the best natural lightingand relaxing atmosphere among them all. Sitting down, Alex suddenly found himself out of words and and his glance at Jane revealed the same.
Oh well, better tostart from the bottom. "The weather today is something straight out of a movie scene, don't you agree?A little light rain here and there mixed with some awfully angry looking clouds, really  makes you appreciate the calmness of what canhappen to the world." Alex quickly stated, weather was always a good topic to start a conversation off of, right? Jane calmly replied, looking worried about what she was about to say "I really wish I could see the world fr om your eyes, Alex, today seems totally miserable if we're being honest, just like the last number of them." Alex, wanting to probe further into
the matter responded back, "What's the matter? Wasn't it just last week you were telling me that you have been given the opportunity of of a lifetime?"
"Well, if we're being honest, I certainly thought it was. Sometimes it seems the world just has  no sympathy for what we go through and feels the need to  add more and more weight onto our shoulder s."
"If you  don'tmind my curiosity, can I ask what happened to the deal?"
After a silent moment that loudly stated Jane was in deep though, she relieved her answer. "Yeah, I botched it up. It was supposed to be a multi-million dollardea l, I was  finally able to see a light at the end ofthe tunnel and I let it get to me."
A moment of silencethen passed, as Jane realized that Alex would not probe further, for she had already started talking. So she continued "The thought of being my own CEO, the feeling of really and truly becoming something,
living a life that I would be proud to call my own. I just let it all get to me, I cracked under the pressure."
After an unnaturally long silence , she quietly managed to get out
"I was soscared, I d idn't even attend the final meeting. I just sat there until my time came, I stood up and left the building. To be honest I've been a nervous wreck since."
Alex, knowing the undoubtedly great impact that his words were about to have, took a momentto compose himself before uttering a sound.
"Firstand foremost, I want to thank you for being open  and honest with me, itis these acts that make us human and whowe are. Secondly, I do not believe that you made a bad decision."
Obviously perplex ed by his words, Jane managed to let out a short sentence between borrowed breaths of air while holding back tears.  "what do you mean?"
Alex promptly replied, "You know far better than I do, the value of money and wealth. If there was anybody in this world that I look up to on these matters, it would without doubt be you . I've seen the things you've accomplished,
and Ivebeen blessed to witness the blossoming of the seeds you ha ve planted for yourself. It's important that you don't confu se happenings for their f ace value, you never will have any idea where that business venture would have
taken you, and you likely never will. If there is anybody in thisworld that is capable of building something from nothing, I know this to be your calling."
Jane, obviously taken aback by the wordsof her close friend, did not mutter a word for the next amount oftime it took three or maybe four people to receive their drinks. Alex,knowing in some waythat he might have shared some of his wealth, simply took to understanding the environment aroundhim. Today really was a good day.
The rest of th is meeting is of great unimportant to our story,  and thus will end here.  Jane moved on that day with a great mix of emotions and desire, but also a fierce motivation to succeed thenext attempt she made, though she madesure not to share that for fear of breaking it. And our
dear friend Alex moved on that day with a great deal of certainty,for he had planteda seed that, if he i s truly lucky, will get to see something beautiful blossom from a conversation that was so ordinary and meaninglesson
the outside.
First time really coming out of my shell and attempting to share some work that I can create, so please allow me constructive feedback and comments so I can further improve my craft.