The recent sentencing o f Chinese dissident, Zhang Chenguang, to 11 yearsin prison has sparked concerns among Hong Kong's pro-democracy activists. Manyfearthat this move  may be an  indication  of the Chinese government'sincreasing efforts to curb freedoms in Hong Kongpost-handover.
Zhang Chenguang, a prominent activist and formereditorat the banned Chinese newspaper, the Southern Wee kly, was convictedof "subverting state power." This charge is often used against critics of the Chinesegovernment who push for greater political freedom and human rights.
Following his sentenc ing, many Hong Kong activists  spoke  outagainstwha tthey see  as a flagrant violation of basic human rights and a move towards authoritarianism. Democracy activist, Joshua Wong,tweeted th at "Beijing' s crackdown in HongKongis increasingly brazen… officials are now going after mainland dissidents."
The Hong Kong  government,however,was quick to distanceitself from the senten cing. Inastatement, the gover nme nt said that "Mr. Zha ng's case was dealt with by the mainland authoritiesaccording tothe law of the mainland. The Hong Kong Special Administr ative Region government would not interfere with the judicial proceedi ngs of the central authorities."
Regardless ofthe government's stance, many remain unconvinced that Zhang's  sentencing is anisolated incident.Critics argue that Hong Kong's freedoms have  been steadily eroded in recent years, with the government taking an increasingly hardline stance against dissent.
This sentiment was echoed ina rece nt  report by the Unite d States'Congressional-Executive Commission on China,which highlighted "grave concern" over  the Chinese government's manipulation of Hong Kong's legal system and theerasureof the city'sautonomy.The report called on theUS government to consideractionsto help protect HongKong's democraticsystem, incl uding sanctions on individuals responsible for undermining the city's freedoms.
Zhang's senten cing also comes less than a year afterChina imposed a controversial national security law on Hong Kong. The lawcriminalize s dissent and give s the Chine se gover nmentnew powers to police Hong Kong's political system.
Thes e developmentsare seen bymanyas a major blowto Hong Kong's autonom y, which was promised when the city was handed over fromBritish to Chinese rule in 1997. With growing concern over the erosion of freedoms, many Hong Kongactivists are calling on the international communityto speak out andtake actionto  pr otect the city's democratic system.