The modern world is currently facing a significant  change under global ization trends that shape economies, politics, t he workplace, education, andeven everydaybehavior. Most imp ortantly, due to the active exchangeof informationbetween people worldwide, culture is changing. Researchers  try to u nderstand whether the culturewill be further homogeniz ed in globalizationor diversified. This paper willargue that culture wil l become morediverse under the influence of  globalizationdue to the introduction of m ultiple cultural el ements int o societ ies.
Thelatest proc esses in cult ural  change demonstr ate that both sides of the argument,  namely those supportingdiversification and the ones claiming homogeneity, have reasonablegrounds. Onthe one hand, Cowen (2010) states that in aglobalized societywhereadominant cultureprevails, diversity will be substit ut ed wit h the culture that is imposed on others throughsuch  means  as c inema. I ndeed, Hollywood promotes Am erican codes a round the world because the US cinema market is the large st in the world.Thus, globalization all ows  Hollyw ood to reach all parts  of the world, integrating thesame culture codes everywhere.
However, the other side of the argument is more compellingbecause itconsiders the strengths of  localcultures. Inparticular, anexample of sushi’spopularityin Americansociety and cult ures of othernations  demonstrates that people adopt new cultural phenomena with acknowledgment of  their origin. According to Best or (2010), “Japan remains the world’s primarymarket for fresh tuna forsushi and sashimi” (p. 110). Thus, havingintegrated  itsproduct into the cultures of other c ountries, Japan has expanded itsmarket share.In suchamanner,with the easeof t ransportation and communication enabled byglobalization, there is amerge of cultures around the world. However, since market forces c ommonly rule these processes,  the host cultures are aware  of the origins of the borrowedcultural clusters. T herefore, to summarize the discussion, onemight state that  culture will not be homogenized inglobalization but rather diversified with credit given to each cultural component.