The wholefieldof astrophysics and astronomy, in general, is quite  perpl exing. The richhistory and s ignificant discoveries madebywell-known scientists paved the  way for the technological revolutionsof the 20th and 21st centuries.However,these distinct discoveries would not have beenmade w ithout equipment.The article The telescope in the sevente enth centurywrittenb yAlbertVanHeld en, sheds light on the devic eand its  significant imp ortance in thehistory of astronomy.
In this article, the author made several strong arguments. In the beginning, he indicates that thetelescopewas used against the enemies as a terrestrial instrument. However, with the advancement and multiple  improvements to the lense, the writer indicates that the telescope  started t o be applied to magnify objects (Van Helden 1974).  According to VanHelden, it wasthe telescope that made the differencein science,and it isthe mainreason why astronomers encouraged the telescope-makersto  work on lenses (Van H el den 1974). I agreet hat the t elescope can be the conduit of information for astronomers, and withits help, they can gather new data and make new discoveries.  Nevertheless, I disagree that it is the only source o f achieving such significant results in the astronomy.
Consequently, as has been mentionedby Van Helden,  different methods of encouragement of  telescope makers were used. There are also other sciences thatcontribute to the development of en gineering. For example, phys ics  and chemistry focus on the applianceof knowledge ab out forces, pre ssure, and chemicals and their  combination.The most rece nt developments might  include the development of new technologies like phones o r modern motors for vehicles. Moreover, while the advan cements have been so b ig, t here are no fields of engineering which are prohibited. Specific developments might be prohibited if theyjeopardize the health or liv es of people. The activity of engineering is,  therefore, controlled by special laws.
Hence, the development of telescopes and the improvement of the lens es gave an impetus to the advances in astronomy. Whilethe telescope was first used as a terrestrial tool, itsoon became astronomers’ tool. With the help  of telescope-makers and  deve lop ments of lenses, it was possible to make discoveries. However, other kinds of scienc es, such as physics and chemistry, contrib ute  to thetechnologi cal advancements of our time.While thereare nostrong prohibitions of engineering, it is unlawful to jeopardi ze thehealth or lives of people.