The stark chords of Tosca begin once again; Scarpia's motive isthe first thing the audience at La Scala Opera hear. Perhaps they are jadedby it,  but it still elicitswithin me feelings from a bygone life. Soon we'llsee entrancesfrom Cavaradossi and of cour se ourleading lady, Tosca, f orced to do the unspeakableand murder  one man totry and saveanother's life. Poor Tosca; if only she had known that Cavaradossi was truly given a stay of e xecution, perhaps she wouldhave acceptedScarpia's demand f or intimacy.
The people will then shuffle out of the opera theatre, lazily critiquing the same show thatthey've  seen entirely toooften here inMilan, and go out to  the cafés andrestaurants that they've been to many times before. Their lives, seemingly on a loop, continue attheir leisurely pace as Isit by i n my darkened villa above the streets watchingthedays pass by.
Acquaintancesof mine alwaysasked, "Why m ove to Milan?" "You don't know  Italian, doy ou?""Why now?"the y'd ask with all the sincerity of a Hallmark Valentine's Day card. I'm not  sure that I'd ever have an  answer for them, because they were righ t t o question my mo tives. Why ch oose  to fu ndamentallychange the eternal workings of the vampiriclifestyle?
For one, the Milanese choose to stay outuntil the ungodl y hours of 1 or 2 o'clock in themorning, meaning that my food is usually spiked with  the residual alcohol from their Lombardy region  chardonnay and pinot bianco by the pint. However, even getting past the eternal hangover that is my life, how do I avoid thatvillainousvegetablethat the Italians seem toput in every dish: ga r  lic.
Oh thedreaded aglio. For so often I took it for granted during my time in Vienna. Stakes could beeasily enough avoide d with goodplanning(an internally locked coffin with plenty of reinforcedsteel between myface and the world t hat might wish to destroyme), but the Austriansn ever bothered with garlic quite as often as they do here.
Perhaps I might go back toVienna and dine  off the simple people whose beer consumption is admirableas much as it isshameful. Perhaps I wil l get back to hearing the operas of Straussand Mozart, or maybe the occasionalperformance of Marschner's "Der Vampyr." But for now, I sit likeT osca, in a place I should never wish to be waiting for th e right mo mentto make my escap e and befreeagain. Now, this never sleeping city o f Milan holds mehostage with the  taste of death on everyone's lips.