Inthe Heat of the Nig htThe ideabehind Supertom can be  described as a trope used to make a black character heroic. The result is a peculiar image of a magical black,who is aminor or even almost background character, whose mission is to help the prot agonist guide him. To show the audience that ethnic minority characters are not bad people,Supe rtom takes a step forward to help others. T hey usuall y enter into the life of amuch more privileged and, in particular, almost always white, the central character,and in some way enrich the life of this main character. Some examples of Supertom include Lucius Fox from Christopher Nolan’s The Dark Knight, Mi chael Clarke Duncan in The Green Mile , Bagger Vance in TheLegend of Bagger Vance,and Uncle Remus from Song of the South.
Thus, a black character is endowe d with high achievements and extraordinary positive characteri stics,  and Supertom is obtained.Mr. Tibbs is Su pertom as he “is smarterthan all the white people, the best  homicide detectiv e in Philadelphia, brave enough to face down a lynch mob,” andexhibits “a somewhatunexpected knowledge of varieties of plant life.” (Vera, 156) He is a kind of racial Sherlo ck Holmes.
In other words, the relationship in the movie suggests the kindof friendship be tween blac ks and whitestha t Americans like to think of as accurate, but that is not true in the contextof the time frame in which In the Heat of the Night takes place. In the film, at no point  or scene does Gillespie seem to reach the point ofaccepting Mr. Tibbs. A t best, at the end of the film, there is a sense of i ndiffere nce. Nothing in the fi lm feels like a buddy moment, more like constant violenceand almost kidnapping. The scene in Gillespie’s living room was   the closest thing to friendliness. Thus, discussing this film in relation to buddy films proves to be a difficult task.
Do the Right ThingIn February 2020, two white men killed Ahmaud Arbery for allegedly robb ingsomeone. In March, two policeofficers broke into the apartment ofBreonna Taylor, who died from their gunshots, during an anti-drug raid. Thencomes the culminat ion – Floyd’s death inMay. Therefore, despite the age of  creation, Do the Right Thing does not lose its relevance.
The theme of US racism is somehow displayed in most ofSpike Lee’s films, andthedirector’sattitude towards it is invariably critical. While the film ultimately shows how dangerous itis to react to othersbasedon race, ironically, Lee port rays the characters in the film st ereotypically through their language and aesthetics. SpikeLee panders to stereotypes by using i conographyto represent the various racialgroups in the film (Etherington-Wright 236). He does this in variousways, such as having Itali an-American characters wear crosses and t-shirts. He also does this in hisportrayal of RadioRaheem with an African locket necklace and a big boom box playing loud rap music. Even tertiary characters,for example, a group ofPuerto Rican friends, are shown listening to salsa, speaking Spanish,and drinking beer on the porch of their apartment building. During the film’sculminatio n and theverbal screaming fight between Sal and Buggin’Out, the former uses racialepithets,telling Radio Raheem to turn off the jungle music and using profanity.
Despite the explos ive denouement,  one of the film’s strengths is the c omplexity of its characters and the portrayal of bla ckness on screen. Lee went beyondthe stereotypesof African Americans in movies and createdcharacters that are reflected in everyday life. In Do the Right Thing, blacks are not represented inthe traditional binary of inferior and s miling, aggressive and dangerous, but rather can exist as fuller expressions of themselves.