Yasu da Fire & Marine Insurance Co. isset to acquire amajority stakein CI GNA'sJapanese unitaspartofits ambitious growth strategy.
The Japaneseinsureris expected tocomplete the acquisition of 51%of CIGNA Life Insurance Co. by the end of 2021, pendingreg ulatory approval.
Yasuda Fire & Marine Insurance Co. aims to steer growth with the acquisition, as it enters into the health and life insurance sector along with its traditional property-casualty insurance bu siness.
The mov ewill also help CIGNA streamline  its operations following a strategic review of its  international insuran ce portfolios.
CIGNA Life Insurance Co. , which has roots inJapan dating back to 1987, provides various lifeand h ea lth insurance products, including individuallif e insurance, universal  life insurance, andmedical insurance.The insuranceunit has suffered s ome hit in recent years due to changes in fi  nancial regulatio ns an d low-interestrates.
Yasuda Fire & Marine In surance Co . seeks to invigorate the unit with increased capital while taking advantageof the growing demand for health and lifeinsurance among the country's aging population."As the Japanesemarket contin uesto evolve, weare excited topartner with CIGNA to offer a wider range of products   to strengthen our customer experience a nd competitiveadvanta ge," said Yas uda Fire &Marine Insura nce  Co.'s Pr e sident and CEO, Akio Kiyotani.
Th e deal also marks the latest move in a wave ofconsolidationin the Japaneseinsurance industr y driven by  changing  demographi cs and intensified by the COVID-19 pandemic.
The deal follows NipponLife Insurance's announcement in September 20 20 that it would acquire 85% ofthe shares i n MassMutual JapanLtd., the Japanese unit of U.S.-based MassMutual FinancialGroup.
The acquisitionby Yasuda Fire & Ma rine Insurance Co. is expected to enhance the company 'sposition inthecompetitive insurance market,with CIGN A alsobenefiting from a considerable capital injection to enhanceitsoperational effi ciency.
The terms of the transaction  have not been disclosed. Still, YasudaFire & Marine Insurance Co. isexpected to receive the financial backing  required to growits position in theJapaneseinsurance market better .