Theso cial determinants  of health are thecon ditions in  the environment in whichpeople live, learn, work,pl a y, worship, and age. I agree that the social  e nvironment in which people liv e can affect their he alth status. Health outcomesare  not determined solelyby biol ogical fa ctorsor access to quali ty health care (Cen tersfor Disease Control and Prevention, n.d.). Resources that improvethe  quality of l ife can significantlyimpact the health o f a populatio n.Ex amples of these  resources include  safe and affordable housing, access  to education, public safe ty, availability of healthyfood, local emergency services, and an environmentfree of l ife-threatening toxins (Office of Dis ease Prevention and Health Promotion, n.d.). Ialso support the rece nt shift in the view that it issolely up to the individual to inf l uencetheir health  in favor of recognizing  th e significant impact of external influences on it. Inthemodern  world, very little depends o n theindividual. At first glance, he can choosewhat to eat, whetherto exercise,  and whether to seekmedical care in a timely manner.
Infact, most of the choices that affecthealth are made by the marke ting machine, the governmen t,andlife circumstances. For example, modern advertising pres ses fromall sides, forc ing one to  choose specific products that are often not conduc ive to a healthy  lif estyle.The need to w ork hard to earn money fortheseproducts pushes people  to sacrifice a healthy sleep schedule and exercise. This chain  has many links, but  the result is always the same: people’s health is largely not up tothem. External  facto rs alsoindirectlyaffecthealth, such as health inequalities. When I read the  CDC ( 20 22) report onthese  inequalities,I was most surprised by the racial andethnic inequalities. In an era of globalization andliberalization of society, a phenomenon like racism must be eradicated.  The  field of health care is one in which treating  people equally is sometimesvital.That is  why I believe that racial andethnic disc rimination in this area must be eradicated in the firstplace.