A houseis more than simply a p laceto live; in fact,that is only one description of ahouse. A home is a place where one  feelsmo re comfortable and looks forward toliving thro ugh every day. A house is constructed not with stones or timbers but with the link of family. A person may ownevery materialistic property on the ea rth, but it would be  not very sensible if he did not ha ve someone with whom to exchange it. In other terms, e xpressingpleasureis also  linguistically tied to home. Additionally,home is more than a physical location; it is a st a te of mind. Th ey share a sens e of joy and pleasure with their family members.
A home is when one understands they are around individuals who can run them nuts in a second and make them feel good in the very same second. Home signifies that no matter what one is experiencing or howdifficult life becomes, there will always be someonewatching out for them. When a person is secure enough to provide an honest account of themselve s, theyknow they willbe accepted definitively. For m yself, I can single out a few places where I feel at home. This work was written with the aim of explaining one’s own concept of homeanda place where a person feels athome.
For me, home is made upof memories of me morable mo ments  that contributed to shaping and teaching me. As a result, my houseis also people, and whenhome tak eson a human figure, it is referred to as a family. I feel that family is a  relative concept th at is determined byconnections ratherthan blood (Hess). Nomatterwhere I  go in  the future, thi s atmosphere and these individuals who have shaped me as a human andshownme howto behave will al ways be astro ng foundation  for me. I know I ca n always return home. Indeed, the spirit is where the hou sehold is.
Since  college is where people spend most of  their day, I feelat ease. My classmates,whom I have known for many years, are also at the same   school.  Fo r instance, Ihavea friend in the same class as mewho is li ke  a sibling to  me. We communicatea lot, and he knowsall of mysecrets. I have known him for years and co nsider him to be my best fr iend. All of my professors are familiar to me, and they are all  delightful to me. They also instruct me and assist me with any  problems I may have.
In this way, I can summarize and express what home for me is. In this essay, like a home,I show my family and the college wh ere I study.For me,  the feelingof home is  the place where I can return at any time, and  if not all, then one person ca n definitely helpme. Home isa sense of calm and security, andfor myself,I single out such a factor as communication. The house is the place where you studied something for a long time and communicatedwith people who, as a result, became close to   me. Feeling at home is an essential feeling for every person because it gives people support and faith inthemselves and theirloved ones.