"Thing is, Nolan, criminalsshouldn't feel offended at being called roaches."
The reporter raised an eyebrow at me from across the coffee table. We were in a Starbucks on a Friday night, fullofchatty  teenagers. Sometimes, either one of us would needto raise our voices to be heard. "Why is that, Mr.  Clay?"
I sipped my coffee. "See, we got one thing in common with those dirty sons of bitches.Whenthe li ght comes on, we run."
"Yet earlier, you said you're different."
"Tell me, do you trust the government?"
Nolan shrugged. "I don't think my opinion—"
"Answerthe damned question."
"Not really. I mean, everyone knows they're spying on us.  Even as a journalist,I don't always get to—"
"So if you ordinary folkdon't t rust the government, wh at makes you think criminals will? Come forth and let your sins be washed away, as long as you committed  them  in this or that year, arbitrarily chosen by your man in that big white house?"
I scoffed. "Was broughtup Christian, you know. Far as I know, only one fella can pardon you. Humans ain't so forgiving or forgetful."
Nolan's expression became thoughtful. "Last year, the government chose 2012. Fifty- six people came forward with  confessions."
"I  saw the new spapers. Eighty murders in total,along with a bunch of petty crimes. One woman ate six of her neighbors' cats. Hilarious."
"Really? I don't seewhat's funny about that."
I laughed. "The cats?Who c ares about the cats? I'mtalking about the ma th. Eighty murders?  There are several times that number of homicides alone in New York City, let alone the state or the country. Doesn't thatprove what I've been saying? Criminals don't want a spotlight  on them.  How many of those fifty-six ended upbeing re-arrested for other crimesin other un-pardoned years?"
"More than half." Before I could interrupt, he sa id, "Let's revisit my earlier question. Why,then, ar e youkeen on publicity?"
"You're making me blush. I don't know what you're talking about."
"1978.You murdered sevenpeople. Or so you confessed."
"Eight, actually. She waslooking forher mom and dad, and wouldn't stop crying."
Nolan blanched, but turned a page on his notebook. "1996. A shooting in Central Park .F ifteen dead,including two police officers."
Ish rugged. "I wanted to clear the air. The Russianmob wasmaking their move; I was only defending myself. Everyone accused my organization of being responsible. But that's nothing compared to the bus bomb bank robbery in December."
"I understand you were arrested for that."
"Released two years later when the government decided to pardon that year." I leaned forward and motioned for him to come closer. "Listen, you wanna know what I think? The real r eason behind these pardons?"  His eyes gained a hungry look. "Yes, you can write this down.""I  think the government just wanted a way to pardo n their own people. You know, the assassinations and the espionage and the sabotage and spying, onAmericans by Americans . Those guys in suits, working for all those three-acronym agencies, they doa lot more shit than us. Why else would they pardon crimes from 1999 to2001?"
Nolan licked his lips and didn't answer, jotting furiously.
Smirking, I leaned back. "Besides, when youconfess, you  get a reputation. Respect. No, not from local shrimps. The big players. 200 1 was a pretty great year for me. Sold a lotof intel to foreign players."
"You didn't confess that," Nolan said.
"Off the record, please." I drained my cup of  coffee and looked at my watch.  "Well, thebiggest one was still 2012, of course. I believe you wrote the article. 'Crime lord comes clean; biggest  theft of the century'."
"Man, those banks and financial institutions just don't get it, do they? It's the information age! Security first;  efficiency and  whatnot second. Twenty billion. Twenty and frickin' loads of zeroes. That's what they get forunderestimating Chinese tech."
Nolan nodded and flipped a page. "Let'smove to the big question, shall we? You're making a confession tomorrow f or 2015; care to give me the scoop?"I grinned. "How about a riddle? The Vietnameseambassador. Fourteen train carriages. Can't be  givin g you everything, right? You a  journalist, do s ome research. Texan governor. The four jud ges. The Syrian massacre."
Nolan g ulped. "I...I guess I have some reading to do."
"Sure you do. Well, I think we'll be seeing each other in court tomorrow."
We stood and shook hands. As I turned to leave, a young man whose face was full of piercings came up to me. "You Mr. Clay?"
I nodded.
He pushe d agun into my chest andopened fire. There was screaming, and a lot of peoplerunning, but I couldn 't turn my head much fromthe floor. The boy backed away a s Nola n crouched beside me.
"There's a reason why roaches don't showthemselves," he  said softly. "Because, eventually, all pe sts meet the same end. You'rea big man, Mr. Clay, but too arrogant for your own good. Just becausethe government wouldn't touch you, doesn't mean we won't."
"And guess what?" He took the gun from the youngman's hand andheld it against my temple. "Next year, when the government decides 2016 was a great year, they wouldn't even hold this against me."
***
*Thanks for reading!Do check out [The Nonsense Locker] (http: //reddit.com/r/nonsenselocker) for more stories! *