According to Kant’ s philoso phy, the distinction between a person and a thing r uns through several basic criteria, largely related toindependence and dignity. A thing is only a means to finitude, that is, to anycompletion,while man contains completion in hims elf. Mandiffers in his finitudefrom the infinityof the world, but  he is valuable in himself  and cannot be used as a means. This determin es autonomy, that is, the independence of a person. Implicit autonomy determines the in ner ability of a person to do anything and, accordingly, the ability to distinguish between good and evil. According to Kant, a person, incontrast to a thing, has amoral  navigator that is common to everyone. It is because of the oppor tunity to masterthe concepts of good and evil and use them morally a  person differsfrom a thing. A pe rson cannot be used as a means and therefore, unlike a thing, hasn o value .
Dignity should be p erceived as an innate and inalienable trait of any  person, regardless of social institutions, class, and experience. At the same time, dign ity i s not only aninternal concept since it is something that can be given byone person to another , such as respect or favor. This means that the concept of human dign ity may not alway s be strictly intrinsic.  Concepts about the transfer or innateness of dignit y can havea significant impact on medical practice. A doctor who believes  that it is they who give dignityto other people by paying attention to them runs the risk offalling into miscon ceptions thatdistort moral representations . At the same time, a physician wh o professes equal human dignitya nd believes it is intrinsic is able to respectthe patient’s autonomy. How ever, this, in turn, can  create treatmentdilemmas if patientautonomy conflicts with th e specialist’s professionalism. In  any case, a medicalworker who professes human dignity as an inalienable value follows key principles of bioethicssuch as autonomy and  justice more  closely.
By the uselessness of dignity in medical practice, McLean means that talking about criteria for dignity in bioethics on ly distracts from the primary immediategoal of treatment. So merville argues in her book that  when dialogue in bioethics comes to a general agreement, the termdignity seems useful and relevant. If it is impossible toagree, the concept of dignity is depreciated and becomes useless. However, the idea of dignity can vary and be distorted in such a way that the very dignity ofa person will be humiliated; there will be no dignityin a person. There isa constructionist approach to human perception, inwhich the personality must meet the criteria to be considered truly human.  T his is the third use case for this concept, i n wh ich the misuse of this view becomes really dangerous.A person canbe determined by a higher awareness and cognitiv e ability, which determines the knowledge of their goal on Earth and moral criterion . However, some people with mental disabilities may thus actually notfi t the criteria for being human. Consequently, their external dignity will be diminished bythose who believe that theirinternal dignity isworthless. This is a terriblemis take in moral judgm ent and is very dangerous for medical ethics. Moreover, thequestion of human d ignity arises in thecase of embryos andembryos, which significantly complicates the issue of moral responsibility and giving dignity to a person in the case ofan abortion procedure. Thu s, the external dignity of a personcomes from the field of social experience and the attitude ofother people toa person, which is most valuable in bioethics and medical practice. The pursuit of dignity in each person can  help a doctor make truly valuableethical decisions and canhelp other profess ionals make them.