In general, the business case for the Centers for Diabetes appears to be positive since the pro jectis closely aligned with theneeds of thecommunity and the targetsset by the Affordable  Care Act (ACA). However, there are potential risks, as outlined in detail intheSWOT analysis, wh ich has to be considered before the  finaldecision is made. This note will detail the risks for the Centers for Diabetes and propose potential ways  of mitigatin g them.
Fi rst and foremost, the idea of a community healthcenter that addresses the community he alth nee ds is closely aligned with the value-bas ed care and the community focus that are the targets set by ACA. Moreover, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and Healthy People 2030 report cites the need to focus on how healt h issuesare managed from a communityperspective and not an individualperspective. Hence, there is a threat of other healthcare facilities that receive reimbursements f rom Medicare and  Medicaid in the county c hoosing to create a similar initiative.  This is because diabetes is acommon problem in the United States, affectin g 10% ofthegeneral p opulatio n and 14% of the Hispanic and African-American community.The only wayto mitigate this risk is to be gin market ing and outreach activit ies as soon as the project isa pproved and thereis funding to support the further stages of operations. In this way, the community willbecome familiar ized with the hospital and the Center, and even if other similar initiatives arise, this Center willalready have  an established brand image, which can guarantee thatit will also have  visitors.The second significant issue identified in the report is the financial statements, since based on the a ssessments, the reimbursemen ts, revenue,and grant funding will be in sufficient tocover the costs of staffing and opera tions. Hence, ther e is aneed to either add servic es that can b e reimbursed und er ACAor obtain an additional source of funding. Alternatively, there can be an opt ion for cutting the costs, for example, having fewer community wo rkers orreducing the expenditu res associated with traveling to help ensure that the fundsthat this Center will have been c overing these expenses. However, it is a better option  to request additional grant funding as it is vital to make certain that this Center addresses the  healtheducation needs ofthe community in a qualitymanner.Another alternative to obtain additional funding would be to request help from the hospital, as the community center helpsreduce the number of complications  and, therefore,  expendituresneededto care for the patients with diabetes. Moreover, the hospital can refer its patientsto th e health center toadvocate for their healtheducation and self-care, and in return, support the operationsof this  facility.
In summary, this note identifies the potentialrisks that the Centerfor Diabetes may face. The two mainconcerns that should be considered before the launch of the Center for Diabetes are the potential threatof other community initiatives address ing the same health disparity. This issue canbe res olved through early outreach and marketing.  The second problem is the funding issue, as the financial statements make it clear that the revenue and grant will not be enough to cover the  operatio nal costs. Hen ce,theCenter has an option of additional services,  r equesting additional grants, or asking for support fromthe hospital.