If the Board of Governors of the U. S. Federal Reserve System does as expect ed early Friday and votes toexpand banks'non-banking activities, it will only heighten the drive inCongress to overhaul U.S. banking regulationscompletely, analysts and industry officials said.
The Fed is expected to voteto allow banks' section 20 subsidiaries to derive 25 percent  of their revenuefrom non-banking activities such as securities underwriting, up from the current 10 percent ceiling.  
Th e  section 20 proposal was released  for  comment in July, but since then another  bank regulator has stolensomeof the Fed's thunder. Comptroller of the Currency Eugene Ludwig saidhis office willbegin a pproving bank affiliatesmoving into an assortment of non-banking businesses.
Both the  Fed's proposalandthe Co mptroller's act ions will raise the pressureon Congress to scrap the Glass-Steagall Act, according to RobertLitan, directorof economic studies at the Brookings Institute.In the past,banks led thechargeto change the law because  they wanted to get into otherbusinesses, like selling insurance or underwriting stock deals. Insurance com pan ies and securities firms generally opposed  thebanks creating le gislative gridlock.
"Now thetables  h ave been turned," Litansaid. "But it's not a two-waystreet. Other industries will wan t to level theplaying field."  
B o th moves also reflectcurrentmarket realities. The fi nancialservices industry, from banksto insurance companiesto mutual funds , is converging. Mutual funds already o ffer checking account-like money market funds andsomeof the leading stock and b ond underwriters are commercial banks.
In the wordsof onet op regulator, theFed's move from 10 to 25  percent,  "isnot m aterial." The Fed has required banks to take certain steps to prevent prob le ms in thesubsidiaries from affectingthe bank itself, and i ts government-insured deposits.
Competit ors in other fields fret thatthe banks insured deposits are aformofgovernment subsidy giving the banks an unfair advantagewhen theyventure into other fields.
Comptroller Ludwig disagreed. Speaking to reporters after deliveringa speech here Thursday,Ludwig said that walling off the subsidiary  "basically eliminates any subsidization."
Heopposes efforts by some in Congress to keep banks out of certa in fields, s uch as real estate ormerchant banking, entirely. "It's a mista keto set productlimits, particularly in  this day and age when we have such a dynamic marketplace," he said.