Britain's Britannic Assurancedeclared on Tuesday a 209 million pound ($336 m illion) special bonus for life  insurance policie s, following discussions with the government ono wnership of surplus insurance funds.
The payout will apply to all"with profits" policies in for ce onFebruary 17 , 1997. Details willbe given with the 1996 bonus due tobe announced nextmonth.
Thecompany said last year it discussing with the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) ownership of long-term assets,and a way to distr ibutethesurplus to policyh olders ands hareholders.
Britannic has now agreed with the DTI that 902 million pound s of the excess assetswithinthe long term fund can be attributable toshareholders.
Britannic also said itintended to increaseitsdivide nd for the year by 82percent to 2 3 pence pershare followin g an increase in life profits. This would be the  basis for continuing the company's progressive dividend policy.The news boosted Britannicshares, which jumped 71 pen ce, or nearly  ninepercent, a t o ne stage before se ttling for a rise of 29  pence at 832.5.
The moneyattributable to shareholders forms part of total assets inthe life funds which amounte d to 5.682billion pounds at the end of 1995.
Those assets were estimated to have risen by the end of 1996, Britannic chiefexecutive Brian Shaw sai d, and updatedfigures would be released on March 18.
 Britannic also  announced a restructuring of its long-te rmfunds and the results o f  astra tegic review of its business.
The review will lead to new sales managementandpremiumcollection  systems, streamlining of head office and investment in market analysi s and productresearch.
The initiatives are expected to cut operating costs by around 25 million pounds, based on 1995 figures.
B ritannic saidit plannedto build on its brand, investment managemen t and distribution  skills, financialstrength a nd product development abilities to strengthen its position and improve value to policy and shareholders.
Restructur ing the long-term fundwill create two continuing "with profits" funds, one for its industrial branch and the other for the ordi narybranch -- life and pensions business.
In f uture at least 90 percent of the surplus in the with pr ofits fundswill be allocatedeach year to with profits policies. The balance will beshareholders' profit for transfer to the profit and loss account.The company has also created tw o separate non-profit su b funds-- onefor life, one for pensions -- which willcontain non-profits business and bo th of which will be ownedby  shareholders.
The shareholder transfer for 1996 will be incr eased by 23 million pounds following the declaration of the 209million pound specialbonus. ($ = 0.621 British Pounds)