OneokInc. and Western Resources Inc. on Thursday agreedto a$660 m illion deal that combines their natural gas assets andgives We stern Resources  access to a broader base of customersfor its electricity and security services.
The deal reflects the moves within the utility industry to preparefor further deregulation.
Under the agreeme nt,Oneok  will take all t he natural gas assetsof Western Resources, making it the ninth largest gas distribution company in the United States serving 1. 4 million customers. Tulsa-basedOneok is the parent of Oklahoma Natural Gas  Co.
Western Resource s, based in Topeka, Kan., willbecome the largest equity holder in Oneok, receiving about 3 million new shares of Oneok common stock and preferred stock thatwill be convertible, upon necessary regulatory approvals, into about another 19.3million shares  of Oneok common. Its total stake in  Oneok isabout 45 percent.
The deal is expected to close by mid-1997, following approval by Oneokshare  holders an d federal and s tate regulatory authoritie s.
"They (Oneok) are a total gas company. They underst and thegas business  better than we do," Western Resources president David Wittig said in a telephone interview.
By swapping its gasassets, WesternResourceswill be able to focusitseffortson growing its electricity and home-security businesses, both of whi ch involve a customerbaseof home owners and 24-hour monitoring  of consumers.
Oneok's 735,000 customers could become potential clients of Western Resources' serv ices.
"Western Rseources has  been becom ing a nationwide marketer of retail energy -- electricity and/or gas -- and home security," Everen Securities analyst Dan Rudakas said. "This combination gives them direct access to another 735,000gas customers, which in the future ... would be potential electric customers and also electronic home  security customers."
The companies said the alliance will position the companies totake advantage ofthe expected dere gulation of theelectricity industry, allowing custome rs to buy electrical power from several sources instead of just the local utility.  That type of deregulation isalreadytaking place in the natural gas industry.
"Eventu allly there will be total competition  in electricity and in gas," John Hay es Jr, Western Resources chairman, told a teleconference. "We are just preparing for the future."
The companies said Oneok's independencewould be preserved by standstill provisions in theagreement  that define the rightsand responsibilities of the respecti ve companies for at least the next 15 years.
Western Resources   will receive a preferred dividend of 1.5 times the underlying common dividend, which now stands at 30 cents a share, but no less t han $1.80 per preferred share per year for the f irst five years.
Geor ge  K. Baum analyst Dennis Hudson said Western Resources'natural gas assets earned that company about $20 million in 1995.Aspa rt of Oneok, the assets  likely will earn more,given that company's expertise in gas distributionsand syn ergies from its  existing gas business.
With its  s take in Oneok, Western Resources will still benefit from a portion ofthegas earnings, aswell as future gas alliances that Oneok might enter into in the future.
"Oneok would continue to searc h for  opportunities to acquire more customers on the gas side. We're most supportive of that," W ittig said.
He added that Western Resourcescontinuesto look for w ays to expand itselectricity andhome-security businesses.