The business world is ever-changing, and companies must always  be flexible to these changes.One  ofthe changes that a business might need to adapt to is an expanding ta rget market. P&G currently sells personal care products to a marketthat is comprisedprimarilyof women. However, research shows that there isagrowing m arket among male consumers due  to the rise of male grooming. P&G should restructure to takeadva ntage ofthe new marketfor men’s  care products.
P&G will need to make several changes to capitaliz e on the “ignored” market.  The restructuring will affect various departments such asresearch and development, product design, a nd salesand marketing. Their redesig n will affecttheiremployee recruitment and  selection practices (Szymczyk,  2016). Forinstance, currently, most employ ees that deal with skin and hair care products, cosmetics, and fragrances are female. This isbecause the target market is mostly women, whichmeansthat the products are probably de veloped, designed, and marketed by women. To attr act a new targetaudience of men, the company willneed to hire more male employees (Nadube & Didia, 2018). Male consumers will be more satisfiedwith male-only personal care products. These products are best developed by people who are male themselves andunderstandwhat other men would want. The  research and development, product design, andsales and marketing departments must comprise more male empl oyees.
The main contextual variablethat led to P&G’s restruct uringwas the changes in the target market as revealed by  a study. Thestudy was conducted by Male Grooming Trends: Profiting in 200 9 and Beyond. It showed that although female consumers do minated the market for personal  grooming products, the market for male consumers wasquickly expanding. P&G saw an opportunity to profit from an expanding market. Therefore, redesigning was necessitated b y changes  in the market characteristics.
Several companies have restructured to capitalizeon a larger target market. Examples include Harley Davidson  Motorcycles, NFL, and Stryx.Traditionally, the demographic market for motorcycles was older whitemen.However, following a decrease in motorcycle sales, Harley Davidson started targeting  female customers (Moreno, 2017).They customiz ed their bikes to   women’s needsand found creative ways to market these bikes to women. Second, the National Football League  discoveredin a study that women comprised over 4 0% oftheir viewership (Townes, 2019). They then exp anded their target marketbeyond the usual male customers and startedto make merchandise  for women. Finally, St ryx is a company that has capitalized on the growing market for male makeup products.  The companies mentioned have been widely successful in expandingtheir markets. Other companies should alsocapitalize on their expanding target market. For instance, traditionally male-dominated gyms sho uld consider opening women-only gyms. Although  women are n ow exercising just as much asmen,there are not enough gyms for them. Overall, companies should be quick to adapt to changes in the market.In conclusion, companies  should keep up-to-date with any changes in the market. All industries are constantly evolving, a nd it would be unwise for businesses to stick t  o oldways. In thegiven case stud y, P& G has the potential to generate profit from a new market for personal careproducts. Itwill need to redesign its recruitment practices to exploit this opportun ity.Restructuring for a new reality can be a profita ble venture if done correctly as shown by Harl ey Davidson,NFL,and Stryx.