The articlecomprehensively describes the definition of an introvert, the features of his behavior,and personal attitudes in the moder n model ofsociety. This category ofpeo ple often remains misinterpreted in a world focusedon predominant ly extroverted and energetically intense people. Thepurpose ofthe author isin the clearly expressed desire to convey to society the goals and wishesof introverts, whose thoughts and  feelings often gounrecognized or neglected. Asuperficia  l analysis ofthe text captures a vivid personal appeal of the author and intensely expresses subjectiv e sentim ents dueto individualexperience. A large number of rhetorical questions at the beginning of the message immediatelyattract the reader’s attention. The article is written in ajournalistic style and has a bright emotional coloring with a hint of a pronounced rejection of the global focus on extraversion.
The obs ervant  text analysis allows the reader to better understand the personal m essage of the author. The article is well structured and includesgeneral questions regarding the life and worldview of intr overts. The textis characterized by a high degree of subjectivism and a pronounced bias towards the category  of extro vert readers. The author  compares extrovertswith “puppy dogs” who can listento a  person for  a minuteand then start“barking”again. Such a comparison ispejorativeand maycause an ambiguous reaction in the reader (Rauch 133). In addition, the authordirectly states that introverts are a moreintellige nt,  re flective, and sensitive category of people. Every conclusion has theright to be presented for acceptance; however, a rather dismissive tone to wards extrovertsmay, on the cont rary, causerejectionof the message.
The posit ion of the author is coherent and has thepo tential to find its reader and supporter. However, the aftertaste from its  reading is rath er  amb iguous and makes onethink about the excessive tendenti ousness of the writer. The text doesnot compare two different categories of peoplebut v igorou sly dow nplays the pr incipal persona l ity traits of extroverts. The author says that the world wo uld be much calmer and saner under t he guidanceof introverts. This theory may well be v alid; however, perhaps the world should notbe so sharplydivided into “white” and “black,” “extroverts,” and “intro verts .” T his article does a good job of its central purpose: to illustrate an alternative  radical visi on of the modernmodelof society separated mainly between extroverts and introverts.