Lear  Corp.has announced the acquisition of Borealis Industrier AB, a Swedish automotive interior systems provider, to create atruly comprehensive offering for automakers worldwide. The deal, which is expectedto close within the next few months,will see Lear Corp. take full  control of the privately-held company,adding to its already  impressive portfolio of automotive components and electronics.
With the acquisitionof Borealis, LearCorp. is looking to provide a total solutionfor automakers, including everything from seating syste ms ande lectronics to complete interi or solutions. This move  follows a successfulyear for Lear Corp.,whohave enjoyed solid demand across allo f their product categories, de spite the ongoing COV ID-19 pandemic.
Borealis  has proven itself to be an excellent partner forLear Corp. over the  years, workingclosely together to provide innovative interior solutions that meettheunique needs of each automotive  custome r. This acquisitionwill allow Lear Corp.to integrate Bor ealis’ design, engineering, and m anufacturing capabilities directly into its own operations, creatin g atruly streamlined  and efficient  experience for automakers.
The acquisition of Borealis alsomeans that Lear Corp. will be able to offer customers a wider  range of colors,materials, and finishes for their  automotive interiors . The company has already indicated that it will be investing  heavily in Bore alis’ m anufacturing facilities i nSweden, giving  it access to state-of-the-art equipment and processes thatwill  f urther streamline  its operations and impro ve output quality.
In announcingthe acquisition, Lear Corp.CEO Ray Scott said that themove would “grow our presence in theautomotive interior s market andsupport ou r ongoingefforts to prov idecustomer s with innovative p roducts that are safe,sustainable, and afforda ble.” He addedthat building onthe strengths of the two companies would help Lear Co rp. “adapt tothe evolving market conditions and positionour business for long-term growth.”
The acquisition of Borealis marks a significantstep forward for LearCorp. in its missi on to build the most comprehensiverange of automotive in terior components and systems in the world. As automakers look to differentiate themselves in an increasingly competitive market,Lear Corp. is well-posit ioned to deliver thequality, reliability, and innovation  that t  heydemand  .