These days never get easier. Actually,the days I like, that's when I get t o rest.It's when the sun goes down that things start tobother me.
You see that kid above me? Cute kid, good with  his parents, and never causes any problems. I've seen him outgrow his crib and move into this racecar bed with flames down the side. It's a good upgrade from the cramped spaceunder the crib, let me tell ya. I haven't seen the kid much outside of this room; the truthis I'm not allowed anywhere else. Boss'srules, not his. I don't mind though, the view is goodand I can hear everything in this smallhouse whichmakes me feellike I'm part of the family.
I like to think he turned out alright sincehe gets such good rest at night, but I wouldn't wa nt to take too much credit.To be honest, I've never actually  met the kid. Whenhe first m oved into the new b ed,his father was in here just before the lights went out. Forwhat seemed like months thefa ther would come in and l isten to the boy talk about his fear of me, the Boogeyman. He would come in and say:
"Taylor, buddy it's alright. The lights go out, but everything is fine."To which the boy would say "Butdad I know he's in here".
"It's just your mind playing games with you.I knew we shouldn'thave let you watch the movies with mo m and I last H alloween." The dad said jokingly with a smile on his face.
Taylor didn't want his dad to think he wasn't  ready to be a big boy so he shouted
"No waydad, I can handle any thing!"
"Okay then bud, sleep well. Remember it's just like any oth er night." The dad said as he turne d o ut the lights and shut thedoor behind him.
Maybe ano ther night for you Taylo r, but I'll be busy.
I mean, how this kid canbe scared of me when we've never met!
I've tried to come out and say hi afew times before, but every ti me this kid hears the slightest noise I can s ense he gets worried. So I stick downhere and haven't moved since.Not thatI get much spare time to ev en come out, but one day would be nice.
You see, where I'm from is a rough part of town. It's not your ordinary town with the kids playing out frontof their homes with white picket fences. As a matter of fact, no one in Taylor's world knows my world even exist s. Sure, everyone around seems to get along, but at night the real creeps come out. Thes e guys like to ca use problems and they can do that toeach other.I wis h they would keep it amongst the other monsters, but they don't. It's when they start seeking the small onesfor an extra rushthatboils my blood and I step in.
You seethese guys night after night go out seekingkids li ke Ta ylor. They don't even call them kids; they call them "dessert" … real sickos.. Luckily, for the little ones they've each been assigned their own "Boogeyman" to make sure they staysafe and don'tget snatched up. So when I hear Taylor tell his dad that he is scared of *me*, it hurts.
If only Taylor knew whatfighting these bastards was like. You've got Aeran with his scaled skin and clawsthe length of a cable car. How about Zeila with spiked arms that burn like hell when they hit you, not to mention she's twice my size. Don't want to leave out Leera. Yeah he's small, but lightening fast with a ferocious bite.It's always the smallones that give you the most trouble. Yea h I get lots of bumpsandbruises in this line of work. I'm fortunate enough I can heal fast. If I wasn't trained for these guys then Iwould have problems and by problem I mean dead. And with me de ad that means the creeps win and  they would have their feast. S ounds  bad but reallythough, it's all in a nights work.
I love my j ob, I really  do. Might sound weird after hearingthat every night I'm busy beating up the  bad guys,  but hearing Tayl or's laugh inthe dayis what ke eps me going. Ijust  wish the ki d knew th e truth. All those noises Ta ylor hears in the night are ju st me doing my job. Making sure Taylor stayswarm and asleepin his bed. And for that, I'm the one he worries about. I would loveto actually meet one of these kids I get to watch over, but it hasn't happened yet. Taylor isn't my first and won't be my last, but I still have hope. Gotta run, I can hear the chattering of claws on the pavementheading my way.Sleep tigh t  Taylor…