The problem of unauthorized termination oflife is the source of numerous debates. On the part of religion, thisproblem has several flaws at once, the most important ofwhich is the commission of a great sin before God, who gives people life. Moreover, the negative consequences of euthanasia are the devaluation of human life , violation of the equality of people before the law, medical duty, and the structure of the doctor-patient relationship. Thus, it can be concluded that the spread of the popularity of euthanasia will lead to a complete loss and restructuring of the system of human values. This paper examines the case study of George, who hasfallen ill with a severe illness that will eventually completely deprive him of mobility. Because of the negative emotions that have overtaken and the understanding that the disease is incurable, the man thinks to solve the problem by euthanasia. Hence, using literary sources, a scientific pape r analyzes the  problem of intentional death andreligious considerations.
In the modern wor ld, despite the relatively progressive development of medicine, peopleare faced with diseases that, unfortunately, do not respond to any treatment. Insuch cases, the blow that the disease inflicts both physically and mentally can be tough to bear. Because of the fear of losing self-care and dignity, people a re thinking about euthanasia or, in other words, voluntary suicide. However, this statementcontradicts God’s attempts to restore the Christian religion. Thus, this scien tific paper explores a thematic study about a man who has lost hope and isthi nking about euthanasia.The case study, which is the basis of this research paper, presents the readerwith the story of a middle-aged man George. Heleads an average lifestyle, works, spends time with his family, and devotes tim e to his own interests. However, one day aman begins to experience muscle weakness and immunity to muscle coordination. Subsequently, he gets injured, and when he goes tothe doctor, he gets a far from satisfactory diagnosis. According to  the resultsof further tests, George is diagnosedwith such a severe and terrible disease lik e amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). This disease is expressed in the disruption of the nerve cells of the brain, which are responsible for the muscles and spinal cord (Westeneng et al., 2018). The most famous representative of a person withthis disease is the great scientist Stephen Hawking(Westeneng et al., 2018). Deviationleads to the complete demobilization of a person, but aspects such as smell, touch, sight, hearin g,and taste remain.
George was informed that ALS currently has no treatment, and its development can only be suppressed by certain drugs, but scientists have not yet found ways to stop the disease. Thisnews can plunge into deep shockand depression and cause a lot of strong negative emotions and confusion. Th at is what happened to George, who wasterrified of being awheelchair user and delegating all the responsibilities of fulfilling basic needs to his family members. The idea of becoming dependentand losing control of his own body did not giv e the man peace of mind, and therefore he began to think about making life easier fo r his relatives byresorting to such a measure as euthanasia.
Th e problem of using euthana sia is acute in modern society. In the U nited States of America, this measure has been legalized in nine regions (Hoehner, 2001). The main argument held by supporters of this int entional termination of lif e is to get rid of prolonged agony to death thanks to the development of medical technologies (Orr, 2001). Despitethis, the spread of this method of death can lead to high medical costs for the families of patients, since dueto low legalization rate, euthanasia is a costly service. The opposite is the opinion of Christianity, which denies euthanasia. For this faith, the main emphasis is placed on the fact that thenear-death period is characterized by love, compassion and reconciliation, and care, which euthanasia deprives aperson of.
The  main problem with regard to euthanasia on t he part of the Christian religion is the fact of violation of the law of God. Thus, the Christian doct rine emphasizes that God gives a person life and determines when to take it away. Euthanasia implies that patients decide the date of their death themselves, which is equivalent to oneof the mainsins ofreligion – suicide. Despite the fact that euthanasia involves the introduction of a particular drug by a medical specialist and not bya patient, it is the patient who is respo nsiblefor the decision taken in this case. Sources also emphasize that “Doctors may help their patients to die a dignified death from natural causes, but they should not kill their patients or help them to kill themselves” (Anderson, 2015, p. 1). Thus, in the eyes of religion, this action is alsoa sin since it can already be considered as intentional murder, that is, the decision to take someone el se’s life.
In addition, the scientific literature provides severalmain reasons not tosupport euthanasia.  One of them is the introduction of risk for the weak and defenseless. Moreover, giving the doctor responsible for taking someone’s life can significantly negatively affect the doctor-patient relationship. In addition, itis al so worth emphasizing  the violation of relationships within the patien t’s family and will violate such fundamental concepts as human dignity and equality before the law (Anderson, 2015). Supporting  the Christian point of view, people should not help othersto kill themselves but provide the necessary level of careand support to soften andbring calm into the life of the patient.
On the one hand, in the light of the Christian narrative, George’ssuf ferings can be interpreted, as already mentioned, with an emphasis on the sinfulness of the world. This is due to the fact that euthanasia is consideredsuicid e and cannot be justified by religion.On the other hand, the fear of future loss o f control over their lives and loss of dignity significantly affect the patient. When  considering the emphasis on the hope of resurrection, then the experiences of a man can be interpreted as a desire for a speedy meeting with the almighty. Therefore, George may feel the unwillingness to be in this world as a burden for his family, and in some ways, the motivation of a man can be understood.
The Chr istian worldview highlights human life as the most critical value. When turning to religion, a person becomes fully aware of how sinful thoughts about taking his own life are because this is the prerogative of God. Thus, George’s view of the problem of living with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis may be  changed.To facilitate the patient’s thoughts, shifting his thoughts in a more positive direction is necessary. Hen ce, it is necessary to  show how important he is to his family and how priceless the moments  spent withthem will be until his death.
Further, based on the above, the Christi an faith denies the use of euthanasia as it contradicts the cen tral values and considerations of religion. Firstly, the value of a person’s life, whichis given to him by theAlmighty, is violated (Reese, 2019). Secondly, euthanasia is considered as voluntary suicide, that is, one of the greatest and gravest human sins. Thirdly, the promotion and dissemination ofthe  popularity of this event can destroy the idea that human life is worth living, and people are obliged to support each other’s desire to continue living.
Thus, it can be concluded that there are no options for justifying the procedure of intentional termination of life in the Christian worldview. All those factors that werelisted earlier c ontribute to this argument. Based on my worldview, I can say that I consider euthanasia an easy wa y to solve problems, which is not a positive aspect. Hence, I believe that life cannot be stopped simply by wishing it since the Almighty has prepared a unique path and purpose for each person. However, I cannot be entirelysure of my opinion since I have never encountered situations like George’s fromthe case study, and I hope that I will never encounter them. Such a statement is since a person’s behavior in a stre ssful situatio n can change dramatically, but I hope that I will be able t o pr eserve dignity and reason to make the right decision.