China's usually rubber stamp parliament fa iled on Monday to pass an anti-corruption b ill after the proposed law fell victim to fierce debate over whether it should specifically target governme nt officials.
State med ia had reported heated discussion atthe  we ek-long session of thestanding committeeof the National People's Congress, or parliament, that closed on Monday.
Disputes among China's usua lly tame lawmakers ranged from controversy surrounding the scope of the death penalty as contained in proposed amendments of thecriminal law towhether corrupt state managers should be executed.
 Thedraft lawon administrative supe rvision, which would target c orruption and had been due to be adopted t his week,  was eventually withdrawn fromvoting, the Xinhua news agencysaid.
The law was withdrawn "because legislators sharpl y disagreed with the name of the law", it said, quoting parliament chairmanQiaoShi.
Some lawmakers believed the bill should be named theLaw On Administrative Supervision in linewith its regulationof the governmen t.
However, they ran in toopposition on constitutional grounds from legislators who argued itshould be cal led simply the Law on Supervision, without referenceto theadministration, Xinhua said, but did not elaborate.
Qiao suggested the issue be put forward for a vote  at the next standing committee sessi on  in February, 1997.Beijing has  launchedrepeated crackdowns on graft, which senior leaders have called a c ancer that threatens the Communist Party's grip on power, but manyChinesesay enforcement ofanti-corruption measures at senior levels is patchy at best.
De bate had swirled around amendments to combat corruption, includingmore than60clauses thatwould specifically define draft and derelictionof duty, while increasing to 32 from seven the types of officials subject to the law, state media said.One  source of contention was the designationof managers of state firms as g overnment employees, who are subject toa maximumpenalty of death for corru ption, it said.
One body of opinion held that government factory managers be defined as  public servants since75percent ofallofficial cases of corruption involved state enterprise managers.
Oth ers argued this was unfair since managers of non-state firms faced a maximum of only 15 years in jail for graft.All should beequal before the law,  the newspaper quoted  the crimina l law a s saying regarding the need to tackle corruption
The failure of the anti-corruption law to pass came as senior leaders considered whether to punish scandal-hit former Beijing Party boss Chen Xitong--the highest-ranking victim of Chin a's anti-corruptioncampa ign -- for dereliction of duty.
Under the la w, prosecutors wo uld havethe powers to investigatea suspect's bank account and ask the courtsto freeze  bank accountsof those su spected of graft, bribery and embezzlemen t.
In the fi rst 11 months of 1996, Chinese prosecutors had begun action in 77,611 cases of corruption, bribery and economic crime and haddealt w ith  33,879 cases, up year-on-year 9.4 percent, the media said.
Corruption was virtually wiped out inthe years after the communists took over in 1949 bu t has staged a  comeback after economic reforms were introduced 17 y ears a go.