In a move that has raisedeyebrows  both locally and internationally,the Chi nese governmenthas accused veteran dissident Wang Xizhe of illegally crossing the border and pursuing thosewho helped him do so.
Wang, a well-known figure in theChinese democracy  movement, has been a thorn in the side of the ruling Communist Party for decades. He was last arrested in 2014 for s peaking out against government corruption and sentenced to eight yea rs in prison.
However,inDecember 2020, ne ws emerged that  Wang had managed to cros s the border into Myanm ar, where he  had sought the help of local pro-democracy activists. It was reported that he was hoping to make his way to Thailand, wher e he planned to seek asylum.
The Chinese government has since accused Wangof violating  itsnational security laws by leaving the country illegally and engagingin activities that could be harmful  to the state. Chinese authorities have labeled Wang a "criminal suspect" and issued an international warrant for his arrest.
In a statement released  viastate media, the  Chineseembassy in Myan mar accusedWang of "breaking Chinese law by leavin g the country illegally and engaging in acti vities th at endanger national security."Theembassy w enton tosay that Wang had "colluded with foreign anti-China forces, accepting their support and funding, and stepping up his ant i-China activities."
The statement also  included a warningto anyone who  had provided support to Wang during his escape from China. Chinese authoritie s said that they would"punish severely tho se who have been colluding with WangXizhe and provide relevant information on his whereabouts."
This latest move by the Chinese government has been criticized byhuman rights groups and pro-democracy ac tivists, who say that it is just anotherexample of Beijing'scrackdown on dissent and free dom ofexpression.
"This is a clear attempt to intim idate those who dare to stand up againstthe Chin es e govern ment and speak the truth," said Amnesty International's China researcher, Wi lliam Nee.
Nee went onto say that it was "deeply c oncerning" that the Chinese government was pursuingthose who had helped Wang during his escape from China. "T his is a clear violation of their basic human rights," he said.
The case has also raisedconcerns am ong Myanmar'spro-dem oc racy movement, which hasbeen grapplingwith its ownpolitical crisis sincethe military coup in February 2021. Many pro-democracy activists  in Myanmar fear that the Chinese governmentwill pressure the Myanm ar autho ritiesto extradite Wang to China.
However, in a statement, Myanmar's Ministry of Foreign Affairssaid that it hadnot  received any request for extradition from the Chinese government. The ministrywent on to say that Myanmar had "always adhered to theprinciple of non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries" and "always respects and protects the rights of political asylum seekers in accordance with international law."
Forhispart, Wang has remained defiant in the face  of the Chinese government's accusations. In a statement releasedthrough his lawyer,Wang said that he was "not afraid" of the Chinese  government and would continue to speak out fordemocracy and human rights in China.
"Ibelieve thatthe  Chi nese peo ple deserve freedom, democracy, and humanrights," he said. "Iwill continue to fight for these values until they are achieved."