TheToronto Stock Exchange (TSX) announced yesterday that  it will be changing its rules governing control blocks, a movethat will havea significant impact on large-cap Canadian stocks.
The new rules will require an y company th a t owns a control block ofsh ares to havea majorityof  independent directors on its board. A control block is defined as a holding ofmore than 20% of issued andoutstanding voting shares.
This change is part of theTSX’sefforts to improve corporate governance and increase transparency in the market. The TSX believes that havinga majori ty ofindependent directors on the board will ensure that al l shar eholders are treated fairl y and that the company is runin the best interest of itsstakeholders.
The TSX hasbeen working on this rule changefor several months in consultat ion with stakeholders andindustry experts. This change isexpected to come into effect later this year.
“This is an important stepforward fo r the TSX asweseek to enhance the quality of our markets and ensurethat issuers comply with the highest standard s of corporate governance,” said Lou E cclest on, CEO of the TMX  Group, which owns th e TSX.
T he rule change is expected to affect  a number of large-cap Canadian stocks.Many of these companies havecontrol blocks owned by founding families, which will now have to ensure that they have amajority of independent directors on their boards.
Some exper ts pred ict that this rule change will lead to increased activism amongshareholders, who may see this as an opportunity to push for changes in the governance of these companies.
“Inve storswill now have more power topush for improved govern ance and greater transparency at companies with contro l blocks,” said Sandra Levy, a corporate governanceexpert at Schulich School ofBusiness.
There areconcerns, however, that this rule change may lead to lessliquidity in the marke t, as some of these founding families may be rel uctant to sell their st akes andd ilute their contr ol.
“We  could see  a situation where these foundingfamilies be come even more entrenched and less willing to give up control,”said John Smith, asecuritieslawyer with Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt.
Despitethese conce rns, many industry experts believe that thisrule change is a positive stepfor the TSX and for Canadian companies.
“This is a wel come development for theCanadian m arket, which has been criticized inthe past for lax governance standa rd s,” said Levy.
The TSX has made significant strid es in improving the qualityof its markets in recent years. In 2017, it introduced a new rule requiring issuers to have a majority of independentdirectors on their boards, and it has since implemented se veral other initiatives aimed at improving corpora tegov ernance and increasing tra nsparency.
The TSX’s rulechange on control blocks is t he latest in a series  of measures aimed atmaking Canadian companies more accountable to their shareholders and ensuring that the market oper ates fairly and efficiently.