It started with spice.
They say marijuana is a gateway drug, but compared to spice it might as well be  a fortre ss wall. Spice opens the floodgates and when you're drowning it appea rs as a life preserver with a holein the side.
Ever since Istarted I could never shake  the feeling of paranoia; that I'd be caught, that my friends would plot against me, that I'd getkicked out of my home. My neighbours would yell at their kids to get back inside theirapartment whenever I walked down the street, high as a  fucking kite, waving my arms like a madman andshouting obscenities thatI had made up on the spot.
I could hear them from the windows, even if they were closed. They spoke loudly and freely with th e assumption that the druggie from upstairs was too wasted to pay attention,and too far gone to careifhecould.
The regularity and alacrity with w hich they reacted to my home coming was astounding,until I put the pieces together. The paranoia, the gossip, the need for "security" -I was being monitored. Those bastards had put up cameras in the neighbourhood so that they would always know when I came down the street.
That didn't matter though. Their opinions were just as shitty as my life was. I had spice  and the rest of theworld could go to hell. I started  closing my windows when I realized I was being watched from the street, but the complaints and insults never stopped. I knew immediatelywhy.
My roomwas bugged! Those assholes had snuck into my roo m while I was  o ut and planted fucking cameras everywhere! I tore my room apart. I ripped my mattress apart, I emptied all the cabinets onto the floor, I took a hammer to several walls, but I could never find anything. They were better than I was. They kept talkingabout me. They still could see me.
After  I tore down most of my bedroom's drywall I realized the truth. They didn't have any surveillance - the y had telepathy. They were inside my head. My thoughts were probably transmitting like a fucking satellite dish because of the drugs. I had to know for sure. I had to  put it to the test.
I sat downin the only remaining chair and foc usedmy thoughts tomy  bitch ne ighbour below me in 405. Almost immediately I heard her cackling, grating laugh in my head.
"Look who's finally figured it out! Ha ha ha! What a fucking retard junkie! Nowyou're discovered our secret, little boy. What do you want to do now? Ha ha ha!"
For a  brief moment I thought I might have schizophrenia, but a new voice entered my brain.
"You serious, kid? You think you're crazy? No, you're just worthless, a worthless sack of shit  who takes spice insteadof advice. Listen up, because we're going to let you know a little secret. You know the g uy in 215? He's the one who's been installing cameras. He's the one who lets us know when you walk down the street. He 's the one whothinks you 're the dumbest motherfucker on the whole goddamn planet, and he's playing you like a fucking violin."
"He hates your guts, little boy," the  woman responded. "He wants you gone, ha ha ha! He's goingto kill you - one way or the other! Perhaps you'll put a bullet in your own brain and save him the trouble?Do one good thing inyour life."
I ran out of the door and nearly jumped down threestories to get out of the apartment. The wicked laughs of my neighbours followed me halfway down the street. I kept running until I hit a beach, the sound  of blood rushing through my earstemporarily muting the jeers from my apartment. When my heat finally slowed, they returned, al beit much more quietly.
Because they were so  much more quiet, I was able to hear a new voice coming f rom a nearby parked car. He was telling me to killmyself, to jump off a cliff and end it all with a single crushingthud. I couldn't see in the tinted windows, but the voice sent shivers throughout my body and I took off running again.
I returned to the apartment, and so did my neigh bour's laughter. This time, howev er, the sameparked car I had run into at the beach was alreadyparked in front of my building. A muscular man rolled down  the passenger side window and glared directly at me without blinking. I couldn't hear his thoughts, but somehow knew that he meant  to do me harm. I quickly ascended the stairs to my room.
"Listen, kid, do us alla favour. Do your family a favour.  You love your family, don't you? Well, we know where they live. It would be horrible ifwe were forced to go down and kill them one by one, wouldn't it? Wouldn't it be much easier to just kill yourself now?Save your family."
"Ha ha ha! There's no helping you now! You're hopeless, useless, worthless,garbage and the world would bebetter off without you breathing my children's air and eating my husband's food."
"Are you alright?"
I paused. That was a new voice. A calm voice that cut through the sea of tortuous sirens that clamoured for m y death.
"If you needhelp, come to us. Cross the street."
Their voice kept coaxing me out, silencing all others.I descended the stairs in a kind of stupor, forgetti ng abo ut the bitch in 405 and the man from upstairs. I cro ssed the street andwalked onto their patio.
When I arrived, they looked at me likeI was scum. "What the fuck you want?" a young man asked me, cocking his head thr eateningly to the side. "You lost?"
I wanted toshout " You must help me! There is a man in my apartment that can  read my thoughts and is trying to kill me!" but even as I thought it Iknew he wouldn't believe me. I didn't believe me. There was only one option.
I climbed to the roof of the nearest buildingand steeled myself for the fall. Iwas getting ready to take a running lea p when my mother'sface emerged fromthe kitchen windowin our apartment. The look on her face filled me with dread and guilt. I couldn't bear to do it, and rushed bac k to my room, locking it before my  mother could come inside. I  ran a bath and tr ied to drown myself in it, but every time I came close to blacking out my body would push itself out of the wate r and gasp for air, convulsing violently.
Will continue later, I'm off to bed. Hope you like it sofar.