Several high tech gi ants have  come together to announce the release of a newCD-ReWriteable technology for ea rly 1997.Th e technology is s aid to be priced below $ 1,000, which is expected to makeit widely accessible to th e publ ic.
The CD-ReWriteable technology was unveiled through a jointpress conference by Hewlett-Packard, Sony, and Phillips. The new technology is expecte d to revolutionize the market as it allows peopleto rewrite over CDs, whichbrings the storagecapacity of CDs to a whol e new level.
The CD-ReWriteable technology hasnumerousapplication s, especially in the realm of archiving and data storage. It provides an affordabl eandefficient method for people to store andsave their files, which was oncea daunting task, especially w hen it comes to largefiles anddata.
Thetechnology easily out classe s other available options on the market since it  can store up to 650 megabytes of data, about 74 minutes of audio, in  a single disc, which is more  than double what currently available technolog y can handle. Moreover, since itis rewritable, it can be used repeatedly  to store new files and data multiple times, making it a  highly economical solution.
The new CD-ReWriteabletechnology is a result of years-long research and development by the three high tech giants. It is based on a technique called pha se-change technology, which allows the laser beam to rewrite the data on the disc at varying speeds without comprom isingthe integrity of the data already sto red.
The technology is expe cted to have a significant impact on the market, especially for small businesses and individuals who needcost-eff ective solutions to  store their data. It  is alsospeculated t ha t it could lead to  the creation of new markets for CD-ROMs as the re-writable featu r e a llo ws forthe storage of dynamicdata that is updated regularly.
Moreover, with the release of the CD-ReWriteable techno logy,consumerscan expe ct a drop inthe price of standard CD-ROMs since the market will be opened up tomore economical alternatives.
"This is an exciting time forthe industry and for all t hose who need to store and access their data regularly," said Koichi Suzukiof Sony. "This release will allow for the efficient management offi les andthe creation of new opportunities within the market."
The CD-ReWriteable technology is a welcomesigh t for manypeople as they no longer need to worry abou t their data b einglost or compromised. The technology is expected  to be a h it amongstudents,researchers, and professionals, who generate a large amount of dataand needeasily accessible and reliable storage solutions. 
In conclusion, the release of the CD-ReWriteable technology isa breakthrough in the field of stora ge technology, andit is expected to have a significant impact on the market.The technology's high capacity  and af fordability make itan ideal choice for people whoneed to constantly manage and store data. Furthermore, the technology could create new business op portunities, especi ally for small businesses who nee d to efficiently store thei r vit al information.