The Hong Kong government was in a flap on Thursday after a bombshell admission that Britain could not protect Hong Kong holders of British passports after China takes overthe colony next July.
Governor Chris Patten  called anurg ent meeting of theLegislative Council for later on Thursday to make a statementon the controversy, which arose after a British envoy said London c ould provide no consular pro tectionf or thepassport holders.
Patten's spokesman said  the issue had sparked " considerable publicinterest and a gooddeal of misunderstanding" as well asdemandsby legislators tomeet him.
Patten would answer their questions at the extraor dinarysitting of Legco on Thursday evening.
The uproaris the latest jolt in Hong Kong's often bumpy transition back to Chinese rule 208 daysfrom now, when 150 years of colonial rule w ill endandthe territory will become an  autonomous region of China.
Britain's Senior Trade Commissioner,Francis Co rnish,said onTuesday that London co uld not protect the more than135,000 Hong Kong people granted full British passp orts with right of abode in Britain under a special selection scheme in 1990.
In a concession to widespread demandsforfull British citizenship after Beijing's 1989 Tiananmen Squ a re crackdown, London offered passports to 50,000Hong Kong households, a privileged fraction of Hong Kong's 6.3 million people.
Cornish said China regarded thes e people as holders of dual citizenshipand would not recognise British consul ar protection for them onChinese soil, on the  ma inland or in Hong Kong.
Cornish's remarks were denounced by local politicians as a sell-out. In the corridors  o f the Hong Kong governm ent even the most seniorofficials were privately criticising Br itainfor what they saw as a concession to China, one source said.
On Wednesday, Londonand the Hong Kong government rushed to assure affectedpassport holde rs that anyone claim ing sole British nationality woul d receive consular protection until it was proven they held dual citizenship.
But a British statement made clear Britain could not give full consular protection for people holding du al Chinese nationality once Hong  Kong bec omes partof China again.
British officials said th epassports issued to  these people were in distinguishable from any other full British passport, but many in Hong Kong are concerned that Britain may have learned that China had obtained the names of the passport hodlers.
"The onlyway to know for sure if one of these passports was issued under the spe cial scheme would be if yo u  had the names," asenior government source  said.
Thetransition to Chinese  rulehas been dogge d by disputes sincethe 1989 Beijing crackdown. China reacted furiously to the special passport scheme , and  again whenPatten introduced reforms expanding democracy in 1992.
China was infur iated last week when Britain unveiled a liberal anti-subve rsion bill that wouldset  legal markers againstChina-style jailin gs of dissidents in Hong Kong.
British and Chinese senior negotiatorsare in the midst of a three-day bargaining session on handover details and have signalled they expect to announce accords on several issues on Friday, althoughthe agenda has so far remained confidential.
Hong Kong is supposed tobe autonomous and keep its capitalist system intact for another 50 years, but a human rights group said o n Wednesday China's crackdown on dissent bode badly for the territory and its autonomy prospects were slim.
"The rule of law and human rights picture is bleak," said Human R ights Monitor director Law Yuk-kai on the launch of an annual human rights report.