RoyalBank of Scotland, which reports full year data next Thursday, is expected toraise its pre-tax profit from last year's602 million stg but  not by as mu ch as analysts thought just a fewmonths a go.
The y expect Royal Bank's profits to rise to between 670 and 700 million stg, with a much smaller contribution from its Direct Line low cost insurance, but benefits continuing to accrue fr om the bank'sefforts to reduce costs.
Total dividend is expected to be around 18.6 pence a share versus last year's16.2p.  
T hepre-tax figures will becomplicated by an exceptional gain from Royal  Bank's disposal o f its 50pctstake in Germany's CC Group,from which itsa id it would make 70 milli on stg, and by restructuring costs of ar ound 23 million pounds stemming froman acquisition by itsNew England subsidiary Citizens.Forecasts for Direct Line vary widely but analysts are generally pessimistic, with the company's main market -- motor insuran ce -- going through"probably the mostd iffucult period in its history", aschief executive Ian Chippendale told Reuter s in an interview last week.  
"Ithink Chippendale was sending a strong message," said one analyst who declined to be named. "I think he was softening up the marketfora  poor set of results."Some  analysts suspect the re sults may notbe quit e as poor as hs been feare d by some.
They see the core bank as continuing toperform quite well wi th the p ositive results of its "Project Columbus"helping  cost s and income.
David Poutney expects a pre-tax  profit of 695 million stg,which in cludes the exceptional items, whileBZW analysts expect 675 million.  
The market received  a big clue on theperformance of Citizens fromthe rece ntresults  of Bank of Ireland which owns 23 percent of the operation.
"Citi zens is doing reasonably well," Poutneysaid, but analysts sayit is being aff ected by the rather lacklust re New Englandeconomy.
The market will be expecting improvement inthecost income ratio butanalysts say t hat even an improvement this time will leavethe bank plenty of scope f or improvement.  
The market will be looking for further clues on lendingwhichshowedgood growth, mostly in corporate lending area, inthe first half.
Inevitably, Royal Bank will also be watched for signs of acquisitions.
It is known tobe interested in buying a building society to exte nd its presence in England but in  the current c limate, it is unlikely to be willing to pay the high prices likely to be   asked.
In any   case,an alystssay Royal Bank would have to raise cash t o be able to perform any major acquisition.  
Inthe meantime, themarket will be looking to i ts relationship withmutually owned ins urance and pensions firm  Scottish Widows , which some thinkmay result inan eventual merger.
Ro yal Bank shares were 15p higher on Friday to stand at 519-1/2p.