Russian Finan ce Minister Alexander Livshits warned financially-troubled Norilsk Nicke l on Friday that it must pay overdue taxes, but analysts saidth e  firm would not be liquidated or that its would assets would be frozen."Norilsk  reall y is a bigdebtor, both to the federaland regional budgets," said Konstantin Chernyshev, equities analyst at Moscow brokerage Rinaco Plus andaNorilsk watcher. "Livshits's words are an attempt to put pressure on the compa ny."
The official Itar-Tass news agency quotedLivshits as telling p arli amentary deputies that RAO Norilsky Nikel0#NKEL.RUO had to pay its tax arrears and thatbankruptcy procedures applied to the metals group.
"If itwas an un solicite d statementand a bolt out ofthe blue,then it obviously means something," said Christopher Granville, chi ef economist a t United CityBank in Moscow.
"But if it was a response to a deputy' s question that was  essentially loaded, then it was the only answer he could  havegiven."
Russian tax and cabinet authorit ies, under pressure from the InternationalMonetary Fund toboost tax revenues as a condition for receiv ing payments of a $10 billion, three-year loan to Moscow, have been striking fear into the hearts of some of Russia's most prominent in dustrial firm s by saying they must pay up or face liquidation.
"They could freeze metal, but it's not a long-term solution toth e problemand wouldn't put money in the budget," Chernyshev said. "I don't think they would do that."
Entire social infrastructures inthe icy Far North whereNorilsk is based depend on the compa ny, and Moscow has said it has no fi nancesto resettle hundredsofthousands of people -- an expenditure which could far ou tstrip Norilsk's debts.
Norilsk officials declined to comment.
Analys ts said the government, while anxiou s about Norilsk's debts, is highly unlikely to bring the nickel, copper, cobalt, platinumand platinum group metals producerto  itsknees or take measures that couldsignificantly affect output.
But it also wants Norilsk, the w  orld' s second-largest nickel  producer, to clean upits act.
"The procedure of bankrup tcy will beapplied," Tass quoted Livshitsas telling Duma deputies about Norilsk.
It ind irect ly quoted him as saying No rilsk should  first pay salary arrears, which in  thepast have led  to worker strikes.
"It is unlikely that Norilsk will p ay these debts in the near-t erm-- the company will rem aina debtor in the near future," Chernyshevsaid.
He estimated the company's regional debts at least one trillionroubles and said 30 percentof the giant Krasnoyarsk regional budget was fuelled by Nori lsk money.
Norilsk's newmajority shareholder, Russian commerical bank Uneximbank, h as sa id it is reorganising metal exports through Interrosimpex in order toboost revenues.
But the changes have ye tto improve significantly Norilsk's si tuation."Uneximbank has inherited a mounta in and whether or not they climb out and over it remains to be seen," said one metals source.
Noril sk said in Septem ber that ittotal debts, including unpaid salaries to workers, wer e 13trillion roubles. The company said last month that it had worked ou t a tax payment  sc hedulewith authorities, after regional tax officials threatened to seize some nickel and copper assets.