Barry Dil ler has recent lyannou nced that his company, Silver King Communications, will soon launch anew nationalbroadcasting network.  The anno unce ment came hot on the heel s of Silver King's acquisition of the Home Shopping Network  (HSN), a m ove thatDiller says will provide the funding necessary to support thecompany's ambitious plans.
Silver King is no stranger to broadcasting – the company already has asuccessfulnetwor k of local television stations across the  U.S . However, Diller believes that the time isripe fora newnational broadcasting outlet thatwillbe ge ared toward a younger, more  t ech-s avvy  audience.The new networkwill fea ture a mixof original programming  and content from other media companies, as well as live eventsandinteractive elements that will bedesigned to engage viewers in new and exciting ways.
The acqu isition of HSN, which is expectedto close in the coming weeks, will give Silver King  the financial clout necessar yto make its new networ ka rea lity. HSN,whichis  a popular home shopping channel, generates revenue of over $2.5 billio n per year. Dill er believes that the company  can leverage HSN'sexisting customer base to help promote its new network, which he hopes will be available to viewers across a variety of platforms, including traditional television, s treaming services, and social media."We see a huge opportunity in creating a new type ofbroa dcasting network that i struly designed for the 21st century," Diller said   in astatement. "T he acquisition of HSN gives us theresources we need to make this vision a reality, and we'reexcited to get towork building something truly special for viewers across  the country."
While thespecifics ofthe  new network hav e yettobe  revealed, Diller has hinted thatit willfocus onlifestyleand ente rtainment content, with an emphasison technolog y and innovation. It remains to be seen w hether Silver King'snew broadcasting venture wil l be successful, but with the ac quisition of HSN, the company is certainl ypoised to make a big s plash in the world of media and entertainment in theyears to come.