Digital foren sics tools are highlypopular among digital investigators ,as they allow easily conducting of the necessary technical an alyses. One of the  most famous software programs for digital forensics is Autopsy,a toolkit that examines the images present on a  devic e’s hard drive. Capable of interacting with personal computers and smart phones, Autopsy is highly versatilea ndcontainsseveral functions  forproperly investigating the image files presen t on the storageunit ( Autopsy , n.d.). Specifically, Autopsy allowsviewing graphical information stored on the device, searching the repository for specific items,or extracti ng the data (Autopsy , n.d.). Although thissoftware isdistri buted freely, it remains an excellent tool forforensic analysis  and iscontinuo usly updated to fol low technological advances.Some digital forensics software  is incredibly specific, createdto examine a particular system. As such,Arsenal Recon is an instrument  constructed to explore the Windows operating systemand its registry, thus accessing information aboutthedevice’s configuration s pecifics. Considering thata Windows  registry contains a va st amoun t of information about the applications install ed and data processed, Arsenal  Recon can be extremely valuable whenconductinga digital forensic investigation ( ArsenalRecon , n.d.). However, this software  is produce d commercially, itcannot be obtained free of cha rge, and $65a  month or $756 a year must be paidto receiveaccess.
Finally, unique programs are requir ed when working with  a smartphone system. Cellebrite UFED is one of the metho d sused to retrieve data fromvarioustypesof mobile devices, primarily modern-day  smartphones that haved istinct operating system s ( Cellebrite UFED, n.d .).In l ight of this e vidence,Cellebrite UFED possessesa rang e of functi ons  to remove the phone’s security measures, and access theinformation stored inthe  internal storage or on external cards (C e llebriteUFED , n.d.).Nevertheless, thesoftware can only  bepurchased for particular purposes, with pri ces starting at $2499.