Britain's SeriousFraud Offic e has yet to contact London-based securities hous es after a request for help with a Frenchprobe into Eurotunnel SA /Plc share dealings, market sources said onMonday.
The SFO said on Sund ay ithad been asked to lend ahand in an investigation b y theFrench authorities into alleged market manipulation of thedebt-laden channel tunnel operator'sshares.
The SFO said it would helpin theFrench probe althoughit had no grounds to launch an investigation of its own into the dealings whichform the basisof the latest  Paris investigation.Securities firms contactedby Reuters on  Mo nday said they had received no approachfrom the SFO and did not expectto do so. They all said they would co-operate fully if they  were approached.The inve stigation isanother chapterin  a troubledcorporate story littered withinci dents, which earlier this year saw two f irms -- Salomon Brothers and Swiss B ank Corp (SBC) -- cleared of insider trading.
The two had been among underwrite rs of a Eurotunnel rights issue in 1994 a nd, althoughnever named by Paris stock exc hange  watchdogtheCommissi on  de Operations de Bourse (COB), said t hat they were under investigation  inJuly last year.
The  underwriting gro up  alsoincluded Banque Indosuez, Morgan Grenfell, now owned byDeutsche Bank AG, Societe de Banque, Banque Nationale de Par is,Banque Paribas, Caisse des Depots, Crdit Agricole, Credit Lyonnais, Robert Fleming, S.G. Warburg (now part of SBC) andBelgian utility TractebelSA.
About two thirds of Eurotunnel shares are held in France and, as a general rule, more tradin g in the shares goes on in Paristhan inLondon.
The SFO's usualpractise is to issue notices which require a person or institution to be interviewed or hand over documents, although it canalsoapply for a search warrant if it wants to surpriseits target.
On Monday, it remained unclear what period  is currently under investigation.
The COB has already investigated the period surrounding the rights issue, th ough itcouldbe revisiting this highly volatile time.
There have been persistent suggestionsthat some o perators were short-selling at around thetime of the rights issu e -- forcingthe prices downby selling sharestheydo not own in the hope of buyingthem back more cheaply later.
Eurotunnel has calledon stockexchange authorities on both sides of the Channelto investigate volatile dealings at varioustimes over the years.
Another example wasin Agust 1995, when a rogue report that the companyh ad  signed a debt rescheduling agreement sent the stock reeling.
The Anglo-French tu nnel operator atthat time deniedit had signeda debtagreement and demanded an inquiry into thetradingactivit y and erroneous reports surro unding its share s and the incident might well be the focus of the French probe.