From ancient ages, humans have used symbolsand m yths to express the irexperience of a reality that transcends thephysicalworld  and transmits i t to future generations. Nowadays, famous brands apply mythology to successfu l produc ts due to their  magical power.  The logo  of the house of Versace is a ve ry extravagant and extraordinary mark; it was designed in 1978 b y Gianni Versace . The logo represents the head ofthe ancient Greek mythology ofMedusa Gorgon. The designer explained why hechose th is character; it is a synthesis ofbeauty and simplicity, which isable to  mesmerize anyone, justlik e theclothes produced by the brand . Other examples ar e Lamborghini; first, the Italian companywas engagedin  the production oftractors. The bull became the  emble m of the brand, as the  bull is the sa cre d animal o f Zeus. Accordingto some people, th is  animalis extremely hardyand strong, which endows the brand with greatpower. Now, Lambor ghini cars  a rehigh-performance, expensive  superc ars, and the emblem of thegolden bull is very appropriate for them .I prefer the myth of Pr ometheus becauseevil nev er prevails,and  goodnes s and justice win. The mig hty titanPrometheus stolethesacred firefr om Olympus to provide it for humankind. He made humanity  independent of the gods.  Prometheus t rainedpeople to write, count, crafts and introducedthem to metals.Before, people were afraid of theelements of thesea,  but now the titan taught them how to build ships;   humans became proficient inthe art ofmedicine (Travis, 2021). Prometheus was destroying people’sfaith in  thedeity, and for this, the thunderer Zeus decided  to punish him. Prometheus was chainedto a rock, the sunburnedhim mercilessly, and the rainwas pounding him. However,this was notthe end of the titan’storment; a giant eagle sat on P rometheus’s chest every day and tore his liver  (Tr avis, 2021). Heracles, the s trongest men, killed theeaglethattortured Prometheus,brokePrometheus’ chains, and the titan wasfree.