English  football champions Manchester Un ited extendedtheir outstanding  recent stock market formon Monday as renewed bid speculation sent the share price s oaring by over 10 percent for the se c ond straight session.
Thelatest gains  wereby aw eekendreport in the  Sunday Express that American Mark McCormack's IMG m arketing agency was considering a bidfor United.
"We never make comments on unsubstantiated press stories," said an o fficial at IMG's London office. But he said thatIMG, most active in sports such as tennis an d golf, was interested in incr easing itsinvolvement in football.
Earlier this year IMG lost out to sportwe ar company Adidas i n a battlefor control of former  French football champions Olympique Marseille.
The Express report said that any credible bid for Un ited would have to be pitched ataround 650-700 penceper share, valuing the club ataround 430million pounds ($678million).
United shares rocketed again on Monday, ris ing 54.5p to 568p, valuing the club at around 350 mi llion poun ds.
The share pricehas virtually trebled since the startof the year and addedalmost 25 percent in the last two sessions alone.
The la test winning run was triggered when chief executive Martin Edwardssaid last week that United's status as Britain's most profitablesoccer club made ita likely bid target.
Publishing group VCI is reported to have ma de a 300 million pound bid forUnitedearlier this y ear which was rejec ted.
Analysts say that United would be a nattracti ve target for media companies, citing the U.Sexample of television mogul TedTurnerwho owns  theAtlanta Braves  baseball team.The potential income fro m pay-per-view television deals i s also helping to drive the sh are  price and may make United's main shareholders think twiceabout sellingnow.
"The directors own 22 percentof  theclub...Theycan sit back fo r five years and  enjoy the football and thenenjoy the benefits when the really big mone y comes in from pay-per-view," said Vina y Bediof brokerage  Wise Speke.
Pay-per-view is expectedto beintroduced by the endof the century and could allow leading clubs such asUnited to earn tens of milli ons of pounds annual ly  from television.
Focus on suchjuicy future pickings also  lifted shares in Tottenham Hotspur, the other Premier League club with  a full London Stock Exchan ge listing. They added 11p to 46 1p.
United, who last season wonthe coveted Englishleague and F.A. Cup double, had television income of 5.7 million pounds in 1995-96 when the club made a profit of 15.4million beforetax.