Czech power producer CEZ a.s. on Friday said its nine month net profit hit 8.4 billion crowns ($312.6 million), up from 7.4  billion for the same period  lastyear, according to international accounting standards, after household electricity demand surged.
CEZ's Director of Planningand Analysis section Petr Voboril told a news conference that higher dep reciation wr ite-offs due to the opening of new installationscut the company'stax obligatio ns , a nd boosting its bottom line. 
The company's grossprofit for theperiod remained flat at 13.1 billion.
Czech accounti ng put the firm's profit for the first nine months at 7.04 billion, up from 6.7 billionlast ye ar.
CEZ s aid the result did not change the firm's profit forecast under Czechstand ards forthewhole year, which is 8.1 billion crowns,equal to lastyear's.
Afinancial statement showed  CEZwrote off 4.1 billion inthe first nine months compared with 3.4 billion in thesame period of 1995, a n d paid 4.7 billion  in incometax after5.7billionlast year .
"Above  all, lowering oftax obligationsin connection with depriciation policy have influenced this (profit) increase," Voboril said.
He said that overall demand for elect ricity rose by5.5 percent in the period,and is expected to reach a record h igh of 55.3 terrawatthours,6.1 percent up year-on-year,for the whole 1996.
Household consumption drove the increase, ri sing 10.5 percent, while large clients demandedalmost twopercent more powerover the same period of the last year.Voboril said that a recent ruling by the FinanceMinstry on maximum prices CEZ can chargeregional power distributors did not effect resu lts thanks to the sales increase.
The mi nistry decided that the maximum average price CEZ can charge for suppl ies this year is 1,0 35 crowns per megawatthour, up two crow ns from the last year  but below the firm's 1,040 crown expectati on  included in business plan.
Voboril said thatshort-term indebtedness of CEZ incr eased as wellas financial expenditures due tounpaid debts from some of  the eight regional distributors, which totalled 3.2 billion crowns as of September 30.CEZ and six of the country 's eight regional grid operators had been lockedin a price dispute with CEZ until the m inistry ruling last month.
CEZ is also considering  an inter national bond issue next year as it needs financing but has alreadyflooded the domestic market with paper,  Voboril said.
Local analysts welcomed the results but said they did not expect them to help CEZ's share  price much a s the Prague Stock Exchange is plagued by alack of confidence.
"The CEZ results are slightlybetterthan I expected.CEZ is fundamentally undervalued but genereal market sentim ent is not very strong," said Petr Do usa of Zivnostenska Banka."I  don't expect the price to go up to 1,000 in the next few days."
CEZ shares closed up 14 crownson the Prague StockExchange on Friday to close at 937. --Prague Newsroo m, 42-2-2423-0003