Mercury Finance Co islikelyto spend  a tenseweekend with itsbanker s trying to work out arrangments to solve its liquitycrisi s, the failure of which could force the company to file forbankrupct y protection, analysts and  attorney's said.
The Lake Forest, Illinois-based auto finance company said Friday it could not  raise new commercial paperto repay maturing debt and could not pay $17 million in commercialpap er due Friday.
A finance company like Mercury makes money on the dif ference, or spread, between what it  pays to borrow money and the higher rates it charges its customers. A finance company without a source of fundsis like a retailer without a sourceof merchandise, analystsnoted.
"If you can't fund, you're out  ofbusiness," one equity  analyst that follows the company said, requesting anonymity.
Some rating agencies,including Standard& Poor's Corp, lowered Mercury'scommercial paperto a default rating F riday.
"The y' r e very close to some reorganization, ban  kruptcy filing, probably a voluntary reorganization," said Thomas Kmiotek, analyst at Duff &Phelps Credit Rating Co.
He and other analysts noted the company has another $100  million in  commercial paper due Thursday, February 6.
A Mercury  spo kesman did not return repeated calls see kingcomment on the company's financing Friday afternoon.
Aside from   the company'scurrent inability to selldebt, Mercury is also facing a host of shareholder lawsuits,  filed after the compan y said it had to restate its net income o ver the past four years b y a totalof about $90 million because of accounting irre g ularities.
Lawsuits do not become a financial liabilityfor thecompany unless there is a judgment in favor of the  shareholders. Howe ver, the company's admissio n of misstatements makes it easier for the sharheolders to prove their case, leaving only the questions of whowould have topay  how m uch, one securities l awyer said.
"Securities laws are very, very simple,"said Ted Koenig, a partner wi th Chicago-based lawfirm Holleb& Coff"If there is an ommission or misstatement of a materialfact... there's liabiltiy."
Also, the company'smarket capita lization plunged by about$2.2 billion Friday, based on the 13 point fall of Mercury's shares and the 172 million shares thecompany said it had outstandinglate last year. That reduces the equity cushion  the company has  available to show its creditors, Koenig said.
But analysts also said the company hadabout $1 billion in loans receivable on its books atthe end of October, 1996 -- an asset to show creditors.
"No one has questioned the validity of the amount ofreceivables they have on their books or the quality of those receivables," Kmiotek  said.
Also, Mercury has generally been well regar ded in the su b-prime credit quality loan bus  iness, which c ouldhelp  it nego  tiate with its banks andcontinueas a going concern, said analysts and lawyers familiar with the company.
Mercur y said in a statement itis indiscu ssions with  its lenders to satisfy working capital needs, butthat it could not  predict the outcome of those discussions.