The U.S. government's top Asia official, Win ston Lord, was to hold talks with ChineseDeputy Foreign Minister Liu Huaqiu in Beijingona range of issuesincludinghuman rights, diplomats said on Wednesday.
Lord, Assistant Secretary of State forEast Asian and Pacific Affairs, arrived on Tuesday for th e unannounced visit and was keeping a low profile while in Beijing, a U.S.embassy official said.
However he was due to hold talks withDeputy Foreign Minister Liuand a possible meeting with Foreign Minister Qian Qic hen wason the age nda before Lord left on Thursday for Japan , diplomats said.In Washington, State Department spokesman Nicholas Burns said on Tuesday that Lord was preparing for a visit next month by Secretary of State Warren Ch ristopher, butofficials said a wide range of  otherissues would almost certainly beraise d.
"Human rights willcome up," one diplomat said.
Washington lastweek sharply criticised the sentencing of dissident LiuXiaobo to three years in a lab our camp, as well as apparent plans to  try another pro-democracy activist, Wang Dan, on the capital charge of plotting  to subvertthe government.
U.S. official s say relations with China have generally improved in recentmonths, but therehave been frictions in the past  two weeksover its treatment of dissidentsand over fresh reports of Chinese nuclear sales toPakistan.
"Ithink all issue s a re on the table in (Lord's) discussions with the Chinese. It wouldn't surprise me at all if thatissue of thealleged sale of items betwe en China and Pakistan came up," Burns said.
Nevertheless, he said Washington continued to maintain that China had not violated past pledges with the sale, which the WashingtonTimes said last week consisted of a  special industrial furnace and high-tech diagnosticequipment.
Burnsalso said human rightsissues were likely to be raised.
Diplomats said Beijing would almost certainly be angered by reports that Chinese dissident Wang Xizhe had arrived in San Francisco forasylum in the United States.
A row over human rights scarred Christopher's la st visit to China in1993.Christopher is dueto visit China on November 21-22 on a trip originally an nounced in July.
The visi t would mark the highest point in relationssince ties pl unged after Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui paid a p rivate visit to the United States in June , 1995 -- a trip that enraged Beijing.
Both sides have  said  they are moving towards apossible exchange of presidential visitsduring 1997.
Among outstanding issues that could spark U.S. anger are the alleged nuclea r salesand China's humanrights record,while Beijing blames Washington forholding up its  application for membership of the World Trade Organisation.
U.S. officials said Lord had  considered the possibility of extending hist rip beyond  South Korea when he left Washingto n last week, but did not  finally decide to do so until he was already in Asia.
Lord came to China after a visit to So uth  Korea to discuss  tensions  over the beaching of a North Korean submarine on the South Korean coast last month.  
"With more and more(listed) firmsinvolving in such t akeovers, regulation andsupervision has become a tough  ta sk," said one analyst with China Guotai Securities.
"The central government shoul d not wait until  there are too many heada chesbefo re taking measures to sortthingsout," he  said.
But the analyst said that despite the problems, takeovers would be a focus of the stock market over the next few years because of restrictions in other areas, including a ban onmergers between listed firms and unlisted firms.
In the six-year history of modern China's stock markets,  there has been no case of a takeover of one listed firm by another.