"You really promise? Really *really* promise?"
"Of coarse I promise! Look, I've got the fiver now in my pocket."
Henry fishes a crumpled £5 note out of his back pocket. In Bill's own handsthe pigeon struggles and squawks.
The group had se en the nest in the corner of the roof and immediately their thoughts turned to throwing egg s at cars and windows. How disappoint ed they were when, upon inspection, theyfound  noteggs but a full grown pigeon sitting in the nest. Not to be put off James  turned to Bill and daredhim to  catch the bird. He accepted and slowly crept closer to the nest, pausing towave away Henry who haddecided to try as well. After taking a moment to co llect himself he leaped for the pigeon, not scared inthe least of the 20 story dropjust inches away, there was no  safety barrier. Sure enough he caught the pigeon. But then came the question: *What do we do with it? * This time it was Henry who supplied the dare."Tie yourstone to it and I'll give you a fiver."
Of coarse , they have all been taught better than this. As young as they werethey had all been told a t one point or another notto do anything so reckless wit h astone. They were at all times to be kept hidden and safe. Neverthel ess, Bill was keento  earn the respectofhis friends and, handi ng the pigeo n to Hen ry, w ent joggin g downstairs to fetc h his stone.Henry's stonewasn't actually a rock, noneof them were nowadays,that's just what people call them.His was a ring bought especiallyfor the purpose. This was  a popular  approachto stones but realistically they could be anything, you could bind your soul toa balloon if you wante d.
P resently Bill returned with his stone and after a few min utes had it t ied to the birds leg.
"Now what?" He asks.
"Now..." says Henry "You need to get it back!" He shoots a grin at James and releases thepigeon withaj ump.Itsquawks andbegins to fly towards the neighbouring apartment block.
Bill takes his promised money from the devious friend  and starts r unning in the opposite direction, towards the edge of the roof. Henryand James are giggling now,excitedfor whats goi ng to  happen next. Without stopping Bill jumps and falls screaming to the har d concrete floor. Of coarse the fall is lethal. From the topof the building the other  two can faintlyhear the soun d of him landing. They're outright laughing at this point,Henry is tryingto us e his phone to get a video .
Reincarnation onlytakes a few seconds and soon enough Bill is falling again, this time watching the pigeon carry on it's flight, gett in g smaller and smaller until his life ends once again. Before it canland B ill appears once more in front of it, this time reaching for  the rings stuck to its leg. This scares the bird and it turns from the tower blocks and h eads away from the centre of town. It's flight takes it to areas with ever s mallerbuildings and itshows no  sign of wan ting to land or descend at all. And as itgoes it carries Bill away with it. Henr y and James stop lau ghing at this point, considering if  this  is why they were told to be sensible with reincarnation stones.