The Poem of The Right eousSufferer is a Mesopotamian poem about the unjust suffering ofa suffering man. The Poem is sm all, consisting of nearly 500lines, andwritten in Akkadian. It is relevant to its time of creation because, by the 13th century B.C., people had already begun to understand the need for moral foundations. The story is told in the first person, who honors his gods,but suffers fro m many illnesses. The Poem is a kindof reflection of alienation from the divine,drawingattention to injustice and the problem of m orality. In this regard, the Poem of the Righteous Sufferer allowsthe historica l c ommunity to explore ancientMesopotami a’s cultural values and social attitudes.First and foremost, the Poem is seen as one of the beginnings ofthe biblical narratives of the Old Testament.The fall of man and his repentance are essential elements ofthe Poem. I n terms ofits culturalcontribution, it is crucial to understand the Babylonians’ view of the divine. Awareness becomes  the companion of t he Poem’s protagonist, and he realizes thatnot all the go od that happens to him isgood toGod. His lamentations are seen as a prayer complaintagain st the injustice accompanying a man, no matter how  much wealth he possesses.
The sourcedemonstrateshow people’s co nsciousness and doubts aboutlife’s value have been trans formed. This cultural heritage shows that arighteous lifestyledoes not mean good treatment from the deities. Possible injustice significantly affects society, so theprotagonist laments,  “the persecutor persecutes me day in anddayout,” without understanding what he deserves it for (Poem of the righteous sufferer). Even the healing of his trouble s does not make him happy, and hethinks that “the gravei s near, the shroud is ready  forme” because he has already once confronted God’s will (Poem of the righteous sufferer). The culture of thetime forced theman to hope for the best, e ven though the deities did not explai n their decisions.
The social problems  in the Poem are revealed as a set of attitudes followed by the protagonist. He considers “the joy of the heart” thedays of hon oring  God, glorifying the king, and striving for the state’s prosperity (Poem of the righteous sufferer). In his figure,one ca n discern  the image of theman of antiquity, who, through suffering,goes through the  hard way of life. The sufferer’s exp erience, adheren ce to tradition, and established social principles received moral merit. Th ese merits  can be seenas ajustified hope, and with this knowledge, wecan understand why biblical motifs originated in Babylon.The social reality was that divine grace could beearned only by hope and faith.
Based on the source, one can appreciate how the man was tightly bound to society. The protagonist speculates about fate and its volatility, trying to understand why good deeds and praise of God have not brought him grace. He wonders why just laws and rewards donot accompany good people(Poem of the righteous suf ferer). Thus, the overall social mood of the Poem is restless and unknown: the reasons why the gods send misfortuneto society remain unspeci fied and unkn own.
Th e Poem of the RighteousSufferer thus re veals the issues of culture and society that existedin the middle of the second decade B.C . The cultur al precepts of soci et y gradually changedfrom complete trust in deities to an understanding of the necessity of morality. Human consciousness at that time  was transformed, and hope for the bestwas the companion. Socie ty’s social attitudes are expressed through the main character’s ritual s: honoring Godand praising the king.  The hope for the best was only fulfilled through the   execution of these rituals.