Austral ia-based transport equipment  hire andlogistics firm, Brambles Industries Ltd, reported a 15.8percent profitlift forthe 1995/96 year onFriday despite flat Australian an d European economies.
Surging profits from Brambles' U.S. andEuropeanCHEP pallet hirejoint venture with  Britain's GKN Plc compensated for otherwiseslow growth from Australia, the company said.  
"The continui ng improvement in our perform ancereflects,in part, the successful retionalisa tion of our wholly owned businesses andstronggrowth  from our CHEP joint ventures," Brambles Chief Executive John Fletcher said.
"CHEP USA, in part icular, co nt inues to justify our confidence inits long term growth prospects inthe  r egion," he said in Bramble's profit statements.
Brambles' net profitr oseto A$215.1 million (US$169.9 million) for the year to June 30, 1997 fro m   A $97.7 million   in 1994/95, but t he previous year's result w asundermined b y a large abnormal loss.  
Pre-abnormal profits for 1995/96 rose 15.8 percent to  A$214.8million, at the top end of analysts' expectations.
Pre-tax profits rose13 percent and 30 percent from Europe and the United States respectively, while Australian profits rose eight percent.
"Overseasprofits grewat twice the rate in Australia and the trendis li kely to continu e," Fletcher said.
"In  particular we expect further contributionsfrom CHEP in Europe and North America," he said.  
Fletcher later toldReuters this strong peformancefrom Bramble's non-Australian operations had encouraged it  to actively loo k at further acquisitions outside Austra lia."You should anticipatesomeacquisition work in the Nort hern Hemisphere,  but in bus inesses we already operate in here," he said, referring to area sliketransportequipment rentals and r ecords managements.
Looking ahead,he said strongcontributions from theUnited Statesand Europe should continue to  offset soft Australian conditions andhelp  produce profit growth.  
"We haven't  got  anexpectation that w e  will get too much help from this economy .. . for at least anothersixmonths,"he said. "But all inall we've got enough things going to see another (profit) increase for this year," he added.
The result generally pleased analysts, who also pointed to the strong U.S.  pallet operations as the  main bullish note.
"CHEP USA is the outstanding area," said Macquarie  Equities analyst Ian Myles.
"As longas they're saying positive things about CHEP in the USA then they'll be alright and there's a rea sonable amount of momentum there," another Sydney transport analyst said.  
Brambles' share s clos ed up five cents at A$18.90 against a soft mark et overall.