Introduction
Leadership is an important concept because it affects op erations such as safety in a healthcare system.  It can be  defined as the ability of an individual toinspire others to attain set goals (Keats, 2019). In additio n, l eaders help  ensure that activities run effectively during care. For instance, nurse leaders can handle workplace incivility and conflict among staff. Workplace incivil ity is among the challenges that affect the provision ofquality care to patients. However, safety is a situation where one is free from harm. Therefore, it  enables nurses to apply safety initiatives to achieve safety standard s required du ring care.
Identification of Leadership
Leadership plays an integral ro le in the performance of an organization. It is defined as leading a group of people towards achieving a given objective (Keats, 2019). For example, leaders helpsolve disputes among health professionals or between patientsand providers. They also assist in eliminating in stances of workplace incivility such as bullying, biases, and other negative emotionalresponses (Keats, 2019). In addition, leaders ensure th atfollowers can work in teams and acquire appropriate communication ski lls.As a result, leaders ensure that an organization runs effectively.
Appraisal of Leadership
Le adership appraisal is an evaluation that consists of capabilities and traits. Firstly, leaders should be rol e models or an exampleto their followers. The followers should learn throughthem (Becker et al., 2019). For instance, leaders should effectively solve disput es professionally. Secondly,they should guide thefollowerson th e right path, especially in teamwork. Thirdly, leaders should communicate effectively and make sure they listen and respond appropriately. Thus, a high score in the evaluationis determined by the leadership capabilities a leaderdisplays.
Identification of Safety
Safety is an important aspect of healthcare because it affects care outcomes. By definition, safety is a state of being free from any harm or danger. It can be the safety of patients or healthcare providers in a setting (Trinchero etal., 2019). It makes sure that providers’ actions, such as diagnosis and treat ment, are free from errors. Safety also assists in the creation of aconducive working environment for providers. For instance, working in a cl ean environment ensures that nurses are free from harm that could be caused when they stay in unclean surroundings. Thus, the overall outcome of safety in a healthcare setting i sproviders delivering quality healthcare services to patients.
Appraisal of Safety
Safety appraisal involves aspects used to evaluate safety in a healthcare setting. Firstly, safety  is characterized by healthcare servi ces such  as diagnostic care being free from mistakes. Secondly, healthcare settings shoul d have minimal patient readmission due  to treatment going wrong (Trinchero et al., 2019). Third ly, healthcare providers should also be free from any danger and should access protective equipment and operate in an environment free from stress. Finally, safety rules are adhered to by bothproviders andpatients.
Impact on the Nurses’ Need to Use High-LevelClinical Judgment
Th e concept of leadership and safety influence nurses’need to use high-level clinical judgment in a healthcare setting. First, nurses are mandated to ensure that patients get quality care. To achieve this, the nurses must use their clinical judgment. They are also required to know when and where to askfor opinions during care. Second, in safety, nurses should adhere torigorous standards of care (Keats, 2019). Third, they are supposed to use evidence to provide care to patients. Finally, nurses should use the concepts learned in school and the resources available at the facility to ensure qual ity care. For instance, nurses should collaborate with othe r healthcare providers to make informed decisions during care.
Emergin g Health In itiatives– Leadership
There are emerging  health initiatives on the aspect ofleadership.  Firstly, there is a need to  create a conducive working environment wh ere nurses can work effectively and provide quality care. Secondly, adequate nurse staffing to eradicate stress levels that adversely impact care. Third, nursesshould have conflict resolution skills to address problems that arise in healthcare (Keats, 2019). Finally, nurses should be educated to help eradicate workplace incivility. For instance, they should understand the effects of incivility on the performan ce of an organiza tion. Nurses should know the role of technology in providing qualityhealthcare to patients by improving the efficiency of operations. Thus,the emerging initiativesthat leaders should consider are fostering an enabling env ironment to provide quality hea lthcare services tothe people.
Emerging Health Initiatives – Safety
There are various emerging health initiatives as far as safety in healthcare is concerned. Thefirst initiative is to ensure that nurseswork in a safe environment and that patients are free from medicalerrors (Keats, 2019). The second initiative is conducting rigorous training on safe ty issues in  healthcare. This involves making sure nurses understand the practices that promotesafety. Finally, the third initiative is the creation of policies and safety standards to guideoperations within healthcare. Safety standards help in directing and maintaining safe and clinically competent nursing operations. Therefore, safety will be attainedin healthcare if nurses understand safety issues and appropriate safety standards guiding operations.
Ways to Advance Communication Related to Leadership and Safety
Communication is integral in the effective management of operations in a workplace. To advance communication, there is a need to cultivate trust between relevant stakeholders in healthcare, such as n urse leaders, nurses , and patients and theirfamilies (Daft & Marcic, 2019).Trust ensuresthat stakeholdersare openand transparent during communication. The other way is to adopt appropriate infrastructure such as communication apps oruse the latest technology to improve communication between stakeholders. Another way is by constantly training nurses to beeffectivecommunicators. For instance, nurses should have listening skills be cause it is essential in providi ng quality care topatients. Thus, effective com munication can be attained when there is trust among providers; the facility has appropriate tools to support information sharing, and when providers are equipped with communication skills.
Co nclusion
Leadership has a direct link to safety in the workplace. It playsanintegral role in motivating followers to achieve the set objectives. Forinstance, a nurse leader ensures that nurses are encouraged to achieve healthcare goals. Nurs e leaders also help solve issues such as conflict and eliminate instances of workplace incivility like discrimination. On the other hand, safety is being free from any harm. Therefore, it also plays an important role inensuring thathealth providers and patie nts operate and stay in a safe environment.