Financial  services and property groupLiberty International Holdings on Thursday unveiled a move into the British pensions market in ventures  involving the British Telecom Pension Scheme and pensi on fund management gro up Hermes.
Liberty is establishing its ownpensions company, Liberty International Pensions, which willtarget both the nee ds of money purchase pension schemes and retail pensions.
BT Pension Scheme ,whichowns Hermes, is to pay five millionpounds ($7.8 million) for10 percent of the equity of Liberty International Pension s, with the rest held b y Liberty.
Libertyand Hermes said  in ajoint statement they were also setting up a new subsidiarycalled Hermes Liberty International Pensions to offer special ised investment services to the British pensions industry, with Hermesas fund manager.BT Pension Scheme is giving the HermesLibertyjointventure"criticalmass from theoutset" with a 1.5 billion pound transfer o f assets to the new funds, Liberty's chairman Donald Gordon said.
Gordon said Liberty was "well positioned to  take advant age of the changes affecting the UK pen sions industry." He rmes' expertise in investment management and track record wouldhel p it toprovide quality and competitively priced pension services.David Fischel, Liberty'smanagin g director, said  Liberty International Pe nsions stillrequired approval of Britain's Department of Trade andIndustry but was otherwi se ready for launch.
Hermes called the joint pensions venture a meeting of minds .
"Liberty  has the ability and techniques of selling pensions, it also hasthes ystems...and the administration.We on the otherhand are good at our particular core areas of investment management...we think that's a very good marriage," Alastair RossGoobey, chief executiveofHermes, said.
Ross Goobey said Hermes had approached Liberty International onlytofindthe group had been considering an approach to  Hermes.
"It reallywas a meetingof minds on this. Whetherit develops further from this we shall see. I think one step at a time is quite enough for us."
He saidthe venture would probably notbe up and runninguntil the first quart er of next year as regulatory  approval first hadto be obtained forthe new group.
The decision by the giant British Telecom Pension Scheme to transfer assetsto the new Hermes Liberty International Pensions funds would give thenew  venture a boost.
"I would hope it gives som e people some feeling ofsecurity that BTPension Scheme, whichis after allthe biggest in the country,iswilling to do this ," he said.
Liberty plans to sell personal pensions at its r egional shoppingcentres, which are held through a majority-owned subsidiary  Capital Shopping Centres. These  have more than150 million customer visits a year, Liberty said.