Bre-XMinerals Ltd. has been silent since it said last month that it formed apartnership with the son of the Indonesian ruler Suharto, a move that has worried shareholders and prompted regulators to seek more information.
Despite a whirl of rumours and persistent questions t hat have sent the Canadian mining com p any's shares on a roller-coasterride, Bre-X has maintained a dogged silence.
The Calgary-based company that controls one of theworld's  biggest gold prospects inIndonesia has not talked to the press forweeks. Company officials  will take calls only from a handfulof favoured analysts, according to market sources.
"I hav en't had any calls returned," said gold analyst Rick Cohen with Goepel Shields in Vancouver. "There seems to be a certain number of people they talk to. Everybody's a bit in  th e dark."Bre-X onOct. 28 announced its allianc e with Suharto's son,Sigit Harjojudanto, whose business influence is pervasive in Indonesia.
Since then, instead of dir ectly addressing questions about its business in Indonesia -- many ofwhich are playing havoc with the stock price -- Bre-X has opted insteadto le akto the market carefully selected pres s material.
On Sunday, forexample, the companyfaxed the media, analysts and shareholders a copy of a story from theFar Eastern Economic Review detailing its links with Sigit.
The article referred to Sigit'spossible t ieswith the Indonesian army, stated that one of Bre-X's Indonesian partners has been bought out and as serted that   gold giant Barrick Gold Corp. tried  to push Bre-X into a bad  deal.
Despite questions  about the article, Bre-X refuse dtorespond andstill has notsaid whether it endorses the story or putsany faith in the  statements.
"I've certainly suggested afew times that they talk to the mediaand clear thingsup,"  said Neil Winchester, manager of surveillance for the Toronto Stock Ex change. "It would be advantageous to the  marketplace."
Rumours have shroudedBre-X since the Indonesian government said last month it wouldnot issue essentialcontracts for work on the project until Bre-X cleared up an ownership dispute with some  of its Indonesian partners.
 The dispute has put a cloud over Bre-X's search to findamajormining partner to help it develop the rich Busang gold deposit in East Kalimantan, but thealliance withSuharto'sson was expected to help the company clear up its proble ms.
"They're op timistic that theycan get everything within a couple of weeks," said gold analy st Michael Fowler of Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion, who said he spoke with Bre-X on   Tuesday.
But he said B re-X would not comment on the article it distributed. "They just sent it outfor general interest purp oses."
Still, statements  in the article and other gossip were taking its toll on shares linked to Bre-X and other ex pl oration companies in Asia have complainedtheuncertainty has hurt their stocks.
Minorca Resources Inc.,  a Canadian mining company that has an interest in theBusang depo sit through a n alliance with  Bre-X's Indonesian part ner, PT Askatindo Karya Mineral, has found itself on the defensive.
Talk about Askatindo being boughtout is unfounded, Minorca President R oland Horst said in an interview."They have nointention to sell out," he said.
Minorca's chairmanis in Indon esia this week me eting with Askatindo officials and verified the company's intentions, Horst said.
Horst  said he had a slew of unanswered questions about Bre-X's arrangements with Suharto's son too. "To be frank, the relationship be tween Minorc a  and Bre-X is relativelyco ol."