I sat atmy desk, racking my brain to find who could have possibly discoveredthe truth behind the dea th of Phillip Mercer, the heir toone of the most powerful petroleum companies in the world. The job was done wit hout  a scrap of evidence, I made sureof that much. I t simply made no sense, every living soul that knew I killed Mercer were the very ones that orchestrated it. I may not know who th ismysterious person is but I do know that I will answer their question with a bullet to the brain.
It  was nearly 3:00 AMwhen Iheard muffled footsteps down the hallway.I reach ed for the silenced 9MM pistol in my bag, aimingfor the onlyentrance to my corner office. The doorknob began to turn as I  steadied my aim. Swe at was trickling down my spin e, my heart pounding as if I were about to come face to face with the devil himself.The second it took forthe door to open felt like an eternity, but I would have rather endured that secon d ofagonizing torment for the rest ofmy life  th en to meet the eyes of Phillip Mercer when the door opened.
His face was covered in scar t issue, leavingit almost  unre cognizable. It was the eyes thatwerethe giveaway.  T he lookin his eyes was the same as the night I thought I killed him. There was a look of superiority in them,as if to let me know I would never be capable of surpassing him in any way." There is no way, you should be dead!" were the only words I was capable of mustering.
"For all intensive purposes I still am, than ks toyou" he replied with anodd sense of calm in his voice."Will you at least give me the courtesy of an answer now that I  am  here? God knows I have been to the depths of hell and back in these last 5 years so s urely you can giveme that. I will answer any questions you have after."
I recounted the entire tale that crossed our two paths on that fateful n ight 5 years ago. I told him how I was approached by a man that worked for Prism International, the most powerful energy cor poration inthe world.  Prism stood to gain  billions from the collapse of Mercer Petroleum, giving them an even tighter stranglehold on the energy market. The terms were simple enough, kill Phillip Mercer orhave everyone I love systematically killed. The choice was made for me. My militar y background coupled with the fact I helped my step-father design theMercer home made methe obvious ch oice for the job no doubt. From there I toldhim how I was able to bypass the security of his mansion because I helped design it. "What it boils down too is your life meant less  to me then those ofmy lovedones. The part I don't unders tand though is how your still alive! I shot you in the head, then as you collapsed you knocked over a candle, starting a fire that destroyed your home."
" I survived by nothing mor ethen luck. Your bu llet went through the side o f my jaw, lodgingitself in the cheekregi on of my skull. The heat of the fire brought me surging back to consciousnessallowing me to escape but no t w ithout being badly burned. The  tho ught of revenge  has  been the only force driving me to stay alive. I have feared that youmight have been merely a pawnbeing controlled by Prismso that they coul d buy up  my fathers company . But d ammit would have been so much easier to enact my revenge if it had simply been you though.But now that I know my worst fears have been realized I at least know what I amup against."
"You can't possibly think you couldtake down Prism singlehanded!"
"I won't haveto doit alone be causeyour going to help me." He said withhis eyes glimmering with more determination than superiority. It was the kind of l ook that was impossible to refuse.