Outboard MarineCorp said i t is onlyfive percent finished with a radical restructuring that it expects will result in m ore charges againstearnings in 1997 and possiblyin 1998, the company said.
Restructuring isabout "five percent complete as faras going down theroad and getting the savings," said spokesman Stan Main. "That doesnot mean that we've taken only five percent o four restructuring charges ... Therewill likelybe more charges during '97 and perhaps even into '98."
Shares i nOutboard onFriday were off 1/4 to 15-3/4. 
The Waukegan, Ill.-based maker ofbo ats and boat engines reported fourth-qua rt er profitsThursday that, excluding restructuring charges, beat Wall Street estimates.
Analystscautioned, however, that a turnaround at Outboard remains a long-term project.
"They're going to be continuing this restructuring process in '97 and they're going to co ntinue to have some more charges ... They describe thephase they're in now asthe discovery proce ss," said Lehman Brothers analystHarriet Bald win.
A key mo ment could com e Tuesday whenOutboardexecutives are scheduled to meet withanalystsand investors in New Yo rk.  
Expected to be in attendance are the principals of Greenway Partners, an investment firm led by forme r Carl Icahn associates Alfred Kingsley and Gary Duberstein. Greenway bought an 8.5-percent stake inOutboard this summer.
Although the firm  is known for activism, Greenwayso farhas not pressured Outboard to alter course, Main s aid. Nor has there been further communication between Greenway and company executives  since initial  discussions in August, he said.
Analysts speculated there could be fireworks next w eek or at the January 16 annual meeting of shareholders, who are saidto be growing impatient for a cohesive recover y plan.  
A restructuring was set in motion this yearby chief executive Harry B owman, who came aboard in 1995, when the stock was trading in the low20s. Bowman continuesto deliberate over how to f ix Outboard and key piecesremain to be put in place, analystssaid.
The business isunder evaluation fromtopto bottom, Main said. Once restructur ing is complete,Outboard "certainly will be a marine products company," he said.   
"Longer term, we could get into products  thatwould not be marinerelated. But our initialfocus over the ne xt two  to three years is  to fix the business that we're in and then perhaps lookat other are as that might be less cyclicalor  seasonal," said Main, who is director of strategicplanning.
Bowman has  spoken offinding  more stability forOutboard, which suffers more from boating' s boom-b ust cycles tha n rivals, such as Lake Forest , Ill.-based Brunswick Corp, which has diversified into bowling, fishing and camping gear.
Outboard sees opportunities to enter other markets-- such as motorcycles, snowmobiles and personalwatercraft -- via its innovative FICHT fuel injection engine tech nology, Main said .
Spending on capital and tooling in fiscal 1996, ended September 30,fel l to $52.7 million from $66.5 million the year before ,  but spending on FICHT is holding steady as the company converts more of its engine line to it, he said.
Sales of 150-hp FICHT engines todealers willbegin in Decemberand consumers will see the engines in January. A promotion al roll-out is underway.
The company plans to convert its entir e outboard engine line ab ove 20-hp to FICHT engine s, which will cost 22  to 25 percent more  than their traditi onal equivalents, Mainsaid.