Most people during the Victorian era valued the virtues ofsociety. Victorians believed that they were fixed and certain as guidin g behavior to  people all the time. The  virtues included morals that one can be judged accor ding to his behavior. Any betrayal ofethical standards wastermed lousy behavior and could deserve punishment. These beliefs have become misguided, undesirable, and inappropriate in modernAmerica (Schlereth,2018).They have shifted to valuesthat no longer have classical ideas of wisdom, justice, courage, orcleanliness (p. 691). They have become sexual connotation where people practice prostitution andother immoral behaviors.
In  previous years, there were low rates of crimes that have continued to rise. Victorians  practiced moralprinciples in their lives, which maintained good morals and behavior. Currently, moralshave changed and translated to de structivebehaviors that contribute to higher rates of crimes (Schlereth, 2018). Victorian speaks about moralityand the bestways of devising it. In modern Ameri ca, a character has been substituted,and most youths indulge in immoral behavior.
In theVictor ianera, women were illiterate, immigrants were not socializing with others, while now women are educated, and immigrants share ideas  with natives. Men used to work for wages and get involved in politics while women engaged in domestic work and childrearing. In liter ature, eachera had a different theme according to the  way we understand life (p. 693). The Victorian era focused on industrializa tion, imperialism, domesticity, and cultural identity (Schlereth, 2018).Modern literature focused on the theme of loss, despair, and politics. Victorian era, most people were Christian and val uedreligion heavily compared to the current American.
The Victorian era and modern Amer ican have similaritiesin howthe people live in the two ages. In the two generations, people practiced m oral behaviorcherishing virtues in society. The  two value the social, economic, and political life, and the individuals participate in them (Schlereth, 2018). The  eras impacted the world of literature and changed people’s lives on how they see literat ure (p. 695). For example, Elizabeth Barrett Browning wrote a  po em, ‘The cry of thechildren’, which has a message about industrialization on ch ild labor. The poem narrates child labor which had become popular due to new machines and workplaces. All people we re able to socialize during the Victorian era to learn formaland informal skills. Most people get involved inliterature where they write poems  that could talk of their cur ren t situations and lifeexperie nces.
The Victorian and modern American eras have imp acted changes to human life. For example, i n England, the rate of indictable offence s reduced by 50% and the population grew from19 mi llion to 33 million, thenumber of crimes reduced from 92000 to 81000. The people learned moral values and the virtues that correspond to better social, economic, and political life.In thetwo eras, men and women understood their roles, learned formal andinformal skill s, and could interact and socialize. Peopledeveloped morals, and they were hardworking andsuccessful in business. The Victorian erabrought change, innovation, and invention that contributed to current technological advancements.
The modern Amer icanmisses a lot from the Victorian era r egardi ng morali ty, beliefs, andvirtues. During the Victorian era, peop le valued cultural  opinions, cherished integrity in society, and practiced good moral behavior. The modern American had derailed from all the normsand changed the way of life. There are practices of immoral behavior such as prostitution, many divorces, many crimes, and alack of seriousness in religious belief. Most people have disrespect and ignorance of everything in the current world. Victorian-era people were religious and valued their religion, but a few currently do the same.
All people were able to socialize during the Victorian erato learn their roles, getan education and interact with each other. Most people get involved in literature wherethey write poems about their  current situations and life experiences. People couldwrite  poems  sensitizing an issue affecting the society for the society  to take necessa ry measures. In the two eras, peo ple learned formal and informal skills, which helped them handle dif ferent issues in society.