Kellogg Co. on Friday reported a drop of more than 30 percen t in its third quarter profit s as its cereal volume droppedin an  intensely competitive market.
Kellogg, which makes Corn Flakes, Frosted Flakes,Rice Krispies, Fruit Loops and Special-K, is fighting back, launching marketing plans for the fourth quarterthat are aimed at boosting its sales.
"We'll be taking what we believear e appropriate actions," Kellogg spokesman Richard Lovell said.
The company, the world's biggest maker ofready-to-eat breakfast cereals, said its net income for the  third qu arter fe ll to $159.5 million, includinga$21.3 million charge, fr om $230 million ayear ago. On a per share basis, Kellogg's earnings dropped 2 9 percent  to 75 cents, with fewer shares outstand ing, from $1 .05 last year.Kellogg said  its overall sales slipped 9 per cent to $1.68 billi on from $1.84 billion ascontinued weak p rices for breakfast cereals offset  a 1 percent gain in worldwide sales volume.
"As previou sly forecast, our third quarter performance was influenced  significantly by competitive conditions in the U.S. cereal category," Kellogg Chairman Arnold  Langbo said in astatement.
Analysts estimate  that Kellogg 's domestic cereal sales volume fell 9 percent to 10  percent in the third quarter.
"We can't detail it. It was a challenging quarter in the  U.S. and our volume was down,"Lovell added.
Kellogg said its fourthquarter 1996 earnings likelywill show a slight rise from the 77 centsitearned a ye ar ago. First quarter 1997 earnings, however, may notmatch the 99 cents earned inthe 1996period.
"It's a challenging comparison," Lovell said.Kellogg's stock fell on concern over U.S. cereal sales volume and the outlookforearnings, dropping $1 at $64.50 a share,  on the New York Stock Exchange. Earlier, it set  a new  52-week low of $64.125.
Kellogg said the U.S .cereal market overall was sluggish,  with sales growing a bout 1.5 percent, measuring grocery stores, mass merchandisers and all other outlets.
Lookingahead, Kellogg refused tooutline what promotional programmes it was planning for the fourth quarter.
Analysts s aid they did not expect theBattle Creek, Mich.-based cereal giant to return to deep-discount coupons or  buy-one, get-one -free promotionalgiveaways. 
"It's sort of leftto speculation what they're going to do," SBC Warburg analyst Chris Jakubik said."There is no indication that, atthistime,they have shifted from theirlong-term strategic goal, which is to reduce inefficient promotions," added BT Securities analyst JohnO'Neil. 
Ke llogg reducedprices on about two-thirds of its breakfast cerealsin June. Other major manufacturers also cut prices this year as  they battled for market share andtried tojump-start consumer purchases.
But those price cuts alone apparently were not enoughto jump-start consumer purchases, ac cording toSmith Barney analyst David Rabinowi tz.
"Themessage there is tha t prices have to come downfurther," Rabinowitz said.
According to Informatio n Resources data, U.S. ready-to-eat  cerealsales in grocery stores fell 1.6 percent to 2.6 billion  pounds for the 52 weeks ended Aug. 11, according to the most recent data available, compared with a year earlier.
Kellogg's sales volumedeclinedin that period by 4.1 percent to 881.3 million pounds for a market share of about 34.4 percent, Information Resourc es said.