Learning history helps  people draw connections between the pa s t andpresent and allowsmaking predictions for the future based on previous lessons.  Climate change is one of the mostsignificant topics of interest and r esearch. No matter h ow well societies develop in terms of technology, they will inev itably face disasters if they neglect the issues of nature. The Chornobyl nuclear accident, which happene d in 1986,was oneof the most devastati ng ecological events thatchanged t hefateso f thousands of people in many countries.
My prior knowledge of the topic is not ample, but I do know that the major release of radioactive materials occurred, which led to  the contamination  of airand wate r, causing numerous diseases and deaths.  I have also read  somewhere thatthe then-ruling government of the USSR kept the explosi on a sec ret,which  prevented people from saving theirlives within the f irst few hours and days after the accident. Unfortunately, individuals living next to the nuclear plant, as well as those living farther, had no chance of survival. The accident led to the increase in radiation levels to “between ten and one hundred  timesnormal” (Price, 2021, pa ra. 1). I have also read  about th e courageousness and self-sacrifice of thosewho were involved in fire extinguishing processes.
I would like to learn more about the reasons that led to such a disaster and tofind out whether it was preventable. Also, I want to investigate the reasons behind the decis ion  of the USSR government to conceal the truth and not let peo ple save their lives. I  cannot understand how they could have beensilent at a time when tho usands of c itizens werebeing gradually driveninto an ecological trap.
The v alues,assumpt ions, and beliefs I have related to the chosen topic  are two-dimensional. On the one hand, I am concerned that such catastrophes can occurand harmpeople’s lives. On the otherhand, I  am deeply disturbed by the fact that the authoritiescan act so thought lessly and dare to neglect people’s lives.  I have always considered freedom and healthas the most important values. I believe that w orld leaders should doeverything possible to prevent such dis asters or at least not conceal them.My opinion about the topic is that peo ple should learn from such disastersand use this devastating lessonin the future. However, my perspective  is very closely  connected tothe current world situation. The relevant events happening due to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine are alarming. In the context of my topic, Ishould note that a fewdays ag o, Russians attacked Ukraine’s Zap orizhzhia nuclear plant, which is the largest in Europe (Borger & Henley, 2022).Whereas the very question of the Russian invasion of Ukraineis highly tragic and relevant, I will focus on  the nuclear plants’ seizure inthis paper. Russia nsseized Chornobyl and Zaporizhzhia nuclear plants, and they seem not to realize  what aftermath e xplosions there could bring.
Sadly, it seems that history has not taught some people anything. Afterso many deaths in 1986and following years, one could t hink that cou ntries of the world had learned the value of people’s health and lives. That is  why I want to investigate the topicof  the Chornobyl nuclear accident. This way, I will be able to learn more about that disaster and draw conclusions on th e pres ent-day threats and the need for preventive measures to stop thepossibility of its repetition.