British National Lottery operator Camelot  LOTT.CN  on Tuesday pos ted lower interim profits asincome from scr atchcardsales fell by over 450 million pounds ($750million).
Camelot chief executive Tim Holley also told Reu tersthat theplanned second weekly National Lottery draw wo uld be launched on Feb ruary 5 and be held every Wednesd  ay thereafter. Camelot,  whichhas faced a storm o f cr iticism overits jackpotearningssince the lottery was launched two years ago,reported  pre-ta x profits of31.5 million poundson sales of 2.1 billion pounds for the 24weeks to September 14.
This compares with pre-tax profit of 36.2 million pounds and sales of 2. 51 billion poundsin the same period a year ago.
Camelot's five shareholding companies -- Cadbury Schweppes, DeLa R ue, GTech UK, Racal Electron ics and ICL shared a total dividend payount of10 million pounds,up from 9.5 million.
Sales forthe weekly National Lott ery g ame rose two percent to 1.68 billion pounds. Two thirds of the adult populationregularly buy tickets for the Saturday draw, anevent which is telev ised live a nd has b ecome a ritual for many Britons.
But sales of C amelot's "Instants" scratchcards fell f rom 8 71 million pounds last year to419million thistime.
Camelot executives said that the decline inscratchcard sales was to beexpec ted as theinitial en thusiasmgenerated by their introductionin March 1995 waned.
"Mirroring the experience oflo tteries worldwide, sales of Instants have fallen since their launchand are now  settled at around 17 million pound s per week," Chairman Sir George Ru sse ll said in a statement.
Chief executive Holley said that t he second weekly draw shoul d boost salesof National Lottery game tickets b y 15-20percent from the ir current weekly average of 69million.
Camelot said that overone billion  pounds -- 50  percent of turnover -- had been handed outin prize money in the firsthalf and that 567 million pounds had gone to "Good Causes" -- including charities and projects insports and the arts.
Camelot, which has been granted a seven-year licence, said that  over 40  percent of turnoverwent to "Good  Cau se s" and the governnme nt in duties, makingit the world's most effici ent lottery operator.
Profit after tax is just under  one percent of total sales and Holley dismissed criticisms of Camelot's performa nce.
"I thinkwe have a slight problem in this country with success," he said, adding that foreign lotterycompanies were bemused  by the atacks on Camelot.
The  group confirmed plans to set up The Camelot Foundation to support organisations helpingthe disadvantaged and disabled.