Colombian Ant i-Drug Prosecutor Dismisses Move to Lift Ban onExtradition as Virtually Meanin gless
The Colombian government's recentmove  to lift theban on extraditiono f its citizens accused of drug trafficking to the United States has beendismissed by the country's anti-drug prosecutor as virtually meaningless.
The b an on extradition of its citizens  had been in pla ce since 2012 when the government passed a law  prohibiting the extradition of Colombiannationals accused of crimescommitted in thecountry to anyother jurisdiction, including the United States. The move was seen a s an attempt to protectColombian drug t raff ickers from extradition to the US, whichis among the major countries that demand the extradition of  Colombian nationals.
However, the Colombian government announced lastmonth that it had decided to lift the banon extradition of its citizens related to drugtrafficking tothe US. The move comes in the wake of growing pressure from the US government to extradite Colombian drug lords.
While the Colombian government hailed the move as a major stepin the fight against drug t rafficking, the country's anti-drug prosecutor, Claudia Carrasquilla, rejected it as virtually meaningless. She said the move would not  change t he situation on the ground, as the banhad already been lifted in practice. She pointed out that Colombia ha s been extraditing its citizens accused of drug traffi cking to the United States even when the ban was in place.
Carrasquilla said that since the  ban was enactedin 2012, Colombiahas extra dited about 1,200 individuals to the US, including several notorious drug lords, such as Juan Carlos Ramírez Abadía, alias "Chupeta," and Diego Montoya Sánchez, alias"Don Diego."Sheadded that the Colombian government had approved all these extraditions despite the ban.
Therefo re, Carrasquilla argued thatthe recent decision to lift the ban was merely a "symbolic gesture" aimed at pleasing the US  government,which has been pushing for more extraditions.  Shewarned that the move would not help Colombiatackle  drug traff icking, whic h remains a major problem in the country.
Colombia is oneofthe world's largestproducers ofcocaine, and drug  trafficking has long been a serious problem in t he country. Despite the government 's e fforts to combat the trade, drug lords continue to operate acros s the country, usingviolence and corruption to m aintain their illegal operatio ns.
The US government has been a key ally of Colombia in the fight against drug trafficking, providing financial and military  s upportto the country's securityforces. However, the UShas also been critical ofColombia'shandling  of drug lords, accusing the country of  beingtoo lenien t on them.
The recent move to lift the ban on extradition of its citizens related to drug trafficking to the US  is seen as an at temptby the Colombian governmentto appease the US administration, which h as demanded that the countryhand over severa l high-profile druglords, including Dairo Antonio Úsuga, who heads Colombia's most powerful drugcartel.
However, theanti-drug prosecutor's dismissal of the move as virtually meaningless suggests that it may not have the desir ed impact.While theColombian government may have lifted t he ban, it remai ns to be seen if it will actually startextraditing its citizens accused of drug trafficking to the US insignificant numbe rs. If it does not, the move will belittle more than a symbolicgesture.