Colombia has long been a hub for drugtrafficking, but the country is taking steps to crack down on th e issueby overturning its extraditionban. The move is  facing backlash from drug traffickers who are seeking  to preventthe extradition of their associates.
Th e ban was p ut in place in the 1990sas a way to protect thecountry's sovereignty. However, it has since become a roadblock in the fight  agai nst drugtrafficking. Colombi a n auth o rit ies have found it difficult to prosecute drug traffickers who flee the country when they are under invest igation.
The current administration led by President IvanDuque has been push ing forthe ban tobe overturned. The country' stop court hasnowapproved the move, allowing for the extradition of Colombian nationals who are wanted by foreign countries for  drug trafficking.
Drugtraf ficking organizationsin the countryhave responded with force.  Just this week, a car bomb exploded in the capital of Bog ota, killing several people and injuring dozens more. The attackh as been linke dto a group known as the National Liberation Army, which is believed to haveties to drug trafficking.
Colombia has long struggled  with drug trafficking, which has fueled violence  and corruption in the country. The government has made strides in recen t years to  combat the issue, but it is an ongoing battle.
The move to lift the extradition ban is seen as a crucialstep in the fight against drugtrafficking. The government hopes it will encourage drug traffickers  to think twice before engagingin illegalactivities.
However, themove is not without controversy. Some critics argue that it could lead to a destabilizationof the count ry.They say that drug traffickers will seek reve ngeonthose whocooperatewith authorities, and that it could le ad to  an escalation of violence.
President Duque has made it clear that he is not backing down. He seesthe move as a way to send a message to drug traffickers that their   r eign of terrorisover .
"We will not allow drug  traffi ckers to continue tooperate with impunity in our country," he said in a statement. "Thi s isa critical step in our fight against drug trafficking, and we willdo whatever it takes to bring those responsible to justice."The move has been lauded by many in the interna tional community, who see itas a bold step in the fight against drug trafficking. The United States has  been a strong ally in this fight, providing funding and resources to help combat the issue.
Colombia is making progress in its f ightagainst drug trafficking, but it is c learthat there is still a long way to go. The government's d ecision to  lif t t he extradition ban is a positive step,  but it is also one th at comes wit h  risks. The country will need toremain vigilant as ittakes on this difficulttask.