Introduction
Peoples’ behaviors and decisions are often  the central scope of sociologicalinquiry.  Flint (Michigan) water crisis can be seen as an illustration of such decisions and beh aviors that have ledto severe issues with multiple implications. To under stand the causes of the crisis and ways to prevent such problems in the future, it is possible to employ the Marxist approach. The class concept of this paradigm best fits into the analysis of the situation as a conflict between two majorgro ups isapparent.
Flint (Michigan): Demographics
In the middle of the twentieth century Flint (Michigan) was a rapidly developing and prosperous city that hosted such giants as General Motors. However, in the 1980s, the town started to degrade due to the severe oil crisis that hit the automotive industry(Pauli, 2020). The city saw tremendous demographic shifts because thousands of people left searching forbetter employment and living conditions. At present, the city’spopulation is slightly over 96 thousand people (Data USA, 2021). The majority of residents are Black, and athird is White. The poverty rate is relatively high and reached 39% in 2020, while the median age is quite low (35,5 years). These figures sugge st that the  socio-economic situation in Flint is alarming, and significant changes are needed.
Water Crisis in Flint (Michigan)
The crisis started in 2014, and officials in coll aboration and supervision of the public and scientists could not solve it until 2019. In 2014,officials had to change the water source due to the difficulties with maintaining the existinginfrastructure (Krings etal., 2018). No rapid measures to improve the infrastructure were implemented. The same year, people addressed officials dueto their dissatisfaction withwater quality, which remained unattained. Afterseveral studies and data publications regarding extreme violation of water quality s tandards (high lead level, harmful bacteria), the officials were forced to take action. As a result, pipes were replaced, and the necessary improvement to the infrastructure was made with the help of the federal budget funds.
Water Crisis in Flint (Michigan): Causes
One of the central issues that caused the crisis wasthe city’s constraints  related to infrastructure. Flint’s budget could hardly ensure proper maintenance of pipesand other infrastructure components (Pauli, 2020). Due to the economic situation inthe city,the public had less control over the actions and decisions of an emergencymanager andGovernor Rick Snyder. Residents addressed the authorities, but their claims received little attention as the authorities concentrated on the economic development of the city rather than public health or safety.
Flint Water Crisis: Social Concept Applied
When addressin  g the causes of the crisis, it isnecessary to apply the concept ofclass. Although various scholars note that c lass is a subjective c onstruct created for analytical purposes, this notion is a relevant component of population stratification (Neilson, 2017). People identifywith a particular group, such as workers (proletariat) or big business own ers (bourgeoisie). In Flint, this stratification is relevant as there is almost no middle class. Apparently, officials concentrated on the needs of big businesses rather than workers.
Marxist Theory: Class
According to the Marxist theory of class, human society is mainly divided into the proletariat (laborers)and bourgeoisie (those who usurp laborers’ resources). The former are working people withlittle resources as they are taken over by the rich (Neilson, 2017). These two groups are in constant conflict, and their resolution can be achieved by revolution. The revolution can be implemented peacefully in terms of the coalition wit h a part (minority) of bourgeois and proletariat or due to violent struggle. Marx believed in the victory of the proletariat and the establishment of communism with its justice and proper distribution of resources.
Marxist Persp ective Regarding  the Crisis
In the situation in Flint, the officials took the side of the bourgeoisie, paying no attention to potential outcomes. Authorities made some decisions to allocate funds to boost the development of the economy supporting business. However,the proletariat was the class deprived of higher living s tandards as poor p eople had to live in older communities with old water pipes contaminated considerably.Water was t he resource  that became central  to the conflict between the two classes. Prole tariat wo n the struggle, which could be explained  by the success ofthe peaceful revolution wit h the coalition of workers and some partof business owners.
MarxistPerspective Regarding th e Crisis (Social Concepts)
The dis cussion of the crisis from the Marxist theoryof class perspective makes it possible to take a closer look at such concepts as civil society and  race. Civil society is regarded as a construct bringing society to balance and ensuring that all groups’ interests are addressed(Neilson, 2017). Race is another social concept that can be applied as most of the city’s residents are Black. The povertyrate in this population is also the high est (Data USA, 2021). This g roup has the lowestaccess toproper living conditions (good neighborhoods), employment, and health care . This is the most vulnerable group that was the primary force empow ering the civil society, which led  to considerable improvements and crisis resolution.
The Crisis from Bourdieu’s Perspective
The Flint water crisis can be viewed from Bourdieu’s perspective based on the idea that classesare analytical constructs. Instead , different groups, with individuals joining and leaving these clusters, collaborate or find themselvesin a conflict. There was no clear-cut working class in Flint, and the big business struggled for resources. However, workers, unemployed people, small business owners, bigbusiness owners, officials, scientists, and  others were commu nicating and collaborating. These interactions helped the groups solve an issue that had adverse effectson all of them.
Conclusion
Marxist and Bour dieu’s perspectives can be both applied to an alyze the Flint Watercrisis. It becomes clearthat classes are objective constructions, although they are not clear-cut. Workers, entrepreneurs, big business owners, merchants , scienti sts, and employees havediverse interests, and they may sometimes be in conflict. However, the needs of people pertaining to different groups canbe achieved by collaborating. The Flint Water Crisis is a n illustration of the conflict and its resolution. Although thefocus was initially on the interest of business es and economic growth at the expense of public health, people managed to force officials to make the right choices and address the waterissue. The representative of different classes and clus ters of society formed the civilsociety that became th e power bringing the solution. The authorities had to  implement appropriate measures to solvethe problem. It is c lear that civil society can be a supervisory force to ensure t hat officials make proper decisions.