Therock and music pop  scene were introduced to and gained popularity on television through massive h it shows for teenagers. The three primary ones were Where the Action Is on CBS,  Shinding on ABC, and Hullabaloo on NBC. As more households had accessto televisions along with   thegrowth  of widespread rang e of programming, inclu dingmusical ones,the television played a significant role in distributing  the music to the public. The bands that appearedon these hit TV shows went on to seesignificant successinthe charts. The television shows helped to articulate the newsort of youth music culture and almost becamea star-making mechanism i n a relationship andprofits that the music and television in dustriesshared. Some bands, suchas theMonkees, the American response to theBeatles, were created with the purpose of television performance as their acting and on-camera comfort as a group were initiall  y prioritized over music. However, the Monkees’ music took off astronomically beyond anyone’s expectations. Nevert heless, they  w ere a band groomed by the entertainmentindustry with an emphasis on television per f ormances which took away much of the authenticity,even when compared to their counterpartsThe Beatles, who although made visual content, focuse d on  their own music strongly (Covach and Flory 212).
Television drastically went on t o c hange the landscape of the musicindustry. First , a splitformedamong artists a n d fans, with oneside foc using on the pop-oriented, performance-focused television m usic, while theother, typically older audience was drawn to serious-minded music of rock which continued to be played onthe ra dio rather than  TV. Television also brought  aboutthe phenomenon of fict ious bands, such as the popular Archies, a cartoon drawn band pop ular with young tee ns (Covach and  Fl ory 214). This has neve r been done before and similarly created a new genre of m usic-television entert ainment. However, until the adventof cable-ne twork of television resulting indedicated channels such asMTV,the television phenomenon in the 1960s had its limitations. MostTVsets at the time had poor au dio  and visual quality, and as recording andradio sound quality improved with hi-fi recording and FM, the dispari ties were noticeable. Television is  notb y nature of design a sound medium, andthe musical experience is meant to beenveloping lead ing to the split in  the fanbase, where younger audienceswho generallycared lessabout soundquality appreciated the visual mediumto theirmusic (Frith 279).