Apple Computer Inc., struggling to remain the teacher's pet among computer makers, is turning a modified version of its handheld Newton organizer into an inexpensive portable computer for students.
The computer  maker on Monday will unveil the Apple eMate 300, an $800 machi ne that looks like a grown-up'slaptop with a keyboard and a flip-up screen, but in a rugged casing that can survive rough ha ndling.
Apple plans to sell the machine  directly to elementary and high schools, beginning early next year, as an alternative to personal computers.For the priceof a $2,500 multimediaPC,  a  school can buy three eMates, Apple executives said.
"The federal government says we need to get to a three-to-one student-to-computer ratio by the  year 2000," s aid Jim Groff, general manager of Apple's info rmation appliances group. "I would say the eMate is the only credibled vehicle foracc omplishing that."
More vital to Apple, the product could keep educators from abandoning the company as the leading supplier of computers for classrooms, analysts said.
"The potential for so mething like this ina classroom setting is tremendous," said Mike Mc Guire, a mobile computing analyst at DataquestInc. "This will be an indication to educators that A pple is on e of the few companies spending time extending computing to more and more kids."
Apple needs a distinctiv e product to set itself apart fromother personal computer m akers crowding into the educ ation market, analy sts said.
Although Apple, based in Cupertino, Calif., still enjoys strongeducational  sales, sales of IBM-compatible personal computers by companies such as Compaq Compute rCorp. are growing much faster.
Apple's computer has always been thefavoredtool  for teaching children how to use computers. But in the face ofApp le'suncertainfuture and a flood of c heap PCs, schools are less likely toremain loyal.
For the 1996-1997 school year, of all the computers that schools plan to buy, 56 percent will be AppleMacintoshs and 40 percent IBM-compatible mach ines, according to arecent report by Quality EducationD ata, an e ducation market researcher.In the previous school year, the pu rchasing planswere 61 percent Macintosh and 38 percent PC.
"The numbers are overwhelming in favor of PCs," said Carole Cotton, president of CCA Consulting Inc., another tracker of technology purchases by schools.
"No school district can afford to make a mistake" when picking computersthey will usefor years, s he noted.
Apple's Groff said , however, that the eMate is not the company's  answer to co mpetitors' inroads.
Instead, he said, the device was built for schools askin gfora cheap, powerful computer that can offe r education al software and Internet connections -- as well  as endure rough handling by kids.
"When we introduced the Newton three  years ago, it was  a solution in sear ch of anapplication," Groff said. Education turne dout to be one of the best applications , he said.
Along with the eMate, Apple plans to unveil a beefier version of the Newton MessagePad onMonday. The new MessagePad 2000 features better Internet capabilities, easier connection to PCs and built-in word processing and spread sheet software.
Analysts said, however, that the eMate is the more interesting device. Teachers and students will likeitbecause it isnot as esoteric an d hard to run as a traditional personal computer.
"Kids a re having to learn more about how to run a computer than about reading and writing,"McGuire  said . "The ability to h ave the kid just turn on the device and g et rig ht into th e writing assigment is really valuable."
The eMate weighs four pounds (1. 8kg) and fits into a backpack. It can run for a week on rechargeable batteries, according to Ap ple.
The machine features a built-in word processor, drawing and equation-drawing programs and an address book. With an optional modem and software, students can browse the Internet.
Still, the eMate could be a tough sell for Apple.
Because its software is based on the Newton operating system,it cann ot run the thousands of educational programs written for theMacintosh andfor PCs running Mi crosoft Corp.'s Windows software.
Apple executives are confident, however, that the eMate will help the company p lace more its computerson students' desks.
" There's 52 million screaming (grades) K-to-12 c hildren to sell to," said Robert Kondrk, Apple's manage r of education product lines. "We've known for years this is an opportunity,but we didn't have the technology to do it before. We  do now."