NatWest Markets , the investmentbankingarm of National Westminster B ank, on Monday named Peter Hall as the man to run its expanding operations but o th er questions over the bank's strategy remained, analysts said.
NatWest s aid Hall, who currently runsitsAmerican op erations, would takeover as chief operating officer of the investment bank, reporting to chief executive Martin Owen.
At the same time,NatWest Markets said it would streamline originat ion and distribution functions  into one Global Financial Markets division from the current capital marketsand treasury divisions.
NatWest said no job losses  would result from the consolidation.
The bank has been on the acquisition trail recently,buy ing corporate finance boutique JO Hambro Magan in Octob er  , spend ing $590millionon U.S. primary dealer Greenwich Capital and 472 millionpounds on Gartmore, the British fundmanager. It also acquired U.S. merger and acquisitions specialist Gleacher for $135 million.
But analysts have expressed concern thatNatWest  willfind it difficult to bring theseall  together, despite the fact that the businesses seem to com pliment each other.
Some feel thatNatWest iss pending largeamounts of cash on buying b usinesses  that could be near the  top of their busine ss cycle.
"The Na tWest mar kets bus iness is robustand it can make returns while it is still building," said one analyst. "But  a  revenue downturn willtend to  hit the players who are building rather than thosewho arealready e stablished."
Currently ,  investment banks are enjoying generally the low-inflation,steady growth conditions seenin many major economies with an accompanying healt hy amountofmergers and acquisitions activity.
Buta substantial downturn on Wall Street, predicted bymany strategists,  could leave some high-cost acquisitions lookinga little less appetizing, analystssay.
Owen saidthe fast growth of NatWest markets,both orga nically andbyacquisition, had led himto theconc lusion thatthe day-to-day operational management should be separated from strategy, client development and financial supervision.
"As President and COO, Pete r will be charged with  implementing our operational plan, leaving me more timeto work withglo bal produ ct heads to shap e our strategies," Owen said.
Analystswere happythat NatWesthad brough t an insider to the job.
"Sometimes i t gets difficult to keep continuity andthings can start to fallapart ," said oneanalyst. "I would class this appointment as continuity, so that'sgood."