LearCorp.,  furthering its quest to supplycomplete car interior s, said Friday it agreed tobuy the instrumentpanel and trim parts unit of Denmark-bas ed Borealis Holding AB.Lear said it signed amemor andum of understanding to acquire Borealis Industrier ABforundisclosed terms.
Based in Gothenburg, Sweden, Borealis Industrier manufacturers instrument panels, door  panels, climatesystems, exterior trimand various other  com ponents for the Europe an car and truck industry.Borealis  Industrier had 1995   sales of about $230 million and owns five plants in Sweden that employ about 1,800people.
Primary customers for the businessinclude Swedish carmakers AB Volvo andSaabAutomobileAB and truckmaker Scania AB.
Borealis Holding is owned by  Fin nish state-controlledoil and energy group Neste Oy and Norwegian state-owned oilgroup Statoil AS .
Completion of the transaction is subjectto approval by the Swedish competition authority and otherconditions.Learsaid the acquisition supports its strategy of having i n-house capability to provide tota  l automotive interiorsystems, includinginst rument panels.
" N ot only does thisacquisition strengt hen relations with our European customers, but it positions Learas the only independent automotive supplier in theworld with in-house capabilities in all five interior systems  -- broadening the ap peal of our already strong one-stop-shopping comp etitiveadvantage," Lear Chairman Kenneth Way saidin a statement.
The deal is thelatest of a ser iesof consolidation moves in the automotiveinteriormarket. Lear earlier thisyear purc hased car pet and floor-mat m ake r  Masland Corp. for$384 million, and last year bought door paneland console maker Aut omotiveIndustries Inc for $626 million.
Lear'sU.S. op erations include the manufacturing of a wide range of automotive interiorcomponents.
The company's stock was unchanged Fridayat $38 a share on the New YorkStock Exchange.
Lear's competitors are  also pursuing the same acquisition strategy.
Johnson Cont rols Inc .,which has a strong s eating business, recently acquired interiorparts maker Prince Automotive,based in Ho lland Mich., for $1.35 bi llion in cas h.
Canada's Magna International Inc., one of the"Big Three" automotiveinterior firms along with Lear and Johnson Controls, recentlyacquired seat maker Douglas &LomasonCo. for $135 milli on.