In th e grand sc heme  of things, prosecutors and victims of violent crimesare natural allies. The prosecutors stri ve to bringthe offenders to justice, whetherto fulfill  their  dutybefore the law or achieve career  progress. At thesame time, thevictims get moral satisfaction whenthe criminals are broughttoju stice. Therefore, one might think that prosecutors and victims are naturally  supposed to cooperate. However, this logical scenariodoes not necessarilyhappe nin practice. Sometimes, the victims cannot adequatelycooperate with the prosecutorsdue to theexperienced shock,  fear,or mist reatment in the prosecutor’s  office. During the mid-70s, theLawEnforcement Assistance Administration funded the first V ictim/WitnessAssis tance  Projects (VWAPs) in  order to enhance cooperation between the prosecutors’ offices and victims (Karmen,2019 ). With time, the VWAPs have become firmly established institutions charged with  the noblemission of supporting crime victims.
Prosecutor of fices can assist the victims of vio lent  crimes throughvarious means. The bestpractices include psychological h elp in hotlines andcrisis coun seling,shelter,  fo od, transportation, and proper ty recovery (Karmen, 20 19). In addition, mostVWAPs make referrals tolocal agencies, which provide the victims with long-term care (K armen, 2019). Furthermore, prosecutor offices offer legal ass istance throughpamphlets about the a djudicationprocess. Finally, VWAPs mitigate confus ion by notifying the victims about indictments, postponements,  acquittals, convictions, and otherpossible developments in the case( Karmen, 2019). As such, the modern prosecutor offices are well equipped forensuring the victims’ cooperation through legal, psychological,and even financial support.The Sa n Diego County District Attorney’s Office serves as a specific exampleof a well-rounded victim services project. The Victim Assistan ce Program offersemergency (crisis intervention),legal (court support, orientation in  the criminal justicesystem), and psychological (re ferral assistance) help (SanDiego County District Attorn ey,n.d.). In addition, victimsofviolent crimes mayreceive specialreimbursement for eligiblelossesfrom the V ictim CompensationBoard, which is funded by  restitution fines (San Diego CountyDistrict Attorney, n.d.). These reimbursemen tscover such losses as medical expenses, homesecurity improvements, or outpati ent mental tre atment, among others. Overall,crimevictims in the County of San Diego can rely o n decent support from thei r District Attorney’s office.