Infertilityis one of the most common problems these days, and it  means that a person  does not have a  chance tog et pregnant for several healthissues. Ma ny couplesin the United States may face this problem, and the causes can vary from congenital diseases to acquired physical or psychological trauma. This bodycondition does not always aff ect only females but also malescan suffer from this issue. Genetics has a strong influence on i nfertility, and it may be connected to people of all ages and nationalit ies. Around 18% of women in the Unite d Sta tes between the age of 21 and 52 stated that they had faced infertility in their lives (Mancuso etal., 2020). I believe that environment plays a significant role in this issue.People should be more cautious about their health to predi ct health problems that maycausethe inability to become pregnant or impregnate apartner.
The causes of infertility are diverse and might not beseen by non-professionals. For instance, age p lays a significant role  asthe oldermal es and females are, the more chancesof receivinginfertility. Moreover, hormones play an important role in pregnancy,and when any type of disbalanceappears in the human body, problems with pre gnancy might arise. Obesity or anorexia canalso indicateinfertility as the human body s pends crucial resources on ot her areas to support life without  giving a chance for women to become pregnant. Somephysiologi cal problemslike anomalies ofthe uterus or  ovaries may also become the maincause of the issue.
The pe rcentage of male infertility is not high comp ared to  the opposite gender. Neve rtheless, 7% of men suffer from this problem, and the causes of these cases are different (Krausz  et al., 2022). Around 20% of those males who cannot impregnate theircouplesare suffering from genetic factors that w ere transferredthroughout generations. When males check their he alth conditionsand diagnose infertility atearly stages, theyhave achance to overcome thisproblem and protectthe ability to procreate.Low sperm production may also happen due to psychological factors like depression oranytype of disorder.
The percentage of females suffering from infertility is higher, and it is usuallyrelated to diseases that cannot be treated. Whenwomen become diagnosed with se veral health issue s which do not allow them from becoming pregnant, doctors rarely have achance to restore the abil ity to procreate (Barbieri, 2019). Nevertheless, a female’s mentality is under a lot of pressure due to sentimentality, which is specific to this ge nder, and  this factor may cause psychological problems which cause infertility. Abortion might   also become the reason for the  inability to become pregnant. While the procedure is at the late stages of pregnancy, doctors might not restore th e functions that allow women to become pregnant again.
Inferti lity  remains the main problem that is not under full control. In some cases, itmay become impossible to giv e a person a chance to continue becoming pregnant  or impregnate their pa rtner. Howe ver, sometimes it is po ssible to solve the problem by using medicines, surgical procedures, and In vitro fert ilization  (Repping, 2019). Moreover, a psychotherapist can help deal withpsychological problems that are barriers  toconceiving a child. Every case is unique,a nd only doctors can decide if any treatment would be useful or not.