Canada's big sixbanks, which have long ruled the country's street corners with their vast branch n etworks, fa ce a challenge to their dominance by the Internet and the rise of new"virtual banks."
Telephone and computer banking, debit cards and automated teller machines (ATMs) are rapidly transforming Canada's old-style bricks -and-mortar banking system.
New technology has eliminated the needfor costly branch networks and lured offshore rivals tojump into Canada's $66.5 billionconsumer banking market.
"Virtual bankshave the potential tosend ourbranch networks the way of the pa ssenger train -- much loved, but seldom used,"said Bank of Montreal chai rmanMatthew Barrett in a speech to Toronto's business community.
BIG BANKS PREPARE TO MEET THE CHALLENGE
The bigbanks, which dominate regular banking, trust and brokerages in Canada, are marshalling their forces against this cyber-onslaught.
Royal Bank of Canada, Canadian ImperialBank of Commerce, Bank of Montreal, Bank of Nova Scotia, Toronto-Dominion Bank and NationalBank of Canadaare spending millions ofdollars to develop new distribution channels and upgra de branches.
ING Groep N.V.,with nearly $ 260 billion in assets, is by far the biggest electronic challenger. TheDutch financial services giant dwarfs Royal Bank, the country's biggest financial institution with assets of $14 7 billion.
ING, already a player in Canada's insurance market, plans to offer a wide range of electronic banking services through a new subsidiary, ING Trust Co. of Canada, based in Toronto.
ING is keeping a low  profile until its application for a  trust licence is approved, butbank officials are confident of success where others have failed.
In r ecent years, several foreign banks abandoned Canada because of its restrictive banking laws and stiffer than expected competition from the big domestic banks.
"It would be fair to say that we will be competing on several fronts. It won't be ha rd to offer better service," said Jim Kelly, vice-president of marketing for ING'sCanadian operations.
ING WILL DRAWON ITS EUROPEAN EXPERIENCE
He said IN G will draw on itsextensive experiencein electronic bankingin Europe.
Analysts have said ING can use Canada tofinetune its virtual bank before offering similar services in the larger U.S. market. But Kell y saidthere are no plans yet to take I NG's virtual bank south of the border.
"To say we're definitely going to the U.S. would be wrong. To say that we would look at it and see if there is a m arket opportunity, yes, of course we would," he said.
Also eyeing Canada's consumer banking market is Citibank Canada, a unit ofU.S. giant Citicorp,which is joining with Canadian fund managerAGF Management Ltd., to create a virtual trust company.
The venture is Citibank's second foray into Canadian consumer banking after abandoning a bid to establish a tra ditional branch system in the 1980s.
Charl es Stuart, country manager of Citibank's consumer banking operations in Canada, said the joint venture gives the bank access to AGF's customer base. Citibank pl ans to offer customers a full-service banking package, including credit card s, access to ATM service and telephone banking .
"We're not locked into the costs of a bricks-and-mortarstructure. So we can serve them through technology and that enables us to price ourselves very competitively," he said.
The Citibank/AGF venturecould set a pattern for other foreign banks seeking to enter Canada withan established customer base, Stuart said.
BIG BANKS UNDER PRESSURE FROM LOCAL RIVALS
The Big Six banks are pressured by local rivals as well.Last month, Vancouver City Saving s Credit Union, the country's biggest credit union with $3.6 billion in assets, appliedto open a nationwide branchless bank early next year.
 Wh ile cyber competitors are  poised to invade the retail market, Canada's major banks are also on the mov e.
The banks spent a record $1.7 billion on new technology in 1995 and that is expected to reach $1.9 billion by1998, according to a report by accounting firm Ernst &Young.
Much of the money is being poured intoalte rn ative delivery channels such as point-of-sale credit and debit cards, ATMs, telephone and computer banking.Cards account for more than a third of all payment transactions in Canada, up from 25 percent a year ago.Telephone and computer transactions are climbingas well. Traditional bank transactions are seen falling to 21 percent in 1998 from 38 perc ent last year.
AmongCanadian banks, Royal Bank is the top player in telephone bankin g wi th more than 800,000 subscribers. Bank officials expect 40 percent of their eight million customers to be using alternative channels in five years.
Last month, Royal Bank joined 14 other North American banks  toset up a computer banking network with comput er giant IBM in early 1997.
All the banks are struggling to decide the future of their branch networks, b ut CIBC has taken the firststeps to overhaul its 1,400 branch es.
In a recent pilot project, CIBC employedgreeters to guide customers to ATM s for their  basic banking needs. Bank tellers were retrained to advise customers on such products as mutual funds, loans and mortgages.
Billing it as the bank branch of the future, CIBC said transaction costs h ad fallen dramatically, while customer lineups  were much thinner.
But by using these  low-cost channels, customers will expect a break on service fees, which many consumers complain are too high, Ernst & Yo ung said.
Bank of Nova Scotia has takenthe acquisition route to boost its Int ernet services. It r ecently bought a10 percent stake in iSTAR Inter net Inc., an Internet solutionsfirm, to helpdeve lop new channels and servic es for the bank.