Two years ago, China's second telephone network set out to challenge the powerful Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications (MPT) and bring competition into the country's afast-gro wing market.
Butthe fledgling  network has found it hard to tac kle a seasoned competitor -- one that is also the market regula tor.
"Are they (the MPT) supposed to be the referee or one of the athletes on the playing field?" asks Li Huifen , president of China United  Telecommunications Corp, also known as Unicom.
The arrivalof Unicom and the end of the MPTmonopoly was initially hailed as a boostfor China's long-suffering telephone subscribers, who often hadto wait up to a year fo r a telephone line and endure indiffer entservice afterwards.
But Unicom has captured only a tiny slice of t he market asits entrenched competitor has kept a tight grip on the telecommunications sector, using its regulatory clout to slow the upstart netw ork's advance.
"They h ave delayed inter connections and  won't give us telephone numbersfor our customers," Li saidin an interview."We need a telecommunicationslaw to giveus a legal framework."
Unicom has 16 shareholders, but the key backers of the pro ject were the ministries of electronicsindustry (MEI), power an drailways.M ANUFACTURINGMUSCLE
The ME  I has manufacturingmuscle witha corps of factories producingtelecommunications equipment. But itfeared the MPT's e quipment-making ca pacity would eventually squeeze it out of the market unless it had its own captive customers.
The other key partners had private telecommunications networks with spare capacity, while the MPT's public network was heavily overcrowded.
The feud between the rival Chines e government camps was often bitter,some times ensnaring foreigncompanies. Firms that did business with the new network were threatened with blacklisting by the MPT, accor ding to Western industry sources.
Those frictions have eased somewhat in recent mo nths, but it still took an order from the State Council, or cabinet, for promised network interconnections to emerge.China expects to have  morethan 60 million telephone lines  installed by the end of this year -- adding a breathtaking 10 million in 1996 alone. The total is likely tot op 100 million by the turn ofthe century, still onlya small segment of the nation's 1.2 billion people.
MPT says it should not be considered a competitor to  Unicom because it has a separ ate operating armcalled China Telecom.
"Since 1993, we have separated policy making from business operations by creating China Telecom," said an MPT spokesman. "The MPT is not both regulating  andcompeting," he said, blaming Unicom's slow progress on its own technical problems.
STRUGGLE TOBE IMPARTIAL
But China Telecom officials concedeit is hard to say where one entityend s and the other begins. And even if they can draw the line cleanly, the MPT must struggle to remain impartial.
"They always say they ar e being fair,"said Unicom's Li."But China Telecom is their own child,and parents are always partial to their own children."
Li took up the Unicom rein s in August, becoming the third president in the company's brief  history. Shewas tapped from her job as deputy mayor ofthe big industrial city of Tianjin to put political clout behindthe second network.
The company started w ith mobile telephone services, first in the big cities of Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin and Guangzhou, andeventually expanded to 16 cities . It has made itsgreatest inroads in Shanghai w hereit has about 20,000 mobil e phone customers, Li said.
"In 10 years we will have 10percent of the fixed line marke t and 30 percent of the mobilephone market," Li said.
One clear success has been in bringing mobile telephone prices down. Th ey nowcost 7,000 to 10,000 yuan ($840 - $1,200) compared with 10,000 to 20,000 yuan before Unicom came along.
Lisays Unicom is profitable on its operations, but that excludes heavy inv estments in building network infra stru cture. Despite the costof putting a network in place,Unicom has one advantage. F oreigners are not permitted to operatetelecommunications networks in China, and many foreignfirms give Unicom capital in returnfor a share of the income.
That will at least ease the growing pains for the infantnetwork, analysts said.