 Canada'ssixbiggest banks are p oised for a further round of buoyant profits when they begin reporting third-quarter earnings Tuesday, setting the  stage for a third consecutive record year, analysts said.
An improved interestrate picture, higher investment banking  anddealing revenues and bette rloan  quality are expected to  drive profits in the third quarter ended July31.
On average, earnings for the so-called Big Six are expected to be 15 percent to 20 pe rcent high er than th e thirdquarter of last year, analysts said.
 "I wouldexpect more sectors of  thebanks to be more profitable than they wer e inthe corresponding quarter of last year," said Roy Palmer, an analyst with TD Securities.
Bank of Montreal and Bank of Nova Scotia, Canada's third-and fourth-largest banks, respectively, kick off the earnings parade on Tuesday.
Canada's fifth-biggestbank, Toronto-Dominion Bank, and the smallest, National Bank of Canada, report on Thursday.
The country'stoptwo banks, Royal Bank of Canada and Canadian Imperial Bank ofCommerce, are scheduled to deliver their results Sept. 5.
Despite a recent downturn in financial markets, analysts said securities earnings should be stronger than la st year. Canada's brokerage industry is dominated by subsidiaries of the countries major banks.
Thebanks are also expected to benefit from lower loan losses as the industry continues to rebound from disastrous loans incommercial real estate, which collapsed in the late 1980's.
Despite the c orrection in stocks earlier this summer, bank stocks have remained st rong  performers. Lower Canadian interest rates have  helped push bank stock prices to all-time highs on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
"I think that if the combinati on of strongprofitability couples up with lower interestrates, then it probably will set the backdrop for higher share prices,"said Susan Cohen, an  analyst with Deacon    Capital C orp.
Analysts said they do not ex pect any of the banks to raise their divid ends during the reporting period.
But the string of record bank profits are expected to y ield dividendhikes at the end of the fiscal year.
The big banks are on track for a third straight year of record annual profits. The group rangup a combined profit of C$5.17 billion in fis cal 1995 ended  Oct. 31, up from C$4.2 5bill iona year earlier .
As for 1997, Palmer  said heexpects a modest increase in profits.
"Investment bankingis a cyclical business. It may tail off a bit, but  thereis no sign of a recession yet, so I would  think we could get modestly higher ea rnings next year," he said.
Bank of Montreal is expected to report a third-quarter profit of 97 cents Canadian (70.8 cents) per share, u pfrom 93  cents Canadian (67.9 cents) per share a year ago, acco rding to figures supplied by the International BrokersEstimates Service.
Scotiabank's earnings are seen climbing to C$1 (73 cents)  per share in the third quarter, u p from 86 cents Canadian (62.8cents) a share.
Toronto -Dominion Bank is expected to post a 72 cents Canadian (52.5 cents) pershare profit, up slightlyfrom71 cents Canadian  (5 1.8 cents ) per share in the third quarterof  1995.
National Bank's third quarterear nings are forecast to rise to 41 cents Ca nadian (29.9 cents)per share from 33  cents (24.1 cents) Canadian a share a yearearlier.
CIBC's third quarter results are pegged atC$1.42 ($1.04) a share comp ared to last year'sC$1.13($82cents) per share.
Royal Bank ofCanada is seen improvingto 96 cents Canadian(70 cents) a sh are in the third quarter, up from 88 cents Canadian (64.2 cents) per share a  year earlier.