SierraSemiconductor Corp.'s stock jumped more than27 percent Thursday on expectatio ns the company will emerge as a smallerbut more profitable operation after it exit s the computermodem  business.
The San Jose, C alif.-based company'sstockgai ne d after its announcement Wednesday that it plans to pull out of the highly competitive modem-chip business andfocus instead on the f ast-growing market for computer networking equipment.
The stock r ose $2.625 to$11.875 in late trading on NASDAQ.
"Certainlythe company will be amuch  s maller company now,butit will  be a more profitablebusiness,"saidanalyst Elias Moosaof Robertson Stephens & Co.
But analysts noted that Sierrastill has much painful work aheadof  it, including cutting as many as 150 jobs from its work force, which currently has  500 peopl e,and building upthe  business ofits PMC-Sierra unit, which makes routing devices and chipsets for high-speed computer networks.
The company hasannounced plansto take a charge against earningsof $50 million t o $80 mi llion t o write down thevalue of assets and inventories and cover s everance payments.
Scott R andall ofSoundvi ew Financial Group said the companylikely would have difficulty selling itsmodem-chip business."Once youannounce y ourintention to exit a business, it becomes  a complete buyer's market," he said.
He said that while the  company is  focusing onthe fastest-growing part of its business, the mark et for networking chips hasbegun to attract the attention of much-larger players such as International BusinessMachines Corp
"As the market develops the questio n is, are they able to make that transition tobe a much larger company?" R andall said.
Other analysts were morebullish , even  though the company is expected to shrink to sli ghtlymore thanhalf its current size in sales.
"It's  a positive strategic move," sa id Miles Kan ofHambrecht & Quist. "The mo dem business is a low-m argin, commodity business,"he said.
Sierra's PMC-Sierra unit generated $33mi llion of the company's $117 million in sales in the first half of the year, compared with $45 mi llion in sales of modem chips, Kan said. But the PMC unit is far moreprofitable, he said.
Sierra's stock h asfallen froma high of nearly $25 this year as the computer c hip sector has been battered byfalling pri ces and concern about slowingdemand.