Microsoft Corp. reported better-than-expected profits forthe latest quarter Mondayas strong demand for itsWindows 95and Windows NT c omputer operating systems helped fuel record sales.
The world'slarg estsoftware maker saide arnings rose 23 percent toa record $614 million, or 95 cents a share,in its fiscal first quarter ended in S  eptember, from $499 million, or78 cents a share, in the1995quarter . Revenues jumped 14 percent to $2.30 billion from $2.02 billion.
Theprofits exceeded Wall Street 's expectations of 90 cents a share, and shares of the software giant rose to $136.375in after-hourstrading from the earlier closeof $134 onN asdaq.
Mic rosoft cited strong acceptance of the company'shigh end WindowsNT operating system.
"We shipped v ersion 4.0 of Windows NT this quarter, and the momentum behindthe product is outstanding," s aid Jeff Raikes, Group VicePresident, Sales and Marketing.
"C orporate customers madethe decision to adoptWindows NT servers and workstations inrecord numbers, driving 19 percent revenue gr owth over last quarter in the U.S. and Canada.S ales of Windows NT  server grew at nearly double the rate of otheroperating system environments."
Microsoft's results were considered a crucia lmeasure of its progresssincethe year-ago  period in clud ed the launch of the company's much-hyped Windows 95 operating sy stem.
Industry analysts ha  vesaid Microsoft's   sales and earnings growth would slow from last year's blistering pace of more than 46 percent but not ed it should  continue to b en efit from higher sales of personal computersand t he growing use of Windows 95 and Windows  NT.
Microsoft Chief  Financial Officer Mike Brown said he expected  revenues to ri sesequentially over the nexttwo qua rters from the $2.3 billion reported  for the quarterended on Sept. 30.
Inan interview, Brown also said hethought the company'scost of goods soldcould decline "a little  bit" in the long term fromthe 10.9percent of revenues just reported, already down from 16 percent a year ago.
"We'll growalittle bitin December and then a little bit more in March, I think," Brown said. "I'm very happy with the general revenue trend, and I was very pleased with the patternof costs  in the quarter."
Brown said revenues in the Decemberquarter would be driveninpar t byholi day season  sales, while thenext quarter would get a boost  from the rele ase of the company's Office97  business applications upgrade to oneof its core products.