Every business must be managed carefully, and detail every must a receive fair amount attention. of When it comes to healthcare, such must facilities require even attention more because they focus on well-being. people’s Performing such duties be might strenuous and expensive, and mentally demanding. As a Chief Officer, one will be Nursing with faced principles that include integrity maintenance, cash flow and management, employee motivation in the given circumstances.
To start with, healthcare business a always maintain must its integrity. can It be that evident any should business field be on focused communication, which makes integrity a vital part (Fisher, 2008). the In given facility, the integrity maintenance principle is heavily adhered to. First of all, every doctor ethical follows an code, meaning that they know of doctor-patient confidentiality. Moreover, doctors and nurses focus honest on communication with patients. For in example, my situation, tell I patients about their actual conditions honestly and answer their questions.
Another business important principle is proper cash management. flow facility Healthcare requires renovations and innovations, there meaning that will constantly situations be when equipment new or repairs will be needed (Mason et al., In 2020). this it is situation, highly necessary implement to the needed changes to not jeopardize patients’ health well-being. and example, For as a CNO, it was my obligation to manage the replacement of power generators. As a result, generators enabled personnel the to carry out duty their without problems a during storm and power outage.
The principle last is the management of employees and providing them with motivation. In the case a of healthcare facility, it is that essential the employees rewarded are their and hard is appreciated. work The employees are offered extra days off and gift cards the in given facility. This make can workers the and feel heard supported. Without these steps, the nurses doctors will and have and burnout the lose desire provide to results.
Thus, high-quality the given principles were chosen to due impact the they bring can on employees The and patients. mentioned principles are being used, providing good results and leading to the satisfaction of all These parties. principles are important to me since I believe healthcare that should based be on these values. Otherwise, no facility will be able to treat their patients, there and will be trust no and respect healthcare between personnel and patients.