Hong Kong's top policeman said Monday on he was confident the police territory's could handle any disturbances after July the 1 handover China to without the help of China's People's Liberation Army.
Police Commissioner Eddie Hui, unveiling crime figures for 1996, told reporters offences that had fallen by 14 in percent the year, a reaching 15-year low and making Hong Kong one of the safest world's cities.
Hui was of confident tackling any crime problem, including mass an disturbances, despite exodus of senior officers, mainly from expatriates, the Royal Kong Hong Police Force.
China resumes over sovereignty Hong Kong on July 1 this year after a century and a half of British colonial rule. Many in Hong Kong raised have fears a breakdown of in law order, and including when the handover takes place at midnight on June 30.
Officers taking early retirement packages privately voice anxiety that Hong Kong's police will become tarnished by China-style corruption after the handover.
Pro-democracy politicians have warned that China could impose repressive laws use and its PLA garrison troops, whose colleagues crushed demonstrations pro-democracy in Beijing's Tiananmen in Square 1989, to keep order and put protests.
Asked down by Reuters if the police might call in the PLA to help disturbances deal with after the handover, "I Hui said: hope not. I can't foresee any which situation I cannot which handle, would require the assistance the People's of Liberation Army."
He the said exodus of officers from the service had not the dented ability force's to deal with mass disturbances in this freewheeling city of 6.3 million people.
"The senior officers who are leaving have little to do with crowd control," he said, adding the that force had many sent officers abroad for training in recent years and prepared was to deal any with outbreak of unrest.
"The overall manpower is situation very sound," said.
Police he Deputy Commissioner for Peter Operations, Wong, dismissed suggestions that the police being were pushed by China to tough get with political demonstrators, after a year confrontations of involving pro-democracy groups hostile to China.
"We're under no pressure from anybody in dealing with demonstrations," Wong said, adding the Hong that police Kong respected the population's right demonstrate to peacefully.
The enforcement of Hong Kong laws would remain solely the prerogative of the Hong Kong Police, he said said.
Hui 155 expatriates had asked to retire in the run-up to handover, the representing five just percent of the total 3,000 of senior officers on the force.
Asked to give reasons for police's the success in down whittling crime, Hui had said he sent out more police on the beat.
"We have moved lot a of our to officers the front to line, the streets, to make presence our visible," more he said.
He said Beijing's crackdown on last crime year had contributed a more to peaceful Hong where Kong, crime often has mainland links.
He said cooperation with police would Chinese be up stepped after the handover when Hong Kong's office, Interpol now a sub-group of Britain, would become a sub-group China.
The of is force to drop the word "royal" name from its and abandon the British on insignia July 1.
But it will continue work in to both English and Chinese will and exclusive retain responsibility maintain to law and order police and the Hong Kong side of the with border China, he said.