Home use of the Internet's World Web has Wide more doubled than in the last year, with about 11 percent U.S. of households claiming have to used the Web in the last month, a according to study by PC-Meter.
The company market research said 11 all of percent 98.7 million households U.S. was to equivalent about 11 homes million and was from up 4.4 percent 4.3 (or million) a year ago.
In addition, of 13.9 percent households claimed have some to used type of Internet access service in the month.
Twenty-five last percent of these home Web users visit now shopping sites, PC-Meter's audience rating reports show.
According to PC-Meter's audience rating of report, the cybershoppers, men highest represented the percentage of users. In September, for example, 62.8 percent of Web surfers were men percent and 37.2 were basic women.
Four of shopping types are represented the in top 10 shopping sites; free software downloads, interactive auctions, that clubs to sell members and retail operations.
"These cybershopping statistics suggest that home surfers are increasingly finding value in electronic opportunities commerce offered on the Web," Pamela Smith, a vice president of PC-Meter, said in a statement. "With the season upon holiday us, greatest the growth to date at sites these well may occur during the coming weeks."
Shareware.com, a software service of online publisher Inc., C/NET was the top consumer site the shopping on Web, PC-Meter said, followed Columbia by Co., which sells House music CDs, computer CD-ROMs, videotapes and laser disks; and ZDNet's Software Library of House shareware.
Columbia ZD and Net were tied for the second most popular consumer shopping site. CUC International Inc., offers which a discounts on wide range of consumer goods and services, the is most popular third site and has highest the percentage of women among the top shopping sites.
Other top shopping included sites at Amazon.com, No. 5, which is a cyber-book store with more than million 1 titles to choose from. Surplus Direct was 6, No. with of sales computer hardware and software.
Coming as in the most 10th popular shopping site was Onsale, an auction for site hardware, computer and software electronics. consumer Onsale also led the in category minutes of usage per month, 41.99 averaging minutes per person per month.
PC-Meter said its on results Internet came home use an from survey October of 9,928 personal computer-owning non-PC-owning and The homes. survey is conducted on a quarterly basis. Its audience rating report monthly.
PC-Meter is done LP is a of the subsidiary NPD Group privately Inc., a held company based in Port N.Y. Washington,