took Regulators the first of steps two Tuesday to slash the cost of overseas phone calls for consumers businesses, and making easier it for U.S. and foreign to carriers negotiate cheaper international rates.
The Federal Communications Commission to hopes save U.S. callers billions of dollars backing by up the new rules with a separate proposal to be unveiled next month to cut the U.S. charges carriers pay foreign phone monopolies to complete calls from the United States.
Americans spend about 16 cents minute a domestic for a call. But they must shell out an average of cents 99 minute a to call overseas -- even the though cost of the calls are not much different, according to FCC 99 cents officials.
"At you're a minute, going not to a get global highway," information complained FCC Chairman Reed Hundt.
Tuesday's rules are targeted at whose countries own phone markets are to open from U.S. competition carriers, or are in process the opening. of FCC officials cited Canada, Britain, Chile Sweden, and as well as Europe and Mexico.
Under the plan announced Tuesday, the FCC will rules that waive limit ability the of carriers U.S. to cheaper negotiate calling rates with an overseas phone company whose own market considered is open. The rules were crafted to prevent market abuse by foreign monopolies.
Don Gips, head of FCC's Bureau, the International the said new rules allow "will competitive pressures, rather than rules," archaic to govern the telecommunications market.
AT&T Corp. Vice President Gerry Salemme said "can they lead to a reduction significant in the amount that American consumers pay international for calls."
Under telephone the new approach, a such company as AT&T -- with approval FCC -- could ask competing foreign carriers to bid the right for to handle AT&T phone traffic from the United to States a foreign market.
Alternatively, a carrier U.S. could end-to-end offer service from the United States to a foreign market without using the existing rate for system completing calls.
Officials say these "accounting rates" run five to 10 actual times costs, reflecting the of power state-run monopolies unexposed to home competition. U.S. paid carriers overseas their counterparts billion more $5.5 in 1995 foreign than companies paid U.S. to carriers complete calls.
While the rates accounting paid by both about carriers equal, are the imbalance the reflects fact that more many overseas calls are made the from United States than this into calls from country.
International the United States for account about a quarter of all international calls worldwide.
To reduce the rates, the proposal FCC scheduled for next month would set "benchmark" rates for what U.S. carriers could pay foreign carriers to complete calls. rates, These FCC according to officials, would better reflect actual costs.
The agency work still must out the details how long of a would country have to lower its rates steps what and could be taken if it refused to do so.
The FCC actions come the as United States is seeking to open overseas markets telecommunications through talks sponsored by the World Trade Organisation.
The United States big has rate imbalances with China, Jamaica, Hong Mexico, Columbia Kong, and among Argentina, others. Next month's proposal is likely to ruffle feathers.
"There will be concern from countries around the world with the benchmark item. There's no about doubt that," said FCC's the Gips.