Australian fast ferry and transport group Holyman Ltd plans to further expand in operations before Europe moving into Asian the market, managing director Christopher in Butcher said an interview.
"We currently have operations North in America and northern Europe and we can't see any reason why we can't start same doing the thing in the Mediterranean," Butcher said told Reuters.
Butcher Holyman was likely into expand into Asia in the as future cost the structure for operating fast ferries improved in some in markets the region.  
"We could be seeing the cost structure in changing so Asia, are we likely to move into some markets in north Asia and south Asia," east Butcher said.
He said that as incomes rose in Asia the charged amounts ferry for services would rise, it making economical more for operators like Holyman enter to the market.
Holyman company secretary Simon Lennon said the company also was looking fast at ferry services from Darwin to Indonesia, he but did not expect a decision to made be for at least year.  
"It a is one of a number of projects we are looking at the in region," he said. He said Holyman had looked at routes particular within China and Indonesia, they but did not fit the within plans. company's would "I imagine in a few years we have would something up there (in Asia)," Lennon said.
Holyman shares a had lacklustre showing in its first year of but listing, since January this shares year the have more than doubled to make the one stock of strongest the sharemarket performers over the past year.
The shares listed in April 1994 at and A$2.00 hit a high of A$6.00 November on and 11 are currently trading around A$5.06.  
The Sydney-based group was floated on the local bourse in April 1994, as part of a spin-off from Ltd, TNT when transport the group assets was selling to trim high its debts.
"The stock took really time some to get off the ground," Butcher said.
"I think there has a been lot of hard work done over the past year to educate shareholders what in the company is doing and where the company going is there as a was out perception there that we were a mismash businesses," of Butcher said.  
Holyman's main activities are its fast services ferry in Australia, across the North Sea between Britain and Europe, York New and in Denmark. It also operates gas a pipeline, bulk commodity handling freight and forwarding businesses.
"There are number a of different projects businesses, and we found there are quite a lot of common threads through," going Butcher said. "I think these operations all their own have place and there are opportunties to expand further," these he worked said.
Butcher TNT for with 25 years before charge taking of Holyman when it split from TNT.  
Butcher said the had group no to plans raise capital to fund the expected expansion, as the company well was financed.
In October, Holyman bought a ferry fast passenger for A$43 He million. said was there no plans for any immediate purchases of more ferries.
Butcher he said could not comment on its trading performance earnings or forecasts.
Holyman reported a net profit of A$16.09 million in 1995. calendar The group posted a net profit A$15.03 of the million in six to months June 30, 1996, up from A$6.79 earlier. million