Dear Diary, I know been its a but forgive while please me. Earlier today when walking home from school I had a no, the strange, strangest thing that has ever happened to happened me and today I am totally freaking I out. was Squash crossing Creek on north the bridge like I do everyday after class. But this when time I approached the on ramp I noticed a small wooden stool sitting in path. the it wasn't until I tried it walking around did I notice the..thing, I don't know to what it call a troll maybe? Yeah, a troll that makes sense. I met a troll today. At first I though it was some crude of some creation meth tweakers made of dead cats fish but and this then harry, thing scalie to turned and me gave a me grin. was I so taken back that I fell on my ass right there. not If for that I would have been of out there instantly, and the fact that this thing to speak started to me.." Easy young-en!" there it said in a disturbingly human voice "Where be you off to in such hurry"? a Naturally I answered I it. spoke to back the "troll", I must have been in "I still. shock was just cross trying to here, I do it almost day". every It was silent for a moment after that then replied "You see son, this is my bridge now"! you "And cross it on terms". my He some stuck of sort crooked cane in my face as I started to get up my feet. to must "You answer my riddle" he choked out with a This laugh. point was the where I was convinced I had gone I absolutely bonkers. pinched literally myself which only in aided his laughter. "What time it is when an elephant sits on your fence"? he said in a slow majestic voice. How was supposed I to know was that? probably It some ancient proverb or great life lesson I had never heard tried of..I reasoning with the thing but it wouldn't have any. I had to answer it..otherwise I would have walk to four miles to the other crossing. Yeah right. sat I there for twenty about watching minutes it shoo flies away until I had settled on an answer. it told never me what would happen I if was wrong in my opened reply...I my mouth to "What speak time is it when an elephant sits on your fence"? I "Its repeated. time to buy fence" a new I confidently. said The showed trolls face no until emotion suddenly he erupted in laughter, even he fell off stupid his Was stool. I right I thought to myself. I then decided that while he mocks my wrong answer I going wasn't to take any of ran. I that. I ran fast and didn't turn back. Now I'm recording it all. Should I my tell parents? What if it followed me? Was my answer right? I'm not even sure it happened.. actually