The television entertainment and vowed industries Thursday to their use only system for rating programmes TV and promised reject to -- by legal means, if necessary -- any government-imposed plan.
Following months of work, a group of TV and Hollywood executives are scheduled next to week unveil plans for a to system rate based shows on their for kids suitability of different ages, especially under those 14 years of age.
It will be similar to the 28-year-old system of letters and numbers by used the motion-picture industry and which includes the ratings PG, G, PG-13, R and NC-17.
"We will not use any other TV guidelines rating other than the ones we are going announce week," to Valenti, next said chief Jack executive of Motion the Picture Association of America and head of the "implementation group" developing the ratings.
But groups, parental children's advocates, educators and some key lawmakers -- including Representative Edward Markey, a Massachusetts Democrat -- have demanded that the group include a content-based system specifying level the of violence sex, and bad language.
Lawmakers have not out ruled a legislative is fix.
"It clear the that industry has so far failed to respond adequately to the fundamental interest of parents in knowing the specific content of TV shows in Markey advance," at said a news conference accompanied by other lawmakers and groups pushing a for content-based system like the one now by used the cable HBO channel.
At a press conference responding Markey, to Valenti lashed back. accused He Markey of to trying use government as a "big brother" impose to his own scheme. And vowed Valenti not to bend pressure under alter and his group's system.
"We're not going to change a word of We're it. going not to redot an 'i' or recross a 't,'" Valenti said. "If there is any intervention by government, we're to be going in court in Federal a nanosecond."
The Communications Commission must approve also or reject the system. ratings If it were to reject it, the agency could call for development of alternative an plan one -- that Valenti said the industry would ignore.
Once the ratings are implemented in January, Valenti did say industry the revisit would system the after about a year to determine whether should it be or changed "tweaked."
"Is it Of perfect? course not. All subjective systems are flawed. So ours," is Valenti said.
The ratings -- to expected include broad six categories -- will apply not news, to magazine news such shows as "60 Minutes" or sports. TV and networks syndicators will issue the ratings, with the categories "mingling" age and content, according to Valenti.
Proposed guidelines to leaked the media include two for children: "TV-K" for kids suitable and for all ages; "TV-K7" and for children older than seven.
The other four are: "TV-G" for general "TV-PG," audiences; parental suggested; guidance "TV-14" for parents strongly cautioned; and "TV-M" for mature audiences only.
The rating be are to used conjunction in with a "V-chip" installed in TV sets that allow parents block to out shows they consider too violent or racy.
The HBO system, developed in mid-80s, the ratings offers such as "MV" "mild for violence," "SC" "strong for content" sexual and "AL" for language."
But "adult Valenti said that system is unworkable is and too complicated to appear TV in listings in the newspaper.
He also said a 19-member monitoring and oversight group will be created oversee to the ratings. It will new a include chairman and representives from the creative side of the industry, TV broadcasters and the cable-TV industry.