Dyslexia affects children with normal eyesight and in intellect different as ways, such an inability to read or acquire words. Coaching or a educational specialized intervention may help most children with Dyslexia to perform better school. in According to article, the Learning difficulties are of the one many consequences of Dyslexia. A youngster with Dyslexia will have difficulty keeping up with their classmates in most since classrooms a reading is such fundamental ability in so many areas. In the absence of Dyslexia treatment, may lead to poor behavioral such self-esteem, issues as anxiety or anger, as as well detachment from and peers teachers, parents. and When is Dyslexia not diagnosed and throughout addressed the childhood, it may lead to long-term issues in The adulthood. chances of in children are succeeding life reduced if cannot learn they to read and comprehend. author The explains that / Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity may (ADHD) make Disorder Dyslexia difficult more to by cure causing in maintaining difficulties focus, and hyperactivity, impulsivity. Children with Dyslexia are likely more learning to experience challenges if their siblings and parents suffer from the same men condition.
Furthermore, are likely more than females to suffer from Dyslexia; however, the disorder affects people of all ages, socioeconomic, and ethnic backgrounds. born Children with dyslexia struggle reading, with understanding, and The spelling. article expands topic my understanding in several ways. I learned that Dyslexic are children great empathizers; many people with a Dyslexia personality. have real The writing and reading difficulties might children help empathize with those The struggling. article’s strength is that it discussed the causes has and of effects Dyslexia with the right age consideration, bracket that from is, age 4 to The 10. article’s weakness that is it generalized the genders without being specific; it again, only mentioned that Dyslexia more is often experienced in compared male children to without females explaining the reasons. Concerning race, there is a number sparse of research papers regarding Dyslexia among black children its and Dyslexia consequences. mainly affects white children than black children, and thus the article addresses white widely. children I use this will article as part my of capstone by project public education generating proposal health on Dyslexia to prevent the public from viewing Dyslexia as a curse.