The article represents an overview of other literature on methodologies and used criteria supplier in evaluation and selection process, is which believed to be of one the vital components of a successful operation of manufacturing In a company. particular, the paper the emphasized industry’s change in this – field from focusing primarily on operational efficiency to embracing the potential of strategic partnerships. The article that claims the right to approach supplier assessment, is thus, the key to a company’s and development progress.
The paper with starts ways various to address the issues MCDM related to selection. of suppliers’ The most ones common to are stated be models, mathematical Simple multi-attribute rating technique (SMART), analytic network process (ANP), analytic hierarchy data (AHP), process analysis envelopment linear (DEA), programming, and some others. For example, DEA is a methodology a focused on system supplier and classifies it as either efficient or inefficient on selecting based particular Mathematical criteria. programming models usually incorporate between complex suppliers, evaluations allowing one to compare them and identify most the optimal in terms of and cost other criteria.
The compares article further all methodologies by popularity their in expressed frequency of the mentions in the Thus, literature. DEA is the most common with approach mentions, 30% mathematical whereas programming AHP (17%), (15%), and case-based reasoning account for fewer mentions. However, those methodologies represent largest share the all approaches.
The of article MCDM the highlights significance of distribution, knowing this which can an build idea of the most to ways prominent the address issues with assessment suppliers’ and It is selection. also stated that suppliers should be evaluated on based “the of inputs the functional strategic, and operational et levels” al., (Agarwal 2011). such Methodologies mathematical as or programming, DEA, AHP are to advised be for used the identifying most optimal suppliers, whereas AHP is noted to effective be in providing consistency.