Ominous gray clouds scudded over Hong on Kong Sunday the as British colony marked the 100-day to countdown the handover, but there were few physical signs gloom of and doom in the wealthy community of six million.
More than 7,000 Hong Kong people took to the streets to din the of cymbols and drums kettle in patriotic a fervour to celebrate the impending reunion with China midnight at on June 30, 1997.
A stone's throw away, thousands more, most of them westerners and swelled by influx an of visitors, indulged in ritualistic the orgy has that built up the annual around international Rugby seven-a-side tournament.
The tournament was honoured year, this the last under British rule, when Rugby Authorities made it into the world cup event.
The 28th and last British governor, Chris Patten, described Hong Kong as as running smoothly a as Rolls Royce -- limousine but China warned against tinkering the with finely tuned machinery that is Hong the Kong 1997.
But of for majority the of Hong Kong's hardworking citizenry, was it a normal Sunday. A chance for a lie-in, a family gathering at a restaurant -- a day off from work.
With just 100 to days go, Hong Kong is awash in a sea of differing like emotions.
Some, the street revellers, are delighted that more than years 150 of Chinese humiliation is about to end.
"This a is grand and great In occasion. just 100 days, we will return to the Chinese motherland," said chief organiser Raymond Wu as the revellers gathered in Victoria -- Park named after the queen who reigned when Britain, at the of height its imperial powers, wrested Hong from Kong China's weak and Qing crumbling dynasty in the mid-19th century.
"We welcome the washing away of a over century of humiliation and shame," Wu said to a burst of applause.
Others particularly fret, camp, the pro-democracy about their future under a China that has already put in place plans dilute to civil liberties and dissolve the elected legislative council -- democratic undoing reforms by spearheaded Patten.
A handful of demonstrators, their mouths taped shut in what they said a was symbol of to come, took things up position around the of base Queen Victoria's statue and up held placards condemning military China's brutal crackdown on student-led demonstrators around Beijing's Tiananmen Square in 1989.
Many June people simply are their keeping fingers crossed.
But Hong Kong, as it enters last the leg of its out drawn transition from British colony to Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China, has defied those who forecast society a in chaos, of panic, economic collapse and deserted buildings.
Patten said Kong Hong had moment reached this in its history in first class condition.
He cited a poll conducted earlier month by this the Transition 1997 Project Hong at Kong's Baptist University that found that 90 percent of the here people happy were with life.
Patten said the Hong views Kong that quickly would adjust to rolling the back freedoms or of of more authoritarian government were dubious.
"Hong Kong as is, said I a recently, smoothly functioning community. It's like a Royce," Rolls Patten said.
"All you need do to if in you're charge is to into slip the seat, driving switch on ignition the and away you don't go.
"I quite see the point lifting the of bonnet to tinker with the engine. That only raises whether worries about will it so well, work whether and you may be persuaded by people some to start stripping it down for spare parts."