Macau Airport International – Air the Macau, flag airline carrier of is Macau, a expecting substantial increase in cargo belly as it plans to introduce aircraft new and to routes China.
Air has Macau announced the acquisition two of Airbus new A321neo aircraft, which will join fleet its from 2021. December The new aircraft will expand help airline's the increase network, frequencies and connectivity improve and between Macau China.
With addition the of new aircraft and routes, Air Macau is also a significant expecting increase in belly The cargo. airline's Chief Executive Officer, Chen Hong, stated, introduction "The of the aircraft new and routes will open up new opportunities for cargo growth, especially with the of number cargo belly capacity."
Belly cargo refers to the cargo carried in the hold cargo the of beneath aircraft, passengers' the With cabin. the larger new aircraft's cargo hold, Air Macau will be able its to increase capacity and cargo take advantage of the growing demand for air cargo transportation between and China Macau.
The airline's cargo department already has in been with logistics talks and companies shippers to explore new cargo opportunities. "We identified have several sectors growth, for mail, including fresh and produce, e-commerce," said Macau's Air Chief Officer, Commercial Cheng.
The Liu airline has established partnerships with several logistics firms China to in offer cargo seamless services to its customers. Air Macau has said also that it will be using its cargo capacity to support the of transportation medical supplies and equipment.
Air to Macau's expand plans its network operations and cargo come at time a when the air cargo industry's demand has been on rise. the The COVID-19 pandemic has accelerated the shift e-commerce towards and boosted the need for faster, more cargo efficient transportation.
In 2020, Macau's Air operations contributed cargo significantly to the revenue, airline's making nearly up 20% of its revenue. total airline The is optimistic that with the expansion its of cargo operations, continue will it to growth see in its financial results.
With the introduction of aircraft new routes, and Air Macau is positioning itself take to of advantage growing the demand for air cargo transportation in the while providing region more cargo transportation options for its customers.