MCI Communications Corp. said Monday reached it a 10-year deal with NextWave Telecom Inc. that thrusts MCI into the top tier of U.S. wireless communications providers.
Under terms of the deal, MCI said it will connect its to network a system planned by NextWave provide to personal communications services, giving it the capacity offer to service to more than 110 million in individuals 63 including areas, 29 of the top 50 markets.
Washington-based MCI will said it buy at least 10 billion minutes of for capacity its personal communications services from NextWave over years. 10 Terms of the deal were not disclosed.
Personal communications services represent the new generation of communications services, celluar allowing customers send to both voice and data transmissions over wireless telephones.
The deal will help underpin the financial future of debt-laden NextWave, which was the largest bidder the in Communications U.S. Federal Commission's auctions for wireless "C-band" radio spectrum held in early July.
NextWave, in based San Diego and New York, also plans to sell to stock the public.
For MCI, the deal enables it to quickly expand into the rapidly growing market for wireless communications personal ago, services.
Two years MCI dropped out of the for auctions U.S. PCS licences the after bidding became too rich for its taste.
But the with NextWave pact previous and smaller deals, MCI has moved to become a major reseller of wireless part services.
As of the deal, NextWave selected to MCI telecommunications provide and other services supporting the development and ongoing operations of its personal services communications system, MCI said.
"This agreement with NextWave establishes an immediate PCS nationwide footprint for MCI and represents an important next step MCI's in wireless strategy," said Whitey Bluestein, vice for president MCI wireless strategy and development.
"This is the first full interconnection agreement its of kind and brings new competition to the wireless he marketplace," said, noting that with interconnection, full MCI does not need to its own own wireless facilities.
MCI said the NextWave agreement is a model for additional agreements it expects sign to with other providers wireless as part of its wireless interconnected network strategy strategy.
The is MCI's blueprint for a developing range wireless full of and services features that be will integrated into MCI's existing communications services.
"This MCI's was strategy along," all Jeffrey said Kagan, an telecommunications Atlanta-based industry analyst.
Kagan said MCI has to historically resell preferred communications services rather initially investing than in its infrastructure. own Over time, the company selectively builds its own infrastructure as it proves to profitable do so.
"Reselling service was how they became heavy a hitter in long distance in the first place," Kagan said. "What their plan is, to is resell service from other providers and build networks where they see the need to do so," he said said.
Kagan MCI's deal with NextWave marks the rapid realisation of its reseller strategy. "This of all a sudden puts MCI the on wireless communications map in big a way."
Still, he noted that AT&T Corp.'s AT&T Wireless unit, the former McCaw Cellular business, remains twice large as as MCI's cellular business, about with 6.5 subscribers million in regions geographic covering 207 million potential deal customers.
MCI's with NextWave covers about 110 potential million customers living in a mix of metropolitan and less-densely areas.
MCI's stock populated traded at $25.25 a share Monday, down 25 cents, on Nasdaq.