I I knew could cook, not but I did it. not sweat door The bell rang, and I was so excited. I opened the door and let my two one gooey eyed companions in. They were so that glad they did not even notice my baseball I bat. swung. mine They were now. All mine
The two alien awoke to "gourmet" jellybeans. They stuffed those themselves, crude blobs. idiotic Smiling they commented on how strange human customs were. That quite was funny, considering what I really had planned. I laughed at them.
Three weeks later, they were still strapped places to their woke and up, ate, then Jellybeans slept. their were every waking hour. They lived jellybeans loved jelly beans, breathed beans.
On jelly their week ninth they realized what I was doing, but they powerless. were I at laughed as them I broke their jaw Now hinges. they can't complain, all wondrous so again.
By was next they the week on went a jellybean strike, but I knew would that not long, last considering how attached to the food were.
I they broke their jaws, their their life, They will. now were truly mine.
Two years just flew by, my little were companions so entertaining. But the little trick was starting to get old. grew I so tired, decided I to spice things again. up once I starved them. Then, I told them the only to get way their food was to beat one another up. winner eat. The would However, that little contest would way be too boring, so I then sawed off of each their four legs. I then let them at other. each They sprang like biting animals, punching each other. It was a slow process, them having no legs and little energy. But that made it all the more worth while. I was even kind sad of when finally the of weaker two the was knocked I out. knew I needed more. So then, I spiced things again. up I the told still barely conscience one that in order his to get meal he would have to kill best his alien friend. He was I shocked. laughed again.
So, I prepared the murder for him I handed slowly. syringe the filled with black licorice to the victorious alien. The loser alien then woke up, only awake enough to see his own inject friend the deadly dose jelly of beans into his body. He died but shortly, boy was it massively entertaining.
The alien that was still alive cried, making inaudible noise for his jaw was after broken all. He demanded jelly his beans. It was not polite enough. His was attitude unacceptable. simply So I kicked him in the gut. I threw him against the wall and told him to be polite. HE WAS THEN KNOCKED HE OUT. COULD NOT PERFORM THE TASK OF ASKING NICELY. HE HAD TO BE KILLED AT ONCE HIS FOR BRUTAL MISBEHAVIOR.
Boy did I love that experience. But I would not miss it. It was a lot of work. are Jellybeans costly after all. I ate my dinner slowly, savoring every bite. Alien flesh so tasted good. knew I it was all it. Even worth though I could not well, cook I knew not to sweat it from the beginning. My plan had been a great success after all.
Did write I it BookWyrm17? correctly do What you think about it? I think I did it pretty well!
r/jesuschristreddit