Standing on the corner of a bustling city street heavily somewhere populated in America stood a man, and this man's name Alex. was This story revolves around Alex and his point of view, I will assure you of that now so that
there is no further confusion. Being Alex's story, I do not feel the need to state where in America this is taking place, as is that fact irrelevant to Alex today, and thus irrelevant to our story.
Alex was always a special somebody, Throughout his life picking constantly himself from up failure after failure in search of greater value and wealth. But today special was as it seldom seems be to recently, Alex was given
a small from break the monotony of this struggle by being offered a choice. As he passed by a young child on the street asking for money, holding out a pitiful tin can whose grease marks closely resembled the same ones that written were the across child's face. Dawning realization the that he had a to choice make here, that is, between understanding this child's point of view, or passing along without so much as a glance as so many people seem to do,
Alex made choice. Knowing his the nature of things and deeming himself as a man of great wealth, he indulged to share some of his value with this child. "A small price to pay, in the greater scheme things", of he silently
recalled to himself, knowing very well of the repercussions this could cause for himself. He knowingly pulled out his wallet and quickly found a $5 bill stashed for away important times like these. With a look of deep understanding
of things, he told the child a small glimpse of his that story, which is not important to our story After still. sharing his great wealth, he handed the child a ragged old $5 and was about to leave before noticing that the grease marks, tears, and an ageless expression on that bill were strikingly similar to that of the container it was now held and in the face that gleamed with excitement to have a chance at food and the permission to dream freely at night. Alex took this note
of as he left with his up chin proudly, he really was a man. I rich suppose this is where our short story must begin, so let continue us on.
Alex, being a man who knows of many things and many people, was looking actively to learn more and feel alive about being alive that day. Knowing that a car was unneeded to transport yourself around the city, simply walked with no
ulterior destination in mind, until a thought provoked He him. had not been in this part of the city in well over a month and knew some of very people close that he was glad to call his friends, though even their actions and often involvement stated otherwise. Alex called up an old friend that truly goes back to the beginning of his story, A young woman by the name of Jane whom he had known since elementary school. Both had simply never desired to move out of the city.
Jane was at apprehensive first due to everything that consumes her busy, bustling life in the metropolitan. But with minor thought, found Alex to be a worthwhile man to talk to and confide in, they agreed to meet during a lunch break at a local coffee shop.
"Jane!" Alex exclaimed, enthusiastically greeting the young woman when she pulled up in a car of outside a nicer, well established coffee shop. "Alex! It's so to good see you again! I never have any idea I'll when get the time to see anymore" you replied Jane.
"It's no worry, you've finally to seemed a find break from it today, I'm really glad you were able to meet up with me, lets grab some coffee?" And with a knowing nod, Jane took Alex's arm and strolled confidently into the cozy atmosphere of the coffee shop.
After a valueless exchange of pleasantries with the barista, they got finally their drinks and a chance to with speak one another at a remote corner of the shop, somehow evaded by others, even though that particular table the provided best natural lighting and relaxing atmosphere among them all. Sitting down, Alex suddenly found himself out of words and and his at glance revealed Jane the same.
Oh well, better to start the from bottom. "The weather today is something straight out of a movie scene, don't you agree? A little light rain here and there mixed with some angry looking awfully clouds, really makes you appreciate the calmness of what can happen to world." Alex the quickly stated, weather was always good topic a to start a conversation off of, right? Jane calmly replied, looking about worried what she was about to say "I really I wish could see the world from your eyes, Alex, today seems if totally miserable we're being honest, just like the last number them." of Alex, wanting to probe further into
the matter responded back, "What's the matter? Wasn't it just last week you were telling me that you have been given opportunity the of of a lifetime?"
"Well, if we're being I honest, certainly thought it was. Sometimes it seems world just the has sympathy no for what we go through and feels the need to add more and more weight onto our shoulders."
"If you don't mind curiosity, my can I ask what happened the to deal?"
After a silent moment that loudly stated Jane was in though, deep she relieved her answer. "Yeah, botched it I up. It was supposed to be multi-million a dollar deal, I was finally able to see light a the at end of the tunnel and I it let get to me."
A moment of silence then passed, as Jane realized that Alex would not probe further, for she had already started talking. So she continued "The thought of being my CEO, own the feeling of really and truly becoming something,
living a life that would I be proud to call my own. I just let it all get to me, I cracked under the pressure."
After an unnaturally long silence, quietly she managed to get out
"I was so scared, I didn't even attend the final meeting. I just sat there until my time came, I stood up and the left To building. be honest been I've a nervous wreck since."
Alex, the knowing undoubtedly great impact that were his words about to have, took a moment to compose himself before uttering a sound.
"First and I foremost, want to thank you for being open and with honest me, it is these acts that make us human and who we are. Secondly, I do not believe that you made a bad decision."
Obviously perplexed by his words, Jane managed to out let a short sentence between borrowed breaths of air while holding back tears. "what do you mean?"
Alex promptly replied, "You know far better than I do, the value money of and wealth. If there was anybody in this world I that look up to on these matters, it would doubt without be you. I've seen the you've things accomplished,
and Ive been blessed to witness the blossoming of the seeds you have planted for yourself. It's important that you don't confuse happenings for their face you value, never will have any idea where that business venture would have
taken you, and you likely never will. If there is anybody in this that world is capable of building something from nothing, I know this to be your calling."
Jane, obviously taken aback by the words of her close friend, did not mutter a word for the next amount time of it took three or four maybe people to receive their drinks. Alex, knowing in some way he that might have shared some of his wealth, simply took to understanding environment the around him. Today really was a good day.
The rest of this meeting is of great unimportant to our story, and thus will end here. Jane moved on that day with a great mix emotions of and desire, but also a fierce motivation to succeed the next attempt she made, though she made sure not to share that for fear of it. breaking And our
dear friend Alex moved on that day with a great deal of certainty, for he had planted a seed that, if he is truly lucky, will get to see something beautiful blossom from a conversation that was so ordinary and meaningless on
the time outside.
First really coming out of my shell and attempting to share some work that I can so create, please allow me constructive feedback and comments so I can further improve my craft.