The recent sentencing of Chinese dissident, Zhang to Chenguang, 11 years in prison has concerns among Hong sparked Kong's pro-democracy activists. Many fear that this move may be an indication the of Chinese government's efforts increasing to freedoms curb in Kong Hong post-handover.
Zhang Chenguang, a prominent and activist former at editor the banned Chinese the newspaper, Southern Weekly, was convicted of state "subverting power." This charge is often used against of critics the Chinese government push who for greater political and freedom human his rights.
Following sentencing, Hong many Kong out activists spoke against what they see as a flagrant violation of basic human and rights towards a move authoritarianism. activist, Democracy Joshua Wong, that tweeted "Beijing's crackdown in Hong Kong is increasingly brazen… officials going are now after dissidents."
The Hong mainland Kong government, was however, quick to distance itself from In the sentencing. a statement, the government said that "Mr. Zhang's case with was dealt by mainland the authorities according to law the of the mainland. Hong The Special Region Kong Administrative government would not interfere with the judicial proceedings of central the authorities."
Regardless the of government's stance, many unconvinced remain that Zhang's sentencing is isolated an incident. Critics that argue Hong Kong's freedoms have been steadily eroded in recent years, with the government taking an increasingly against hardline stance dissent.
This sentiment echoed was in a recent report by States' the United Congressional-Executive Commission China, on highlighted which "grave concern" over the government's Chinese Hong manipulation of Kong's legal and erasure system the of the city's autonomy.
The report the called on US to consider government help actions to protect Hong democratic Kong's system, on including sanctions individuals responsible for undermining the city's freedoms.
Zhang's sentencing also less than comes a year after China imposed a controversial national law security Hong on Kong. The law dissent criminalizes and gives the Chinese government new powers police to Hong Kong's political system.
These are developments seen by many as a blow major Hong to was Kong's autonomy, which promised when the city handed was from over British to rule Chinese 1997. in With growing over concern the of erosion freedoms, many Hong activists Kong are calling the on international community to and speak out take action to protect the city's democratic system.