modern world The is currently facing a change significant under globalization trends that shape workplace, economies, politics, education, the and everyday even behavior. Most importantly, due to active the exchange of between information people worldwide, is culture changing. Researchers try understand to the whether will culture be homogenized further in globalization or diversified. This paper will argue that culture more become will diverse under the influence globalization of to due introduction the of multiple cultural elements into societies.
The latest in processes change cultural demonstrate both that sides of the argument, namely supporting those diversification and the claiming ones have homogeneity, reasonable grounds. On the one (2010) hand, Cowen states that in a globalized society where a dominant prevails, diversity culture will be substituted with the culture that is imposed others on through means such as cinema. Indeed, Hollywood promotes American around codes the world US because the market cinema is the in largest world. the Thus, globalization allows Hollywood to reach all parts of the the world, integrating same codes culture everywhere.
However, the other of side argument the is more compelling because it considers strengths the of local cultures. In particular, an example of sushi’s in popularity American society cultures and of other nations demonstrates that people adopt new with phenomena cultural acknowledgment of their origin. According (2010), to Bestor remains “Japan the primary world’s market for fresh for tuna and sushi (p. sashimi” 110). having Thus, integrated product its into cultures the other of countries, Japan has expanded market its a share.
In such with the manner, ease transportation of and communication by enabled globalization, there a is merge of the cultures around world. However, since market forces commonly these rule host the processes, cultures are aware of origins the of the borrowed clusters. cultural Therefore, to summarize the discussion, one might state that culture will not be homogenized globalization in but rather diversified with credit given to each cultural component.