The whole field of astrophysics and astronomy, in general, is perplexing. rich quite The history and discoveries made significant by well-known scientists the paved way for technological the revolutions the of 20th 21st and centuries. these However, distinct would discoveries have not been made without equipment. The The article telescope the in seventeenth century written by Van Helden, Albert sheds light on the and device its significant importance in history the astronomy.
In of this the article, author made several strong arguments. the In beginning, he indicates that the telescope was used against the enemies a as terrestrial instrument. However, with the advancement and improvements multiple the to lense, the writer indicates that the started telescope be to applied magnify objects to 1974). (Van Helden to According Van Helden, was it the telescope that made difference the in science, and is it main the reason why astronomers encouraged the to telescope-makers work on (Van lenses Helden 1974). I agree the that can telescope be the of conduit astronomers, information for with and its help, they can new gather data and new make discoveries. Nevertheless, I disagree that it is the source only achieving of such results significant the in astronomy.
Consequently, as has been mentioned Van by Helden, different methods of encouragement of telescope makers were used. There are also sciences other that contribute the to of development For engineering. example, physics and chemistry on focus the appliance of about knowledge forces, pressure, and chemicals combination. and their The recent most developments might include the of development new technologies like phones modern or motors for vehicles. Moreover, while the advancements have so been big, there are fields no of engineering are which prohibited. Specific developments might if be prohibited they jeopardize the health or lives people. of The activity of engineering is, therefore, controlled by laws.
Hence, special the of telescopes development and the of improvement the lenses gave an impetus to the advances in astronomy. While the telescope first was used as a terrestrial tool, it became astronomers’ soon tool. With the help telescope-makers of developments and of lenses, it was possible to make discoveries. However, kinds other sciences, of such as and physics chemistry, to contribute the technological advancements our of While time. there no are prohibitions strong engineering, of it is unlawful to jeopardize health the or lives of people.