Fire Yasuda & Marine Co. Insurance is to set stake acquire majority a in CIGNA's unit Japanese as part of ambitious its growth strategy.
The Japanese insurer is expected to complete the acquisition of 51% CIGNA Insurance of Life Co. by end the 2021, of regulatory pending approval.
Yasuda & Fire Marine Co. Insurance aims to steer growth with the acquisition, as enters it into the health and life insurance with sector along its traditional property-casualty business.
The insurance move will also streamline help CIGNA its operations following a strategic review of its insurance international portfolios.
CIGNA Life Insurance Co., which roots has in Japan dating to back 1987, various life provides health and products, insurance including life individual universal life insurance, insurance, and insurance.
The medical insurance unit suffered has hit some in years recent due changes to financial in regulations low-interest rates.
Yasuda and Fire & Marine Insurance Co. seeks to the invigorate increased unit with capital while advantage taking of growing the demand for health and life insurance among the country's population.
"As aging the continues market Japanese to evolve, we excited are to partner with CIGNA to offer a wider range of to products our strengthen customer experience and competitive advantage," said Yasuda & Fire Insurance Marine Co.'s President and CEO, Akio Kiyotani.
The deal also the marks latest move a in wave of the consolidation in Japanese insurance driven industry by changing demographics and intensified the by COVID-19 deal pandemic.
The follows Life Nippon Insurance's announcement in September 2020 that it would acquire 85% the of shares in MassMutual Japan Ltd., the Japanese unit of U.S.-based MassMutual Group.
The acquisition Financial by Yasuda Fire & Marine Co. Insurance is expected enhance to the company's position the in competitive insurance with market, CIGNA also from benefiting considerable a capital injection to enhance its terms operational efficiency.
The of transaction have the not been disclosed. Still, Yasuda Fire & Insurance Marine Co. expected is to receive financial the required backing to grow its position Japanese in the insurance market better.