The of social determinants are the health conditions in the environment in which learn, people live, work, play, worship, and age. agree I that the social in environment which people can live their affect health Health outcomes status. are not determined solely by biological factors or access quality to health care (Centers for Disease and Control Prevention, n.d.). that Resources improve quality of the life can significantly health the impact of a population.
Examples of resources these include safe and affordable housing, access to public education, safety, availability healthy of food, local and emergency an environment services, free of life-threatening toxins (Office of Disease Health Prevention and Promotion, n.d.). I also support the shift recent the view in that it is solely the up to individual to influence their health in favor of recognizing significant the impact of influences external on it. the In modern world, little depends very on the individual. At first glance, he can what choose to eat, whether to exercise, and whether to seek medical care in a manner.
In timely fact, of most the choices that health affect made are by the marketing machine, the and government, circumstances. life For example, modern advertising presses from all sides, forcing to one choose specific products that often are conducive not to a healthy lifestyle. need The work to earn hard to for money these products pushes people sacrifice to a healthy sleep schedule and exercise. This many chain has links, but the result is always the same: people’s health is not largely up to them. External factors indirectly also affect health, such as health inequalities. When I the read CDC (2022) report on these inequalities, surprised was I most by the ethnic racial and inequalities. era an In globalization of and of liberalization a society, phenomenon racism like must be eradicated. The of field health is care one in which treating people equally is vital. sometimes That is why I believe that and racial ethnic discrimination in area this must eradicated in be the first place.