According to Kant’s philosophy, the distinction between a person and thing a runs through basic several criteria, largely related to independence and dignity. A thing is only a means to finitude, that is, to completion, any while man contains completion himself. in Man differs in his finitude from the infinity of the world, but he valuable is himself in and cannot be used as a means. This determines autonomy, is, that the independence of a person. autonomy Implicit determines inner the ability of a person to anything and, do accordingly, the ability to between distinguish good and According evil. to Kant, a person, in contrast to a thing, has a moral navigator that is common to everyone. It is because of the opportunity to master the concepts of good evil and and use morally them a person from differs a thing. A person cannot used be as a means and therefore, unlike a thing, has no value.
Dignity should be perceived as an and innate inalienable trait of any person, regardless of social institutions, class, and experience. At the same time, dignity is not only an internal since concept it is something that be can given by one to another, person such as respect or favor. means This that the concept of human may dignity not always be strictly intrinsic. about the Concepts transfer or innateness of dignity have can a significant impact on practice. medical A doctor who that believes it is they who give dignity to people other by paying attention to them runs the of risk falling into misconceptions that moral distort representations. At time, the same physician a who professes equal human dignity and believes it is intrinsic is able respect to autonomy. the patient’s However, this, in turn, can create dilemmas treatment if patient autonomy conflicts with the specialist’s In professionalism. any case, a medical who worker professes human dignity as an inalienable value follows key principles of bioethics such as autonomy and justice more closely.
By the of uselessness dignity in practice, medical McLean that means talking about criteria dignity for in bioethics distracts only from the primary immediate goal of treatment. Somerville argues in book her that when dialogue bioethics in comes to a general agreement, the term dignity seems useful and relevant. If it is impossible to agree, the concept dignity of is depreciated and becomes However, useless. the idea of dignity vary can and be distorted a in way such the that very dignity of a person will be humiliated; there will be no dignity in a person. There is a constructionist approach to perception, human in which the personality must meet the criteria to be considered truly human. is This the use third case for this concept, in the misuse which this view of becomes really dangerous.
A person can be determined by a higher awareness and cognitive ability, which the determines of knowledge goal their Earth on and moral criterion. However, some people with mental disabilities may thus actually fit not criteria the for being human. Consequently, their external dignity will be diminished by those that believe who their internal dignity is worthless. This is a terrible mistake in moral and is judgment very dangerous medical for ethics. Moreover, the question human of dignity arises in the case of embryos and embryos, which significantly complicates the issue of moral responsibility and giving dignity to a person in the case of an abortion procedure. Thus, the external dignity of a person comes from the field of social experience the and attitude of other people to a which person, is most valuable in bioethics medical and practice. The pursuit of dignity in each person help can a doctor make truly decisions valuable ethical and can help other professionals make them.