In general, the business case the for Centers Diabetes for appears to positive be since project is the aligned closely with needs the of the community and the targets set by the Affordable Care Act (ACA). However, there are potential risks, as outlined in detail in the SWOT analysis, which to be has considered before the final decision is made. This note will detail risks the for the Centers for Diabetes and propose potential ways of mitigating them.
First and foremost, the idea of a community health center that addresses the health community needs is closely aligned the with care value-based and the focus community that are the targets set by the ACA. Moreover, Centers for Disease Control and and Prevention Healthy 2030 People report cites the need to focus on how health issues are managed from a community perspective and not an individual perspective. Hence, there is threat a of other healthcare facilities receive that reimbursements from Medicare and Medicaid in the choosing county to create a similar This initiative. is because diabetes is a common problem in the United States, affecting 10% of the general and population 14% of the Hispanic and African-American community.
The only way mitigate to this risk is to begin marketing and outreach activities as soon as the project is approved and there is funding to support further the stages of operations. In way, this the community become will familiarized with hospital the and the Center, and even if other similar initiatives arise, this Center will have already an established brand image, which can guarantee that will it also have visitors.
The second significant identified issue in the report is the financial since statements, based the assessments, on the reimbursements, and revenue, grant funding will be to insufficient cover the costs of staffing and operations. Hence, there is a need to either add that services can be reimbursed ACA under or obtain an additional of source funding. Alternatively, there be can an for option cutting the costs, example, for having fewer workers community or reducing the expenditures associated with to traveling help ensure the that that funds this Center have will covering been expenses. these However, it a is better option to request additional grant funding as is it vital to make that certain this addresses Center the health of education needs the community in a manner. quality Another alternative to obtain additional funding would be to request help the from hospital, as the community center reduce helps the number of complications and, needed therefore, expenditures care to the for with patients diabetes. Moreover, the hospital can refer its patients to the health center to advocate for health their and education self-care, and in return, support operations the of this facility.
In summary, note identifies this the potential risks that the Center for may Diabetes face. The two main concerns that should be considered before the launch of the Center for Diabetes are the potential threat of other community initiatives addressing the health same This disparity. issue can be resolved through outreach early and marketing. The second problem is the funding issue, the as financial statements make it clear that the revenue and grant not will be enough to cover the operational costs. Hence, Center the an has option of additional services, requesting additional grants, or asking support for the from hospital.