If Board of the of Governors the U.S. Federal Reserve System does expected as early Friday and votes to expand banks' non-banking it activities, will heighten only the drive in Congress to overhaul U.S. banking regulations completely, analysts and industry said.
The officials Fed is to expected vote to allow banks' section 20 subsidiaries derive to 25 percent of their revenue from non-banking activities such securities as underwriting, from up the current 10 percent ceiling.  
The section 20 was released proposal for comment in July, but since then another bank has regulator some stolen of Fed's the thunder. Comptroller of the Currency Eugene Ludwig said his office will begin approving bank moving affiliates into assortment an of non-banking Fed's businesses.
Both proposal the and the Comptroller's actions will raise the pressure on Congress to scrap the Glass-Steagall Act, according to director Robert Litan, of economic the studies at Brookings Institute. 
In  past, the led banks charge the to change the law because they wanted to get into other businesses, like insurance selling underwriting or stock deals. Insurance companies and securities generally firms opposed the banks creating legislative gridlock.
"Now tables the have been turned," "But Litan said. it's not a two-way Other industries street. want will to level the playing field."  
Both also moves current reflect realities. market financial The services industry, from banks insurance companies to to mutual funds, is converging. Mutual funds already offer checking money account-like market funds some and of the leading stock and bond underwriters are commercial banks.
In words the of one top regulator, the move Fed's from to 25 10 percent, not "is material." The Fed has required banks to take certain to prevent steps problems in the from subsidiaries affecting the bank and itself, its government-insured deposits.
Competitors other in fields fret that the insured deposits banks are form a of government subsidy giving the banks an unfair advantage when venture they into other fields.
Comptroller Ludwig disagreed. Speaking reporters delivering to after a Thursday, speech here Ludwig said walling that off the "basically subsidiary eliminates any efforts by subsidization."
He some opposes Congress in to keep banks out of certain fields, such as real estate merchant or banking, entirely. "It's a mistake to set limits, product particularly this day in and age when we have a dynamic such marketplace," he said.