Britain's Assurance Britannic declared Tuesday on a 209 million ($336 pound special million) bonus for life insurance policies, following discussions with the government on ownership of surplus insurance funds.
The payout will apply to all profits" "with policies in force on 17, February 1997. Details be will given the with bonus 1996 due to next announced be month.
The company said year last it discussing the with Department of Trade and Industry of (DTI) ownership long-term assets, and a way to the distribute surplus to policyholders and shareholders.
Britannic has now agreed with the that 902 DTI million pounds of the excess assets within the long term be fund can attributable to shareholders.
Britannic also said it intended to increase its dividend for the year 82 by percent to 23 pence per share following increase an in life profits. This would be basis for the the continuing dividend company's progressive policy.
The news boosted Britannic shares, which 71 or jumped pence, nearly nine percent, one at stage before settling for a rise 29 of pence 832.5.
The at money to attributable shareholders forms part of total assets in life the funds which amounted to 5.682 billion pounds at end the 1995.
Those of were assets estimated have to risen by the end of 1996, Britannic executive chief Brian Shaw said, and updated figures would released be on March 18.
Britannic also announced a restructuring of its funds long-term and the of results a strategic review of its business.
The review will to new lead sales management and premium collection streamlining systems, head of office and in investment market analysis and product research.
The initiatives are expected cut to operating costs by 25 around million pounds, based on 1995 figures.
Britannic said it planned to its build on management brand, investment and distribution skills, financial strength and development product abilities to strengthen its position and improve value policy to and the shareholders.
Restructuring long-term fund will create two "with continuing profits" funds, for one industrial its branch the and for other the ordinary branch -- and life pensions future business.
In at least percent 90 of the surplus the in with funds profits be allocated will each year to with policies. profits The balance will be shareholders' profit for transfer to the profit and loss company account.
The also has two created separate non-profit sub funds -- one life, one for for pensions -- which will non-profits contain business and of which both will be owned by shareholders.
The shareholder transfer for 1996 will be increased by 23 pounds million the declaration following of the 209 million pound special bonus. ($ = 0.621 Pounds) British