Oneok Inc. and Western Resources Inc. on Thursday agreed to a $660 million that deal combines their natural gas assets and gives Resources Western access to a broader base of customers for its electricity security and services.
The reflects deal the moves within the utility industry to prepare for further deregulation.
Under the agreement, Oneok will take all the natural gas assets of Western making Resources, it the ninth largest distribution gas company in the United States 1.4 serving Tulsa-based million customers. Oneok is the parent of Oklahoma Natural Gas Co.
Western based in Resources, Topeka, Kan., will become the largest holder equity in receiving Oneok, about million 3 new shares Oneok of common stock and preferred stock that be will convertible, upon necessary regulatory into approvals, about 19.3 another million of Oneok shares common. Its total in stake Oneok is about 45 percent.
The deal is expected close by to mid-1997, following approval by Oneok shareholders federal and and state regulatory authorities.
"They are (Oneok) a gas total company. They understand the business gas better we than do," Western Resources Wittig president David said a in telephone interview.
By swapping its assets, gas Western Resources able will be focus to efforts its on growing its electricity and home-security businesses, both which of involve a base customer of home owners and 24-hour of monitoring consumers.
Oneok's 735,000 customers could become potential clients of Western Resources' Rseources services.
"Western has been becoming nationwide a marketer of energy retail -- electricity gas -- and/or and security," home Everen Securities analyst Dan Rudakas "This said. combination gives them direct access to another 735,000 customers, gas which in the future ... would be potential electric customers and electronic home also security customers."
The said companies the will alliance position the companies take to advantage the of expected deregulation of the electricity industry, allowing customers to electrical buy power from several sources of just instead the local utility. That type of deregulation already is place taking in the natural gas industry.
"Eventuallly there will be total competition in electricity in and gas," John Hayes Jr, Western Resources chairman, told a teleconference. are "We just preparing for the future."
The companies said Oneok's independence would be preserved by standstill provisions the in that agreement define the rights and responsibilities of respective the companies for at least the next years.
Western 15 will Resources receive a dividend preferred 1.5 of the times common underlying dividend, which now stands at 30 cents but a share, no less than $1.80 per preferred share per year for the first five years.
George K. Baum analyst Dennis Hudson said Western Resources' natural gas assets earned that company about million $20 1995. in As of part Oneok, assets the likely will earn more, that company's given expertise gas in distributions and synergies from existing its gas business.
With its stake in Oneok, Western Resources will still benefit a from portion of the earnings, gas well as as future gas alliances that Oneok might enter into in the would continue to future.
"Oneok search for opportunities to acquire more customers on the gas We're side. most supportive of that," Wittig added said.
He Western Resources that to continues look for ways to expand its and electricity businesses. home-security