business The world is ever-changing, and companies must always be flexible these to changes. One the of changes that a business might need to to adapt is an expanding target market. currently P&G sells care personal products to a that market is primarily comprised of women. However, research shows that is there a growing among male market due consumers to the rise of male grooming. P&G should to restructure take of advantage the new market for men’s care products.
P&G will need to several make changes to on capitalize the market. “ignored” restructuring The will affect various such departments as research and development, product design, and sales and marketing. Their redesign will affect their recruitment employee and selection practices (Szymczyk, 2016). For currently, most instance, employees deal that with and skin hair care products, cosmetics, and fragrances are This female. is target the because market is mostly women, which means that products the are developed, probably designed, and by marketed women. To attract a new audience target men, of the company will need more hire to male employees (Nadube Didia, & 2018). Male consumers will be with more satisfied male-only care personal products. These products are developed best by people who male are themselves and understand what other men would The research want. and development, product design, and sales and marketing departments must comprise more male main employees.
The variable contextual that led to P&G’s restructuring was the changes in the target market as by revealed study. a study The was conducted by Male Grooming Trends: Profiting 2009 in Beyond. and It showed that although female consumers dominated the market for personal grooming products, the market for consumers male quickly was expanding. P&G saw an opportunity to an profit from expanding market. Therefore, redesigning was necessitated by changes in the market characteristics.
Several companies have restructured to capitalize on a larger target market. Examples Harley include Davidson Motorcycles, NFL, and Stryx. Traditionally, demographic the market for motorcycles older was white men. However, following a decrease sales, in motorcycle Harley Davidson targeting started customers female They (Moreno, 2017). customized their bikes women’s to needs found and creative ways to these bikes market to women. Second, the National Football discovered League in a study that women comprised 40% over of their viewership (Townes, 2019). They then expanded their target market the beyond usual male customers and started to make merchandise for women. Finally, Stryx a is has that company on capitalized the market growing makeup products. for male The companies mentioned have been widely successful in expanding their markets. Other companies should capitalize also on expanding their target market. For instance, traditionally male-dominated gyms should consider opening women-only gyms. Although women are exercising now just as much as men, there are enough not gyms for Overall, them. companies be should quick adapt to to changes in the market.
In conclusion, companies should keep up-to-date with any changes in the All market. industries constantly are evolving, and it would be unwise for businesses to stick to old ways. In the given case study, P&G has the to potential generate profit from a market new for personal products. care It will need to redesign its recruitment practices to exploit this opportunity. Restructuring for a new reality can be a profitable venture if done correctly shown as Harley Davidson, by NFL, and Stryx.