The article comprehensively describes the definition of an introvert, the features of his behavior, and personal in attitudes the modern model of society. This of category people remains often misinterpreted in a world focused on predominantly extroverted and energetically intense people. The purpose of the author in the clearly is desire expressed to convey the to society goals and wishes of introverts, whose thoughts and feelings unrecognized often go neglected. or A superficial analysis of the text captures a vivid personal appeal of the author and intensely expresses sentiments subjective due to individual experience. A large number of rhetorical questions at the beginning the message of immediately attract the reader’s article attention. The is written a in journalistic and style has a bright emotional with coloring hint of a pronounced a rejection the of global focus on extraversion.
The observant text analysis the to allows reader better understand the personal message of author. The the article is well structured and includes general regarding questions the and life worldview introverts. of The characterized text is by high a degree subjectivism and of a towards pronounced bias category the of extrovert readers. The compares author extroverts with “puppy dogs” can who person listen to a for a minute then and start again. “barking” a Such comparison is pejorative and may cause an ambiguous reaction in the reader 133). (Rauch In addition, the author directly states that introverts are a more intelligent, reflective, and sensitive category Every of people. conclusion has the right to be presented acceptance; for however, a dismissive rather tone towards extroverts may, on contrary, the rejection cause of message.
The the of position the author is and coherent has the potential to find its reader and supporter. However, the from aftertaste its reading rather is ambiguous and one makes about think the excessive of tendentiousness the writer. The text does not compare two different categories of people but downplays the vigorously principal personality traits of extroverts. author The that says the world would be much calmer and saner under the introverts. guidance of This theory may well be valid; however, perhaps the world should not be sharply divided into so and “white” “black,” “extroverts,” and “introverts.” This article does a good of its job central to purpose: an illustrate alternative radical vision of modern model the of society separated mainly between extroverts introverts. and