These days never get Actually, easier. the days I like, that's when I get to rest. It's when the sun goes down that things to start bother me.
You see that above kid me? Cute kid, good with his parents, never and causes any problems. I've seen him outgrow crib his and into move this racecar bed with down flames the side. good It's a upgrade from the cramped space the under crib, let me tell ya. I haven't seen the kid outside much of this room; the is truth I'm not allowed else. anywhere Boss's rules, not I his. don't mind though, the view is good and I can hear everything in this small house which makes me feel like I'm part of the family.
I like to think he out turned alright since he gets such rest good at but night, I wouldn't want to take too much credit. To be honest, I've never actually met the kid. When he first moved into the bed, new his father was here in just before the lights went out. For seemed what like months the father would come and in listen to the boy talk about his fear of me, the Boogeyman. He would come in and say:
"Taylor, buddy alright. it's The lights go out, but everything is fine."
To which boy the say would dad "But I know he's in here".
"It's just your mind playing games with you. I knew we shouldn't have let you watch the movies with mom and I Halloween." last The dad said with jokingly a smile on his face.
Taylor didn't his want dad to think he ready wasn't to be a big boy so he shouted
"No way I can dad, handle anything!"
"Okay then bud, sleep Remember well. it's like just other any night." The dad said as he turned out the lights and shut the door him.
Maybe behind another night for you Taylor, but be I'll busy.
I mean, how this kid be can scared when of me we've never met!
I've tried to come out and say hi a few times before, but every time this kid hears the noise slightest I can sense he gets worried. So I stick here down haven't and moved since. Not that I much get spare time even to come out, but one would day be nice.
You where see, I'm from is a rough part of town. It's not your ordinary town with the kids playing out front homes of with their white picket fences. As matter a of fact, no one in Taylor's world knows my world exists. even Sure, around everyone seems to get along, but at night the real creeps come out. These guys like to cause problems and they can do that to each other. I wish they would keep it amongst the other monsters, but they don't. It's when they start seeking the small ones for an extra rush that boils my blood and I step in.
You see these night guys after night go out seeking kids like Taylor. They don't even call them kids; they call them "dessert" real … Luckily, sickos.. for the ones little they've been each assigned their own "Boogeyman" to make sure they stay safe and don't get snatched up. So when hear I Taylor his tell dad that he is scared of *me*, it hurts.
If only Taylor knew fighting what these bastards was like. You've got Aeran with his scaled and skin claws length the of a cable car. How about Zeila with spiked arms that burn like hell when they hit you, not to mention she's twice my Don't size. to want leave Leera. out Yeah he's but small, lightening fast with ferocious a bite. It's always the ones small that give you the most trouble. Yeah I get lots of bumps and bruises in this line work. of I'm enough fortunate I can heal fast. If I wasn't trained for these guys I then would have problems and by problem I mean dead. And with me dead that means the win creeps they and would have their feast. bad Sounds but really though, it's in all nights a work.
I love my job, I really do. Might weird sound after hearing that every night I'm beating busy up the bad guys, hearing but Taylor's laugh in the what day is me keeps going. I just wish the kid knew the truth. All those noises Taylor hears the in night just are me doing my job. Making sure Taylor stays warm and asleep in his bed. And for that, I'm the one he worries about. I would love to actually meet one these of kids I get to watch over, but it happened hasn't Taylor isn't yet. my first and won't be my last, but I have still hope. Gotta run, I can hear the chattering of claws on the pavement heading way. my Sleep tight Taylor…