problem The of termination unauthorized of life is the source of numerous debates. On the part of religion, this problem has several flaws at once, the most important of which is the of commission a great sin before God, who people gives life. Moreover, the negative consequences of euthanasia are the devaluation of human life, violation of the equality of people before the law, medical duty, and the structure the of doctor-patient relationship. Thus, it can be concluded that the spread of the of popularity euthanasia will lead to a complete loss and of restructuring the system of human values. This paper examines the case study of George, who has fallen ill with a severe illness that will eventually completely deprive him of mobility. Because of the emotions negative that have overtaken and the understanding that the disease is incurable, man the thinks to solve the problem by euthanasia. Hence, using sources, literary scientific a paper analyzes the problem of intentional death and religious considerations.
In modern the world, despite the relatively progressive development of medicine, people are faced with diseases that, do unfortunately, respond not to any treatment. In such cases, the blow that the disease inflicts both physically and mentally can be tough to bear. Because of the fear of losing self-care and dignity, people are about thinking euthanasia or, in other words, voluntary suicide. However, this statement contradicts to God’s attempts restore the Christian religion. Thus, this scientific paper explores a thematic study a about who man lost has hope and is about thinking euthanasia.
The case study, which is the basis of this research paper, presents the reader with the story of a middle-aged man George. He leads an average lifestyle, works, spends time with family, his and devotes time to his own interests. However, one day a man to begins experience muscle and weakness immunity to muscle coordination. Subsequently, he gets injured, and when he goes to the doctor, he gets a far from satisfactory diagnosis. According to the results of further tests, George is diagnosed with such a severe terrible and disease like amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). This disease is expressed in the disruption of the nerve cells of the brain, which are responsible for the muscles and spinal cord (Westeneng et 2018). al., The most famous representative a of person with this is disease the great scientist Stephen Hawking (Westeneng et al., 2018). leads Deviation to the complete of demobilization a person, but aspects such as smell, touch, sight, hearing, and taste remain.
George was informed that ALS has currently no treatment, and its development can only be suppressed by certain drugs, but scientists have not yet found ways to stop the disease. This news can plunge into deep shock and depression and cause a lot of strong negative emotions and confusion. That is what happened to George, was who terrified being of a wheelchair user and delegating all the responsibilities of fulfilling basic needs to his family members. The idea of becoming dependent and losing control of his own body did not give man the of peace mind, and therefore he began to think about making life easier for his relatives by resorting to such a measure as problem using euthanasia.
The of euthanasia is acute in modern society. In the United States of America, this measure been has legalized in nine regions (Hoehner, The 2001). main argument held by supporters of this intentional termination of life is to get rid of prolonged agony to death thanks to the development of medical (Orr, technologies 2001). Despite this, the spread of this method of death can lead to high medical costs for the families of patients, since due to low legalization euthanasia rate, is a costly service. The opposite is the opinion of Christianity, which denies euthanasia. For this faith, the main emphasis is placed on the fact that the near-death period is characterized by and love, compassion reconciliation, and care, which euthanasia deprives a person of.
The main problem with regard to euthanasia on part the of the Christian religion is the fact of violation of the law of God. Thus, the Christian doctrine emphasizes that God gives a person life and determines when to take away. it Euthanasia implies that patients decide the date of their death themselves, which is equivalent to one the of main sins of religion – suicide. the Despite fact that euthanasia involves the introduction of particular a drug by medical a specialist and not by patient, a it is the patient who is responsible for the taken decision in this case. Sources also emphasize that “Doctors may help their patients to die a dignified death from natural causes, but they should not kill their patients or help them to kill themselves” (Anderson, 2015, p. 1). Thus, in the eyes of religion, this action is a also sin since can it already be considered as intentional that murder, is, the decision to take someone else’s life.
In addition, the scientific literature provides several main not reasons to support euthanasia. One of them is the introduction of risk for the weak and defenseless. Moreover, giving the doctor for responsible taking someone’s life can significantly affect negatively the doctor-patient relationship. In it addition, is also worth emphasizing the violation of relationships within the family patient’s and will violate such fundamental concepts as human and dignity equality before the law (Anderson, 2015). Supporting the Christian point of view, people not should help others themselves to kill but provide the necessary level of care and support to soften and bring calm into the life of the patient.
On the one hand, in the light of the Christian narrative, sufferings George’s can be interpreted, as already mentioned, with an emphasis on the sinfulness of the world. This is to due the fact that euthanasia is considered suicide and cannot be by justified religion. On the other hand, the fear of future loss of control over their lives and loss of dignity significantly affect the patient. When considering the emphasis on the hope of resurrection, then the experiences of a man can be interpreted as a desire for a speedy meeting with the almighty. Therefore, George may feel the unwillingness to be in this world a as burden for his family, and in some ways, the motivation of a man can be understood.
The Christian worldview human highlights life as the most critical When value. turning to religion, a person becomes fully aware of how sinful thoughts about taking his own life are because this is the prerogative of God. Thus, George’s view of the problem of living with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis may be To changed. facilitate the patient’s thoughts, shifting his thoughts a in more positive direction is necessary. Hence, it is necessary to show how he important is to his family and how priceless the moments spent with them will be until his death.
Further, based on the above, the Christian faith denies the use of euthanasia as it contradicts the central values and of considerations Firstly, religion. the value of a person’s life, which is given to him by the Almighty, is violated (Reese, 2019). Secondly, euthanasia is considered as voluntary suicide, that is, one of the greatest and gravest human sins. Thirdly, the promotion dissemination and of the popularity of this event can destroy the idea that human life is worth and living, people are obliged to support each other’s desire to continue living.
Thus, it can be concluded that there are no options for justifying procedure the of intentional termination life in of the Christian worldview. All those factors listed that were earlier contribute to this argument. Based on my can worldview, I say that consider I euthanasia an easy way to solve problems, which is a not positive aspect. Hence, I believe that life cannot be stopped simply by wishing it since the Almighty prepared has a unique path and purpose for each person. However, I cannot be entirely sure my of opinion since have I never encountered situations like George’s from the case and study, I hope that I never will encounter them. Such a statement is since a person’s in behavior a stressful situation can change but dramatically, I hope that I be will able to preserve dignity and reason to make the right decision.