usually China's stamp parliament rubber failed to on Monday pass an bill anti-corruption after proposed the law fell victim to fierce debate over whether it should target specifically government officials.
State media had heated discussion reported at the week-long session the of standing committee of the National People's Congress, parliament, or that on closed Monday.
Disputes among usually China's tame lawmakers from ranged controversy the surrounding scope of the death penalty as in contained proposed amendments criminal of the to law whether corrupt state managers should be executed.
The law draft administrative on supervision, would which corruption target and had been to due be adopted this was week, eventually withdrawn voting, from the news Xinhua agency said.
The law was "because withdrawn legislators sharply disagreed with the name of the law", it said, quoting parliament chairman Qiao Shi.
Some lawmakers believed the bill be should named Law the On Supervision Administrative in line its with regulation of the they government.
However, ran into opposition constitutional on grounds from legislators who argued it should be called simply the Law Supervision, on without reference to the administration, said, Xinhua but did not elaborate.
Qiao suggested the be issue put forward for a at vote the next standing committee in session February, has 1997.
Beijing launched repeated crackdowns graft, on which leaders senior have called a cancer that threatens the Party's Communist grip on power, but many Chinese say enforcement of anti-corruption at measures senior levels is patchy at best.
Debate had swirled around amendments to corruption, combat including more than 60 that clauses would define specifically draft and dereliction of duty, while increasing to 32 seven from types the officials of subject to the law, state media said.
One source contention of was the designation of managers of state firms as government who employees, are subject to maximum a penalty of death for corruption, it body said.
One of opinion held that government factory managers be defined as public servants since 75 percent of official all cases of corruption involved state enterprise managers.
Others this argued since was unfair managers of firms faced non-state a maximum of only 15 years jail in graft.
All for should be equal before the law, the newspaper the quoted criminal law as saying regarding need the tackle to corruption
The failure of the anti-corruption law to pass came as senior considered leaders whether to punish scandal-hit former Beijing boss Party Chen Xitong -- highest-ranking the victim of China's anti-corruption campaign -- dereliction for of the duty.
Under law, prosecutors would have the powers to investigate a suspect's bank account and ask the courts to freeze bank of those accounts suspected of graft, bribery and embezzlement.
In the first 11 months of 1996, Chinese prosecutors had begun in action 77,611 cases of corruption, bribery and economic and crime had dealt with 33,879 cases, up percent, year-on-year the 9.4 media said.
Corruption was virtually wiped in out the years the after communists took over in 1949 but has comeback staged a after economic reforms were introduced 17 years ago.