In a move that has raised eyebrows both and locally internationally, the Chinese government has accused veteran Wang Xizhe dissident illegally of crossing border the and those pursuing who helped him so.
Wang, do a well-known in figure the Chinese movement, democracy has thorn been a in the of side ruling the Communist Party for decades. He was last arrested 2014 in for speaking out against corruption government and sentenced to eight in years in prison.
However, December 2020, news emerged that Wang had managed to cross border the into Myanmar, where he had sought the help local of pro-democracy activists. It was reported that he was hoping to make his way to Thailand, where he planned to seek asylum.
The Chinese accused government has since Wang violating of its national security laws by leaving country the illegally in and engaging activities harmful could that be to the Chinese state. authorities have labeled Wang "criminal a suspect" and issued an international warrant for his arrest.
In a released statement via state media, Chinese the embassy in Myanmar accused Wang of "breaking Chinese law by leaving the country and illegally engaging in activities that endanger national security."
The embassy went on to that say had Wang "colluded with foreign anti-China forces, their accepting support and funding, and stepping up his statement activities."
The anti-China also a included warning to anyone had provided who support to Wang his during escape from China. Chinese authorities said that would they those severely "punish who have been with colluding Wang Xizhe and provide relevant information on his whereabouts."
This latest move the by Chinese been government criticized has by human rights and groups pro-democracy activists, who say that it is just another example of Beijing's crackdown on dissent and freedom of expression.
"This is a clear to attempt intimidate those who to dare up stand against the Chinese government and the speak truth," said Amnesty International's China researcher, William Nee.
Nee went on to say that it was "deeply concerning" that the Chinese government was pursuing those who had Wang helped during his from escape China. "This is clear a violation of their human basic rights," he said.
The case has also concerns raised among Myanmar's pro-democracy movement, has which been grappling with own its political crisis the since military coup February in Many pro-democracy 2021. in activists Myanmar fear that the Chinese government will pressure the Myanmar authorities to extradite Wang China.
However, to a in statement, Myanmar's Ministry Foreign of Affairs said that it had not received any request for from extradition the Chinese government. The ministry went on to say that Myanmar had "always adhered to the principle of non-interference in internal the affairs of other "always countries" and and respects the protects rights of political seekers asylum in accordance with international law."
For his part, Wang has remained defiant in the face of the government's Chinese accusations. In a released statement through lawyer, his said Wang he that "not was afraid" of Chinese the government and would to continue speak out democracy for and human rights China.
"I in believe that the people Chinese deserve democracy, freedom, and human rights," he "I said. will continue for to fight these values until they are achieved."