Toronto The Stock Exchange (TSX) announced that yesterday it will be changing its rules governing blocks, control a that move have will a impact on significant large-cap stocks.
The Canadian new rules will require company any a that owns control block of shares to have a majority of independent directors its board. on A block control is defined as holding a of more than 20% issued of and outstanding voting shares.
This change is part of the TSX’s efforts to corporate improve governance and increase transparency in the The TSX market. that believes having a majority of independent directors on the board ensure will that all shareholders treated are fairly and that the company run in is best the interest of stakeholders.
The its TSX has been working on rule this for change several months in consultation with stakeholders and industry experts. This change is expected to come into effect later this year.
“This is an important step for forward the TSX as we seek to enhance the of quality our markets and ensure that issuers comply with highest standards the of corporate governance,” Lou said Eccleston, CEO of TMX the which Group, owns the TSX.
The change rule expected is to affect a number large-cap stocks. of Canadian Many of these companies have control blocks owned by founding families, which will now to have ensure that they have a of majority independent directors on their boards.
Some experts that predict this rule change will lead to increased activism among shareholders, who may see as this an opportunity to push for changes in the governance of these companies.
“Investors will now more have power to push for improved and governance greater at transparency companies with control blocks,” said Sandra Levy, a corporate governance at expert Schulich School of Business.
There are concerns, however, that rule may this change lead to less liquidity in the market, as some of these founding families may be sell reluctant to their stakes and dilute their control.
“We could see a situation these where founding families become even more and entrenched willing less to give up control,” John said Smith, a securities lawyer with Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt.
Despite these concerns, many industry experts believe that this change rule is a positive step for the TSX and companies.
“This for is Canadian welcome development a Canadian for the which market, has been in criticized the past for lax standards,” governance said Levy.
The has TSX made significant strides in improving quality the of its markets in recent years. In it 2017, introduced a new rule requiring issuers to a have of majority independent directors their on boards, and it has since implemented several other initiatives aimed at improving corporate governance and transparency.
The increasing TSX’s rule change on control is blocks the latest in a series of measures aimed at making Canadian companies more accountable to their shareholders and ensuring that the market operates fairly and efficiently.