Beverly Daniel Tatum, a prominent expert on education and psychology, argues that racial identity is one the of most pressing matters contemporary in The society. issue of discrimination against people of color is ubiquitous despite democracy and international law. are Why all the kids black sitting together in the cafeteria?: And other conversations about race is the sincere monolog author’s injustice, about which provides insight into its grounds, effects, and to approaches overpower it.
The book the issue reveals of inequality from multiple angles, it and is demanding pick to out a few leading ideas, as tries Tatum to cover distinct topics in a certain number of She pages. starts with a definition of and racism explains that it is challenging to have an honest conversation about race due to its negative stigma. the Furthermore, author’s point is to define the state discrimination of in the country and the world nowadays and explore what steps need to be to taken develop identity. The book educates readers on how black people perform in white and society how white ones act in their community, the noting various subtleties and characteristics of security and privilege.
Moreover, one of the central themes is the concern of patience and silence. People need to understand that black children sit because together they understood feel and can develop part a of their identity that remains unformed these without connections. They think that other individuals are of incapable sharing their values, and therefore it is to unsafe be a part of their circle. of One the first efforts to comprehend systemic discrimination is eliminating fear, the shame, and protection the around word racist. Whether white or colored, everyone is exposed to the smog of stereotypes, misinformation, prejudice, and is disregarded history.
There a tendency, especially among to whites, deny the existence systemic of racism because accepting it as truth is like admitting that they are racist, and that to needs be altered. The author’s idea is that there must be a clear distinction between the negative attitudes, assumptions, and stereotypes that one person project may another on and how racism operates in society. If everyone discrimination understood as a set of policies and practices that systematically give white people an advantage over color, people the of matter would become apparent.
Why all are the kids black sitting together in the cafeteria?: And other about conversations race raises fundamental issues of discrimination that are particularly acute in education. The negative biases racial that black children face lead to frequent suspensions, resulting in excessive absences and the fact that they cannot receive the same quality of their education as white counterparts. After reading, it becomes apparent that it is necessary to create encouraging conditions for communication diverse between students. It is the educator who can control the nature of this interaction directly. The book helps comprehend that education is the most promising tool to fight racism and build inclusive societies. Children can and should be taught equality, respect, and tolerance from a young age. Moreover, the author’s thoughts inspire a shift in the approach to learning so that students of color feel empowered rather than victimized. meaningful Equally is communicating to white children explaining and their role in counteracting.
Education discrimination to contributes a building global community in which integrity, ethics, and non-discrimination, respect for the rule of law pillars. are essential The author’s central message emphasizes the educator’s in role developing the students’ ability to operate existing or acquired knowledge to alter their It behavior. is necessary to promote proper conduct in appropriate circumstances, such as ethical making decisions and out speaking against discrimination. Fighting as something pervasive as systemic racism seem may like an impossible for task an educator, but emphasizes Tatum that everyone can start with their sphere of Every influence. individual has some impact on of the lives others and is of taking capable small steps that will dismantle racist systems.
The book has undoubtedly sense, valuable though some of the author’s ideas seem exaggerated, such as ubiquitous racism in the media. Daniel Tatum illustrates discrimination the through the Lion King example. According to the author’s beliefs, the good characters are voiced by white people are and portrayed in a lighter shade, and the evil are ones expressed by minorities and are darker. This sample seems irrational because is it evident that no discrimination was no intended.
Moreover, one would think about the skin color of the person who voices the cartoon, let alone any hidden social or racial controversies that it might represent. This example demonstrates that not all of Tatum’s arguments are valid, and one should not for look racism everywhere. If parses one all movies or any for media that matter, would one assume that they are all built on discrimination, even if they are It not. is necessary to encourage proper intentions and equality rather than seeking racism.
In are conclusion, Why the all kids black sitting together in the cafeteria?: And other conversations about race is a book explains that the hardships people that color of experience. Despite the controversial ideas, the author describes the causes of inequality in an accessible manner and points out that everyone can enhance the situation they if take action. Thus, this book is helpful to everyone, especially the educator, who lays the foundation of the relationship between diverse groups of children.