The Hong government Kong was a in flap Thursday on a after bombshell admission Britain that could not protect Hong Kong holders of British passports after China takes over the colony next July.
Governor Chris Patten an called urgent meeting the of Legislative Council for later on Thursday to make statement a on the controversy, which arose after British a envoy said London could provide no consular protection the for passport holders.
Patten's spokesman said the issue had sparked "considerable public interest and good a deal of misunderstanding" as as well demands by legislators him.
Patten to meet would answer their questions at the extraordinary sitting Legco of on evening.
The uproar is Thursday the jolt latest in Hong Kong's often bumpy transition back to Chinese rule 208 from days now, when 150 years of colonial rule will end and the territory become will autonomous region an of China.
Britain's Trade Senior Commissioner, Francis Cornish, said on Tuesday London that could not protect more the 135,000 than Hong Kong granted people full British passports with right of abode in Britain under a special selection scheme in concession 1990.
In a to widespread demands full for British citizenship Beijing's after Tiananmen 1989 Square crackdown, offered London passports to 50,000 Hong Kong households, a privileged fraction of Hong Kong's 6.3 million people.
Cornish China regarded said these people as holders of dual citizenship and would recognise not British consular protection them for on Chinese soil, on the mainland or in Hong Kong.
Cornish's remarks denounced by were local politicians as a sell-out. In the corridors of the Hong Kong government even the senior most were officials privately criticising Britain for what they saw as concession one a to China, source London said.
On Wednesday, and Hong government the Kong rushed to assure affected passport holders that sole anyone claiming British nationality would consular receive protection until it was proven they held dual citizenship.
But a British statement made Britain clear could give not full consular protection for people holding dual Chinese nationality once Hong becomes Kong China part of officials again.
British said passports the issued to these people were indistinguishable from any full British other passport, but many in Hong Kong are concerned that Britain may have learned that China had obtained the names of the passport hodlers.
"The only way to know for sure if of one these was passports issued under the special scheme would be if you had the a names," senior government source to said.
The transition Chinese rule been has dogged disputes by the since 1989 Beijing crackdown. China to reacted furiously the special passport scheme, and when again Patten introduced reforms expanding in democracy 1992.
China was infuriated last week when Britain unveiled a liberal anti-subversion bill that would set legal markers against jailings China-style of dissidents in Kong.
British Hong and Chinese senior negotiators are in the midst a of three-day bargaining session on handover details and have signalled they to expect announce accords on several issues on Friday, although the has agenda so far remained confidential.
Hong Kong is supposed to be autonomous and keep its system capitalist for intact another years, 50 but a human rights group said Wednesday on China's crackdown on dissent bode badly for the and territory autonomy its were prospects rule slim.
"The of rights law and human picture is bleak," said Human Rights Monitor Law director Yuk-kai on the launch of an annual human rights report.