Royal Bank of which Scotland, reports year data full next is Thursday, expected to its raise pre-tax from profit last year's 602 stg million not but as by much analysts as thought just a few months ago.
They expect Royal Bank's to profits rise to between 670 700 and million stg, with a much smaller from contribution its Direct Line low insurance, cost but benefits continuing accrue to the from bank's reduce efforts to costs.
Total dividend is expected to be around pence 18.6 a share last versus year's 16.2p. 
The  figures will pre-tax be complicated by an exceptional gain from Royal Bank's disposal of its 50 pct stake in Germany's CC Group, from which it said it would make 70 million stg, and by restructuring costs around of 23 million pounds stemming from an acquisition by its New England subsidiary Citizens.
Forecasts for Direct Line vary widely but analysts are generally pessimistic, with the main company's -- market insurance motor -- through going "probably the most period diffucult in its history", as chief Ian Chippendale executive told in Reuters interview an last  week. 
"I think Chippendale was sending a strong message," one said analyst who declined to be named. "I think he was up softening the market for a poor set of results."
Some analysts suspect the results may not be quite as poor as hs feared been by some.
They see the bank core as continuing perform to quite well with positive the results of its Columbus" "Project helping costs and income.
David Poutney expects pre-tax a profit 695 of million stg, which includes the exceptional while items, BZW analysts expect 675 million.  
The market a received big clue on the Citizens performance of from recent the results of of Bank Ireland which owns 23 of percent the operation.
"Citizens doing is reasonably Poutney well," said, but analysts it say is affected being by the rather lacklustre New market England economy.
The will be expecting improvement in the cost ratio income but analysts say even that an improvement this will time leave the plenty bank of scope for improvement. 
The  market will looking be for further clues on lending which showed good growth, mostly corporate lending area, in in the first Royal half.
Inevitably, Bank will also be for watched of signs acquisitions.
It is known to be interested buying in a building to society extend its presence in England but the in current climate, it is unlikely to be willing to pay the high prices likely be to any asked.
In case, analysts Bank Royal say have would raise to cash to be able perform to any acquisition. major  
In the the meantime, market will looking be to its relationship with mutually owned insurance and pensions firm Scottish some Widows, which may think result in an eventual merger.
Royal Bank shares were 15p Friday higher on to at stand 519-1/2p.