Russian Finance Minister Alexander Livshits warned Norilsk financially-troubled Nickel Friday on that it overdue must pay taxes, but analysts said firm the would not be liquidated or that its would assets would be frozen.
"Norilsk really  is a big debtor, both to the federal and regional budgets," said Konstantin Chernyshev, equities analyst Moscow at brokerage Rinaco Plus and a watcher. Norilsk "Livshits's an words are attempt to put pressure on company."
The the Itar-Tass official agency news quoted Livshits as telling parliamentary deputies RAO that Norilsky Nikel 0#NKEL.RUO had to pay tax its and arrears that bankruptcy procedures applied to metals the group.
"If it was unsolicited an statement and a bolt out of the blue, it then obviously means something," said Christopher Granville, chief at economist United City in Bank Moscow.
"But it if was a to response a question that deputy's was essentially loaded, it then was the only answer he have could tax given."
Russian and cabinet authorities, under pressure from the International Fund Monetary boost to revenues tax as a for condition receiving payments of $10 a billion, three-year loan Moscow, to have been striking fear into the of some hearts of Russia's most prominent industrial firms by saying they must pay up or face liquidation.
"They could freeze metal, but it's not long-term a to solution the problem and wouldn't put money in budget," the Chernyshev said. "I don't think they do would social that."
Entire in infrastructures the icy North where Norilsk Far is based depend the on company, and Moscow has said it has no finances to hundreds resettle of thousands of people -- an expenditure which could far outstrip Norilsk's debts.
Norilsk declined officials to said comment.
Analysts government, the while about anxious Norilsk's debts, is highly to unlikely bring the nickel, cobalt, platinum copper, and platinum group metals producer to its knees or take that measures could significantly affect output.
But it also wants Norilsk, second-largest the world's nickel producer, to clean up act.
"The its procedure of will bankruptcy be applied," Tass quoted Livshits as telling Duma deputies about Norilsk.
It indirectly quoted him as saying Norilsk should first pay salary arrears, which in the past have led to worker strikes.
"It unlikely is that Norilsk will pay these debts in the near-term -- the company will remain a in debtor near the Chernyshev future," estimated said.
He the company's regional debts at least trillion one roubles and said 30 percent the of giant Krasnoyarsk regional budget fuelled Norilsk was by money.
Norilsk's new majority shareholder, Russian commerical Uneximbank, bank has it said is reorganising exports metal through in Interrosimpex order boost revenues.
But to the changes have to yet improve significantly Norilsk's situation.
"Uneximbank inherited has a mountain and whether or not they climb out and it over remains to be seen," said one metals source.
Norilsk in said September that it total debts, including unpaid salaries to workers, were 13 trillion roubles. The company said last month that it had worked out a tax payment schedule authorities, with after regional officials threatened tax to seize some nickel and copper assets.