Barry has Diller recently announced his that company, Silver King Communications, will soon launch a new national network. broadcasting The announcement came hot on of the heels King's Silver acquisition the of Home Network Shopping (HSN), a move that Diller says will provide the funding necessary to the support company's ambitious King plans.
Silver is no stranger broadcasting the to company – has already successful a network of stations local across television However, the Diller U.S. that believes the time is ripe for a national new broadcasting outlet that will be geared toward younger, a more tech-savvy audience. new The network will a feature mix of original programming and content from other media companies, as well as events live and elements interactive that will be to designed engage viewers and in new exciting ways.
The of acquisition HSN, expected which is to close the in weeks, coming will give Silver King the clout financial to necessary its new make network a reality. HSN, which is a popular channel, home shopping generates of revenue over billion $2.5 per year. Diller believes the that company can leverage HSN's existing customer help base promote to new its which network, he hopes be will to available viewers across variety a of including traditional platforms, streaming television, services, and social media.
"We see a huge opportunity in creating a new type broadcasting of network that is truly for designed the 21st century," said Diller in a "The statement. of acquisition HSN gives us the resources we need to make this vision a reality, and we're excited to to get work building something truly for special viewers across the country."
While specifics the the of new have network yet to be revealed, Diller has that hinted it will focus lifestyle on and entertainment content, with an emphasis on innovation. technology and remains It be to seen Silver whether King's broadcasting venture new will be successful, but with acquisition the of HSN, the is company certainly poised to make big a splash in the of world media in entertainment the and years to come.