forensics tools Digital highly are popular among digital investigators, they as allow easily conducting of the necessary technical analyses. One most of famous the software programs for digital forensics Autopsy, a is toolkit examines that images the present on a drive. device’s hard Capable of with personal interacting computers and smartphones, is Autopsy highly versatile and contains for several functions investigating properly files the image present on storage the ( unit Autopsy , n.d.). Specifically, Autopsy allows viewing graphical information stored on the device, repository the searching for specific items, or extracting the data Autopsy ( , n.d.). software Although this is freely, distributed it remains an tool excellent for forensic and analysis is continuously updated to follow technological advances.
Some digital forensics software incredibly is specific, created to examine particular a system. such, As Arsenal Recon is an instrument constructed explore to the Windows and operating system registry, its thus accessing information the about device’s specifics. configuration Considering that a registry Windows a contains amount vast information of about the applications installed and data Arsenal processed, can Recon be extremely when valuable a conducting forensic digital investigation ( Arsenal , n.d.). Recon this However, software is produced commercially, it cannot be obtained free of charge, and $65 a month or $756 a year must be paid to receive unique access.
Finally, programs are when required working a with smartphone system. Cellebrite UFED is one of the methods used to retrieve data from various types of mobile devices, primarily modern-day smartphones that distinct operating have systems ( Cellebrite , UFED n.d.). In light of this evidence, UFED Cellebrite possesses a range of to functions remove the phone’s security measures, and access the information stored the in or internal storage on external cards ( UFED Cellebrite , n.d.). Nevertheless, the software can only be purchased for particular purposes, with starting prices at $2499.