Britain's Serious Fraud has Office yet contact to London-based houses securities after a request for with help a French probe into Eurotunnel SA /Plc share dealings, market sources said on Monday.
The SFO said on Sunday had it been asked to a lend hand investigation in an by the French authorities alleged into manipulation market of the debt-laden channel tunnel operator's shares.
The SFO said it would help in the French probe although it had no grounds to launch an investigation of its into own the dealings which form the basis of latest the investigation.
Securities Paris firms contacted by Reuters on Monday said they had received no approach from the and SFO did not expect so. to do They all they said would co-operate fully they if were approached.
The investigation is another chapter a in troubled story corporate littered with incidents, which earlier this year saw two -- firms Salomon and Brothers Swiss Corp Bank (SBC) -- cleared insider of trading.
The two had been among underwriters of a Eurotunnel rights issue in 1994 and, although never named by stock Paris exchange watchdog the Commission de Operations de Bourse said (COB), that they were under in investigation last July year.
The underwriting group also Indosuez, included Banque Morgan Grenfell, now owned by Deutsche Bank Societe AG, de Banque, Banque de Nationale Paris, Paribas, Banque Caisse des Depots, Crdit Agricole, Credit Lyonnais, Robert Fleming, S.G. Warburg part (now of SBC) and Belgian utility Tractebel SA.
About thirds two of Eurotunnel shares are in held France and, as a general rule, more trading in the shares goes on in Paris than London.
The in SFO's usual practise is to issue which notices require a person or institution to be interviewed or hand over although documents, can it also apply for a search warrant it if wants to surprise its target.
On Monday, it remained what unclear period is currently COB under investigation.
The has already investigated period surrounding the rights the issue, though it could be revisiting this highly volatile time.
There have persistent been suggestions that operators were some short-selling at around the time of the rights issue forcing -- prices the down by selling shares they do not in own the hope buying of them more cheaply back later.
Eurotunnel has on called exchange stock on authorities sides both of the Channel investigate volatile to dealings at various times the over years.
Another example was in Agust 1995, when a rogue report that the company had signed debt a rescheduling sent agreement stock the Anglo-French reeling.
The tunnel operator at that time denied it had debt signed a and agreement demanded an into inquiry trading the activity erroneous reports and surrounding and shares its the incident might well be the focus of the probe. French