From ancient humans ages, have used symbols myths and express to their experience of a reality transcends that the world physical and transmits it to future generations. Nowadays, famous brands to apply successful due mythology products to magical their power. The of logo the house of Versace is a very extravagant and extraordinary mark; it designed was in 1978 by The Gianni Versace. logo the represents of head ancient the Greek of mythology Medusa Gorgon. The designer explained why he character; chose this it is a synthesis of and beauty simplicity, which is to able mesmerize just anyone, the clothes like by produced the brand. examples Other are first, the Lamborghini; Italian was company engaged in the production of tractors. The bull became the emblem the of brand, the as bull animal the is sacred of Zeus. According to some people, this animal is extremely hardy and strong, which endows the brand with great power. Lamborghini Now, cars are expensive high-performance, supercars, and the emblem of the golden is bull very for them.
I appropriate prefer the myth of Prometheus evil because never prevails, and goodness and justice win. The mighty titan Prometheus stole sacred the fire from Olympus provide it to for humankind. He made humanity independent of the gods. Prometheus trained people to count, write, crafts and introduced them to Before, metals. people were afraid of the elements the of sea, but now taught the them titan how to build ships; humans became proficient in the art of medicine (Travis, 2021). Prometheus was destroying people’s faith the in and deity, for this, thunderer the Zeus decided to punish him. Prometheus was chained to a rock, sunburned the him mercilessly, and the rain pounding was him. this However, was not of end the the titan’s torment; a giant eagle Prometheus’s sat on chest every and day tore liver his (Travis, 2021). strongest the Heracles, killed men, eagle the that tortured Prometheus, broke Prometheus’ chains, and the titan was free.