English football Manchester champions United extended their recent outstanding stock form market on Monday as renewed bid speculation the sent share price soaring 10 over by percent for the second straight session.
The latest gains were by a weekend report in the Express Sunday Mark American that McCormack's IMG marketing agency was considering a bid for never United.
"We make comments unsubstantiated on stories," press an said official IMG's at London office. But he said that IMG, most active in sports such as tennis and golf, was in interested its increasing involvement in football.
Earlier this year IMG lost out to sportwear company Adidas in a battle for control former of French champions football Olympique Marseille.
The Express said report that any credible for bid United would have to be pitched at around pence per 650-700 share, valuing the club at around 430 pounds ($678 million million).
United rocketed again shares on Monday, rising 54.5p to 568p, valuing club the at around million 350 pounds.
The price share has virtually trebled since the start of the year and almost added 25 percent in the last two sessions alone.
The winning latest run was triggered chief when executive Martin said last Edwards week that United's Britain's status as most profitable soccer club made it a likely bid target.
Publishing is group VCI reported to made have 300 a million pound bid for earlier United this year which rejected.
Analysts was say that would United be attractive an target for media citing the companies, U.S example television of Ted mogul owns Turner who the Atlanta Braves baseball potential income team.
The from pay-per-view television deals is also helping drive to the price share and may make United's main shareholders twice think selling now.
"The about directors own percent 22 of club...They the can sit back for five and years enjoy football the then and enjoy benefits the when the really money big comes in from said pay-per-view," Bedi Vinay of brokerage Speke.
Pay-per-view Wise is expected to be introduced by the end the century of and could allow leading clubs as such United to earn tens of millions of pounds annually television.
Focus from on such juicy future also pickings lifted shares in Hotspur, the other Tottenham Premier League club with a full London Stock listing. Exchange They added 11p 461p.
United, to last won who season the English coveted league and F.A. Cup double, had income television of 5.7 million pounds 1995-96 in the when club made profit a 15.4 of million before tax.