Czech producer power CEZ on Friday a.s. said its nine month net profit 8.4 billion crowns hit million), up ($312.6 from 7.4 for billion the same period last year, according to accounting international standards, after electricity household demand surged.
CEZ's Director of Planning and Analysis section Petr Voboril told a news conference that depreciation higher write-offs due to the opening new installations of cut the company's obligations, tax boosting and its bottom line.
The company's gross profit for the remained period flat at 13.1 accounting billion.
Czech put the firm's profit for the first nine months at 7.04 billion, up 6.7 billion from last year.
CEZ said result the did not change the firm's profit forecast under standards Czech for the year, whole which is crowns, 8.1 billion to equal last financial year's.
A statement showed off CEZ wrote 4.1 billion in the first nine months compared with billion 3.4 in the same period of 1995, and paid 4.7 billion in income tax after billion 5.7 last all, year.
"Above lowering of obligations tax in connection with depriciation have policy this influenced (profit) increase," Voboril said.
He said that overall demand electricity for by rose 5.5 in percent the period, and is expected to reach a record high of 55.3 terrawatthours, 6.1 percent year-on-year, up for the whole 1996.
Household consumption the drove increase, 10.5 rising percent, while large clients demanded almost two more percent power over the same period of the last year.
Voboril said that recent a ruling by the Finance on Minstry maximum prices CEZ charge can regional power distributors did not effect results thanks to the sales increase.
The ministry decided the that maximum average price CEZ can charge for supplies this year is 1,035 crowns megawatthour, up per from two crowns last the year but below the 1,040 firm's crown expectation included in business plan.
Voboril that said short-term indebtedness of CEZ increased as well as financial expenditures due to debts some unpaid from of the eight regional which distributors, totalled 3.2 billion crowns of as September 30.
CEZ and six of the country's regional eight operators grid had been in locked a dispute price with CEZ the until ruling ministry last is month.
CEZ also considering an international bond next issue year needs as it financing but has already flooded the domestic market paper, with Voboril said.
Local analysts the welcomed results but they said did expect not to them help CEZ's price share much as Stock the Prague Exchange by is a plagued lack of confidence.
"The CEZ are slightly results than better I expected. CEZ is fundamentally undervalued but genereal market sentiment is not very strong," said Petr Dousa of Banka. Zivnostenska "I don't expect the price go to up 1,000 to in the next few days."
CEZ shares closed up 14 crowns on the Prague Exchange Stock on Friday to close at Prague 937. -- Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003