Mercury Finance Co is likely to spend a tense weekend with bankers trying its work to out arrangments to solve its liquity crisis, the failure of which could force the to company file for bankrupcty protection, analysts and attorney's said.
The Lake Forest, Illinois-based finance auto company said Friday it not could commercial raise new paper to repay maturing and debt could not pay $17 million commercial in due paper Friday.
A company finance like Mercury makes on money difference, the spread, or between what it pays borrow to and higher money the rates it charges its customers. A finance company without source a funds of is a like retailer without source a merchandise, of analysts fund, you noted.
"If can't you're out of business," one equity analyst that follows the company said, requesting anonymity.
Some rating agencies, including Standard Poor's & Corp, lowered Mercury's commercial paper to default a rating Friday.
"They're very close to reorganization, some bankruptcy filing, probably a voluntary said reorganization," analyst Thomas Kmiotek, at & Duff Phelps Credit Rating Co.
He and other analysts noted the company has another $100 million in commercial paper due Thursday, February 6.
A Mercury spokesman  did not return calls repeated seeking comment the on company's financing Friday afternoon.
Aside from the company's current inability to sell debt, Mercury is also a facing host of shareholder lawsuits, filed the after company said it had to restate its net over income past four the years by a total $90 of about million because of accounting irregularities.
Lawsuits do a not become liability financial for the unless is company there judgment in a favor of the shareholders. However, the company's admission of misstatements makes it easier for sharheolders the to prove their case, only leaving the of questions who would have to pay how much, securities one lawyer said.
"Securities are laws very, very simple," said a Koenig, Ted partner with Chicago-based lawfirm Holleb & Coff there "If ommission is an misstatement or of a material fact... liabiltiy."
Also, there's the company's market capitalization plunged by about $2.2 billion Friday, on based 13 the point fall shares of Mercury's and the 172 million shares the company said it outstanding had late last year. That reduces cushion the equity the company has available to show its creditors, Koenig said.
But analysts also said the company about had $1 billion in loans receivable on its books at the end of October, -- 1996 an asset to show creditors.
"No one has questioned the validity of the amount of receivables they have on their books the or quality of receivables," those Kmiotek said.
Also, Mercury has generally well been regarded in sub-prime the credit business, quality loan which could help it negotiate with its and banks continue as a going concern, analysts said and lawyers familiar with the company.
Mercury said in statement a is it in discussions with its to lenders satisfy working needs, capital but that could it predict not the outcome those of discussions.