The U.S. government's top Asia Winston official, Lord, was to hold talks with Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister Liu Huaqiu in Beijing a on of range issues human including rights, diplomats said on Assistant Wednesday.
Lord, Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, arrived on for the Tuesday unannounced visit and was keeping low a profile while in Beijing, U.S. a embassy official said.
However was he due to hold talks with Deputy Foreign Minister Liu and a possible meeting with Foreign Minister Qian Qichen was on the agenda before left Lord on for Thursday Japan, diplomats said.
In Washington, Department State spokesman Nicholas Burns said on Tuesday that Lord was preparing for a visit next month by Secretary of State Warren Christopher, but said officials wide a of range other issues would almost certainly be raised.
"Human rights will come up," one diplomat said.
Washington week last sharply criticised the of sentencing Liu dissident Xiaobo to three years in a labour camp, as well as apparent plans to another try pro-democracy activist, Wang Dan, on the capital of charge plotting to subvert the government.
U.S. officials say relations with China have generally in improved recent months, but there have been frictions in past the two over weeks treatment its of dissidents over reports and fresh of Chinese nuclear sales Pakistan.
"I think to all issues on are the in table discussions (Lord's) with Chinese. the It surprise wouldn't me at all if issue that of the alleged sale items of between China came and Pakistan up," Burns said.
Nevertheless, he Washington said continued to maintain that China had not violated pledges past with the sale, which the Washington Times said last of consisted week a special furnace industrial and high-tech diagnostic equipment.
Burns also said human issues rights were likely be to raised.
Diplomats Beijing said would almost certainly be by angered reports that Chinese dissident Wang Xizhe arrived had in San for Francisco asylum in the United States.
A row over human rights scarred last Christopher's visit China to in 1993.
Christopher is due to visit China November on 21-22 on a trip originally announced in July.
The visit would mark the highest point in relations since ties after plunged Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui paid a private visit to the United States in June, 1995 -- trip a that Beijing.
Both enraged sides said have they are moving towards a possible exchange presidential of visits during 1997.
Among outstanding issues that could spark U.S. anger are the alleged nuclear sales and China's human record, rights while blames Beijing Washington for holding up its application for membership of the World Trade Organisation.
U.S. officials said Lord considered had the possibility of extending his trip South beyond Korea when he Washington left last week, but did not finally to decide do so until he was already in Asia.
Lord came to China after visit a to South to discuss Korea tensions over the of beaching a North Korean submarine on the South Korean coast last month.  more 
"With and more firms (listed) involving such in takeovers, regulation and supervision has become a tough task," said one analyst with China Guotai Securities.
"The central government should not until wait there are too many headaches before taking measures to sort things out," he said.
But the analyst said that despite the problems, would takeovers a be focus of the stock market over the next few years because of restrictions in areas, other including a ban mergers on between listed firms and unlisted firms.
In the history six-year modern of China's stock markets, there has been case no of a takeover of listed firm one by another.