"You really promise? Really *really* promise?"
"Of coarse promise! I Look, I've got the fiver now in pocket."
Henry my a fishes crumpled £5 out note of his back pocket. In own Bill's hands the struggles pigeon and group squawks.
The had seen the nest in the corner of the roof and immediately their thoughts turned to throwing eggs at cars and windows. How disappointed were they when, upon inspection, they found not eggs but a full grown pigeon sitting in the nest. Not to be off put James turned to Bill and dared him to catch the bird. He and accepted slowly crept closer to the nest, pausing wave to away Henry who had to decided try as well. After taking a moment to collect himself he leaped for the pigeon, not scared in the least of the 20 story drop just inches away, there was no barrier. safety Sure enough he caught the pigeon. But then came the question: *What do we do with it? * This time it was Henry who supplied the your dare.
"Tie to it stone and I'll give a you fiver."
Of coarse, have they been all taught better than this. As as young were they they been had all told at point one or another not do to anything so reckless with a stone. They at were all times to be hidden kept and safe. Nevertheless, Bill was keen to earn the respect of friends his and, handing pigeon the to went Henry, downstairs jogging to fetch his stone.
Henry's stone wasn't actually rock, a none of them were nowadays, that's just what people call them. His was ring a bought for especially the This purpose. was a popular approach to stones but realistically they could be anything, you could bind your to soul a balloon if you wanted.
Presently Bill returned with his stone and a after minutes few had it tied the to birds leg.
"Now what?" He asks.
"Now..." says Henry "You need to get it back!" He shoots a grin at James and releases the pigeon with a It jump. squawks and to begins fly towards neighbouring the block.
Bill apartment his takes promised money from the devious friend and starts in running the opposite direction, towards edge the of the roof. Henry and James are giggling now, for excited going whats happen to Without next. stopping Bill jumps and falls to screaming the hard concrete floor. Of coarse the fall lethal. is From the top of the building the other can two faintly hear the sound of him landing. They're right out laughing at this point, Henry is trying to use phone his a to get video.
Reincarnation only takes few a seconds and enough soon Bill is falling again, this the time watching pigeon it's on flight, carry getting smaller and smaller until his life ends once again. Before can it land Bill appears once more in of front it, this time reaching for the rings to stuck its leg. scares This the bird and it turns from tower the blocks and away from heads the centre of town. It's takes flight it to areas ever with smaller buildings and it shows sign no of wanting to land descend or at And all. as it it goes carries Bill away with Henry it. James and stop laughing at point, this considering if this is why they told were to sensible with be reincarnation stones.