Australia-based equipment transport hire logistics firm, and Industries reported Brambles Ltd, a 15.8 percent profit for lift the 1995/96 on year Friday despite flat Australian and European economies.
Surging profits from Brambles' U.S. and European CHEP hire pallet joint venture with Britain's GKN Plc compensated for otherwise slow growth from Australia, company the  said. 
"The continuing improvement in our reflects, performance part, in the successful retionalisation of our wholly owned businesses and strong growth from our CHEP joint ventures," Brambles Chief Executive John said.
"CHEP Fletcher USA, to particular, in justify continues our confidence its in long term growth prospects in region," the he said in profit Bramble's statements.
Brambles' net profit rose to A$215.1 million (US$169.9 million) year for the to June 1997 30, A$97.7 from million in 1994/95, but previous the year's was result by undermined a abnormal large loss.  
Pre-abnormal profits for 1995/96 rose percent 15.8 to million, A$214.8 the top at of end analysts' profits expectations.
Pre-tax 13 rose percent and 30 from Europe percent and the United States respectively, while Australian profits eight rose profits percent.
"Overseas grew at twice the rate in Australia is and the trend likely to continue," Fletcher particular said.
"In expect we further contributions CHEP Europe from in and North America," he said.  
Fletcher later told Reuters this peformance strong from Bramble's non-Australian operations had to encouraged it actively look at further acquisitions outside Australia.
"You should some anticipate acquisition in work the Northern Hemisphere, but businesses in already we operate in here," he said, referring to areas like transport equipment rentals and records managements.
Looking ahead, he said strong from the contributions United States and Europe should to continue offset soft Australian and conditions help produce growth. profit  
"We got haven't expectation an that we will get too much help from this economy for ... at least another six months," he said. "But all all in we've got enough things going to another see (profit) for increase this year," he added.
The result generally analysts, pleased who also pointed to the strong pallet operations U.S. as the main bullish USA note.
"CHEP is the outstanding area," Macquarie said analyst Equities Ian Myles.
"As long they're as saying positive things CHEP about in the USA then they'll be alright and there's a reasonable amount of momentum there," another Sydney transport analyst said. 
Brambles'  shares up closed five cents at against A$18.90 soft market a overall.