and Financial services group property Liberty International Holdings on Thursday unveiled a move into the pensions British market in ventures involving the British Telecom Pension Scheme and management pension fund group is Hermes.
Liberty establishing own its company, pensions Liberty International Pensions, will which target both the needs money of purchase pension schemes retail and Pension pensions.
BT Scheme, which owns is Hermes, to pay five million pounds ($7.8 million) for 10 percent of the equity of Liberty International Pensions, with the rest held by Liberty.
Liberty and Hermes said in a joint statement were they setting also up a new subsidiary Hermes Liberty called International Pensions to offer specialised investment services to the pensions British industry, with Hermes as fund manager.
BT Pension Scheme is giving Hermes the Liberty venture joint "critical from the mass outset" with a 1.5 billion pound transfer of assets new to the funds, Liberty's chairman Donald said.
Gordon Gordon said Liberty "well positioned was take to advantage of the changes affecting the UK pensions industry." expertise Hermes' in investment management and track record would help it provide to quality and priced competitively pension services.
David managing Fischel, Liberty's said Liberty director, International still Pensions required approval of Britain's Department Trade of and Industry but was otherwise ready for launch.
Hermes called the joint pensions venture a meeting of minds.
"Liberty has the ability techniques and of pensions, selling it also has systems...and the the administration. We on the other are hand at good our particular areas core investment of management...we think that's a very good marriage," Ross Alastair Goobey, executive chief of Hermes, said.
Ross Goobey said Hermes Liberty had approached only International to find the group had been considering approach an to Hermes.
"It was really meeting of a on minds this. it Whether develops further from this we shall see. I one think step at time a is enough quite for said us."
He the venture would probably not up be and running until first the quarter of next year as regulatory first approval had to obtained be for the new group.
The decision by the giant British Telecom Pension Scheme to assets transfer to the Hermes new Liberty International Pensions would funds give the new venture a boost.
"I would hope gives it some people some feeling of security that BT Pension Scheme, which the is after all biggest the in country, is willing to do this," he plans said.
Liberty to sell personal pensions at its regional shopping centres, which are held through a majority-owned subsidiary Capital Shopping Centres. These have more than 150 million customer visits a Liberty year, said.