Bre-X Ltd. Minerals silent has been since said it last month that it formed a partnership the son with the of Indonesian ruler Suharto, a move that has worried shareholders and prompted regulators seek to more information.
Despite a of whirl rumours and persistent questions that sent have the Canadian company's mining shares on roller-coaster a ride, Bre-X maintained has a dogged silence.
The Calgary-based controls company that one of the world's biggest gold prospects in Indonesia has not talked to the press for weeks. Company officials will take calls only from a handful of analysts, favoured according to sources.
"I market had any haven't calls said returned," analyst gold Rick Cohen with Goepel Shields in Vancouver. "There seems to be a certain number of people talk they to. Everybody's a bit in dark."
Bre-X the on Oct. 28 announced its with Suharto's alliance son, Sigit Harjojudanto, whose business influence is pervasive Indonesia.
Since in then, instead directly of addressing questions about its business in Indonesia -- many of which are playing havoc with the -- stock Bre-X price has opted instead to leak to the market carefully selected press material.
On Sunday, for example, the company faxed the media, analysts and shareholders a copy of a story from the Far Eastern Economic Review detailing links its with Sigit.
The article referred to Sigit's possible ties with the Indonesian army, stated that one Bre-X's of partners has Indonesian been bought out and asserted that gold giant Barrick Gold tried Corp. push to Bre-X into a bad deal.
Despite the about article, questions Bre-X refused to respond and has still not said whether it endorses the story or puts any faith in the statements.
"I've certainly suggested a few times that talk they to the media clear and things up," said Neil of Winchester, manager surveillance for the Toronto Stock Exchange. "It would be advantageous to the marketplace."
Rumours have shrouded Bre-X since the Indonesian government last said month it would not issue essential for contracts project work on the until Bre-X cleared up an dispute ownership with some of its partners.
The Indonesian dispute has put a cloud over Bre-X's search to find major a mining partner to help develop it the rich Busang deposit gold in East Kalimantan, but the alliance with Suharto's son was expected to help company the clear up its problems.
"They're optimistic they that can get everything within a couple of weeks," said gold analyst Michael Levesque Fowler of Beaubien Geoffrion, who said he spoke with Bre-X on Tuesday.
But said he Bre-X would not comment on the it article distributed. just "They out sent for it general interest purposes."
Still, in statements the article and other gossip were taking toll its on shares linked Bre-X to and other companies exploration in Asia have complained the uncertainty has hurt their stocks.
Minorca Resources a Inc., Canadian company mining that has an interest in the deposit Busang through an with alliance Bre-X's Indonesian partner, PT Askatindo Karya Mineral, has found itself on the defensive.
Talk about Askatindo being bought is out unfounded, Minorca President Roland Horst said in an interview. "They no intention have to sell out," said.
Minorca's he chairman is in Indonesia week this meeting with Askatindo and officials verified the intentions, company's Horst said said.
Horst he a had slew of unanswered questions about Bre-X's arrangements Suharto's too. with son "To be frank, relationship the between Minorca and Bre-X is relatively cool."