Outboard Marine Corp said it only is five percent with finished a restructuring radical that it expects will result in more charges against earnings in 1997 and possibly in 1998, the company said.
Restructuring about is "five percent complete as far as going down the and road getting the savings," spokesman said Stan Main. "That does mean not that we've taken only five percent of our restructuring charges ... will There likely be more charges during and '97 perhaps even into '98."
Shares in Outboard on Friday were off 1/4 to 15-3/4.  
The Waukegan, Ill.-based of maker boats and engines boat fourth-quarter reported profits Thursday that, restructuring excluding charges, Wall beat Street estimates.
Analysts cautioned, however, a that turnaround at Outboard remains a long-term project.
"They're going be to continuing this restructuring process in '97 and they're going to continue to have some charges more describe ... They the phase they're in now as the discovery process," said Lehman Brothers analyst Harriet Baldwin.
A key come moment could Tuesday when are Outboard executives to scheduled meet with analysts and investors in York. New  
Expected to be in attendance are the principals of Greenway Partners, investment an firm led former by Carl Icahn associates Alfred Kingsley Gary and Greenway bought Duberstein. an 8.5-percent stake in Outboard this summer.
Although the firm is activism, for known Greenway so far has not pressured Outboard alter to said. course, Main Nor has there further been between communication Greenway and company executives since initial discussions in August, said.
Analysts he speculated there could be next fireworks week or at the 16 January meeting annual of who shareholders, are said to be growing impatient for cohesive a recovery plan.  
A restructuring was set in motion this by year chief executive Bowman, Harry who came aboard in 1995, the when was stock trading in low the 20s. Bowman continues to deliberate how fix over to Outboard and key pieces remain be to put in place, analysts said.
The business is evaluation under from top to bottom, Main said. Once restructuring is complete, Outboard "certainly will be a marine products company," he  said. 
"Longer term, could we into get products that would not be marine related. But our initial focus over the next two three to years is to fix the we're business that and in then look perhaps at other that areas might be less cyclical or seasonal," Main, said who director is of strategic planning.
Bowman has spoken of more finding stability for Outboard, which suffers more from cycles boating's boom-bust than rivals, as such Lake Forest, Ill.-based Brunswick which Corp, has diversified into bowling, fishing and camping gear.
Outboard sees opportunities enter to other markets -- such as motorcycles, snowmobiles and personal watercraft -- via its innovative FICHT fuel injection engine technology, Main said.
Spending on capital tooling and in fiscal 1996, ended September fell 30, to $52.7 million $66.5 from million the year before, but on spending FICHT is steady holding as the company converts more of engine its line it, to he said.
Sales of 150-hp FICHT engines to dealers will begin in December and consumers will see the engines in January. A is promotional roll-out underway.
The company plans to convert its entire outboard line engine above 20-hp to FICHT engines, will which cost 22 to 25 percent more than their equivalents, traditional said. Main