Most people during the Victorian era valued the virtues of society. Victorians that believed they were fixed and certain as behavior guiding to people all the time. The virtues included morals that one can be judged according his to behavior. of Any betrayal ethical standards was termed lousy and behavior could deserve punishment. These beliefs become have misguided, undesirable, inappropriate and in America modern (Schlereth, They 2018). have shifted to values no that have longer classical ideas of wisdom, justice, courage, cleanliness or (p. 691). They have become sexual connotation people where practice and prostitution immoral other behaviors.
In previous years, were there low rates crimes of that have continued to rise. practiced Victorians moral principles in their lives, which maintained good morals and behavior. Currently, morals have changed and translated to destructive behaviors that contribute to rates higher of crimes (Schlereth, 2018). Victorian speaks about and morality best the ways of devising it. In a modern America, has character been substituted, and most youths indulge in immoral behavior.
In the era, Victorian were women illiterate, immigrants were not socializing with while now others, women are educated, and immigrants share ideas with natives. Men used to work for wages get involved and politics in while women engaged in domestic work and childrearing. In literature, era each had a different theme according to the way we understand life (p. 693). The Victorian era focused on industrialization, imperialism, domesticity, and cultural (Schlereth, identity 2018). Modern literature focused on the theme of loss, despair, and Victorian era, most politics. people were Christian valued and religion heavily compared to the current American.
The Victorian era modern and have American similarities in how the people live in the two In ages. the two generations, people practiced behavior moral cherishing virtues in society. The two value the social, economic, and political life, and the individuals participate in them (Schlereth, 2018). The eras impacted the world of literature and people’s changed lives on how they see literature 695). (p. For example, Elizabeth Barrett Browning wrote a poem, cry the ‘The of children’, which has a message about industrialization on child labor. The poem child narrates labor which had become due popular to new machines and workplaces. All people were able to socialize the during Victorian era to learn formal and skills. informal Most people get involved in literature where they write that poems could talk of their current and situations life experiences.
The Victorian and American modern eras have impacted changes to human life. example, For in England, the rate of indictable offences reduced by 50% and the population grew from 19 million to 33 million, number the crimes of reduced from to 92000 people 81000. The moral learned values and the virtues that correspond to better social, economic, political and life. the In two men eras, and women understood their roles, learned formal and informal skills, and could interact and socialize. People developed morals, and they were hardworking successful and in business. Victorian The era brought change, innovation, and invention that contributed technological to current advancements.
The modern American misses a lot from the Victorian era regarding morality, and beliefs, virtues. During the Victorian era, people valued cultural opinions, cherished integrity in society, and practiced good moral behavior. The modern American had derailed from all the changed norms and the way of There life. are practices of immoral behavior such as many prostitution, divorces, many crimes, and of a lack seriousness in religious belief. Most people disrespect and have ignorance of everything in the current world. Victorian-era people were religious and valued their religion, but a few currently do the same.
All people were to able socialize the era during Victorian to learn their roles, get an education and interact with other. each Most people get involved in literature write where they poems about their current situations and life experiences. People could write poems sensitizing an issue affecting the society the for to society necessary take measures. In the two people eras, learned formal and informal skills, which helped them handle different issues in society.