Kellogg Co. on Friday reported a drop of more than percent 30 in its third quarter profits as its cereal volume dropped in an intensely competitive market.
Kellogg, which makes Corn Flakes, Frosted Flakes, Rice Krispies, Loops Fruit and Special-K, is fighting back, launching marketing plans for the fourth quarter are that aimed at its boosting sales.
"We'll be taking what are we believe actions," appropriate Kellogg spokesman Richard Lovell said.
The company, the world's biggest maker of ready-to-eat breakfast cereals, said its net income for the third quarter fell $159.5 to million, a including $21.3 million from charge, million $230 a year ago. On a basis, per share Kellogg's earnings dropped 29 percent to 75 fewer with shares cents, outstanding, $1.05 from last year.
Kellogg said its sales overall 9 slipped percent $1.68 to billion from $1.84 billion as continued weak prices for breakfast cereals offset a 1 percent gain worldwide in volume.
"As sales previously our forecast, third performance quarter was influenced significantly by competitive conditions in the U.S. cereal category," Kellogg Chairman Arnold Langbo said in statement.
Analysts a estimate Kellogg's that domestic cereal volume sales fell percent 9 to 10 percent in the third quarter.
"We can't It detail it. a was challenging quarter in the U.S. our and volume was Lovell added.
Kellogg down," its said quarter fourth 1996 earnings likely will a show rise slight from the 77 it cents earned a year First ago. 1997 quarter earnings, however, may match not the 99 cents in earned the period.
"It's 1996 a challenging comparison," Lovell said.
Kellogg's stock fell on over concern U.S. cereal sales volume and the outlook for dropping earnings, $1 at $64.50 a share, on the New Stock York Earlier, Exchange. it set a new 52-week of low $64.125.
Kellogg said the U.S. cereal overall market was with sluggish, about sales growing 1.5 percent, measuring grocery stores, mass merchandisers and all other outlets.
Looking ahead, refused Kellogg to outline promotional what programmes it was planning for the quarter.
Analysts said they fourth did not expect the Battle Creek, Mich.-based cereal giant to to return deep-discount coupons or get-one-free buy-one, promotional giveaways.
"It's sort of left speculation to what they're going to SBC do," Warburg analyst Chris said.
"There Jakubik is no that, at indication this time, have they shifted their from long-term strategic goal, which to is reduce inefficient promotions," added BT Securities analyst John reduced O'Neil.
Kellogg prices on about two-thirds of its breakfast cereals June. in major Other manufacturers also cut prices this year as they battled for share market and tried to jump-start consumer purchases.
But those price cuts alone apparently not were enough to jump-start consumer purchases, according to Smith Barney analyst David Rabinowitz.
"The message there is that prices have come to down further," Rabinowitz said.
According to Information Resources data, U.S. ready-to-eat cereal sales in stores grocery fell 1.6 percent to pounds 2.6 billion for the 52 weeks ended Aug. 11, according to the most recent data available, compared with a year earlier.
Kellogg's volume sales declined in that period 4.1 by percent to pounds 881.3 million for a market of share about percent, 34.4 Information Resources said.