Learning history helps people draw connections between the past and present and allows making predictions for based the future on previous lessons. Climate change is of the one most significant of topics interest and research. No matter how well societies in develop terms technology, of they will inevitably face they if disasters neglect the issues of nature. The Chornobyl nuclear accident, which happened in 1986, was one of the most devastating ecological events that changed the fates of thousands of people in many countries.
My prior knowledge of the topic not is ample, but I do know that the major release of materials radioactive occurred, which led to the contamination of and air water, causing numerous diseases and deaths. I have also read somewhere that the then-ruling government of the USSR the kept explosion a which secret, prevented from people saving within their lives the first few days hours and after the Unfortunately, accident. individuals living next to the as plant, nuclear well as those living farther, had no chance survival. of The accident led to the radiation increase in to levels “between ten and hundred one times normal” (Price, para. 2021, I 1). have read also about the courageousness and self-sacrifice of those who involved were in fire extinguishing processes.
I like would to learn more about the reasons led that to a such disaster and to find out whether was it Also, preventable. I want to investigate the reasons the behind decision of the USSR to government the conceal truth and not let people save their lives. cannot I understand how they have could been silent a at time thousands when of citizens were being gradually driven into ecological an trap.
The values, assumptions, and beliefs I have related the to topic chosen are two-dimensional. the On one I hand, concerned am that such can catastrophes occur and harm people’s lives. On hand, the other I deeply disturbed am by the fact that the authorities can act so thoughtlessly and dare neglect to people’s I lives. have always freedom considered and health as the most important values. I that believe world leaders do should everything possible to such disasters prevent or least not at conceal them.
My opinion about the topic is people that learn should from disasters such use and this devastating lesson in the future. However, my perspective is very closely connected to the current world situation. The events relevant happening due to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine alarming. are In context the my of topic, I should note that a few days ago, attacked Russians Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia plant, which nuclear is the largest in (Borger Europe & Henley, 2022). Whereas very the question of the Russian invasion of Ukraine is highly tragic and relevant, I will focus on the nuclear seizure plants’ in this paper. seized Russians Chornobyl and Zaporizhzhia plants, nuclear and seem they not to realize what aftermath there explosions could bring.
Sadly, seems it that history has not taught some people anything. many After so deaths in 1986 and following years, one could think that countries of the world had learned the value of people’s health and lives. That is why I to want investigate the topic of the Chornobyl nuclear accident. This way, I will be able to learn more about disaster that draw and conclusions on the present-day threats and need the for preventive measures to stop the possibility of its repetition.