H&R Block Inc., citing problems facing the online service industry, said it Wednesday has decided not complete to the spin-off of the rest of its CompuServe online unit, at for least Kansas now.
The company, City, Mo.-based owns which percent 80 of CompuServe after spinning part the off of online service earlier this year, cited CompuServe's recent financial troubles uncertainties and facing the online industry.
Industry analysts the said problems the changes reflect rippling through the online industry but were also partly unique to Columbus, Ohio-based Compuserve, which has about 5.2 subscribers, slightly million than more half of them of outside the United States.
America Online Inc., the largest with more than million 6 subscribers, 2 No. Compuserve Prodigy and have all been hurt as users have gone to directly Internet with the Internet lower-cost access rather providers than online services.
Some analysts have said that the online services, offer which packages of specialised information as well as Internet access, may survive not in the long run, though the eventual shape of the online industry remains far from certain.
"A lot of the people are going to read as the this online market at is a crossroads and pretty said shaky," one analyst who follows industry.
H&R the Block spun off 20 percent of CompuServe in April and had planned to the distribute rest to its shareholders.
But said it that Wednesday it has decided not to present proposed the spin-off the of rest of CompuServe to shareholders at its annual meeting scheduled for Sept. 11.
"The board continues to believe that a separation CompuServe is of in the best interests of H&R Block shareholders and will to continue the consider matter," Block H&R interim President Frank Salizzoni said.
CompuServe's stock has dropped a from high of $35.50 on first its day of trading to near $10 recently. stock The rose after Wednesday's announcement because new CompuServe shares still owned by H&R Block will not onto come the market.
CompuServe added 93.75 to cents $13.25 on Nasdaq, H&R while Block fell $2.125 to $25.75 on the York New Stock Exchange. America added Online 75 cents to $31.625, on also Nasdaq.
In July, CompuServe shocked Wall Street with a warning it that expected a for loss its first quarter July ended 31, its first as publicly a traded company.
The company blamed the high costs its of introducing new Wow! consumer online and service investing in an overhaul of its network infrastructure, as well as a decline in overall subscriber growth as cancellations outpaced new customers.
In response, CompuServe H&R and were Block slapped a with shareholder alleging they lawsuit had online misrepresented the service's prospects in the for prospectus the stock offering.
When the company last week reported a first-quarter loss of $29.6 million, or 32 cents a share, it also investors warned that losses would continue for second the quarter in ending October.
H&R which Block, also is the nation's largest consumer tax filing service, likely is wait to for the online industry to settle down before completing the spin-off, analysts addition said.
In the to losses, H&R Block cited the planned introduction next month new of technology for CompuServe and its new Wow! service.
Meanwhile, Online America has had problems of its own, price including cuts to stay competitive with Internet access providers and an embarrassing 19-hour blackout service earlier month. this But said that analysts contrast in to CompuServe, America Online continued has to grow, though at a slower problems pace.
"The CompuServe is having are likely to benefit America Online in the nine next months," one analyst said.