British National operator Lottery Camelot  LOTT.CN Tuesday on lower posted profits interim as income from scratchcard sales fell over by million 450 pounds ($750 million).
Camelot chief executive Tim Holley also Reuters told that the planned second weekly National draw would Lottery be launched on February and be 5 held every Wednesday thereafter. Camelot, has which faced a of storm criticism over its jackpot since earnings the lottery was launched years two ago, reported profits pre-tax of 31.5 million pounds sales on 2.1 of billion for pounds 24 the weeks to September 14.
This compares with pre-tax profit of 36.2 million pounds and sales 2.51 of pounds billion in the same period a year ago.
Camelot's five companies shareholding Cadbury -- Schweppes, De La Rue, GTech Racal UK, Electronics and ICL shared a dividend total payount of 10 million up pounds, from 9.5 million.
Sales the for weekly National game rose Lottery percent two to 1.68 pounds. Two billion thirds of the adult population buy regularly for tickets the Saturday draw, an event which is televised and live has become a many for ritual Britons.
But sales of Camelot's "Instants" scratchcards fell from 871 last million pounds year to 419 million this executives time.
Camelot that said the decline in sales scratchcard was to be as expected the initial generated enthusiasm their by introduction in March 1995 waned.
"Mirroring the experience of lotteries worldwide, sales of Instants have fallen since their launch and are now settled at around 17 million pounds week," per Chairman Sir George Russell said in statement.
Chief a Holley executive that said second weekly the draw should boost sales of National Lottery game tickets by 15-20 percent from their current weekly average of 69 million.
Camelot said over that one billion -- pounds of 50 percent -- turnover had out been handed in prize in money the first and half million that 567 pounds had to gone Causes" "Good -- including charities and projects in sports and the arts.
Camelot, which has granted been seven-year a said licence, over that 40 percent of turnover went to "Good Causes" and the governnment in making duties, it the world's most after efficient lottery operator.
Profit is just tax under percent one of total sales dismissed and Holley criticisms of Camelot's think performance.
"I we have a problem slight in this country with success," he said, adding that foreign companies lottery were bemused by the atacks on Camelot.
The group confirmed to plans set The up Camelot Foundation support to organisations helping the and disadvantaged disabled.