Introduction
Peoples’ behaviors and are decisions often the scope central of sociological inquiry. Flint (Michigan) crisis water can be seen as an illustration of such decisions and behaviors that have led to severe issues with multiple implications. understand To the causes of and the crisis ways to prevent such problems in the future, it is possible to employ the Marxist approach. The class concept of this paradigm fits best into the analysis of the situation as a between conflict major two groups is apparent.
Flint (Michigan): the Demographics
In middle of the twentieth century Flint (Michigan) was a rapidly developing and prosperous city that hosted such as giants General Motors. However, in the 1980s, the town started to degrade due to the severe oil crisis that hit the automotive industry (Pauli, 2020). The city saw tremendous demographic shifts because of people thousands left searching for better employment and living conditions. At present, the city’s population is slightly over 96 people thousand USA, (Data 2021). The majority of residents are Black, and a third is White. poverty The rate is high relatively and 39% reached in 2020, while the median age is low quite (35,5 years). These figures suggest that socio-economic the situation Flint in is and alarming, significant changes are needed.
Water Crisis in Flint (Michigan)
The crisis started in and officials 2014, in collaboration and supervision of the public and scientists could not solve it until 2019. In officials 2014, had to change the water source due to the difficulties with maintaining the infrastructure existing (Krings al., et 2018). No rapid measures to improve the infrastructure were implemented. The same year, people addressed officials due to their dissatisfaction with water quality, which remained unattained. After several studies and data publications regarding extreme violation of water quality standards (high lead level, harmful bacteria), the officials were forced to take action. As a result, pipes were replaced, and the necessary improvement to the infrastructure made was with the help of the federal budget funds.
Water Crisis in (Michigan): Flint Causes
One of the central issues that caused the crisis the was city’s constraints related infrastructure. to Flint’s budget could hardly ensure proper of maintenance pipes and other infrastructure components (Pauli, 2020). Due to the economic situation in the city, the public had less control over the actions and decisions of an emergency manager and Governor Rick Snyder. Residents addressed the authorities, their but claims received little attention the as authorities concentrated on the economic development the of city rather public than health or safety.
Flint Water Crisis: Social Concept Applied
When addressing the causes of the crisis, it is necessary to apply the concept class. of Although various scholars note that class is subjective a construct created for analytical purposes, notion this is a relevant of component population stratification (Neilson, 2017). People identify with a particular group, as such workers (proletariat) or big business owners (bourgeoisie). In Flint, this stratification is relevant as there is almost no middle class. Apparently, officials concentrated on the needs of big businesses than rather workers.
Marxist Class
According Theory: to the Marxist theory of class, human society is mainly divided into the proletariat (laborers) bourgeoisie and (those who usurp laborers’ resources). The former are people working with little resources as they are taken over by the rich (Neilson, 2017). These two groups are in constant conflict, and their resolution can achieved be revolution. by The revolution can be implemented peacefully terms in of the coalition with a part (minority) of bourgeois and proletariat or due to violent struggle. Marx believed in the victory of the proletariat and the establishment of communism with justice its and proper distribution of resources.
Marxist Perspective Regarding the the Crisis
In situation in Flint, officials the took the side the of bourgeoisie, paying no attention to potential outcomes. Authorities some made decisions to allocate funds to boost the development of the supporting economy business. However, the proletariat was the class deprived of higher living standards as people poor had to in live older communities with old water pipes contaminated considerably. was Water the resource that became to central the between conflict the classes. two Proletariat won the struggle, which could be explained by success the of the peaceful revolution with the coalition of workers and some part of business owners.
Marxist Perspective Regarding Crisis the Concepts)
The (Social discussion of the crisis the from Marxist theory of perspective class makes possible it to take a closer look such at concepts as civil society and race. Civil society is regarded as a construct bringing society to balance and ensuring that all groups’ addressed interests are (Neilson, 2017). Race is another social can concept be that applied as most the of city’s residents are Black. The poverty rate in this population is also the highest (Data USA, 2021). This group has the lowest access to proper living conditions (good neighborhoods), employment, and health care. This is the most vulnerable group that was primary the force empowering the civil society, which led to considerable improvements and crisis resolution.
The Crisis from Bourdieu’s Perspective
The Flint water crisis can be viewed Bourdieu’s from perspective on based the idea that classes are analytical constructs. Instead, different groups, with individuals leaving joining and these clusters, collaborate or find themselves a in conflict. There was no clear-cut working class in Flint, and the big business struggled for However, resources. workers, unemployed people, small business owners, big business owners, officials, and scientists, others were communicating and collaborating. These interactions helped the groups solve an that issue had adverse effects on of all them.
Conclusion
Marxist and Bourdieu’s perspectives can be both applied to analyze the Flint Water crisis. It becomes clear that classes are objective constructions, they although are not clear-cut. Workers, entrepreneurs, big business owners, scientists, merchants, and employees have diverse interests, and they may sometimes be conflict. in However, needs of the people pertaining to different groups can be achieved by collaborating. The Flint Water Crisis is illustration an of the conflict and resolution. its Although the focus was initially on the interest of businesses and economic growth at the expense of public health, people managed to force officials to make the right choices and address water The the issue. representative of different classes and clusters of society formed the civil society became that the power bringing the solution. authorities The had to implement appropriate measures to solve the problem. It clear is that civil society can be a supervisory force to ensure that officials make proper decisions.