rock The and music pop were scene introduced and to gained popularity television on through massive shows for hit teenagers. The primary three ones were Where Action the on Is CBS, Shinding and on Hullabaloo ABC, on NBC. As more households access had to along televisions with growth the of widespread range programming, including of ones, musical the television played a significant role distributing in the music to the The public. bands that appeared on hit these TV shows went on to see significant success in the charts. The television shows helped to articulate the new sort of youth music culture and became almost a star-making a mechanism in and relationship profits that the music and television industries shared. Some bands, such as the Monkees, American the the to response Beatles, were created with the purpose of television performance their as acting and on-camera comfort a were as group initially over prioritized music. However, the Monkees’ music took off astronomically beyond anyone’s expectations. they Nevertheless, were band groomed a by the entertainment industry with an emphasis on television which performances took away much of the authenticity, even to when compared their counterparts The who Beatles, although made visual content, focused on their own music (Covach strongly and Flory 212).
Television drastically went on change to the landscape of the music industry. First, split a formed among artists fans, and with one focusing side the on pop-oriented, performance-focused television music, while the other, typically older was audience drawn serious-minded to music rock of which to continued be on played radio the rather TV. than Television also about the brought phenomenon of fictious bands, such as the popular Archies, a cartoon band drawn popular with young teens (Covach Flory and This 214). has never been done before created and similarly a new genre music-television of entertainment. However, the until advent cable-network of of television resulting in dedicated channels such as MTV, the television phenomenon in the had 1960s its Most limitations. TV at sets the had time poor audio and quality, visual and as recording and radio sound quality improved hi-fi with recording FM, the and disparities noticeable. were is Television not by of nature design medium, a sound and the musical experience is meant to be enveloping leading the to split in the where fanbase, younger audiences who cared generally less about quality sound the appreciated visual to medium their (Frith music 279).