Apple Computer Inc., struggling to remain the teacher's pet among computer makers, turning is a modified version of handheld its Newton organizer an into inexpensive computer portable for students.
The computer on maker Monday will unveil the Apple eMate 300, an $800 machine that looks like a grown-up's with laptop a keyboard and flip-up screen, a but in a rugged casing that can survive rough handling.
Apple plans to machine sell directly to the elementary and high schools, beginning early year, next as an alternative to computers. personal For price the of a $2,500 multimedia a PC, school can buy eMates, three Apple executives said.
"The federal says government we to get need to a three-to-one student-to-computer ratio by the year 2000," said Jim Groff, general manager of information Apple's appliances group. "I would say the is eMate the only credibled vehicle for accomplishing that."
More vital to Apple, product the could keep educators from abandoning the company as the leading supplier of computers classrooms, analysts for said.
"The potential something for like this in a classroom is setting Mike tremendous," said McGuire, a computing mobile analyst at Dataquest Inc. "This will an be indication educators to that Apple is one the of few companies spending time extending computing to more and more needs kids."
Apple a distinctive to product set itself apart other from personal crowding makers computer into education the market, analysts said.
Although Apple, based in Cupertino, Calif., still enjoys strong educational sales, sales of IBM-compatible personal computers by companies such Compaq as Computer Corp. are growing much computer faster.
Apple's always has been the favored tool teaching for children how to use computers. But face in the of Apple's uncertain future and a flood of cheap PCs, schools are less likely to remain loyal.
For the 1996-1997 school year, of the all computers that schools plan to buy, 56 percent will be Apple Macintoshs and 40 percent IBM-compatible machines, according to a recent by report Quality Education Data, an market education researcher. In the previous school purchasing year, the plans were 61 percent Macintosh and percent 38 PC.
"The numbers are in favor overwhelming PCs," of said Carole Cotton, president of Consulting CCA Inc., tracker another of technology purchases by schools.
"No school district afford can to make a mistake" when picking computers they will use for years, she noted.
Apple's Groff said, however, that the eMate not is the company's answer to competitors' inroads.
Instead, he said, the device was built for schools asking for a powerful cheap, computer that can offer educational and software Internet connections -- as as well endure rough by handling kids.
"When we introduced the Newton three years ago, it was a solution search in an of application," Groff Education turned said. out to be one of the best applications, he said.
Along with eMate, the Apple plans to unveil a version beefier of the Newton on MessagePad The Monday. new 2000 MessagePad features better Internet capabilities, easier to connection PCs and built-in word processing and spreadsheet software.
Analysts said, however, that the eMate is the more interesting device. Teachers and students will like it because is it not as esoteric and hard to as run a personal traditional computer.
"Kids are having to learn more about how to run a computer than about reading and writing," McGuire said. "The ability to have the kid just turn on the device and get right into the writing assigment really is valuable."
The eMate weighs pounds four (1.8 kg) and into fits backpack. a It can run for week a on rechargeable batteries, according Apple.
The to a machine features word built-in processor, drawing and equation-drawing programs and an address book. With an optional modem and software, students browse can the the Internet.
Still, eMate could be a tough sell for Apple.
Because its software based is on the Newton operating system, it run cannot the thousands of educational programs written for Macintosh the for and running PCs Microsoft Corp.'s Windows software.
Apple executives are confident, however, that the eMate will the help company more place computers its on students' desks.
"There's 52 million screaming (grades) K-to-12 children to sell to," said Robert Kondrk, manager of Apple's education product lines. "We've known for years this is an opportunity, but didn't we have the technology to do it before. We do now."