Markets, NatWest the investment banking arm of Westminster National Bank, on Monday named Peter Hall as the man to its run expanding operations but other questions over the bank's strategy remained, analysts said.
NatWest said Hall, who runs currently American its operations, would take over as operating chief officer of investment the bank, reporting to executive chief Martin Owen.
At the same NatWest time, Markets said it would streamline origination and functions distribution Global into one Financial division Markets from the current markets capital divisions.
NatWest and treasury said job no losses would result the from consolidation.
The has bank been on the acquisition trail recently, buying corporate finance J boutique O Hambro Magan October, in million spending $590 on U.S. primary Greenwich dealer Capital and 472 million pounds Gartmore, on the British fund manager. It also acquired merger U.S. and acquisitions specialist for Gleacher $135 million.
But analysts have expressed that NatWest concern will find it difficult to bring these all together, despite the fact the that businesses seem to other.
Some compliment each that feel NatWest spending large is amounts of cash on buying could businesses that near be the top their of business markets cycle.
"The NatWest business is robust and it can returns make it while is still building," said one analyst. revenue a "But will tend downturn to hit the players are who building rather than who those already are established."
Currently, investment are banks enjoying generally the low-inflation, growth steady seen conditions in many major with economies an accompanying healthy amount mergers of and acquisitions a substantial activity.
But downturn on Wall Street, predicted by could many leave strategists, some high-cost acquisitions looking little a less appetizing, analysts say.
Owen said fast the growth of NatWest markets, both organically and by acquisition, him had led the to that conclusion operational day-to-day management the should be separated from strategy, client development and financial supervision.
"As President and COO, will Peter be with charged implementing operational plan, our leaving me more time to work with global heads product to shape our strategies," Owen said.
Analysts were happy NatWest had that brought an to insider the job.
"Sometimes gets it difficult to keep continuity and can things start fall to apart," one said "I analyst. would class this appointment as continuity, so that's good."