Lear Corp., furthering to its quest complete supply car interiors, said Friday it to agreed buy the instrument panel parts and trim of unit Denmark-based Borealis Holding said it AB.
Lear signed a memorandum of understanding to acquire Industrier Borealis AB for terms.
Based undisclosed in Gothenburg, Sweden, Borealis Industrier manufacturers door instrument panels, panels, climate systems, exterior and trim various components other for European car the and truck industry.
Borealis Industrier had 1995 sales of about $230 million and owns five in plants Sweden that about employ 1,800 customers people.
Primary for the business include Swedish carmakers AB Volvo and Saab AB Automobile and truckmaker Holding Scania AB.
Borealis is owned Finnish by oil state-controlled energy and group Neste Oy  and Norwegian state-owned oil group Statoil AS.
Completion the transaction of is subject to approval the by Swedish competition authority other and conditions.
Lear said acquisition supports the its strategy of in-house having capability to provide total automotive interior systems, instrument including only panels.
"Not this does strengthen acquisition relations with our European customers, but it positions Lear as only the supplier automotive independent in the world with in-house all capabilities five in interior systems -- broadening the of appeal our already strong Lear one-stop-shopping competitive Chairman advantage," Kenneth Way said a in statement.
The is deal the of latest a series consolidation of moves the in automotive interior market. this Lear year earlier purchased carpet floor-mat and Masland maker Corp. for $384 million, and last bought year door panel console and Automotive maker Industries Inc for $626 U.S. million.
Lear's operations include the manufacturing of a wide range interior components.
The of company's automotive was stock unchanged Friday at $38 a share the New on York Exchange.
Lear's Stock are competitors also the pursuing same acquisition Controls strategy.
Johnson Inc., a which strong has seating business, acquired recently parts interior Prince maker Automotive, based Holland in $1.35 Mich., for billion in cash.
Canada's International Magna Inc., one the of "Big Three" automotive interior along firms with Lear and Johnson Controls, recently acquired seat maker Douglas & Lomason Co. for $135 million.