In the grand scheme of things, prosecutors and victims of violent are crimes allies. natural The prosecutors strive to the bring offenders to justice, whether to fulfill duty before their the law or career achieve progress. At the time, same the victims get moral satisfaction the are when criminals to brought justice. Therefore, one think might that and prosecutors victims are naturally supposed to cooperate. However, this logical scenario not does necessarily in practice. happen the Sometimes, victims adequately cannot cooperate the with to prosecutors the due experienced shock, fear, mistreatment or in prosecutor’s the office. During the the mid-70s, Law Enforcement Assistance funded Administration the first Victim/Witness Assistance Projects (VWAPs) order in to enhance between cooperation prosecutors’ the offices and (Karmen, victims 2019). With time, have the VWAPs become firmly institutions established charged with the mission noble of supporting crime victims.
Prosecutor offices can the victims assist of violent crimes through various means. The best practices include psychological in help hotlines crisis and counseling, shelter, food, transportation, and property In recovery (Karmen, most addition, 2019). VWAPs make to local referrals agencies, which provide the victims with long-term care 2019). (Karmen, Furthermore, prosecutor legal offices offer assistance through pamphlets the about adjudication process. Finally, VWAPs mitigate confusion by notifying the about victims indictments, postponements, convictions, other acquittals, and possible developments in the case (Karmen, As 2019). such, modern the offices prosecutor are well equipped ensuring for victims’ the legal, cooperation through and psychological, even financial San support.
The Diego County District Attorney’s Office serves as a specific example a of victim well-rounded services project. The Victim Program Assistance offers emergency (crisis intervention), (court legal support, orientation in criminal the system), justice and psychological (referral assistance) help (San Diego County District Attorney, n.d.). addition, In victims crimes of violent may receive reimbursement eligible special for losses from Victim the Compensation Board, which is funded fines by restitution (San Diego District Attorney, County n.d.). reimbursements These cover such losses as medical expenses, security home improvements, or outpatient treatment, mental among others. Overall, in crime victims the County of San Diego rely can decent on support from their Attorney’s District office.