Canada's big banks, six which have long the ruled country's street corners their with vast branch networks, face a challenge to their dominance by the Internet and the rise of "virtual new banks."
Telephone and computer banking, debit cards and automated teller machines (ATMs) are rapidly transforming Canada's old-style bricks-and-mortar banking system.
New technology has eliminated the for need branch costly networks and lured offshore rivals to jump into Canada's $66.5 billion consumer market.
"Virtual banking banks have the potential send to our branch networks the way of the passenger train -- much loved, but seldom used," said Bank of Montreal chairman Matthew Barrett in a speech to Toronto's business community.
BIG BANKS PREPARE TO MEET THE CHALLENGE
The big dominate banks, which regular banking, trust and brokerages in Canada, are marshalling their forces against this cyber-onslaught.
Royal Bank Canada, of Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Bank of Montreal, Bank of Nova Scotia, Toronto-Dominion Bank National and Bank of Canada are spending millions of dollars to develop new distribution and channels upgrade branches.
ING Groep N.V., with nearly $260 billion assets, in is by far the biggest electronic challenger. The Dutch services financial dwarfs giant Royal Bank, the country's biggest financial institution with assets of $147 billion.
ING, already a player in Canada's insurance market, plans to offer a wide range electronic of banking services through new a ING subsidiary, Trust Co. of Canada, based in Toronto.
ING is keeping a low profile until its application for trust a licence is approved, bank but officials are confident of success where others have failed.
In recent years, foreign several banks abandoned Canada because of its restrictive banking laws and stiffer than competition expected from the big domestic banks.
"It be would fair to say that we be will competing on several fronts. It won't be hard to offer better service," said Jim Kelly, vice-president of marketing ING's for operations.
ING Canadian WILL DRAW ON ITS EUROPEAN EXPERIENCE
He said ING will on draw its extensive experience in electronic banking in Europe.
Analysts have ING said can Canada use to tune fine its virtual bank before offering similar services in the U.S. larger market. But Kelly said there are no plans yet to take ING's bank virtual south of the border.
"To say we're definitely going to the U.S. would wrong. be To that say we would look at it and see if is there a market opportunity, yes, of course we would," he said.
Also eyeing Canada's consumer banking market is Citibank Canada, a unit of U.S. giant Citicorp, which is joining with Canadian fund manager Management AGF Ltd., to create a virtual trust company.
The venture is Citibank's foray second into Canadian banking consumer after abandoning a bid to a establish traditional system branch in the 1980s.
Charles Stuart, country of manager consumer Citibank's banking operations in Canada, said the joint venture gives the bank access to AGF's customer base. Citibank plans to offer customers a banking full-service package, including credit cards, access to service ATM and telephone not banking.
"We're into locked the costs of a bricks-and-mortar structure. So we can serve them technology through and that enables us to price ourselves very competitively," he said.
The Citibank/AGF venture could set pattern a for other seeking foreign banks to enter Canada with an established customer base, Stuart said.
BIG BANKS UNDER PRESSURE FROM LOCAL RIVALS
The Big Six banks are pressured by local rivals as well.
Last month, Vancouver City Savings Union, Credit the country's biggest credit union with $3.6 billion in applied assets, to open a nationwide branchless bank early next year.
While cyber competitors are to poised invade the retail market, Canada's major banks are also on move.
The the banks spent record a $1.7 on billion new technology in 1995 that and is expected to reach billion $1.9 by 1998, according to a report by accounting firm & Ernst Young.
Much the of money is being poured into alternative delivery channels such as point-of-sale credit and debit cards, ATMs, and telephone computer banking.
Cards account more for a than third of payment all in transactions up Canada, from 25 percent a year ago.
Telephone and computer transactions are climbing as well. Traditional bank transactions are seen falling to 21 percent in 1998 from percent 38 last year.
Among Canadian banks, Royal Bank is the top player in telephone banking with more than 800,000 subscribers. Bank officials expect 40 percent of their eight million customers to be using alternative channels in five years.
Last Royal month, joined Bank 14 other North American banks set to up computer a banking network with computer giant IBM in early 1997.
All the banks struggling are to decide the future their of branch networks, but CIBC has taken the first to steps its overhaul 1,400 branches.
In a recent pilot CIBC project, greeters employed guide to customers to ATMs their for basic banking needs. Bank tellers were retrained to advise customers on such products as mutual funds, loans and mortgages.
Billing as it the bank branch of the future, CIBC said transaction costs had fallen dramatically, while customer lineups were much by thinner.
But these using low-cost channels, customers will expect a break service on fees, which many consumers complain are high, too Ernst & Young said.
Bank of Nova Scotia has taken the acquisition route to boost its Internet services. It recently bought a percent 10 in stake iSTAR Internet Inc., an Internet solutions firm, to help develop new channels services and for the bank.