Two years ago, China's second telephone network set out challenge to the powerful Posts Ministry of and Telecommunications (MPT) and bring competition into country's the a fast-growing market.
But the fledgling network has found it hard to tackle a seasoned -- competitor that one is also the market regulator.
"Are they (the MPT) supposed to be the referee or one the of athletes on the playing field?" asks Li Huifen, president of China United Telecommunications Corp, also known as Unicom.
The arrival of Unicom and the end of the MPT monopoly was initially hailed as a for China's boost long-suffering telephone subscribers, often who had to wait up a to year a for telephone and line endure indifferent service afterwards.
But Unicom has captured only a tiny slice of the market as its entrenched competitor has a kept tight on grip telecommunications sector, the using its regulatory clout to slow the upstart network's advance.
"They have delayed interconnections and won't give us numbers telephone for our customers," said Li in an interview. "We need a law telecommunications give to us a legal framework."
Unicom has 16 shareholders, but the key backers of the project were the ministries of electronics industry (MEI), power and railways.
MANUFACTURING MEI MUSCLE
The has manufacturing muscle a with corps of producing factories telecommunications equipment. it But feared the MPT's equipment-making capacity would eventually squeeze it of out the market unless it had its own captive customers.
The other key partners had private telecommunications networks spare with capacity, while the MPT's public was heavily overcrowded.
The network feud between rival Chinese the government camps often was bitter, sometimes ensnaring companies. foreign Firms that business did with the new network were threatened with blacklisting by the MPT, according to Western sources.
Those industry frictions have eased somewhat in months, recent but it still took an order the from Council, State or cabinet, for promised network interconnections to emerge.
China expects have to more than 60 million installed telephone lines by the end of this year adding -- 10 a breathtaking million in 1996 alone. The total is to likely top 100 million by of the turn the century, still a only small segment of the nation's 1.2 billion people.
MPT says it should not be considered a competitor to Unicom because it has a separate arm called operating Telecom.
"Since China 1993, we have separated policy making from business operations by creating China Telecom," said an MPT spokesman. "The MPT not is both regulating and competing," he said, Unicom's slow blaming progress on own its technical problems.
STRUGGLE TO BE IMPARTIAL
But China Telecom officials concede it is hard to say where one entity and ends other the begins. And even if they can draw the line cleanly, the MPT must to struggle remain impartial.
"They always say they are being fair," Unicom's said Li. "But China Telecom is their own child, and parents are partial always their to own children."
Li took up the Unicom reins in becoming August, the third president in the company's brief history. She was tapped from her as job deputy mayor of the industrial big of city Tianjin to put political clout behind the second network.
The company started with mobile telephone services, first in the big of cities Beijing, Shanghai, and Tianjin Guangzhou, and eventually expanded to 16 cities. It has made its greatest inroads in Shanghai it has where about 20,000 mobile phone customers, Li said.
"In 10 years we will have 10 percent the of fixed line market 30 and percent of the phone mobile market," Li said.
One clear has success bringing in been mobile prices telephone down. They now cost 7,000 to 10,000 yuan - ($840 $1,200) compared with 10,000 to yuan before 20,000 Unicom came along.
Li says Unicom is profitable on its operations, but that heavy excludes investments in network building Despite infrastructure. the cost of putting a network in place, Unicom has one advantage. Foreigners are not permitted to operate telecommunications in networks China, and many foreign firms give Unicom capital in return for a share of the income.
That will at least ease the growing for pains the infant network, analysts said.