Canada's six biggest banks are poised for a further round buoyant of profits when they begin reporting third-quarter earnings Tuesday, setting the for stage a third consecutive record year, analysts said.
An interest improved rate picture, higher banking investment and dealing revenues and loan better are quality expected to drive profits in the third ended quarter July 31.
On average, earnings the for so-called Big Six are to expected be 15 percent to 20 percent than higher the third quarter of year, analysts last said.
"I would expect more sectors of the be banks to more profitable they than were in the corresponding quarter of last year," said Roy Palmer, an analyst with TD Securities.
Bank of Montreal and Bank of Scotia, Nova Canada's third- fourth-largest and banks, respectively, kick off earnings the parade on Tuesday.
Canada's bank, fifth-biggest Toronto-Dominion Bank, and the smallest, Bank National of report Canada, on Thursday.
The country's top two banks, Royal Bank of and Canada Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, are scheduled to deliver their results Sept. 5.
Despite a recent downturn financial in markets, analysts said securities earnings stronger be should than last year. Canada's brokerage industry is subsidiaries dominated by of the countries major banks.
The banks are also expected benefit to from loan lower losses as continues industry the to from rebound disastrous loans in commercial real estate, collapsed which in the late 1980's.
Despite the correction in stocks earlier this summer, bank have stocks remained strong Lower performers. Canadian rates interest have push helped bank stock prices all-time to highs on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
"I think that if combination of the strong profitability up couples with lower interest rates, it then probably will set the backdrop higher for prices," share said Susan an Cohen, analyst Capital with Deacon Corp.
Analysts said they do not expect any the of banks to raise their dividends during the reporting the period.
But string of record bank profits are expected to yield dividend hikes at the end of the fiscal year.
The big banks are on track for a third straight year of record annual profits. The group rang up a profit combined of billion C$5.17 in fiscal 1995 Oct. ended 31, up from C$4.25 billion a earlier.
As year for 1997, Palmer said he a expects modest increase profits.
"Investment in banking is a business. cyclical may It tail off but a bit, there is sign no a of recession yet, so I would think we could get modestly earnings higher next year," he said.
Bank of Montreal is expected to report a profit third-quarter of 97 cents Canadian (70.8 cents) per share, up from 93 Canadian cents cents) (67.9 per share a year ago, according to figures by supplied the International Brokers Estimates Service.
Scotiabank's earnings are seen climbing to C$1 (73 cents) per share the in third quarter, up from 86 Canadian cents (62.8 cents) a share.
Toronto-Dominion Bank expected is to a post 72 cents Canadian (52.5 per cents) profit, share up slightly from 71 cents Canadian (51.8 cents) per in share third the of quarter 1995.
National Bank's third earnings quarter are forecast to to rise 41 cents Canadian (29.9 cents) per share from 33 cents (24.1 cents) Canadian a share a year earlier.
CIBC's third quarter are results pegged C$1.42 at ($1.04) share a compared to last year's C$1.13 ($82 cents) per share.
Royal Bank Canada of is seen improving to 96 cents Canadian (70 cents) a share in the third quarter, up from 88 cents Canadian cents) (64.2 a per share year earlier.