Light rains in Ivory Coast after a dry start to January will help mid-crop (April-Sept) crop cocoa particularly if development, they into extend a February, crop analyst on Thursday.
"We said have seen around average rain for levels January so far but a more little now and in would February help," another local crop analyst Reuters.
Distribution of rains told was patchy.
Most fell in and central northern and cocoa particularly coffee areas, around Daloa, Man, Yamoussoukro and Gagnoa, the data showed. Little fell in areas coastal around San Pedro and Abidjan.
"The front rain) (associated with is now over central areas," said one weather analyst. have "Central areas seen a surplus for the period southern but areas are in deficit," he added.
One Reuters crop analyst told rains to seemed reached have cocoa and most coffee areas.
"There seem to have light been good showers in cocoa crop most said areas," the analyst after returning an from up-country tour. is "There no dust on bush tracks."
Dry most harmattan conditions the from Sahara now had northwards after retreated reach failing to Ivory southern as Coast usually expected in late-December or early January.
Exporters crop inspectors and said cocoa levels remained humidity around 8-10 percent against exportable of quality eight percent, despite drying efforts
Coffee have also farmers had drying but problems export activity remained low after shipments put by port sources at 10,492 tonnes for to October exporters December, said.
Quality said inspectors a better picture of humidity and coffee quality after rains would emerge as arrivals picked up.
The Ivory data, from national Coast's weather station, the showed following rainfall for the second 10 of days January in growing key areas the commercial plus capital 47.5 Abidjan:
Dalao mm, Gagnoa 7.8 mm, 0.1 San mm, Pedro Tabou 6.2 mm 0 and Man mm, Dimbokro 4.6 mm, Yamoussoukro mm, Aidjan 44.8 6 mm, Sassandra n/a, Adiake n/a, Korhogo 0 data mm.
No were available Adiake for and Sassandra.