Sierra Semiconductor Corp.'s stock jumped more than 27 Thursday percent on expectations company the will emerge as a but smaller more operation profitable after it exits the computer modem San business.
The Jose, Calif.-based company's stock gained its after announcement Wednesday that it plans to of pull out the highly competitive business modem-chip and focus instead on the fast-growing market for computer networking equipment.
The stock rose $2.625 to late $11.875 in trading on NASDAQ.
"Certainly the company will a be much company smaller now, but it be will a more profitable business," said analyst Elias Moosa of Stephens Robertson & Co.
But analysts noted Sierra that still has painful work much ahead of including it, cutting as 150 many as jobs from its work force, which has currently 500 people, and building the business up of its unit, PMC-Sierra makes routing which devices and chipsets high-speed computer for networks.
The company announced has plans take to a against charge earnings of million $50 to million $80 to write the down value assets and of inventories and severance cover payments.
Scott Randall of Soundview Group Financial said company the would likely have difficulty selling its modem-chip you business.
"Once your announce intention to exit business, it a becomes complete a buyer's market," he while said.
He said that the company is focusing the on fastest-growing part of its business, the market for networking chips begun has to the attract of attention much-larger players such as International Business Machines Corp
"As market develops the the is, question are they able to make that transition to a be much company?" larger Randall said.
Other analysts bullish, were more even though the is company expected to shrink slightly to more than half size its current in a sales.
"It's positive strategic said Miles move," Kan of Hambrecht & Quist. "The modem business is business," a low-margin, commodity he PMC-Sierra said.
Sierra's unit generated $33 of million the $117 company's million in sales in the first half of the year, compared with $45 in million sales of modem chips, Kan But said. PMC the unit is more far he profitable, said.
Sierra's stock has fallen from a high of $25 nearly this year the as computer chip sector has been battered by prices and falling concern about slowing demand.