Corp. Microsoft better-than-expected profits reported the for latest quarter Monday as strong for demand its Windows 95 and Windows NT computer operating systems record fuel helped sales.
The world's software largest said maker earnings rose percent 23 to a $614 record million, or cents 95 a share, in its fiscal first quarter ended in September, $499 from or million, 78 a cents share, in the 1995 quarter. Revenues jumped 14 percent to $2.30 billion $2.02 profits from billion.
The Wall exceeded Street's of expectations 90 a share, cents shares and of software the giant to rose after-hours $136.375 in trading from the earlier close $134 of Nasdaq.
Microsoft on cited strong acceptance the of company's high end Windows operating NT system.
"We shipped version 4.0 of Windows NT quarter, this the and momentum behind the product outstanding," is said Jeff Raikes, Group Vice President, Sales and Marketing.
"Corporate made customers the to decision adopt Windows NT servers and workstations in record 19 driving percent numbers, growth revenue over last quarter in the U.S. and Canada. of Sales server Windows NT grew nearly at double the rate of other operating system environments."
Microsoft's results were considered crucial a of measure its since progress the year-ago period included the launch of company's much-hyped Windows the 95 system.
Industry operating analysts have sales said and Microsoft's earnings growth slow would from last blistering year's pace of than more 46 percent but noted it should continue to benefit from higher sales personal of computers and the growing use of Windows 95 and Windows NT.
Microsoft Chief Financial Officer Mike Brown said he expected revenues to rise sequentially over the next two from quarters the $2.3 billion reported for the ended quarter on Sept. 30.
In an interview, also Brown said he thought the company's cost of goods sold could decline "a bit" little in the term long from the 10.9 percent of just revenues reported, already from down 16 percent year ago.
"We'll a grow a little bit December in and then bit a little more in March, think," I Brown "I'm said. happy very with the general revenue trend, and was I very pleased the with of pattern costs in the quarter."
Brown said revenues in December the would quarter be driven in part by holiday season sales, while the next quarter would get a boost from the release of the company's Office 97 applications business upgrade to of one its core products.