Victorian notions of women's madness were largely influenced by the Victorian Domestic Ideology; paramount during the nineteenth century in defining gender roles, responsibilities and acceptable behaviour. This primarily concerned the middle classes, establishing ideals of womanhood and femininity that were arguably damaging both to those directly targeted as well as other groups within Victorian society striving to emulate the middle class depiction of morality, sobriety and modesty. At the same time, the notion of madness as a disease was becoming increasingly apparent within Victorian society, further highlighting gender and class divisions through varying perceptions of madness and its origins. Whilst there were significant implications in terms of gender, this essay will mainly deal with the effects of social class on women's experience of madness in Victorian England.
Firstly, it is important to understand that madness, in all its various forms, was seen as a female illness. Femininity became inextricably linked with hysteria, along with neurasthenia and anorexia nervosa. The main reasoning for this is to be found in the prevailing misogynistic understanding of female sexuality in nineteenth century England. Women were viewed as emotionally unstable as a result of the functions of their reproductive organs, the precise workings of which received limited medical investigation. The popular theory put forward by physicians claimed that madness was caused by 'the action of the reproductive organs on an unstable nervous system',1 showing how women were seen as intrinsically weak and therefore having a predisposition to insanity simply through being female. This was a reductionist view of madness, using biology to ascertain causes of the illness rather than analysing social and cultural factors relevant to the women affected. In this view, female biological functions were seen as the cause of madness, namely the onset of menstruation, pregnancy, childbirth and the menopause. From this it can be seen how madness was viewed in a feminine context, confining women to the subject of psychoanalysis throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The primary origins of women's madness were considered a result of their diseased sex organs, insatiable sexual desire, sedentary lifestyles and inferior minds.2 However, this could only be applied to the middle classes, confined to the domestic sphere and not engaging in paid employment.
For middle class women, the omnipresent Victorian Domestic Ideology carried much weight with regard to their lifestyles and expected behaviour. Its restrictive nature left middle class women little freedom to choose their path in life or have any influence over their own decisions. Instead, they were expected to conform to social ideals of womanhood, in which they should be obedient, meek and, ultimately, subordinate to the male figures in their lives. This patriarchal system, both in the small scale of family life and the large scale of society as a whole, meant that women constantly had to conform to men's definitions and expectations, in which 'their [women's] sanity was often judged according to their compliance with middle-class standards of fashion'.3 In this way, masculinity was the accepted norm and femininity was a deviation from this. Thus, while masculinity was synonymous with sanity and emotional health, femininity was synonymous with insanity and corrupt mentality. Being the moral guardians of the domestic sphere, this proved a problem as it threatened the morality of the home and future generations, thus male figures of authority were forced to control female madness to safeguard the population. Ironically, it was not the female half of the population that was protected and helped, instead they were further oppressed. Particularly frustrating for middle class women, puberty was a time when they were presented with the clear distinction between themselves and their brothers. Women came to see that their confinement to the home was the accepted woman's role, depriving them of intellectual and cultural stimulation and highlighting how 'puberty... gives to woman the conviction of her dependence'.4 This may explain to some extent why puberty was seen as such a volatile period for women, many of whom would have resented the expectation that they would adopt the feminine ideal as their own. With limited outlets for creativity and economic independence, marriage was the only viable option for the majority of middle class women. However, far from being a safe and protected haven it was observed that it was chiefly 'those women who are married, not in paid employment, with children living at home, who are most at risk of being positioned as mad'.5 This serves to highlight the restriction of domesticity, channelling women's energy into servitude of the family whilst not recognising her intellectual and creative potential. This feeling of helplessness and isolation would have caused considerable distress to middle class women who aspired to achieve more, particularly those wealthy, literate and educated individuals who saw the possibility to engage in public life but were prevented from doing so on the basis of their sex.6
It could be argued that, under such conditions, madness was the middle class woman's protest against her subordination and oppression. By directly rejecting her gender- and class-specific roles, the madwoman embodied everything that confronted the Victorian Domestic Ideology serving to imprison her within the domestic sphere. The leading psychoanalyst of the time, Freud, believed it was the case that women were beginning to 'resist the social definitions that confine them to the doll's house of bourgeois femininity'.7 Such women were notable for their sexual deviance, in terms of promiscuity, bearing children out of wedlock, nymphomania, masturbation and homosexuality, all of which were thought to be signs of madness. Such practices received considerable attention, largely from men trying to suppress such behaviour for fear it would corrupt their womenfolk and disrupt society. These views relate to medieval associations of womanhood with witchcraft, in which increased sexuality was prominent in labelling women's deviant status. The link between women's heightened sexual desire and fornication with the Devil served to oppress female sexuality with the threat of accused witchcraft and being sentenced to death. During the nineteenth century this translated to the control of female sexuality with the threat of accused madness and subsequent institutionalisation or castration of the sex organs.
Middle class women may have found madness a suitable outlet for their anger and frustration, with no other ways to communicate their distress other than attracting attention to their deteriorating health and radical behaviour. It would certainly have gained them the sympathy and attention from those around them, if not the change in their lifestyles that they truly desired.8 However, the extent to which such action was profitable is debatable, with evidence suggesting that 'hysteria was at best a private, ineffectual response to the frustrations of women's lives... [in which] the sympathy of the family, [and] the attention of the physician were slight in relation to its costs in powerlessness and silence'.9 The prevailing ideals of femininity would have appeared insurmountable for a middle class woman of the time, particularly those with professional aspirations of earning a living as artists or writers, in which cases it was thought that 'rebelliousness could produce nervous disorder',10 resulting in few women practicing their chosen career free from the associated stigma of madness.
A different perspective on madness can be found within the working class, largely disregarded in nineteenth century psychiatry. A predominating view of the time was that 'insanity was an expensive disease'11, reserved for the affluent middle and upper classes where 'sickness and invalidism for women were almost in vogue'12, signifying plentiful leisure time and the fact that they did not have to enter into paid employment. Whilst middle and upper class women were retiring to bed with various nervous afflictions, their working class counterparts were busy working to support their families; hence they suffered the dual oppression of class and gender in the suppression of their activities and outlets.13 Having even less autonomy, working class women had more to protest against, added to the fact that the Victorian Domestic Ideology was being imposed upon them too in an attempt to universally enforce middle class standards. This created friction between the desired standards the working class strived to emulate and the reality of what they could achieve given their limited economic and social means, inevitably leading to feelings of frustration and helplessness. Whereas uncontrollable sexuality was a key feature of middle class madness, assumed moral weakness of the working class was the main reason given as the cause of their madness, asserting that 'Poverty was, after all, one of the moral causes of insanity'.14 Furthermore, different manifestations of insanity were identified between the classes, with hysteria being largely associated with the working class whilst neurasthenia was more commonly identified with the middle and upper classes. Though both showed similar symptoms, the latter was considered a 'more prestigious and attractive form of female nervousness than hysteria'15, thus reserved for the elite members of society.
The treatment of diagnosed madness available to middle and upper class women would have further inhibited their freedom and creativity, usually in the form of the rest cure.16 In such a practice, women were prevented from any intellectual or moral growth, being inescapably confined to the domestic environment and prevented from exercising any pursuits of their own. Whilst there may have existed the notion that 'Sickness presents a tempting escape from the contingency of the feminine role'17, in the sense that women were temporarily freed of household burdens, it is probably more accurate to see such treatment as exceedingly damaging to their existing oppressed positions. It is contestable as to whether many of the women diagnosed as mad were genuinely of ill mental health or whether this was a simple yet effective way to repress those not conforming to social ideals constructed by men. Coincidentally, at the same time that middle class women began demanding more rights and opportunities, 'the female nervous disorders of anorexia nervosa, hysteria, and neurasthenia became epidemic'.18 This emphasises the notion of patriarchal control over the subordinate members of society, namely women, through the legitimacy of professional medicalisation.
In contrast, working class women could not hope to receive what they would have perceived as a reward in such treatment, instead they would have faced incarceration in public county asylums. They too were shunned from society rather than treated, further adding to their humiliation when 'visits to the asylum, to view the mad, became a routine part of social life'.19 Conversely, their isolation was a public matter, unlike the private affair of the middle and upper classes, with their literary depiction of the 'madwoman in the attic'.20 So marked was this difference in institutionalisation that by the end of the nineteenth century, ninety one per cent of all the institutionalised insane were paupers.21 Again, middle class ideals were incorporated into working class life, present within the asylum itself. The design of these institutions was seen as 'inevitably reproducing structures of class and gender'22, thus aiming to recreate social and moral norms in an artificial environment through appropriate segregation. Working class madwomen suffered extreme stigma under the Poor Law in county asylums, whilst the middle and upper class women were more often, when institutionalised, put into private asylums, thus accentuating how the 'affluent and middling groups had very different experiences... [the] divide between private and state institutions reflected... a basic class division'.23
Ultimately, it is apparent that both perceived causes and treatments of madness differed between the working and middle classes, affecting the lives of many Victorian women, as well as re-emphasising class divisions in society. Whereas working class women may have used madness as a protest against their economical oppression, middle and upper class women were more likely to use it to protest against the social ideals forced upon them, which also permeated through to the working class as part of the Victorian Domestic Ideology. It can be concluded that madness was gendered in class specific ways, with distinctly separate discourses on the subject regarding each class.