The aim of this experiment was to carry out an enzyme assay to study the effects of pH, temperature and product inhibition on an enzyme and calculate the Michaelis constant and order or reaction. This was carried out by assaying alkaline phosphotase under different conditions measuring the extent of reaction with a spectrophotometer. It was discovered that the optimum pH was 9.5 whilst the optimum temperature is 42 oC and activity decreases either side of these optimums due to disruption at the active site or denaturing of the enzyme. Phosphate was found to carry out product inhibition and the reaction was determined as first order. The Michaelis constant was calculated to be 0.0871.
Enzymes are biological catalysts (they accelerate the rate of a reaction without themselves undergoing any net change) and catalyse most of the chemical reactions taking place in the cell. They carry out this catalysis by providing an alternative reaction pathway with a lower energy transition state. Enzymes are highly specific binding a specific substrate in the active site. The amount of enzyme activity and elements of the kinetics of an enzyme-catalysed reaction can be measured by measuring the rate of appearance of one of the products of the reaction. The effect of a variety of factors on rate of enzyme activity such as pH, temperature, concentration of substrate and enzyme and presence of inhibitors can also be determined using this method.
Inhibition of an enzyme involved in an initial step in a metabolic pathway is often carried out by the end product. This is known as feedback inhibition and is an important regulatory strategy. A similar effect, product inhibition occurs when the product of an enzyme catalysed reaction inhibits the enzyme carrying out that reaction.
An enzyme catalysed reaction has a reaction rate order. If the rate of the reaction at any instant is proportional to the concentration of the substrate then this is known as first order kinetics. Enzyme kinetics can also be described using the Michaelis-Menten equation. This involves the use of two parameters to describe the kinetic properties of enzymes - V max, the maximum velocity, and K M, the Michaelis Menten constant. K M is related to the affinity of the enzyme for its substrate and is defined as being the concentration of substrate at which the velocity is at half its maximum value. These are linked in the following equation where V O is the rate of formation of product:
Here alkaline phosphotase was used to study principles of enzyme kinetics. Alkaline Phosphotase is a phosphotase (hydrolyses organic esters to inorganic phosphate and alcohol) which is optically active at alkaline pH. It is an excellent enzyme to use in the determination of enzyme kinetics as it is robust and easily assayed.
The synthetic substrate p-nitrophenyl phosphate (pNPP) is a convenient choice of substrate to demonstrate the activity of the enzyme as is it colourless until hydrolysed by the enzyme to the products inorganic phosphate and p-nitrophenol (pNP). p-nitrophenol is yellow at alkaline pHs (although colourless below pH7) and so the hydrolysis of pNPP can be followed using a spectrophotometer if the solution is made more alkaline after completion of reaction (eg. By adding NaOH). This also stops the reaction as at a very high pH the enzyme is denatured. pNP is also very stable once the reaction is stopped.
The aim of the experiment was to quantitatively assay the activity of alkaline phosphotase under different conditions in order to study the effects of temperature, pH and product inhibition on the enzyme. The kinetic properties of the enzyme were also determined with the aim of calculating the Michaelis constant and the order of reaction.
The experiment was carried out as described in the lab manual with the following details:
The graph below shows the varying concentrations of product, pNP, as the pH changes. This shows a clear increase in concentration as the pH increases to start with up until pH 9.5 where the graph peaks and then falls away again as the pH continues to increase. The graph is fairly symmetrical around the peak.
The graph showing the effect of temperature on the product concentration shows a gradual increase getting sharper towards the peak at about 42 oC. After this point the concentration drops sharply as the temperature is further increased. Boiled enzyme at 37 oC showed only trace absorbance.
Graph 3 shows the effect of increasing concentration of phosphate present in relation to the amount of pNP present. It is clear that as the concentration of phosphate is increased the concentration of pNP present falls rapidly.
Graph 4 is an Eadie-Hoftsee Plot to calculate the Michaelis constant. This was calculated from the slope of the graph to be 0.0871. (see Appendix Table 5 for calculation).
This graph (graph 5) to determine the order of reaction shows a straight line and gives a value of k of 0.013 (see appendix for calculation).
The concentration of product can be used as a measure of enzyme activity as all the tubes started off with the same amount of substrate in each part of the experiment. Therefore the tubes with more product at the end must have had more enzyme activity take place in order to produce more product.