Essentially, there is a distinct difference between motifs of war being beautiful and inspiring as opposed to tragic and distressing. Principally, since the First World War, a handful of governments in Western Europe especially have attempted to find a balance between these seemingly incompatible effects. However, both commemorating soldiers- without making war appear heroic and desirable- and reminding society of the utter ugliness of conflict- without causing offence to the dead who sacrificed their lives so courageously- is extremely difficult to capture in one symbol. Arguably, time plays a crucial role in reducing the opportunity to find an equilibrium; to future generations that share no relationship with the lines of graves covering the Somme, memorials are rarely painful experiences, but instead quite the opposite. Visitors are normally attracted to the splendour and impressiveness of the architecture. Emotionally, the effect can be uplifting, arousing a sense of pride in the nation just by seeing the headstones of fallen brothers who fought and died side-by-side in one of mankind's prime historical events. Fundamentally, memorials become part of the treasured past and the landscape that surrounds us- 'Over the years, passing by in a bus or a bike, I have seen the Cenotaph so often I scarcely notice it'. Indubitably, as memory of the atrocities fade, the painful impact of war lessens and the mysteriousness and grandeur of it grows. Ultimately, this essay firstly attempts to identify whether the assertion of all war memorials eventually leading to the glorification of war is necessarily true. Secondly, it challenges the parameters of the question and considers whether the genuine reason for memorialisation is to warn against war: perhaps memory and the manifestation of memory through objects is fashioned by the interests of contemporary society and is a 'potent ideological weapon' that serves to justify the authority of an existing belief.
As figure 1 demonstrates, the Beth Shalom ("House of Peace") Holocaust Centre is grand and striking. It could easily be interpreted as a symbol of Jewish strength and survival, possibly leading visitors to sympathise with and even admire the success of the post-World War Two Jewish state, Israel. Taking a cynical point of view, why had the owners not opened the centre until half a century later if they were really concerned about preserving the memory of roughly six million European Jews? As Norman G. Finkelstein indicates, it is one exemplification of how the Jewish community has utilised its previous anguish to deflect criticism of any of its current policies; such commemorations that have arisen since the Arab-Israeli war in 1967 constantly remind society of the dangers of anti-Semitism and as a result, have possibly 'been used to justify criminal policies of the Israel state and US support for these policies'.
However, Finkelstein's scepticism can be countered by the claim that Beth Shalom rather warns against any form of conflict than justify anymore, especially as it teaches about other persecuted minorities and its walls are covered with quotations emphasising the need for reconciliation and forgiveness. Indeed, the correct balance is attained by juxtaposing beautiful gardens with dark, musty corridors documenting the torturous past; the centre is not only a tribute to those who died, but a startling warning against further acts of barbarism. Significantly, it is a location 'where visitors from around the country and further field come to learn, to remember and to reflect'; it does not provoke anger or pride for Jews, it succeeds in making visitors grateful for a peaceful present and yearn for a closure to inter-racial genocide. Another recently established commemoration, the Holocaust Memorial Day, achieves similar effects; it educates and aims to be inclusive, rather than produce antagonism and exclude. Without doubt, HMD drains people, it does not stir them: 'As both a means and an end, HMD aims to make the Holocaust relevant to as many people as possible and to help educate society about the causes and catastrophic effects'.
Nevertheless, the memorials concerned with the Holocaust are associated with those who suffered great loss, whether it is in numbers or morale. An additional key factor when considering whether memorials become glorified is the outcome of the conflict for those who are remembering. For the victors of war, there are inevitably critical differences; their underlying intention may actually be to glorify their triumph and capitalise on the theme of sacrifice for those who lost their lives for the "greater cause". Figure 2 shows the Thiepval Memorial on the Somme; the grand size, attractive architecture and inclusion of the French and British flags contribute to observers being inspired and moved, perhaps even longing to be part of such a spectacle. Focusing on British commemoration of the Great War, Fry has illustrated that in the 1920s, people became obsessed with making martyr's out of lost ones with national registers and records, alongside rolls of honour. Furthermore, 'the dead took on a sacred character'; commemorative art was initially expressed in archaic language, comparing British soldiers with the valour of knights and kings, and stained glass windows proliferated in churches. For example, in St. Stephen's Church, Cheltenham, the saint's face was replaced with that of a soldier, complete with his moustache. All this added to the elevation of war, building men into champions of the victorious past. Even the literature of post-1918 concentrated on the theme of sacrifice as opposed to re-enforcing the horrors of war; hence, Siegfried Sassoon's The Redeemer and Rudyard Kipling's Gethsemane: 'It didn't pass- it didn't pass/ It didn't pass from me/ I drank it when we met the gas/ Beyond Gethsemane!'.
Chiefly, memorials are not always created to warn against war; sometimes they promote it. This depends heavily on whether those who construct memorials have won or lost. In addition, Fry argues that most memorials, whatever their original intention, actually result in celebrating and recalling the past, not preserving it. According to the psychologists Winter and Sivian, negative effects of symbols can only truly affect families, mainly through 'extrinsic contexts' such as graves which bring back to life the pain experienced when losing a loved one. Therefore, if someone shares no direct bond with the dead, this including abstract relationships such as nationality or race, then memorials cannot negatively affect them and subsequently fashion them into loathing warfare. As the families die therefore, painful connotations fade; time steers this process, thus making it predetermined. In the end, people are influenced in positive ways: uniform headstones signify the common purpose and devotion of the soldiers- whatever their social class or rank- and the standard employment of the cross is a Christian motif 'evoking the infinite'. As shown by figure 3, the memorials on the Somme for a twentieth-first century audience more than likely symbolise collective unity rather than individual loss.
Vera Brittain extends this conception of time detaching people from the horrors of war, thereby leading the memorial to change its function from a representation of demise and misfortune to beauty and sacrifice: 'What a cheating and a camouflage was this combined effort of man and nature to create the impression that war was glorious just because its aftermath could wear an appearance of beauty and dignity'. Geoff Dyer elaborates on this; he outlines the dissimilarly between the effect of commemorations in the immediate aftermath of the First World War with eighty years later. Originally, the two-minute silence was 'almost pain... And the spirit of memory brooded over it all'. Furthermore, when the surviving soldiers marched past the Cenotaph, their role was to 'offer tribute, not to receive it' and thus they were the 'surrogate dead'. Contrastingly, Armistice Day in modern Britain is joyous and triumphant. Arguably, for the English at least, it has substituted St. George's Day for celebrating nationality. Crucially, man does not necessarily engineer the changing effect of memorials, it is a process controlled by time. Consequently, it is inevitable that memorials will eventually exalt war.
Norman G. Finkelstein challenges this by advocating the idea that memorialisation is an 'indispensable ideological weapon' which is not shaped naturally by time, but by the ruling elite in any era. In other words, memorials can be utilised to either glorify or warn against war depending on the present needs of a powerful section of society. Finkelstein takes the example of American Jewry and shows how before the militaristic and geopolitical strength of Israel was recognised by American leadership in 1967 after the six-day war, they avoided commemorating the Nazi Holocaust and in fact financially assisted right-wing organisations such as the All-American Conference to Combat Communism- that SS veterans actually joined. Accordingly, this was to ensure they did not appear a vulnerable and ineffectual minority. Yet, after the Arab-Israeli war, they supposedly institutionalised Holocaust memorialisation at a vast rate to signify how far they had progressed as a community since 1945. Moreover, as Israel became closer to America and moved to the right politically and economically, memorials were drawn on to avert criticism and warn against an upsurge of anti-Semitism that could potentially cause a "Second" Holocaust: 'Invoking the Holocaust was therefore a play to delegitimise all criticism of Jews: such criticism could only spring from pathological hatred'. Interestingly, Finkelstein demonstrates how forces in society can actually change the impression of memorials; there is no certainty that memorials will eventually glorify war, although political actors would probably use it in this way to indoctrinate and mobilise: 'the real aim is not at all an understanding of the past, but a manipulation of the present'.
To the modern observer, the Tyne Cot Cemetery in Belgium, as shown in figure 4, does not sicken or disturb, it in fact does the antithetical: inspire and stimulate. Fry has rightly explained that this is due to time loosening the direct relationship contemporary society has with memorials; they soon become part of some exciting and eventful past. However, the development of memorialisation from intending to warn against war to gradual glorification is not strictly inevitable. As Finkelstein has controversially accentuated, forces within society can aim to elevate their victory from the beginning or fashion how people interpret memorials later in time, depending on their interests. The reconstruction of cemeteries in 1920s Britain substantiates this; a striking and attractive appearance guaranteeing remembrance in the future was seemingly more important than the legacy of carnage. This is also exemplified by the Cambridge war memorial in figure 5: an impressive eight-foot by twelve-foot statue which cost roughly 4,500 to create. The image of a brave fighter, walking strong and unwounded, lionised British history, ensuring the victor in 1918 was not forgotten. Seemingly, the intention and result of war memorialisation is not universal; it alters depending on the social forces driving it.