This essay will begin with a brief discussion of three functional categories of English which are interconnected; tense, aspect, and modality. It will then further define modality and identify characteristics of the different types recognised by investigating its various functional expressions. The aim is to show how these expressions show that modality has nothing to do with form.
Discussions of modality are generally included in discussions on tense and aspect (e.g., Berk, 1999; Downing & Locke, 2002; Greenbaum & Quirk, 1990; Huddlestone, 1988; Palmer, 1990) so it will be useful here to look briefly at the connections. Space restrictions allow for clarification only.
The interconnection of the three categories is evidenced when it is recognised that every time we construct a clause we are obliged to use a tense and an aspect which we then may choose to modalise or not (Downing & Locke 2002). All English sentences must contain at least one verb and it is the verb which conveys information concerning tense and aspect. Tense signals whether an action or event happens in the present or the past and is always marked on the first verb in a verb phrase. Aspect signals the duration that the event covers and may be perfect (i.e., complete), or progressive (i.e., still progressing) (Berk,1999). Tense and aspect mark the verb either with inflectional suffixes, auxiliary verbs or adverbial expressions.
Examples (from Berk, 1999) of some of the various forms taken by the past tense include,
Examples of the perfect aspect show the auxiliary verb have combining with the inflectional morpheme of the past participle are,
Examples of the progressive aspect show the use of the auxiliary verb be and the -ing inflection are,
Examples of adverbial expressions conveying time where an adverb is used with an inflectional morpheme are,
These few examples serve to show how tense and aspect are marked by the form of the verb. Form refers to the external features of words in terms of their inflections, pronunciation, or spelling. Just as Berk (1999:130) says that 'modality has nothing to do with form' she also says that 'tense is a matter of form not meaning' and that 'modality provides another layer to tense' (ibid: 132). Having identified the interconnection of these three categories a closer look at modality will follow.
Modality is an abstract concept which is associated with, but distinctive from, the grammatical category of mood. Mood is the ways in which the concept of modality is marked. By describing the relationship of a verb with reality and intent mood involves the grammaticalisation of modality. Basic modality expresses possibility, probability, necessity, volition, obligation, and permission. Recently the concept has also been viewed in terms of abstracts such as doubt, regret, wish, desire, and usuality.(Downing & Lock, 2002: 382).
Traditionally modality is the subject concerning modal auxiliary verbs, i.e., can, could, may, might, will, would, shall, should, and  must that are used to modify the meaning of other verbs.
The basic functional expression of modality concerns itself with a statement showing a speaker's relation to reality rather than a declarative statement which represents reality itself. It can be defined as, firstly, a communicative act which refers to and makes a judgement about the reality of that act, and secondly, as an act used to become involved in and make changes to events (Downing & Lock, 2002).
Greenbaum & Quirk (1990) divide modality into two types, intrinsic and extrinsic. These may be further categorised as, firstly, epistemic which shows a subjective view of the world and comments on outside events (i.e., extrinsic) allowing a speaker to modulate commitment to an opinion. Secondly, deontic and dynamic modalities which are intrinsic and refer to an intervention or manipulation of events and people in the real world.
All of the modals may be used extrinsically or intrinsically, e.g.,
is extrinsic showing epistemic use of deduction, and
is intrinsic showing deontic use of obligation.
They can also be paired into present and past (can/could, shall/should, will/would, may/might). Semantically the past forms are generally more polite expressions of the present (Greenbaum & Quirk 1990).
In section three modality was described as traditionally concerning modal auxiliaries and section four demonstrated other categories which express modality. This section will look at more claims made about modality which also relate to its semantic position as a grammatical category.
McCarthy (1991) discusses modality in a section on vocabulary rather than including it with tense and aspect and by doing so highlights the significance of the number of word classes which carry modality. He refers to Holmes'(1983) and Hermern's (1978) studies of modality in discourse. Their data shows that lexical verbs, adverbs, nouns and adjectives together express modality more frequently than do modal verbs. In addition the verbs and adverbs do so more frequently than the nouns and adjectives.
Consider example (30) above, when the lexical verb changes form the commitment of the speaker to the truth of the statement does not change. For example, in the statement,
the use of the past tense does not change the speakers relationship with the truth of the statement.
McCarthy (1991) relates the meanings these words convey to Halliday's interpersonal function of language where they form part of the tenor of discourse.
Halliday (1971: 106) describes the interpersonal function as;
(The tenor of discourse describes the participants in a communication and their relationship to each other (Halliday 1974).)
McCarthy's argument is that modality is fundamental to discourse because all participants choose a degree of modality even if that choice is neutral. He examples (ibid: 85),
as an asserted choice of non-modalisation compared with the profoundly modalised,
This is a positive indication of semantic options available while form plays the syntactic role.
Grammarians often differ in their definition of modality as highlighted by Narrog (2003: 165);
They do agree that there must be a distinction made between modality and mood, where modality is semantically defined and mood, whose function is to express modality, is a specific linguistic form typically marked by verb inflection (Palmer, 2001) which holds with previous discussion in section 2.
Narrog (2005: 182) claims that it is not necessary for a definition of modality to refer to '... "speakers' attitudes"... ' (the scare quotes are Narrog's) suggesting they should even be excluded as it becomes impossible to demarcate between grammatical forms that fit into the category and those that do not. He refers his argument to Kiefer (1997) who admits the relevance of the speaker but emphasises that sentence meaning is validated through its realisation within a possible set of worlds. And to Papafragou (2000) who says that modality allows expression, or thought, of conditions or situations which may not currently exist or may never actually occur. Narrog (ibid) confirms modality as a 'semantically defined grammatical category on the same level as tense and aspect' and, although his discussion goes much deeper space here does not allow a more detailed exploration, it is this statement which is relevant here.
This essay began with a look at the relationship between tense, aspect and modality, moved to a discussion exampling the subjective nature of modality and explored its abstract concept to show how it represents ideas and concepts and a relativity to truth which may or may not be reflected in actual facts as they exist in the world. It is this subjectivity of modality, and the functional nature of this approach to grammar, that allows the statement under investigation to work. It also serves to highlight how meaning can be interpreted differently by individuals where the form used may not have changed.
Form is to do with syntax or the structure of language while meaning is to do with semantics or the sense of understanding we take or gain from language. The functional expressions of modality discussed have shown the realisation of different senses of modality. The formal categories identified do not provide corresponding matches in actual meaning so that the meanings themselves have no relationship to the form.
The conclusion is that Berk's (1999:130) statement that 'Modality has nothing to do with form' may be more complete by adding the words 'but everything to do with meaning'.