The inaugural speech of an American President has been described as the 'supreme sacrament of the democratic system' (Price 1997). Its key goal is to demonstrate leadership and authority and it is this social and cultural function which provides a context in which language choice may change little over centuries. The familiar expression 'fellow-citizens' with which many presidents begin their speeches has become an accepted, perhaps expected, form of address used to express solidarity. This paper will examine how the solidarity initiated by this use of 'fellow-citizens' in the first paragraphs of the inaugural speeches has been furthered by the use of the personal pronoun 'we' as the speeches progress.
The aim of this paper is linguistic. I will examine the use of 'we' where 'we' may be defined as;
to investigate American Presidents' promotion of solidarity through their choices in the use of the pronoun 'we' within the three selected meanings.
Have American Presidents changed their use of the personal pronoun 'we'? If so, what theoretical evidence is there to explain any change?
The methodology used is that of corpus linguistics. I have built two corpora by downloading 24 inaugural speeches made by 15 different presidents from George Washington's first inaugural speech in 1789 to George W Bush's second inaugural speech in 2005 (Bartleby.Com 2001). These will be referred to as Group 1 and Group 2 as indicated in the following tables and provide two corpora of about 23000 words each.
Group 1
Group 2
These presidencies are used because they represent the institution of the presidency from the two most distant groups in terms of time and they are limited to two groups of twelve because of space restrictions. The Group 1 speeches were made at a time of nation building during the years following the War of Independence and the Group 2 ones proceed through a period of world change and growth of the power of the United States.
The data has been tagged showing the use of 'we' as follows:
Concapp concordance software has been used as it allows the identification of all instances of the use of a word and displays that word in its co-text. Antconc concordance software has been used for the creation of a list of keywords indicating keyness by showing which words display particular significance in a given discourse relative to another.
The political process is essentially an ideological process and its discourse provides that ideology its expression (van Dijk 2004). The relationship between language and ideology is one of expressing assumptions which presume to describe what the world is like and, in political discourse particularly, in testing power relations (Hunston 2002), such as those of American Presidents in relation to the people of America.
Stubbs (1996) says:
The underlining has been added to provide a link between Stubbs' use of authority and Hunstons use of power.
Further to Stubbs' reference to context Van Dijk (2004) points out that the use of the pronoun 'we' in its political context needs to be viewed against the situational context of its use. He says that style of political discourse, including choice of pronoun, depends on situational context following in the tradition of Firth's (1935) contextual theory of meaning.
Firth's major principle of this theory is described by Stubbs (1996:53):
Halliday (1973:49) talks of 'the context of culture' defining  'the potential' and the 'context of situation' defining  'the actual'.
In this paper the wider context of political discourse is narrowed to a speech given at a particular time - the beginning of a new presidential term - or its temporal context. It brings into focus the cultural context, that is the range of potential possibilities of language choice and shows the actual choice among those possibilities within its situational context, that is the first rhetorical act of a new or returning leader whose aim is to assert his power and authority after a usually long and often bitter election campaign.
In confirming my introductory contention that 'fellow-citizens' is a common form of address in this style of speech I looked at its use in each speech and discovered that the Group 1 presidents used it 47 times and the Group 2 presidents 17 times. However, Group 2 also used the more patriotic term 'fellow Americans' 8 times. Overall the use of 'fellow' followed by a noun representing the people occurred 48 and 35 times in Groups 1 and 2 respectively as shown in the table below.
The Brown corpus data has been used to highlight the frequency of the use of these terms making them a feature of the type of discourse being analysed.
The Brown Corpus is American and contains 1 million words. There is only one use of 'fellow-citizens' in 68 occurrences of 'fellow'. As previously noted Groups 1 and 2 corpora consist of 23,000 words each making the comparison with the 1 million word Brown Corpus highly significant.
Antconc and a stoplist which eliminates function words showed that for Group 1 'fellow' was the 11 th most popular lexical item and for Group 2 it was the 26 th. Group 1 used 'fellow + a noun representing the people' in the first paragraph of 9 of their 12 speeches, for Group 2 the figure was 11 out of 12.
The keyword facility in Antconc determined that 'we' shows a negative keyness of 405.233. This figure shows that the keyness of 'we' to the speeches of group 1 is far less than its keyness to group 2 speeches.
Exploring this further, and following the introductory remarks concerning the perception of solidarity initiated by the early use of 'fellow-citizens' in the speeches, tagged data was used to examine the occurrences of 'we' which may promote that solidarity as the speech continues.
The following table displays those results.
This table shows that the Group 2 presidents used 'we' nearly 6 times more frequently than the Group 1 presidents. Group 2 used 'we' to refer to the American nation as a whole 15 times more frequently than their predecessors.
The figures show that although the two groups use 'fellow' + 'a noun representing the people' in their first paragraphs with similar frequency, (9 and 11 times respectively), the Group 2 Presidents use the inclusive 'we' significantly more often in continuing the perception of solidarity thus initiated.
Fairclough (1989) refers to 'relational values' of textual features and suggests that the use of inclusive 'we' is relationally significant because it includes all the listeners in a perception of togetherness with the speaker.
For example, as I have indicated through the use of bracketing in the following extract from speech 31.1, it is Lyndon Baines Johnson's choice to use 'we' rather than 'I' which provides an impact of assimilation with the people;
The concept of a contextual theory of meaning helps to explain the change in use of 'we' through a change in cultural and situational context. Group 1 Presidents' speeches were made during the years 1789 to 1833 and Group 2 from 1961 to 2005. In terms of population growth between these two time-frames there has been significant change. The temporal context has not changed as the speeches maintain their position in tradition as a new or retuning president's demonstration of leadership and authority. More significant is the presidents increasing accessibility to their audience. Inaugural speeches are now broadcast into people's homes and the perception of solidarity has become more tangible. This is reflected in the significant increase in the use of 'we' by the modern presidents is spite of nearly all the presidents addressing their audience as 'fellow-citizens' or similar in their introductory remarks.
While showing there has been a significant shift in the use of the personal pronoun 'we', which may be explained by shifts in cultural and situational contexts, this conclusion warrants further investigation which the methodology allows but space restrictions do not. The use of corpus linguistics allows observance of things otherwise unobservable because software can highlight frequencies and statistics in large amounts of texts. Here the number of speeches included in the corpus could be extended to cover all American presidencies and an analysis made of the use of other pronouns. Assessing semantic prosody through phraseology patterns uncovered by using concordancing software may provide a means of raising consciousness of the connections between language and power, in this context alerting people to the methods their leaders use to influence them and consequently providing choices previously not clearly visible.