When the oxygen is completely depleted in the lower parts of the sediment anaerobic species of Clostridium bacteria begin to grow. Anaerobic bacteria can use nitrates or sulphates as the terminal electron acceptor of respiration instead of oxygen. The Clostridium species degrade the cellulose to glucose and then ferment it to produce energy. Other products of this anaerobic type of respiration are organic compounds such as ethanol, acetic acid and succinic acid. Sulphur reducing bacteria such as Desulfovibrio can use these products for anaerobic respiration using sulphates producing lots of H 2S. This H 2S will react with any iron producing black ferrous sulphide.
The H 2S diffuses from the sediment into the water column; this is then used by photosynthetic bacteria to grow. Immediately above the sediment there is usually a band of green sulphur bacteria followed by a band of purple sulphur bacteria. They use H 2S instead of water as the reductant during photosynthesis so produce sulphur and not oxygen.
This sulphur then returns to the sediment and is recycled by Desulfovibrio.
The water column above this zone is often full of red bacteria, these are purple non-sulphur bacteria that grow in anaerobic conditions and are known as photoheterotrophs. This is due to their use of organic acids supplied by Clostridium bacterium as their carbon source. These bacteria such as Rhodopseudomonas, Rhodospirillum and Rhodomicrobium are intolerant of high concentrations of H 2S so occur above the layers of green and purple sulphur bacteria.
The top zone in the Winogradsky column is the aerobic zone, it is mainly populated by three distinctive types of bacteria:
Sulphur oxidising bacteria such as Beggiatoa and Thiobacillus known as chemoautotrophs. They oxidise any H 2S that diffuses into the aerobic zone to gain energy and synthesise their organic matter from CO 2
Photosynthetic Cyanobacteria which produces oxygen from CO 2
Sheathed bacteria which produces sheaths formed by a mixture of proteins, polysaccarides and lipids. These are found right at the top of the water column and can be encrusted with ferric oxide giving them a yellow colour.
From looking at our Winogradsky columns the different zones can be identified by their levels and their colours, our experiment shows that the three columns with only distilled water added have signs of ferric hydroxide encrusted sheathed bacteria at the top, some initial growth of purple non-sulphur bacteria on the inside of the glass and the dark coloured sediment suggests H 2S production in the presence of iron. The addition of extra sodium sulphate and salt affects the rate and the growth in the other columns but it is hard to quantify as the columns need to be left for longer to mature sufficiently for the system to have balanced.