Diseases of coral reefs are caused by a variety of things but many are due to pathogens such as bacteria and fungi. There are diseases that affect the hard corals, the coralline algae and other architectural parts of the reef such as sea fans. Often stresses like higher temperatures in the sea water, increased UV radiation and poor nutrition make corals more susceptible to disease. Many diseases seem to have only recently appeared and the scientific community is struggling to identify, record and understand all of them before too much destruction is caused to the reefs around the world.
Many of the diseases are named after the way that they look such as their shape and colour. Two such diseases are Black Band disease and Red Band disease, they are both characterised by a band of tissue on the surface of the coral formed by a variety of around forty micro-organisms (Frias-Lopez et al, 2004), they spread over the coral tissue in a circular ring, leaving the bare white skeleton of the corals behind. Recent investigation into Black Band disease has found that one of the main organisms in the band is a filamentous cyanobacterium known as Phormidium corallyticum. It has a complex mutualistic relationship with other cyanobacterium, sulphate reducing bacterium and heterotrophic bacteria revolving around a complex sulphur cycle (Richardson et al 2001). It has been suggested that this relationship causes the coral tissue underneath the band to be starved of oxygen so it dies which produces food for the micro-organisms in the band (Carlton and Richardson, 1995). Red Band disease works in a similar way but with a different combination of micro-organisms that appear red-brown instead of black.
Another disease of great threat to corals is known as Rapid Wasting disease as it can spread several centimetres over the coral in just one day. It is found on star corals Montastraea annularis and brain corals Colpophyllia natans, which show patches of bare white skeleton that often appears to be crumbling away. The cause of the disease appears to be a fungus however some correlation has been seen between the corals attacked by terminal-phase male parrot fish Sparisoma viride and those that are affected by the disease (Bruckner et al 2000). Research is currently underway to determine whether there is a link between Rapid Wasting Disease and Parrot Fish predation, it may be that some parrot fish transfer the disease on their mouths from one coral to another.
With some diseases even intensive study does not give conclusive evidence of what causes a disease. Staghorn corals Acropora palmate and Elkhorn corals Acropora cervicornis, can suffer from a disease known as White Band disease. It appears that tissue simply peals off the coral skeleton beginning at the base and working towards the tip of the coral branch. The aetiology (science or cause of a disease) of White Band disease has been difficult to identify, however unusual amounts of gram-negative rod-shaped bacteria were found in the tissues of affected corals. There is also a White Band disease Type II which differs from the first type in that the peeling tissue is preceded by a line of bleached tissue, bacteria of the genus Vibrio were found in the surface mucus of the bleached band (McCarty and Peters, 2000 [Online]).
A similarly named disease is White Plague disease, it causes tissue loss on large encrusting coral species, there are also two types of White Plague disease; a slower acting type I and a faster acting type II. The disease is caused by a pathogen which can easily be spread from one coral to the next. White Plague disease type II is found to be caused by the bacterium Aurantimonas coralicida and it is suggested that a higher profusion of benthic macroalgae increases the occurrence of the disease (Nugues et al 2004). The causative bacteria were found to be present upon the macroalgae Halimeda opuntia close to and far away from the infected corals suggesting that the pathogen may travel around upon the algae; it is also thought that the numbers of macroalgae have increased over the last few years so increasing the occurrence of diseased corals (Nugues et al 2004). This increase in macroalgae may be related to over nutrition of the sea water near populated islands from sewage or farm fertiliser run off.
Raw human sewage is increasingly being seen as one of the major causes of the recent increase in diseases of coral reefs (Lafferty et al, 2004). White Pox disease affects the large Elkhorn corals and has been seen to cause enormous amounts of damage; up to 70% loss of coverage was seen in the Florida Keys reefs (Patterson et al 2002). This disease causes bare white patches on the corals and is thought to act very quickly, it has been found to be contagious and is linked with the pathogen Serratia marcescens. The pathogen is a bacterium known to be common in the human gut and is not known to be typically present in healthy reefs (Patterson et al 2002). This suggests that the pathogen may have been introduced to the reef in untreated human sewage.
Another disease thought to be related to human activity is Aspergillosis, which is a fungal infection of sea fans Gorgonia ventalina and Gorgonia flabellum. The fungus is Aspergillum and is found in soils on land, it is thought to have been washed into the sea when soil erosion has occurred possibly due to farming on the land or deforestation. Researchers believe that the fungus has defiantly come from land as it cannot complete its life cycle in water (Yoon, 1997, [Online]).
With all of the diseases that cause the death of the coral tissues leaving bare white patches of the coral skeleton, recovery can be very slow. This is due to the, nearly immediate, population of the bare bits by filamentous algae which in turn blocks light from the surrounding algae and prevents repopulation by planula which grow into coral polyps.
Other than causing disease increases through sewage and soil erosion, human interference can cause stresses to corals in many ways, making them more susceptible to diseases. For example diving and fishing disturbance and other pollution can cause stress to the corals and possibly a weaker immune system. Global warming has also been thought to affect coral diseases by increasing the length of the 'disease season' which is in the summers when the water is warmer (Ben Harder, 27.06. 2002 [Online]).