Coral reefs are one of the oldest eco-systems on the planet and so have evolved to survive many naturally occurring phenomena. They have been around for over 450 million years and have incurred some mass extinctions since then; in fact of the 7500 known coral species only around 3000 are extant. One of the known mass extinctions occurred around 136 million years ago and coincided with the extinction of the dinosaurs. The cause of this was undoubtedly a natural disaster of some sort. Natural disasters that occur regularly, from an evolutionary perspective, on modern day earth, include hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes, and volcanoes. These can lead to tsunamis and flooding along with possible temporary climate change in some cases of large volcanoes.
Hurricanes are defined as large storms that originate over the ocean, with winds of over 74mph. They refer to storms that occur over the Atlantic Ocean with similar storms over the Pacific Ocean known as typhoons and storms over the tropical oceans around Australia and the Indian Ocean known as cyclones. Hurricanes begin over the ocean near the equator as they need the heat of the ocean and the rotation of the earth to form; these areas are often close to areas inhabited by coral reefs as they also require the warm waters (Robinson 2002). Hurricanes can cause damage to corals in a variety of ways, the most obvious being the damage done by strong wave action especially on the more delicate branching corals. These waves can be caused by winds acting on the surface of the water and also by a phenomenon known as a storm surge, this happens when low pressure in the eye of a hurricane combines with the power of the high winds causing the sea to be sucked up. As the hurricane hits shallows, such as coral reefs, and land masses the effect of the storm surge is to produce a wall of water that may then come crashing down onto the land or the reefs. However other effects are less immediate, hurricanes can cause cooling of the oceans by more than 3C, this drop is more extensive in the shallower waters where the coral reefs are situated and can last for more than two weeks. This drop in temperature around the reefs can cause the expulsion of the symbiotic zooxanthellae contained within the polyp tissues of the corals due to them becoming dysfunctional in processes of photosynthesis and providing the corals with the extra food that they need. This in turn leads to coral bleaching. Tornadoes are much smaller than hurricanes and are more short-lived; however they may have wind speeds that exceed 300mph (Robinson 2002). Tornadoes cause similar damage to reefs through wave action and water displacement on the ocean.
In November Hurricane Lenny occurred around the Netherlands Antilles near Bonaire and Curacao. It caused the leeward shores of both islands to be subject to heavy wave action for 24 hours. Reef surveys were conducted over a six month period and damage recorded were 'occurrences of toppling, fragmentation, tissue damage, bleaching, and smothering due to the storm' (Bries et al, 2004)
Earthquakes and volcanoes are caused by the movement of tectonic plates that are moving around on the lithosphere which is the top layer of the earths crust. Land masses are situated on top of the plates. This movement is caused by currents in the molten magma in the mantle of the earth. The movement of these plates can cause friction between them, and eventual movement either horizontally, when the plates are moving side by side, or vertically, when one plate moves beneath the other at subduction zones (Robinson 2002). Subduction zones occur when two tectonic plates collide with each other causing the younger and less dense plate to move on top of the older plate. Due to the mechanics of plate tectonics most ocean trenches are caused by 'trench flipping' at subduction zones, these are mostly found along the edges of continents as they tend to create land masses on one side and therefore shallow areas that are often perfect for corals to settle (). The diagram shown below indicates how close many corals reefs are to subduction zones and areas with high incidences of earthquakes.
These disasters appear not to be affected by human influences such as climate changes however the damage caused may have been increased due to the human settlements on the land masses near coral reefs, introducing more sediment, rubbish and pollutants such as fertilisers and sewage that may be drawn into the sea.
Earthquakes can cause catastrophic tsunamis, especially if their epicentres are at or near the ocean floor and mainly if the movement occurring in the tectonic plates is vertical. Tsunamis can also be caused by underwater volcanoes and submarine landslides. The damage to coral reefs is again caused by strong wave action, but also after the waves have broken on land causing much destruction and loosening of debris, much of it is pulled back into the sea with the water when it drains back. Along with large crushing debris and sediment there may also be untreated sewage and fertilisers (Dr Wallace J. Nichols [Online]). These introduce elevated nutrient levels to the reefs and the waters around the reef, promoting rapid algal growth. The algae along with other sediment can overwhelm and smother the coral polyps. This problem can also occur with water running into the oceans from floods.
On December 26 th 2004 a large earthquake occurred off the coast of Sumatra measuring 9 on the Richter scale, this caused a catastrophic tsunami wave that killed thousands of people and damaged many coastal settlements around Thailand (). The tsunami also hit many of the abundant coal reefs in this area, so surveys to assess the damage were carried out as soon as possible. In this case the impact of the waves is not thought to have been the main culprit of the damage; instead the debris pulled back from the land seems to have caused more damage. Photos of coral reefs with kitchen sinks, deck chairs and even suitcases have been seen (Hakan Bjorkman 17.01.2005 [Online]).
Healthy coral reefs can protect islands from strong wave damage by acting as a natural break-water. This was seen after the recent tsunami around Thailand, Simon Cripps, Director of WWF's Global Marine Programme said, 'Places that had healthy coral reefs were far less badly hit than places where the reefs had been damaged' (www .globalissues.org). Coral reefs were also seen to dissipate tsunami energy during the 1992 Flores Island Earthquake tsunami (Tsuji et al, 1995). This is just another one of many reasons that conserving coral reefs is in humanities best interests.
The Natural disasters described here have been shown to cause a variety of damage to coral reefs however reefs have endured these disasters throughout their existence, the map of the coral reef distribution and the earthquake zones around the world shows a close geographical relationship. Also the nature of hurricanes and tornadoes means that they can only form over areas that are near the equator and therefore are also geographically close to many reefs. Due to this corals have evolved to allow the species to survive through natural disasters. This is done in a variety of ways including having mass spawning events when reproducing that release many eggs and sperm into the water at once, when the eggs are fertilized they form 'planula' which float around with the plankton until they land on a suitable site to live on and become a polyp ( /coralreproduction.html). In this way reefs destroyed by natural disasters can be recolonised and slowly begin to recover. However some reduction in ''recruitment'' ('the settling out of coral larvae that starts new colonies and supports local biodiversity') of corals after storms has been noted (Crabbeal. 2002). Coral colonies displaced by strong wave action have been known to continue growing in a new situation after being dislodged (Crabbe 2005 [Email]), therefore death is not always the result of storms and tsunamis pounding onto the reefs.