The wood mouse (Apodemus sylvaticus) has often been found to express the symptoms of 'insular syndrome'. This is not a disease but a phenomena that occurs within island populations of a variety of vertebrates, and is expressed in the evolution of a different body size, and occasionally altered behavioural patterns. Preliminary investigations of small mammals on the Isle of Cumbrae, Scotland, produced a wood mouse of large proportions and lead us to investigate further into the possibility of the occurrence of insular syndrome in the island population. The results were inconclusive as only two mice were caught overall and one of them gave birth after it was caught, however unusual population densities of Wood mice and Common Shrews (Sorex aranaeus) were found which may need further investigation.
Preliminary trapping was carried out over three nights, 12 th-14 th July 2005, combining to 70 Trap Nights (TN)
All of the traps were laid close to the University Marine Biological Station, Millport on the Isle of Cumbrae off the coast of south-west Scotland. These areas were all within 100m of human habitation. Over the trapping period 11 animals were caught, 9 Common shrews and 2 A.sylvaticus. One of the A.sylvaticus caught shown in table 1 was measured and the results were unusual.
It was concluded that although the measurements of the mouse fit into the range for the yellow-necked mouse (A. flavicollis), it was in fact a wood mouse (A.sylvaticus) as no yellow band of fur was present around the neck of the mouse. Also the known range of the yellow-necked mouse does not extend as far north as the Isle of Cumbrae. However the weight and the tail length of the mouse were unusually large compared with the mainland size ranges.
There were 64 Longworth live-capture traps (Fig 2) available for use. Hay was added as bedding and bird seed was added as food for the A.sylvaticus. In case of the unintended capture of shrews, cat food was also added to minimise deaths. The traps were checked once in the morning and once in the evening. Trap night (TN) in this case therefore refers to a 12 hour period during the day or the night.
15th-16th July 05 Traps were laid at sights 1, 2 and 3 (Table 2); these sights were chosen as they were thought to be good wood mouse habitat, away from human habitation in well established vegetation.
16th-18th July 05 The trap success was found to be very poor at the first three sights so the traps were moved to sights more similar to those in the preliminary experimentation. These were on the south side of the island and were closer to human habitation.
Trap success was found to be much higher at the sites near human habitation (Table 3). Many S.aranaeus were caught but only 2 A.sylvaticus (Table 4)
The mouse caught during the preliminary experiment was kept as an example of a large sized island A.sylvaticus. A few days into the experimental period it gave birth to 2 pups. The female was reweighed a few weeks after giving birth and she weighed 8.3g less. The pups were weighed at the end of September but they were still below the adult weight range so had not matured enough to be included in the research.
The S. aranaeus caught were also measured and all sizes were found to be within the mainland parameters except for one tail length that was over a third of the body size by 1.36mm.
At the end of the survey period only 2 A.sylvaticus had been caught and measured including the mouse from the preliminary experiments. Both mice were females and had tails that were longer than the mainland range. The average length of the two island tail measurements (99.5mm) was 17.5 mm longer than the mainland average of 82mm and was 6.5mm longer than the top of the range (93mm) (Table 5)
The results gained from the trapping period for wood mice were not enough to form any solid conclusions on the island A.sylvaticus sizes, compared with mainland A.sylvaticus sizes. Also the S. aranaeus data gathered showed them to be the same size as mainland populations as the measurements were all within the mammal society range (The mammal society 2005).
The results gained from the S. aranaeus show that they are not significantly different from the British mainland populations in the parameters that were looked at. Some island populations of S. aranaeus have been found to differ in the frequent lack of 5 th unicuspid teeth and having very grey flanks (The Handbook of British Mammals 2 nd Ed, 1977). These characteristics were not investigated in this survey.
Why were so few mice caught and so many shrews?
If the results are to be considered a representation of the small mammal populations of Cumbrae then it seems that S. aranaeus are unusually abundant and A.sylvaticus are found in much smaller numbers. Also many other species thought to be present on Cumbrae were not caught such as pigmy shrews and voles, these species are usually caught on the mainland and may indicate a lack of competitor species on the island. The two species should be equally as 'trappable' on Cumbrae as on the British mainland, however population density cannot be compared directly to mainland results for similar environments due to the incompatibility of the random trap layout used in this experiment with the transect layout of the British Mammal Societies survey traps. However estimates and experiences (Colin Prescott) of mainland trapping, suggest that there should be a higher density of A.sylvaticus (0.25-100/ha (The Handbook of British Mammals, 2 nd Ed, 1977)) than S. aranaeus (49/ha (Crowcroft 1957)) present but this did not seem to be the case. This may have been due to the availability of suitable foods or habitat; also it could have been due to predation. S. aranaeus are insectivores and live on a diet of invertebrates whereas A.sylvaticus eats mainly seeds and fruits but also arthropods, therefore they avoid direct competition for food. The main predators of  S. aranaeus are owls, in particular barn owls which are known to be present on Cumbrae but may not be evenly distributed as it is suggested that they are more commonly viewed on the north of the island and so may consume more S. aranaeus there than on the south side where most of the S. aranaeus were caught. Other predators of S. aranaeus include tawny owls, kestrels, polecats, possibly rats and domestic cats, however they are often killed but not eaten by cats due to a foul tasting liquid that is produced from glands on the skin. A.sylvaticus predators present on the island include domestic cats, kestrels, tawny owl, buzzards, brown rats and the polecat. The area around the marine station may have been a sanctuary from many of these predators due to the presence and activities of humans. From the results of the trapping it appears that there are only these two small mammals present on Cumbrae therefore there may be an uneven occurrence of predation between the species, A.sylvaticus may be disadvantaged due to their larger size but S. aranaeus may be disadvantaged due to their need to be active all of the time and may therefore be more likely to be seen by predators. Advantages of A.sylvaticus characteristics increasing its survival chances may be its more general diet but the  S. aranaeus ability to produce foul tasting liquid from its skin may decrease its chances of being eaten and therefore be an advantage to them.
The trapping period was not extensive enough to answer the questions posed on the differences between British mainland and Island populations of A.sylvaticus, nor were the observations made substantial enough to answer questions about differences in the S. aranaeus populations. Another important observation that was not made was whether the animals were in their adult stage of life as this would be important in order that the sizes could be comparable with current records (Lomolino 1985). Further research into the unexpected densities of S. aranaeus and A.sylvaticus could be done by firstly doing a survey comparable to that on the mainland to identify population densities, and secondly investigating the diet of predators on the island. For example owl pellets could be examined to identify the bones contained within them and to which species they belong. It must be noted however that permission would need to be gained to specifically intend to trap shrews.