Three sided-quadrate samples were taken of the sand at five sites on a transect of the beach. One was taken above the high-tide mark, the second was taken on the tidemark, the third and fourth samples were taken one meter lower each time and the final sample was taken at the lowest line of the tide (Fig 2). The species collected at each site were counted and one of each species was identified using a marine fauna key (Table 4). The average gradient of the beach was 0.02 (Table 2)
It was found that there were clear zones down the beach. Closer to the low tide line progressively more molluscs (Angulus tenuis) and more Cat worms were found, also higher up the beach less samples were found (Fig 4). Site A (Supralittoral) above the tide line showed no results and site two on the tide line showed only a single Diptera larvae, which are predominantly terrestrial or freshwater and not marine, it is therefore an indication of site B on the transect line having very little exposure to the sea.
Different zones support different marine life due to their physical and biological differences. Lower down the beach tends to be wetter and is covered by the tide for longer so the sand is easier to move through. Also organic particles in the sand such as diatoms, which provide food to the filter feeding animals like bivalves get their nutrients from cycling seawater, so have food for longer lower down the beach.
An important aspect of the zonation on beaches is the variation in the meiofauna that lives in between the sand particles. This was not included in our survey and would be an important aspect to look at in the future as it is very abundant and plays a large part in the overall ecology and chemistry of the beach.
The Lady's grave rocky shore is on the north side of the Isle of Cumbrae; it is fairly sheltered by other islands around it along with the mainland. In order to map the rocky shore nine sites were measured using a theodolite, these were placed at intervals of 0.5m down vertically. The average gradient of the beach was 0.20 (Fig 1 and Table 1). Meter square quadrates were taken at seven of these sites; firstly at 1m intervals the additional sites were added to include areas of interest to the zonation study. High tide was between Site C and Site D and low tide was at Site H. Table 3 and Fig 3 show the zonation of species clearly. These are divided as they have varying tolerance to exposure and seawater, which depends on the tides. At the top of the shore plants that can cope with drying up for ten hours are present; these include lichens and some rhodophyceae such as channelled wrack. Midway down the shore Beadlet anemones and small periwinkles are present, also more Brown algaes occur. Nearer the low tide mark where it is only exposed for a few hours, common periwinkles and dog whelks replace the small periwinkle and there are green algaes (Chaetomorpha) present. These zones are occasionally altered by the occurrence of rock pools and crevices that provide more shelter from exposure but generally the zones can be clearly distinguished.