Food manufacture is the process of turning a raw food material into a finished product, usually by means of a large-scale industrial operation in which mechanical power and machinery are employed (Walker, 1999). The food processing industry is continually changing as a result of technological advances and consumer pressures. In industrialised countries consumers no longer require the majority of foods to have a shelf life of several months at ambient temperature, such as that offered by canning and pickling. Changes in family lifestyle, and increased ownership of freezers and microwave ovens are reflected in the demands for foods that are convenient to prepare, and are suitable for frozen or chilled storage. Consumers are now increasingly demanding foods with a healthy or natural image, those containing fewer synthetic additives, or which have undergone fewer changes during processing, and resemble the original raw materials. This is also reflected by the growth in demand for organic foods. Manufacturers have responded by reducing or eliminating synthetic additives from products, substituting them with nature or nature identical alternatives. Ranges of low-fat, sugar-free or low-salt products can be found in nearly all sub-sectors, and foods are often supplemented with vitamins, minerals and even probiotic cultures (Fellows, 2000).
The origins of mans struggle with food can be traced; the development of man and agriculture is divided into three periods: pre-agricultural times, agricultural times and agro-industrial times (Agropolis-Museum France, 2004). Pre-agricultural times, which span from 3 million years ago to 10,000 years ago, are based on collecting, hunting and fishing; man living on wild food taken from its natural environment. He domesticated fire and used shells and bark as simple containers to collect, transport, preserve, cook and eat with. It is apparent that man has always been driven by the need to process food, even in Neolithic times. Man was no longer satisfied with roasted or grilled food, cooked in the dry heat of flames, so he invented earthen pots and cooked foods with moist heat. This gave a greater diversity of dishes and flavours and allowed foods to be mixed in the same meal, thus the culinary revolution preceded the agricultural revolution. On a scientific basis, it can even be argued that the simple and prehistoric process of cooking can be seen as unnatural, however, the French anthropologist, Claude Levi-Strauss gives the argument that while raw food is natural, cooked food is cultural (Weightman J & D, 1975).
Cooking of food generates both flavour and aroma compounds, usually through Maillard reactions of proteins and sugars and through lipid oxidation, but these are now considered natural and indeed are expected in food products.
The agricultural period, which spanned from 10,000 years ago to the beginning of the 19 th century, is based on the domestication of food plants and animals and the development of agricultural techniques. Founder species were selected, for example wheat (Triticum durum), oats (Hordeum vulgare L.), pigs (Sus scrofa domesticus), and cows (Bos taurus). These species were used as the starting basis for agricultural development, although were added to after Christopher Columbus and his successors brought plants, such as maize, potato and tomatoes from America to Europe. Acquisition tools were replaced by Production tools, stone tools by metal tools, manual agriculture by animal-powered agriculture. Agriculture is also responsible for the change in socio-cultural conditions by encouraging the settlement of communities around cultivating lands. With the development of towns, and the increase in population, agricultural productivity had to be increased to provide for the level of consumption. This indicates the 'natural' progression towards food manufacture, through economic necessity, as food gathering was inadequate for feeding the increased population (Agropolis-Museum France, 2004).
The agro-industrial period, which is only a tiny period of time in mans evolution, ranging for the 19th century to present day, is characterised by a combination of agricultural and industrial activities. The development of sciences and their practical application, education and information, and the superiority of new techniques, resulted in the increase of agricultural production. Transportation was revolutionised with railways, steamships and then the motor vehicles, and refrigerated transport allowed for long distance transport of heavy and perishable agricultural produce. The agro-food industry replaced agriculture first in the transformation of agricultural foods for example the substitution of industrial butter for farmer-produced butter, however more recently, it allowed the replacement of homemade foods with ready-made food products. Despite industrialized societies reaching a stage of mass production and consumption, in underdeveloped poor countries starvation and malnutrition remains. More than 840,000,000 people suffer from hunger, which kills 24,000 people every day, or over 8 million each year, of which 75% are younger than five (Oracle Think Quest, 2004).
Society today is heavily influenced by the information provided to them relating to 'food scares'. This information is often misinterpreted and exaggerated. The use of chemical pesticides on foods has been related to the cause of cancer. Bate, 1997 reviews the effect of pesticides in foods and suggests that the carcinogenic effects of synthetic pesticides are minuscule compared to the benefits, in terms of protection from cancer, resulting from eating fruits and vegetables. He argues that regulating the use of pesticides increases the cost of food and thereby reduces the consumption of fruit and vegetables, and that such regulations therefore tend to harm the poor and are not necessarily in the public interest.
Concerning organic foods, Morris & Bate, 1999 argue that if modern farming techniques were to be replaced with organic farming, there would simply not be the agricultural land to produce the same quota of food because of is lower yields. There is also no evidence to suggest that the quality of organic foods is better, and no claims are permitted that organic foods taste better. Genetic modification (GM) is another topic of public concern, yet it has the potential to offer very significant improvements in the quantity, quality and acceptability of the world's food supply, but issues of product safety, environmental concerns, and also ethics must be and are continuing to be addressed. For the development of improved food materials, GM improves pest, disease and herbicide resistance in plants and may also provide drought resistance, improved nutritional content and improved sensory properties. It is also faster and cheaper and allows for greater precision than traditional selective breeding techniques. Morris and Bate, 1999 believe that GM crops hold the key to solving famine over the next 50 years, and to using less land without causing an increase in pollution.
Environmental pollution is caused by contaminants in air, water, or land, by both natural phenomena and human activity. The greatest source of air pollution is the burning of fossil fuels by power plants as well as by motor vehicles, which results in increase in carbon monoxide, lead, nitrogen oxide, carbon dioxide and ozone. All of which have either a known or suspected effect on human health as well as environmental balance. Human activities are often the cause for localised water pollution, as water becomes contaminated with heavy metals, toxic chemicals and bacteria. One of the worlds worst man-made environmental disasters is the shrinking of the Aral Sea, which is now only 3/5 of its size 30years ago. This was caused by the Soviet Unions decision in the 1950s to convert much of the area to land for growing cotton. Rivers, which once flowed to the sea, were dammed and redirected to the plantations.
The water and soil were polluted with salt and chemicals, including nitrates, through heavy use of chemical fertilisers. The draining of water also dried out the areas top soil, producing dust filled with poisonous chemicals, which caused respiratory problems in nearby residents. The contamination resulted in an increase in birth abnormalities, liver cancer, and blood disease in some areas. Fishing was also dramatically affected (The New York Public Library, 1995).
Chemically treated agricultural fields also give rise to heavy metal pollutants such and lead, cadmium, nickel and mercury in water. These can build up in the tissues of animals and are poisonous in excess. Soil erosion, which occurs when vegetation is removed or land use is changed in an area causing top soil to be carried away by water, wind, or ice action, decreases the fertility of cultivated land. Top soil is being lost at a rate much greater than the amount being naturally replenished. Soil erosion is affected by man-made factors as well as natural, including deforestation, such as for cattle grazing or development, uncontrolled land use and poor agricultural and forestry practises. However, the food industry alone is not sole cause of pollution, it is just a contributing factor from the world wide industrial society. The pollution burden is diminishing; economic growth does not seem to be destroying the earth, in fact in many areas pollution has been reduced and an increase in environmental quality seen (Lomborg, 1998).
The UK produces more than 434 million tonnes of waste every year, with approximately 50% of household waste being potentially recyclable, and a further 20% is kitchen waste and other organic matter suitable for composting. Only 5% of dustbin contents are recycled or composted in the UK with around 85% being landfilled. Every day, 45 million food and drinks cans are bought in the UK, of which only 10% are recycled. The UK has a glass recycling rate of only 27% and only 7% of plastic bottles are recycled (The Guardian, 2001). Recycling reduces the amount of materials entering the environment, and is essential because without recycling, many of our renewable and non-renewable resources will eventually become severely depleted. For the food manufacturing industry, the major points of consideration include reducing waste, reusing materials, recycling materials that can be converted into other products, and conserving energy. In the past decade, mandatory recycling had decreased the amount of waste reaching landfills in some areas by more than 50% (The New York Public Library, 1995).
In Germany the Packaging Ordinance has been in force since 1991, therefore their waste practise is well above that required by EU standards, the UK is still to reach these targets (Hitchens et al. , 2000).
It is possible to put these environmental issues into context, for example by examining a supply chain (Hitchens et al. , 2000). The dairy industry consists of primary milk products, pasteurised, powdered, and condensed milk, as well as processing of milk into by-products, both intermediary (such as casein) and final consumer products (cream, butter, cheese and yoghurt). Between 1984 and 1997, there was steady growth of the industry, with consumption increased by 80% and production by 76%. During the same time, however employment in the industry fell by 8% as a result of increased automation. The dairy industry is distinguished by the presence of companies of different sizes, from small specialised industries to large fully automated production. The main environmental issue resulting from the farming stage of the dairy industry is the pollution of water beds by animal farming, which is also apparent in dairy processing activities, where there is considerable water usage and discarding of effluents. During processing, the main problems stem from the disposal of packaging and the recycling of used containers whilst following the EU or national standards of practise.
In many industries, the entire processes of food manufacture can be automated, from the reception of ingredients, through processing and packaging and then to the warehouse. This requires a higher capital investment by the manufacturers, but results in improved quality assurance, reduced production costs and less wastage. Automation increases production efficiency, uses less energy and often fewer operators, and generates an increased revenue and market share because of the resulting high quality of the finished product (Fellows, 2000).
This essay reviews the development of man and agriculture, and ultimately the food manufacturing industry, with particular reference to some of the concerns and also the benefits. Manufactured food is often different to home prepared food, for example the shelf life of foods must be extended with preservation techniques, which inhibit microbiological or biochemical changes to allow time for distribution, sales and home storage.
However with these changes, the food industry is trying to make a positive contribution to society, by increasing the variety in our diets by providing a range of attractive flavours, colours, aromas and textures in food and ultimately in providing the nutrients required for health. Without the scale of modern food manufacture, we could not sustain the population, and the modern lifestyle could not allow for a reversion to natural ways of food gathering.
In this situation, it is more a case of 'normal' versus 'natural'; the whole of industrialised society is dependant on the food industry, in the same way it is dependant on, for example the health care profession. Despite this, it can be argued that we are defying natural selection; since the beginning of time, shortages of food and famine have been the limiting factor to population growth explosions. If food manufacture continues to grow and thus allow our population to expand, we could reach the point were there are not enough other resources on the planet to substantiate life, for this reason, careful consideration must be taken about the long term effects of food manufacture on the environment. In summary, modern agriculture and food technologies provide benefits both to human health and to the environment, therefore, I conclude, that food manufacture, although not scientifically natural is essential, both for our development to date and for the future.