The most significant factor affecting obesity is an individual's energy balance, which is determined by calorie intake and physical activity. An environment that increasingly favours obesity, the so-called obesogenic environment, is driving the rising obesity epidemic. The National Food Survey suggests that over the last 25 years, calorie intake has actually decreased. However, there has been a shift in the composition of the diet; with less food prepared within the home, and increased consumption of highly processed convenience foods, fast foods or takeaways. Consequently, more energy in the diet is obtained from fat and less from carbohydrate; evidence suggests this favours the development of obesity. One reason for this may be that fat has less ability to satisfy hunger, making appetite control more difficult; also, diets high in fat lead to passive over-consumption, unaided by the observed gradual increase in portion sizes. At the same time, there has been a reduction in physical activity levels, resulting from increased automation both in transport and technology in the home and workplace, and more passive leisure pursuits. This causes concern, as obesity is a major risk factor linked to heart disease, diabetes and premature death.
No country is free from the obesity problem, although statistics vary significantly worldwide, as shown by the following graph of global obesity prevalence in Adults (1991-1992) from the National Audit Office:
These large differences can be attributed to very different cultures, diets and lifestyles throughout the world population. Obesity is defined as a body mass index (BMI) score of greater than 30, this is calculated on an individual's weight relative to their height. In England the percentage of the population that are obese has tripled during the last two decades and continues to rise. According to the Department of Health, the percentage of adult women categorised as obese increased from 16.4% in 1993 to 23.4% in 2003, with a further 37.3% described as overweight. Similarly the percentage of adult men categorised as obese increased from 13.2% in 1993 to 22.9% in 2003, with 44.4% describe as overweight. It is estimated that obesity in the UK will soon reach levels similar to the current US situation, where one third of the population is obese.
Metabolic rate is actually raised in obese individuals, as a person is carrying excess weight, more energy is required during daily activities. There is however evidence to suggest that regular physical activity may elevate average daily metabolic rate. Energy expenditure is not only elevated above resting metabolic rate during exercise, but also for several hours following exercise, particularly high-intensity exercise. This sort of activity is likely to be avoided by obese people.
It is widely accepted that children of obese parents are at higher risk of adult obesity. Although environmental factors are considered the most important determinate of body weight and composition, more than a dozen genes have been identified, that if mutated, may predispose people to obesity. This was first observed in obese (ob) mice, where a hormone, called leptin, which is responsible for switching off hunger was missing. However most obese people do not lack leptin, contrarily, they have more than normal people, but their body does not seem to respond to it.
Current Department of Health recommendations for adults are 30 minutes of moderate activity at least 5 days per week, for example, a 2 mile walk. Activity can be accumulated throughout the day, in sessions of 10 minutes or longer, including housework or gardening. However, to prevent obesity, many people will need at least 45-60 minutes of activity most days. Children and young people should have 60 minutes of moderate physical activity each day. Only about 24% of women and 36% of men in England are sufficiently active (estimates from Health Survey for England 2003). Physical activity can aid weight loss; the body maintains an energy balance where the difference between energy intake and energy expenditure reflects a change in body energy stores. By increasing exercise and maintaining energy intake, the body will become deficient in energy and at first use emergency carbohydrate (glycogen) stores, following which, it will use fat stores for energy, providing exercise is continued. Not only will exercise aid weight loss, but regular physical activity throughout life is associated with better physical and mental health and well-being.