Semillon's home is in the South West of France, including Monbazillac, but more particularly Bordeaux, the regions of Graves and Sauternes, where it is the most widely planted white grape.
Semillon produces small clusters of medium sized fruit, which when fully mature produce lively, dry white wine. These are most commonly blended with Sauvignon Blanc and often a little Muscadelle, to produce a wine that is less dry and acidic, with more richness and complexity, than Sauvignon itself can achieve. As well as dry wine, Semillon produces excellent sweet wines, made from the same blend, grown in Sauternes, Barsac or Monbazillac. Semillon is extremely susceptible to a fungal rot called Botrytis cinarea or noble rot, which is disastrous if it attacks unripe or damaged grapes. However, when it attacks ripe, healthy white grapes, the fungus, which grows on the surface of the grape, makes microscopic holes in the skin, allowing water to evaporate, concentrating the natural sugars. This enables small yields of extremely concentrated juice that produces sweet wines. (Wilson, 1998)
Bordeaux - Graves: The Graves appellation, located just outside the town of Bordeaux, produces white wine, which generally fresh, fruity and dry, with hints of fig and melon. The appellation of "Graves suprieurs" is strictly reserved to sweet white wines. The growing region is 3,000 ha, with 25% land production being for white wine and a total of 22 million bottles of wine produced. Bordeaux - Sauternes: Sauternes is famous for sweet dessert wines, which are often golden, with delicate hints of honey, dried pineapple and nut, and a roasted note appearing with age. The growing region is 1,800 ha, producing 4.5 million bottles. South west - Monbazillac: Located, in the Dordogne valley, south of Bergerac, Monbazillac, produces sweet viscous white wine with flavours of honey, vanilla, apricot and orange. The growing region is 2,200 ha, producing 6.5 million bottles. (Terroir-france.com, 2005) Outside France, Semillon is grown in California, Chile and Australia. In the Hunter Valley of Australia, Semillon produces some of Australia's most interesting white wines, with grapes picked early at low potential alcohol and unoaked, to give acidic white wines that mature to develop character (Wineanorak.com, 2005).
The essential property of a quality wine-producing area is to permit growth and favourable maturation of grapes. The French word, terroir encompasses the interaction of the vine with the geology and geography of the vineyard, including elements such as the soil, slope and localised climate (Wilbey, 2005). Maturation of grapes is affected by light, heat and water availability. Photosynthesis is optimum at a sun radiance of 700 E/m 2/s; a reduction in photosynthetic activity can result in a nutrient deficiency. In the absence of clouds, sun radiance is greater than 2500 E/m 2/s, but on cloudy days it varies from 300 - 1000 E/m 2/s. Temperature affects budding and flowering, as well as grape growth and maturation. During growth, the optimum temperature is 20-25 oC, any higher is unfavourable to cellular multiplication. Optimum vine temperature during maturation is 20 oC, any higher and sugar accumulates in other parts of the vine, to the detriment of the grapes. Grape development below 10 oC for most varieties is very difficult. Temperature also strongly influences biochemical mechanisms such as malic acid degradation, the composition of grape phenolic compounds and development of aromatic substances.
A satisfactory water supply is necessary for both growth and maturation, however most quality wines are produced in regions where annual rainfall does not exceed 700-800mm. Excess water supply retards maturation and modifies grape chemical composition; in Semillon it gives a strong grassy note. Heavy rains near maturity can cause berries to burst due to rapid water absorption across the grape skin. In Bordeaux, where the climate is temperate, the moment at which the best or worst climatic conditions occur has a greater influence on grape quality than absolute temperature or total rainfall. (Ribreau-Gayon, 2000)
The soil, directly affects the development of the root system and consequently the vine water and mineral supplies. Being a natrophic plant, the vine accumulates little sodium, providing a level of resistance in salty soils. The table below indicates approximate ranges of nutrients needed by grapevines (Jackson, 1994):
The soil in the Graves appellation is mainly gravel, limiting the growth of other vegetation, however the roots of the vines are able to seek out the lenses of clay, silt and dirty sand, that are interbedded and hold moisture and mineral nutrients, key to the successful growth of vines such as Semillon. Water drains rapidly through gravel and coarse sand, but the lenticular stratum within the mound slows the downward movement of water, storing it in pores for later use. This is critical to the conservation of water, in an area were irrigation is not permitted (Wilson, 1998). Rootstock, plant density, trellising methods, vine management and disease also affect maturation, and therefore quality. Semillon is notably vulnerable to bunch rot and fanleaf degeneration. (Jackson, 1994)
A maximum sugar concentration without loss of berry weight indicates the completion of maturation. In Bordeaux, Semillon must have 176g of sugar per litre, below which, the wine has a vegetal aroma, and an optimum acidity at time of harvest of 4-5g/l; correlates to ideal maturity. The best terroirs for making aromatic dry white wines allow slow and complete maturation. In a climate, which is too cold, maturation is not sufficient; in a climate, which is too warm, the increase in sugar concentration may result in premature harvest, before other grape constituents are fully mature. The personality of dry white wine is due to varietal expression and its particular aromatic profile, resulting from a given terroir. When producing sweet wines, Semillon must obtain 12-13% potential alcohol and have a pH of less than 3.2 before any fungal development. The development of noble rot requires a particular climate, ideally with morning fogs to assure fungal growth, followed by warm afternoon sunshine to concentrate the grapes for relatively long period of 2-4 weeks. In Bordeaux vineyards, this corresponds to the establishment of a high-pressure ridge extending the anticyclone from the Azores to the north-east (Ribreau-Gayon, 2000). In 2001, Sauternes benefited from an Indian summer, producing wines with great potential (Spurrier, 2002).