European imperialism in the pre-World War era appears aggressive, coercive and plainly exploitative. Indeed, it seems antithetical to liberalism that is embedded on the principles of self-determination, autonomy and individual freedom. However, this incongruity between nineteenth century European metropolitan theory and non-European colonialisation has been accurately accounted for by neo-Marxists such as Lenin. The 'Highest stage of capitalism' theory emphasises that the annexation of exotic territory was influenced purely by economic needs, as imperialism was essential for the very survival of capitalism; the acquisition of materials such as rubber, copper, sugar, tea and diamonds would elevate the income of the rising bourgeois and the proletariat and keep domestic public discontent down to a minimum, an idea amplified by advocates of the social imperialism theory. Interestingly, this interpretation is suggestive of a crucial point: that imperialism is not a direct contradiction of liberalism but liberalism itself is paradoxical. As Raymond Williams highlights, it is a 'doctrine based on individualist theories of man and society' and thus implies that individuals are politically equal, but have the freedom to be economically dissimilar; theoretically, a strange blend of universality and differentiation. This mixture is also the bedrock of imperialism; the phenomena was not just driven by economic self-interest, as Marxist interpretations would lead us to believe, but also by ideology that intended to 'provide the natives with the guarantees essential to the good distribution of justice and lead them prudently and consistently to a higher level of civilisation'.
This universalism, in the form of importing liberte, egalite and fraternite, combined with racialism, in the sense that the French believed they had a right to adopt coercive and violent measures against the colonised for the sake of manufacturing a liberal society simply because they perceived themselves to be morally and materialistically superior, is criticised by Alice Conklin, who exemplifies Frances's mission civillastrice in West Africa. She shows that although the French abolished the slave trade in 1905, introduced the politique des races between 1908 and 1914- an exhaustive attempt to attack the 'continuing institution of aristocratic rule in the form of hereditary chiefs'- and established an education system which all Africans could infiltrate, not just children of the old elite, so 'a society in which careers would be... open to talent rather than based on privilege' would be created, they failed to follow these principles themselves. Fascinatingly, all West Africans were treated as subjects and not citizens, although France was viciously anti-monarchical. Notably, France concealed this by passing the 1907 naturalisation law which allowed worthy natives to rise to equal citizenship with the French; accordingly, this diverted attention from the large majority that actually remained subjects. Disguise was also used by the British who 'displayed submissive maharajahs in jewelled robes- freely loyal rather than captive' at royal jubilees and coronations. Apparently, supposed liberal ends justified illiberal imperial practices and resultantly the colonisers 'managed to obscure the fundamental contradiction between democracy and the forcible acquisition of an empire'.
However, the detachment of imperialism with liberalism denies firstly that civilisation was not seen as a peaceful construction born from the willingness and education of Africans, and secondly that the beginning of superior Europe was 'characterised by struggle, conflict, and crisis'. Significantly, Hardt and Negri elevate the paradox of liberal ideology: 'A contradiction that runs throughout European modernity...the immanent forces of desire and association, the love of the community, and on the other, the strong hand of an overarching authority that imposes and enforces an order on the social field'. Chiefly, just as an enlightened and educated few had to guide the French masses in the post-Revolution period to ensure an 'achieved condition of refinement and order', namely civilisation, the European superpowers now perceived themselves as having a duty to elevate the backward and irrational natives to a higher standard of living: 'Colonial subjects...were not just barbarians, they were barbarians capable of, and in the process of receiving, civilisation understood in the most democratic and universal sense'.
But, illiberal means to a liberal end being central to European liberalism is questionable as in the 1906 British general election, the Liberal Party in Britain achieved a landslide victory principally because of its anti-imperialistic message: it was against the existence of Chinese slavery in South Africa. Moreover, liberal philosopher J.A. Hobson condemned imperialism, believing a minority of business elites who perverted true capitalism and exercised illegitimate and undemocratic influence over government and mass opinion controlled it. This is exemplified by the fact that approximately forty-five percent of Britain's cotton exports went to India; a plausible reason for creating formal colonies- namely Egypt and South Africa- which would guarantee trade access to the 'the brightest jewel in the imperial crown'. Additionally, Schumpeter detached imperialism from liberalism, offering an alternative interpretation of it being a feature of the old pre-capitalist autocratic and militaristic elite trying to hold on to some form of influence by flying the imperialist flag with liberal colours. Nevertheless, Hobson and Schumpeter seem to deny that nineteenth-century classical liberalism is a two-headed monster; an inherent part of the ideology is uncontrolled economic advancement and the establishment of an authority that guarantees security. Indeed, 'the anarchic organisation of the international system of states' was repaired by the epoch of empire between 1875 and 1914.
The notion that imperialism is a perversion of liberalism is elaborated by the observations of Eric Hobsbawm; the impulse for imperialism, the very act of imperialism itself, and the intended outcome were far from being liberal, apart from in an economic sense. Certainly, Australia, New Zealand and Argentina all had developed labour and radical democratic parties and systems of public social welfare and security before any of the European superpowers. Furthermore, the New Colonialism of the latter part of the nineteenth century was mainly a 'by-product of an era of economic and political rivalry between competing national economies'; the acquisition of colonies became a status symbol and declaration of power- surely, Italy did not have liberal tendencies when it conquered undesirable stretches of African desert and mountain- and also often a disguise for militaristic and demographic inferiority, as was the case with France. This search for supremacy also explains the fact that racism was rampant in the metropolis: Italian workers called strike-breakers crumiri, after a North African tribe, and the French called criminal gangs Caids, originally the name of indigenous chiefs. Ultimately, this shows that imperialism was merely a last struggle by government to achieve some degree of rule as their own countries slipped into the unconquerable system of democracy where all member of societies were treated as equal, confirmed by the mounting consideration and eventual implementation of universal male franchise in 1918. The view of imperialism being utterly illiberal and demonstrative of pre-democratic practices, for the French even mirroring the conduct of the detested ancien regime, is substantiated by the fear amongst some imperialists of colonial self-rule: 'Europe will shift the burden of physical toil...on to the coloured races, and itself be content with the role of rentier, and this way... pave the way for the economic and...political emancipation of the coloured races'. This is demonstrated in the Irish campaign for self-rule, a country that is seemingly educated, civilised and Western enough to govern themselves; the Conservative and Irish Unionist Party opposed the proposal staunchly between 1910 and 1913, even at the cost of igniting civil war. To Hobsbawm, the creation of liberal institutions in the colonies was merely a clever 'rationalisation of empire' and a deterrent of the real, unimpeded liberation of the subjugated natives.
However, this interpretation denies the expensive and exhaustive attempt of the colonisers to improve their colonies economically and socially. In 1870, for example, there was two hundred thousand kilometres of railway worldwide. By 1914, there was just over one million. India flourished because of this: by 1913, it was second only to Britain in the world as a supplier of cotton yarn, and because of the development of a 'sensitive inter-regional crop failure grain trade', the United Provinces of Northern India, for example, was able to import roughly 725, 000 tons of grain to lessen the catastrophic effects of a severe famine in 1907. Moreover, in West Africa, the French eradicated only four traditional African institutions: indigenous languages, slavery, barbaric customary law and feudal chieftaincies. Unquestionably, to claim that imperialism was not rooted by any degree of social liberal theory, but instead solely on the seeking of power and increase in material, is to neglect the genuine post-Enlightenment humanitarian urge to intervene beyond Europe to better the circumstances of non-Europeans.
To adopt a wholly cynical, Marxist view of imperialism- that there is an immediate link between monopoly capitalism and colonialism- is to still agree that the phenomenon is a branch of economic liberalism. However, this rejects an additional dimension to imperialism that perhaps makes formal imperialism more liberal then informal imperialism, which is conventionally thought of as the symbol of 'the free-trading and freely competing liberal world of the mid-century': the creation of a wider society based on the principles of equality, individual freedom and rational not backward or supernatural thought. Just as informal imperialism is regarded as the economic high point of capitalism, formal imperialism was the high point of social universalism. Here, we have met the crux of this argument: that universal civilisation and equality, according to imperialists, was a manufactured state, not a natural one. The colonisers, therefore, had a right to ensure the natives attained a higher state of society through undemocratic and often violent methods. It is a contemporary fashion to be sceptical of imperialism if you believe in such liberal values as human rights, autonomy and freedom. But one must examine more closely the contradictory nature of liberalism in the nineteenth century to understand why imperialism originated from and was part of this ideology.