By ancient decree, commercially grown grape vines and wine production are not allowed in Brittany. The nearest wine comes from the Loire valley, particularly Muscadet from the Nantes region (Purefrance.com, 2005).
With Carnac's proximity to the region, Muscadet would be the ideal choice of grape, having thick skin and being hardy and an early ripener. In this region, soils vary from Clayey-limestone, limestone, siliceous and chalky soils, but are Muscadet is usually grown in regions of granite. The weather is influenced by the Atlantic, with warm ocean currents resulting in mild winters and warm summers and also a damp climate.
Establishment and operating costs can vary significantly. Major establishment costs include land, land preparation, labour, grapevines, trellis materials and pest management materials. The site should be prepared by weeding and fertilisation to increase the organic matter content of the soil. Ripping the soil to a depth of 5 feet, and establishing a ridge of soil about 10 inches high and 2 feet wide, on which vines are to be planted may be advantageous. This will provide an improved surface and internal drainage, and allow for deeper rooting, also preventing ponding of water around the base of vines, which can lead to disease. Soil may be tested for fertility and pH, and if necessary nutrients, such as potassium, and limestone, to achieve pH 5.5-5.6, may be added. Planting would typically be in straight rows running in a north-south direct, to allow for maximum sunlight interception. If the vines were to be planted on a slope, it may be necessary to plant across the slope. If pest control is to be an issue, it may be advantageous to plant the rows parallel to prevailing costal winds. Rows should be spaced, with a distance of 8-10 feet, or wider if larger harvesting equipment must be accommodated. Planting should take place in early spring, when the risk of frost has passed. Roots should be soaked and pruned as necessary, and the planting hole large enough to accommodate the root system. For grafted vines, the graft union should be at least 2-3 inches above the soil level to prevent scion rooting (Vine et al., 1997).
It is important to properly train vines during the first few years of growth. Trellising can vary extensively, but all function to support the weight of heavy ripening fruit and to establish a vine form, which is easy to manage. It is especially important to provide good weed control during the first several years of vineyard establishment. Young vines do not compete well with grasses and weeds for soil nutrients, moisture and sunlight. Weed control may be achieved either mechanically or through use of herbicides for larger plantings. After a vineyard is established, management practises take over. Grape vines require annual pruning to remain productive and manageable. Control of diseases and pests is necessary to maintain healthy leaves and protect the fruit from various types of deterioration (Vine et al., 1997).
White wines are exclusively produced by the fermentation of grape juice. The flow diagram below illustrates the basic outline of the procedure:
Picking may be by hand for minimal damage and maximum selection, but this is expensive, therefore machine picking is common, with greater damage to the fruit as a consequence. Juice extraction and varying degrees of clarification precede alcoholic fermentation. The sensory characteristics of a dry white wine are particularly dependant on the conditions of the pre-fermentation operations of picking, crushing, pressing and clarification.
The schematic below (DSM-Oenology.com, 2005) illustrates some of the equipment that would be used in the commercial production of white wine:
Stems are removed by a de-stemmer, to avoid excess tannin extraction and transfer of vegetal characteristics. Grapes are crushed to allow juice extraction, but pressing should be gentle enough that juice extraction from grape pulp only, and not stems, seeds or skins. Grape must may be treated using SO 2 and possibly ascorbic acid, to improve colour and fruit flavour. In the New World, particularly, grape juice is then clarified in order to remove solid particles: wild yeast and oxidases from the must before fermentation. This prevents the formation of off-flavours and vegetal characteristics and reduces SO 2 combinations. Clarification processes used include centrifugation, filtration or flotation. During alcoholic fermentation, natural sugars present in the must are converted into CO 2 and ethanol. This process is a complex series of conversions carried out by enzymes within a yeast cell. The sugars provide yeast with energy to continue fermentation until alcohol reaches a level where it becomes toxic and actually inhibits their growth. Fermentations vessels for most commercial wines are stainless steel, however oak may be used for premium wines. Fermentation temperatures of 15-20 oC are regard as normal for obtaining good fruity flavour. Malolactic fermentation is less practised in white wine production, but may be used to deacidfy the wine by the conversion of malic acid to lactic acid by bacteria (Ribreau-Gayon, 2000).
In Nantes, Muscadet winemaking is according to the Sur Lie method. The wines are left over winter in either the barrel or vinification vat. During this time, the wines feed off the fine lees in the vats or barrels. The surplus of carbon dioxide, this produces gives a very slight carbonated nature, which increases the wines freshness (Azureva.com, 2005).