The world population is becoming increasingly older, which understandably has led to recent public interest. Ageing or senescence is a natural biological process that occurs in all multicellular organisms. It is the progressive decline in an organism's physiological processes, over its normal life cycle, however particularly after the reproductive phase of life. Ageing leads to a restriction of the adaptive capability of an organism, through functional impairment of cells, tissues and organs; stimulates the development of age-related diseases; shortens the lifespan, and ultimately leads to death.
Statistics from the 2001 UK Census highlighted, that for the first time there are more people aged over 60 than there are children. The proportion of the population aged under 16 has decreased to 20% from 24% in 1951, whilst the proportion of the population aged 60 and over has increased to 21% from 16% in 1951. This ageing of the population reflects longer life expectancy due to improvements in living standards and health care. The ageing of the UK population is particularly evident when considering the number of people aged 85 and over; in 1951 this was 0.2 million people or 0.4% of the total UK population, however by 2001 this had grown to 1.1 million or 1.9% of the total population.
These figures are comparable worldwide; elderly people currently represent approximately 20% of the total world population, which may reach an estimated 25% by 2020.
At preset, there is no single theory explaining the process of ageing, instead it is viewed as a result of multiple processes. However any proposed theory must explain several phenomena:
Firstly, although maximum lifespan is fixed, actual lifespan is affected by environmental conditions. Raymond Pearl first suggested this theory in 1928, based on the effect of temperature on lifespan in Drosophila. He found the higher the temperature, the shorter the lifespan, as the flies' biochemical reactions occurred faster at higher temperatures. Secondly, Caloric Restriction (CR) during early growth phase of life has been shown to extend life span in many types of animals, e.g. Drosophila, C. elegans, and there is also preliminary evidence suggesting that it extends life span in rhesus monkeys. How CR works is uncertain, however evidence points to metabolic readjustment in order to utilize energy more slowly and efficiently; increased antioxidant defences or reduced free radical production.
Genetic theories propose that ageing is a continuation of the development process, and is encoded into our genomes, based on evidence that the stability of DNA decreases with age, and the transcription of information from chromosomal DNA to RNA becomes less efficient and mutations can occur in senescent cells. Work with flies (Drosophila), yeast cells (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) and the nematode worm (Caenorhabditis elegans) has established the presence of genes that regulate lifespan, and disorders of human ageing, e.g. Werner's syndrome, provide further evidence that some genes have a major effect on ageing.
One genetic theory of ageing is the telomere shortening theory. Telomeres are structures found at the end of chromosomes in eukaryotic cells, which prevent the loss of genetic material after each cycle of replication, and thus enable the complete replication of chromosomal DNA. In humans, telomeres, which also function to protect the ends of the chromosome from damage and prevent fusion, are composed of several thousand repeating base sequences e.g. TTAGGG, that are generated by the enzyme telomerase. As mammalian cells approach senescence, telomeres begin to shorten, with the loss of 25-200 base pairs at each chromosomal division. Genetic theories of ageing suggest this occurrence is part of the body's molecular clock and that short telomeres trigger the onset of ageing. Evidence for this theory is found in patients suffering from Hutchinson-Gilford syndrome, a rare disease that results in premature ageing; where pronounced shortening of telomeres is evident.
One metabolic or damage accumulation theory of ageing is the free radical theory. This was first introduced by Denham Harman (1956), and it proposed that normal ageing results from random damage to tissues by free radicals. Free Radicals are 'unstable highly reactive and energized molecules having unpaired electrons' (Kaur & Kapour, 2001). They react quickly with the nearest stable molecules trying to attain the electrons needed to gain stability, thus activating a chain reaction when the molecule that has been attacked losses an electron and becomes a free radical itself. Once started, this process can initiate lipid peroxidation, which leads to destabilisation and disintegration of the cell membranes or oxidation of other cellular macromolecules such as proteins and DNA, ultimately resulting in an accumulation of damaged molecules. Some free radicals arise normally during metabolism: the body's immune system creates free radicals to neutralize viruses and bacteria; they are formed in the mitochondria during the electron transport chain and during some enzymatic reactions and metal catalyst redox reactions. Other free radicals come from exogenous sources including environmental factors such as air pollution (O 3, NO x), sunlight and ionising radiation; cigarette smoke, alcohol and drugs. Free radicals, therefore have beneficial effects, but also induce harmful oxidation and cause serious cellular damage if generated in excess.
The body is not without protection against free radicals. Damage to lipids, proteins and DNA, and can be prevented by antioxidants. Halliwell & Gutteridge (1999) define an antioxidant as 'any substance that, when present at low concentrations compared with those of an oxidisable substrate, significantly delays or prevents oxidation of that substrate', where the term 'oxidisable substrate' includes every type of molecule found in vivo. Antioxidants neutralize free radicals by donating one of their own electrons, but do not then become free radicals because they are stable in either form. The body's defence system to combat free radicals includes various antioxidant enzymes, e.g. superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase and glutathione peroxidase, and there is some evidence for their role in slowing ageing from model studies. Mutations that extend life span have also been found to increase resistance to oxidative damage in C. elegans, Drosophila melanogaster, and mice. Furthermore, over expression of superoxide dismutase in Drosophila also extends life span. This evidence supports the theory that free radical damage is a significant determinant of ageing. What remains unclear is whether free radical damage is the primary cause of ageing, or whether it is a secondary effect.
Antioxidants can be lipid or water soluble, and an antioxidant network is present because they do not work in isolation. Significant sources of antioxidants are fruits and vegetables, of which the government recommends we eat at least 5 portions per day. Fruits and vegetables contain significant levels of biologically active components that impart health benefits beyond basic nutrition, including fibre, vitamins A, B, C, E, selenium and phytochemicals such as flavonoids, lycopene and carotenoids. Epidemiological studies have constantly shown that there is a clear significant positive association between intake of fruit and vegetables and degenerative diseases, as well as ageing (Cao et al. , 1998). However, because the mechanisms of ageing are not fully understood, there is great importance in increasing intake of antioxidants through diet, rather than through supplementation, because the benefits of phytochemicals are not yet fully determined.
Antioxidant defences do not protect completely against free radical damage. A balance exists between sources of oxidants and the antioxidant defences, and if the formation of free radicals exceeds the free radical elimination then oxidative stress occurs. Oxidative stress reduces the capability of combating ageing, and serious illness including cancer, atherosclerosis and heart disease.
Healthy ageing is the process of optimising health and quality of life as people age, and is important because ageing will put increased economic and social demands on all countries. Elderly people are more susceptible to diseases such as coronary heart disease, cancer, Alzheimer's, osteoporosis, Parkinson's disease, and dementia. By encouraging healthy ageing, the prevalence of these diseases may be reduced and the quality of life improved amongst the elderly. Healthy ageing is dependent on proper nutrition as well as a healthy lifestyle, including moderating alcohol and smoking and obtaining sufficient exercise.
This essay reviews the population statistics, the telomere shortening theory and the free radical theory of ageing, and the role of nutrition in healthy ageing. An increased population of elderly people, particularly those aged 85 and over, will put increased economic and social demands on all countries. Encouraging healthy ageing is necessary to reduce the prevalence of diseases in the elderly such as CHD, cancer, Alzheimer's, osteoporosis, and Parkinson's. Models with Drosophila, S. cerevisiae and C. elegans have established the presence of genes that regulate lifespan, strengthening genetic theories of ageing such as telomere shortening. Evidence from model studies also implements the role of various antioxidant enzymes in slowing ageing. Mutations that extend lifespan have also been found to increase resistance to oxidative damage and the over expression of superoxide dismutase in Drosophila also extends lifespan. This evidence supports the free radical theory of ageing. However these molecular mechanisms need to be better understood, but given the rapid progress in the research into ageing during the last 10 years, there is a real possibility that during the coming decades scientists will attain a full understanding of the causes of ageing. In the meantime, an increased dietary intake of fruits and vegetables, by all ages, together with a healthy lifestyle appears the best way to ensure the healthy ageing of our population.