The processes of protein modification and cross-linking by glycation and autoxidation, has received much scientific attention. As a result the Maillard reaction has been associated with ageing, cancer, Alzheimer's disease and diabetes.
Diabetes mellitus is a metabolic disorder that results in excess glucose in the blood because the body is unable to use it properly. There are two types of diabetes: Type 1 - insulin dependent diabetes (IDDM) and Type 2 - non insulin dependent diabetes (NIDDM). Insulin is a hormone produced by the beta cells in the islets of Langerhans of the pancreas. It promotes the storage of glucose in the liver and the uptake of glucose by the body's cells. Type 1 diabetes develops when the beta cells have been destroyed, possibly by an abnormal reaction of the body to the cells, triggered by a viral or other infection. This type of diabetes usually appears before the age of 40, and is treated by insulin injections although a healthy diet and regular exercise is recommended. Type 2 diabetes develops when the body cannot make sufficient insulin, or when the body's cells become resistant to the effects of insulin. Type 2 diabetes usually appears in people aged 40-75, particularly those who are overweight. It tends to run in families and is more common in Asian and African-Caribbean communities, where it often appears before the age of 40. It is treated by diet and exercise alone, or combined with tablets or insulin injections. Other causes of diabetes are very rare but include pancreatic diseases. Diabetes affects approximately 1.4 million people in the UK, equivalent to 3% of the population, of which over three-quarters have Type 2 diabetes. There is however an estimated one million people undiagnosed (Diabetes UK, 2000).
Diabetics have a higher chance of developing certain serious health problems, particularly those who are very overweight, who smoke or who are not physically active. These complications include coronary heart disease (CHD), stroke, hypertension, circulation problems, nerve damage, and damage to the kidneys and eyes. Persistently raised levels of blood glucose damaging the nerves and blood vessels is the cause, therefore controlling blood glucose and blood pressure can significantly reduce the likelihood of these complications. However delays of 9-12 years in the diagnosis of diabetes after onset means that one-third to half of all diabetics already have evidence of organ or tissue damage (UK Prospective Diabetes Study Group, 1991).
As a result of persistently raised blood glucose worsening atherosclerosis and arteriosclerosis, people with diabetes have a substantially increased risk of developing CHD. Diabetics are also more likely to have a stroke, due to the effects of prolonged raised blood glucose on the blood vessels serving the brain. Foot ulceration, resulting from nerve damage (neuropathy) and lack of blood supply (ischaemia) is the commonest reason for diabetics in the UK to be admitted to hospital, and people with diabetes are 15 times more likely to need amputation, as a result of ulcers becoming infected and gangrenous, than people without the condition. Diabetic retinopathy - eye disease caused by damage to the capillaries at the back of the eye - is considered to be the leading cause of blindness in people of working age. Diabetic nephropathy - kidney disease caused by diabetes - is one of the most serious complications of diabetes. It is caused by excess blood glucose damaging the capillaries in the kidneys and by raised blood pressure. Diabetic nephropathy is the leading cause of complete kidney failure, with approximately 8% of diabetics in the UK receiving treatment for kidney disease (Diabetes UK, 2001).
In 1912 a French scientist called Maillard discovered that heating amino acids and reducing sugars led to the formation of yellow-brown pigments. For the next 60 years the Maillard reaction was studied extensively, and shown to be responsible for the generation of aroma and flavour compounds, as well as the decreased nutritional availability of foods, which occurs after prolonged storage. The initial step of the Maillard reaction is a reaction between carbonyl compounds such as amino acids and reducing sugars such as glucose. Subsequently there are many complex steps including 'Amadori rearrangement' and 'Strecker degradation', before ultimately melanoidins (brown nitrogenous polymers and copolymers) are formed.
More recently, the importance of Maillard reactions in vivo has been recognised, and studies since have focused on its role in the biochemical abnormalities occurring in diabetics.
The term Advanced Glycation End-products (AGEs) was introduced to describe Maillard products that form in vivo under normal physiological conditions of glucose concentration, pH (7.4) and temperature (37 oC) (Cerami A, 1994).
Studies of the non-enzymatic glycation of proteins in vivo began with the discovery of elevated amounts of haemoglobin A 1c in the blood of patients and animals with diabetes. Haemoglobin A 1c was shown to result from modification of haemoglobin A. The rate of formation of haemoglobin A is dependent on the ambient blood glucose concentration and was found to be three times faster in diabetics, resulting in the measurement of three times the expected amount of haemoglobin A 1c. Structural studies of haemoglobin A 1c revealed that a glucose Amadori product was attached, however the presence of Amadori products in vivo is not restricted to haemoglobin, and has been found to occur on the amino-terminal amino acid and the -amino groups of lysine of many different proteins. As in the case of haemoglobin, the amount of Amadori product on these proteins was increased in diabetics.
This discovery led to the search for further Maillard rearrangement products on long-lived proteins. Crystalline proteins of the ocular lens were the first tissue in which AGEs were described. Yellow-brown fluorescent pigments were noted to accumulate in the lens with age, and at an accelerated rate in diabetics. These pigments were also found to be capable of cross-linking proteins. The progressive accumulation of AGEs on lens crystallins in vitro was observed to lead to the formation of high molecular weight aggregates that mimic the formation of diabetic cataracts. Connective tissue collagen, another long-lived protein, has also been found to accumulate AGEs in vivo. The AGE content of human collagen increases over lifespan, and is higher in diabetics. From model studies it has been observed that the AGEs that are found on collagen are associated with increased cross-linking of collagen molecules, and can also cross-link various serum proteins trapping plasma proteins, which could result in tissue damage.
Requena et al. (1998) extends the study of Maillard reactions in vivo to reactions of aminophospholipids with glucose, and with products of glucose and polyunsaturated fatty acid autoxidation. N(carboxymethyl)lysine (CML) is an AGE product formed, in vitro by reaction of proteins with reducing sugars under oxidative conditions. CML can be produced by the oxidative cleavage of the Amadori compound, fructose-lysine in vitro and following autoxidation of glucose, which yields glyoxal, which in turn can react directly with lysine to form CML. Findings indicate that CML can also be formed by the autoxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) independent of carbohydrate. These studies demonstrate a complex in interaction between oxidation of sugars and lipids during the Maillard reaction. Elevated levels of circulating AGE-lipids were also reported in diabetic patients vs. healthy individuals.
Therefore, the browning of proteins via the Maillard reaction in vivo involves nonenzymatic autoxidation and/or enzyme-catalysed catalysed oxidation of carbohydrates, lipids and amino acids. Carbohydrates also contribute to non-oxidative browning of protein by rearrangement and elimination pathways. A common feature of both the oxidative and non-oxidative reactions is the formation of reactive carbonyl compounds, suggesting that carbonyl stress, as well as oxidative stress, is involved in chemical modifications of proteins during the Maillard reaction. As a result, the AGE hypothesis of protein glycation has evolved to accommodate a role for carbonyl and oxidative stress. In light of this, evidence suggesting the therapeutic use of free-radical scavengers, antioxidants, and metal-ion chelators in preventing oxidative stress and glycation is being examined.
The hypothesis that the Maillard reaction is important in the pathogenesis of the complications of diabetes is further strengthened by studies, which show that daily injections of AGE-peptides into rats led to the progressive accumulation of AGEs in the tissue and the development, over several months, of the pathological changes seen in diabetic animals.
Macrophages, the body's scavenger cells have been found to posses specific AGE-receptors that could mediate the uptake and breakdown of AGE-proteins. They remove the senescent molecules that have accumulated AGEs and initiate the steps that led to new protein synthesis. However, the removal and replacement of senescent proteins, which have accumulated AGEs is easily disrupted by the excessive net accumulation of AGEs in the tissues of diabetics and ageing individuals.
A number of groups around the world have confirmed the ability of aminoguanidine to inhibit AGE formation and protein cross-linking in experimental animals as well as to prevent a number of diabetic complications, including nephropathy, neuropathy and retinopathy.
This essay discusses diabetes, the Maillard reaction, and its role in diabetic complications, including inhibitors of advanced glycation reactions. Significant scientific research has highlighted the importance of Maillard reactions in vivo in the occurrence of diabetic complications, with elevated levels of AGE proteins and lipids reported in diabetic patients. Maillard rearrangement products, capable of cross-linking proteins and causing tissue damage were found on long-lived proteins of the ocular lens and connective tissue.
The AGE hypothesis of protein glycation has evolved to accommodate a role for carbonyl and oxidative stress, after the discovery that AGEs can also be formed by the autoxidation of PUFAs. Macrophages have been identified as an AGE removal system in vivo, and aminoguanidine as an inhibitor of AGE formation, and cross-linking in experimental animals. Current studies are investigating the therapeutic use of free-radical scavengers, antioxidants, and metal-ion chelators in preventing oxidative stress and glycation, and thus their role in diabetes, ageing, cancer and Alzheimer's.