The high oxygen level, relative to air serves to increase the depth of the oxymyoglobin layer at the meat surface. Oxymyoglobin is a pigment, which gives meat the desirable bright red colour, as in freshly cut meat. Oxymyoglobin is the oxygenated form of myoglobin (see below). 80% O 2 extends the colour shelf life of the beef because it delays the oxidation of oxymyoglobin to the brown pigment metmyoglobin, which gives the meat an unattractive brown colour. The high CO 2 level improves the microbial stability of the meat, because it provides unfavourable conditions for microbial growth. This system of modified atmosphere packaging would not be useful for white fish, because fish muscle does not contain myoglobin. Veranth (1979) suggests a mixture of 60% CO 2, 20% O 2 and 20% air would be better for the modified atmosphere packaging of fresh fish. This is because the high CO 2 level is effective in preserving the fish.
The authors suggest that a complicating factor in this study, which leads to no clear effect of dietary supplementation on muscle vitamin E content, may be the inclusion of silage in all diets. They believe that the -tocopherol content of the silage may be sufficiently high to affect the tissue -tocopherol levels in the cows. If this diet provides levels of -tocopherol sufficient to cause tissue saturation, then supplementation of vitamin E will give no further benefits. The animals' magnitude of response of plasma and muscle to dietary vitamin E also differed, due to factors such as the animal's size and metabolism. They suggest, from other experimental studies carried out, that plasma vitamin E levels in animals fed silage did not respond to supplementation.
Packaging with N 2 or CO 2 reduces the formation of metmyoglobin, and thus helps maintain the red colour of the meat. Because the rate of metmyoglobin formation is greatest at relatively low oxygen concentrations, oxygen either has to be completely excluded from the packaging, or present at an exceptionally high level for colour maintenance. MAP containing 80% oxygen gives a thick layer of oxymyoglobin, which will maintain the red colour of the meat for a few days, however this will oxidise on storage to form metmyoglobin, giving the meat a brown colour. Samples containing high levels of vitamin E are unacceptable because the presence of the antioxidant is only sufficient to maintain the colour of the minced beef for short periods, and not for 32 days.
In Group 1, meat containing 2.4-2.6 g vitamin E per gram, there is very good correlation between the oxymyoglobin content and extent of lipid oxidation, supporting the theory that lipid oxidation is an important contributor to discolouration in beef. In subsequent groups lipid oxidation was greatly reduced, with only a fraction of the TBARS being detected after 8 days storage. In Group 2, meat containing 2.8-3.6 g vitamin E per gram, lipid oxidation increased gradually on storage, whilst oxymyoglobin fell. In Group 3, meat containing 3.6-4.4 g vitamin E per gram, lipid oxidation was approximately half that seen in group 2, however oxymyoglobin levels fell by similar amounts. In Group 4, meat containing 4.4-6.2 g vitamin E per gram, lipid oxidation is reduced further, but the oxymyoglobin content is similar to the previous two groups after 8 days storage. These last two sets of data, suggest little correlation between the extent of lipid oxidation and the oxymyoglobin content of the meat samples. This may be because the beneficial effect of vitamin E on colour preservation reaches a plateau at concentrations similar to those in group 2 samples.
Lipid oxidation in beef is prevented by antioxidants such as vitamin E. In its role as an antioxidant, vitamin E delays the oxidation of myoglobin to metmyoglobin. It neutralizes free radicals intermediates of the lipid oxidation process by donating one of its own electrons, but does not then become a free radical because it is stable in either form. Because metmyoglobin formation is temporarily retarded, the red colour of the meat is preserved. However the effect of vitamin E is only temporary, because if the source of free radicals outweighs the source of antioxidant (plasma and muscle levels of -tocopherol) oxidative stress occurs and the myoglobin will be oxidised to give the brown pigment metmyoglobin. Alternatively, muscle constituents such as metmyoglobin reductase, which have a positive impact on colour may be protected by antioxidants from potentially damaging oxidising lipids.