To investigate the range of properties of various food packaging materials by a series of simple tests.
Packaging is important in all food processing operations, and can be defined in terms of its protective role - 'packaging is a means of achieving safe delivery of products in sound condition to the final user at a minimum cost'. The functions of packaging are:
Packaging provides a barrier between the food and the environment. It controls light transmission; the rate of transfer of heat, moisture and gases; and the movement of micro organisms and other pests. Moisture loss or uptake is one of the most important factors that controls the shelf life of foods. The permeability of the packaging, together with the vapour pressure of moisture in the food at the temperature of storage, will effect the moisture exchange, and as a result, will effect microbial and enzymic spoilage, condensation on the inside of packaging and resulting mould growth, drying out or softening of foods, or the extent of freezer burn (Fellows, 2000). Dehydrated foods require packaging that has a low permeability to moisture, otherwise they will lose their crispness, and if their water activity (a w) rises above the level, which will permit microbial growth, they will spoil.
Foods that contain high levels of lipids or other oxygen-sensitive compounds are spoiled if the packaging has an inadequate barrier to oxygen. However, fresh foods, which are respiring, and have a high relative humidity (RH), require a degree of permeability to allow the exchange of CO 2 and O 2, without the excessive loss of moisture that would cause weight loss and shrivelling (Fellows, 2000). Chilled foods require controlled movement of water vapour out of the packaging to prevent fogging in display packs when the temperature changes, and foods packaged in modified atmospheres require careful control of both gas consumption and water vapour movement to achieve expected shelf life.
The table below illustrates selected properties of packaging films (Fellows, 2000):
Packaging should be sufficiently impermeable to retain desirable odours and prevent odour-pick up, and there should be no noticeable odour pickup from plasticisers, inks, adhesives or solvents used in the manufacture of the packaging material. Plasticisers and pigments loosen the film structure and increase its permeability, however permeability is not just related to the type of film, it is also affected by the type of gas or vapour and the relative humidity. Plastic films are joined together by heat seals; the strength of which is tested for various films in this experiment. An inadequate heat seal in polymer films, caused by the contamination of the seal with the product or faulty heat sealer settings, is one of the main causes of microbial contamination of adequately processed foods (Fellows, 2000).
The suitability of a packaging film to protect foods from environmental damage depends on its ability to withstand puncturing or fracturing. In this experiment the bursting strengths and heat seal strengths of the packaging films give an indication of their behaviour under stress. The molecular structure of polymer films may be aligned in different ways, depending on the type of film and the method of manufacture, and this will result in varying properties of strength for different films. A flexible packaging film is a non-rigid, non-fibrous plastic polymer, which is less than 250m thick (Fellows, 2000). There are a very large number of possible combinations of polymer and treatment, to meet the varied requirements of foods, providing a range of mechanical, optical, thermal and barrier properties:
Refer to practical schedule for the methods followed during this experiment.
Each member of the group carried out the rapid tests on a different packaging material, as stated in the practical schedule, and the results are summarised in table 1, which is taken from Pg. 7 of the practical schedule. The following materials were analysed:
As well as the rapid identification tests, the following mechanical and physical properties of the packaging materials were investigated:
When tests were carried out, three repeats were taken, and the average used, providing a reading didn't differ from the average too considerably, in which case it was disregarded.
The bursting and heat seal strength was measured using a Stevens machine, in which a 12.5cm length of the sample material was fastened into a tension cell and the load applied until the material failed or 100% extension was achieved. The heat seal was created from 2 strips of the material, using the appropriate time and temperature, according to the material, and as advised by the supervisor. For the water vapour permeability test, a disc of material 80mm diameter was exposed, giving an area of 0.005m 2. The dishes were stored in a controlled humidity cabinet at 25 oC and 75% RH. One repeat was taken for each material, and the weight was measured after 5 and 7 days. Permeability to odours and flavours was measured for all 5 materials and a control was used for comparison. The judges were allowed water in between each test, and the average opinion is given in the results table.