The objective of this practical was to provide an understanding of the procedures to produce UHT milk by direct processing, and evaluate the quality of a range of heat-treated milk products.
With direct UHT treatment, the milk is heated to sterilisation temperatures by mixing with steam. Some of the steam condenses giving up its latent heat of vaporisation to the milk and giving a faster rate of heating than indirect processing. It is possible to inject steam into the milk, as used in the pilot plant, or to pump the milk into a steam chamber as a curtain or spray, known as infusion. These two methods give different characteristics. This method of heating can cause considerable dilution of the milk, for example increasing the temperature of the milk by 60 oC also adds approximately 11% water as condensed steam (Lewis & Heppell, 2000). The design of the holding tube for the required residence time must therefore take into account that the flow rate within it will be greater than the inlet flow rate. Cooling may be by an indirect heat exchanger, but this does not remove the water added as steam, and so is not suitable for use when processing milk.
For those food products, such as milk, were water addition is not acceptable, or where very rapid cooling is required, flash cooling may be used. In flash cooling, the milk is expanded through a restrictor into a cooling vessel, usually a cyclone where the pressure is below atmospheric. Water in the milk immediately boils, giving water vapour, which is removed from the vessel and condensed. The milk is cooled very rapidly due to the loss of the latent heat of vaporisation. Dissolved gases such as oxygen and any volatile or flavour components such as H 2S and CH 3SH 3 which are derived from sulphur-containing amino acids and are responsible for the cooked flavours of milk, may also be removed from the milk (Lewis, 1996). The amount of water removed, and the temperature the milk is cooled to is controlled by the pressure in the vessel. Products which are shear sensitive or that contain discrete particulate solids cannot be cooled this way because the pressure is maintained using a valve.
The thermal efficiency of a direct heating system is increased by indirect regenerative heating before the steam is injected. This is achieved by either heat transfer from the outgoing product after initial cooling, by the recovery of heat from the water vapour liberated by the flash cooling, or by using the condenser cooling water on exit from the condenser, when it has been heated. The milk temperature before mixing with steam must be closely controlled, and any indirect preheating stage must also be controlled, therefore after preheating the outlet temperature is measured (Lewis & Heppell, 2000). It is also normal with direct heating to homogenise after sterilisation. The steam quality is important, and contamination of the milk by steam pipe corrosion or boiler feed water additives must be prevented.
The diagram below illustrates the typical temperature-time curve for a direct heating continuous-flow thermal process:
Indirect heating is often used to raise the temperature to 80-85 oC, followed by direct heating to give the final sterilising temperature. After the designated holding time at the sterilisation temperature, expansion cooling follows where the vacuum in the cooling vessel is normally controlled at a level corresponding to a boiling temperature a little above that of milk before mixing with steam. The vacuum level will remove the same amount of water added as condensed steam.
There are many different steam injector systems, but they all aim to meet the same requirements with the least cost and minimum complication. The principle requirement is the rapid condensation of steam, to give rapid heating, and to prevent bubbles of uncondensed steam getting into the holding tube. If this were to happen it would reduce the effective holding time at the sterilisation temperature by displacing liquid and increasing the effective volume throughput of product in the holding tube, and as a result could lead to insufficient processing. Rapid condensation is achieved by introducing the steam into the liquid in the form of small bubbles that have easy access to the liquid. It is also encouraged by having an adequate back-pressure in the liquid, above that needed to prevent boiling, at the steam injector.
The second requirement is for the lowest possible pressure difference between the liquid and the steam. Higher steam pressures lead to higher product temperatures where the product first contacts the steam, causing excess damage to the product through overheating. In addition, the steam must be at a higher pressure than the product, up to 1.5 bar extra, in order to give the required flow rate and good mixing characteristics, and will therefore be at a higher temperature. The steam and product must be thermally separated as far as possible until they reach the mixing zone, for products where fouling may occur. Surface fouling can occur if parts of the injector carrying the product are at high temperature through heat transfer from the steam. This interferes with liquid flow within the injector and causes deterioration in the performance. Injectors are therefore designed to minimise indirect heat transfer between steam and product (Lewis & Heppell, 2000).
Below is a diagrammatic representation of the process plant used for the direct UHT processing:
The product is pumped from a level-controlled balance tank through a heating section where it is preheated by the outgoing product. It is then further preheated to a constant temperature approximately 75-85 oC in a heat exchanger by hot water circulation. Controlling the temperature of the hot water controls the temperature of the milk at the outlet of the pre-heater. A high-pressure pump then supplies the milk to the steam injector and the holding tube, where the pressure must be high enough to prevent boiling of the product and the separation of dissolved air, and also give satisfactory steam condensation within the injector. Too low a pressure will make it difficult to maintain processing temperature and holding time (Swartzel & Jones, 1980).
The cooling vessel is kept at a suitable vacuum by condensation of the released water vapour in a condenser with a back pump. The vacuum corresponds to a boiling temperature 1-2 oC higher than that of the milk at the outlet of the final pre-heater. This temperature difference is needed to ensure that the correct amount of water vapour is removed to compensate for the addition of steam during heating. A valve at the end of the holding tube retains the high pressure in the injector and holding tube and then as the milk passes into the low pressure in the cooling vessel it boils and is rapidly cooled. The cooled product collects at the base of the vessel and is then pumped to a homogeniser and then the regenerator before it is aseptically packaged.
The turbulence caused by direct heating may result in the breakdown of the homogenisation. It has also been found that steam injection encourages the formation of casein aggregates, which can give a chalky mouthfeel to the product (Hostetter & Imhof, 1963). This is minimised if the aggregates are broken down by homogenisation after sterilisation, however an aseptic homogeniser is required.
The amount of steam condensed during the heating stage of direct UHT processing is very significant in relation to the amount of product. Small errors in the balance of water removal will have considerable practical and commercial effects on the total product volume, even though the change in product composition may be impossible to detect. Differential temperature is a very precise way of controlling composition, as a deviation of differential temperature from the set point by 0.6 oC gives a concentration or dilution of 0.1%. A fall in sterilising temperature will cause a dilution of approximately 0.12% per oC; and a rise in sterilising temperature will cause a similar concentration.
The pilot plant was prepared according to the instructions on page 15 of the practical schedule and raw whole milk was processed. The methods for alcohol stability testing were followed as on page 21, testing the stability of samples in 70, 80, 100% alcohol. The fat, protein and lactose and SNF content of samples were measured using the Dairylab II Infrared Analyser as on page 28, and freezing point depression was measured using a cryoscope as on page 30 of the practical schedule. Microbiological testing on all the samples was adapted from page 22-23 of the schedule, and turbidity testing as written on page 21.
The whole process time was measured as 126 seconds
Flow rate was measured by the time taken to collect 1 litre, which was 24 s, 24 s, 25 s, and 25 s.
This is an average time of 24.5 s. 60/24.5 = 2.45 l min -1 which is equivalent to 147 l h -1.
The whole process time was measured as 126 seconds, this is quite fast, but indirect UHT processing only took 80 seconds in comparison, however the flow rate was measured as 147 l h -1, which is faster than the flow rate of 147 l h -1 for indirect UHT processing. The readings taken for the processing conditions give an indication of the typical temperature-time curve of the process. The milk is fed into the process at 7.7 oC and indirect heating is used to raise the temperature of the milk to approximately 75 oC, followed by direct heating using steam at 145.0  oC to give the final sterilising temperature of 142.0  oC. After the designated holding time at 142.0  oC, expansion cooling reduces the temperature of the milk to 70.0  oC. Finally the product leaving the process is cooled to 10.4  oC by transferring its heat to the incoming milk during the regeneration step. The pH decreased from 6.88 in Raw Milk to 6.70 in direct UHT Milk, compared with a reduction from 6.79 to 6.65 for indirect UHT milk. This is because during heating, some water dissociates to form hydrogen ions, which increases acidity. It appears that the direct milk undergoes a greater reduction in pH taking the original pH of the milk into account, although this is not significantly different. This may be because more water is present in the milk during direct UHT processing. This pH seems suitable, as the pH of shop-bought UHT milk was 6.62 and shop-bought sterilised milk was 6.59.
Good quality milk should be stable in 80% alcohol. The minimum requirement for UHT treatment is that milk should be stable in 74% alcohol solution. Raw milk that is not stable at the required level may be susceptible to fouling. Fouling causes extensive problems in the processing of milk as it reduces the efficiency of heat transfer and can present microbiological problems. Burton (1988) suggests that the alcohol stability test is a useful indirect test for assessing whether UHT - treated milks are microbiologically sound; it is recommended that such milks should be stable in at least 68% alcohol. The results from alcohol stability testing have shown the raw milk to be of good quality, with loss of stability between 80 - 100%. The UHT milk had no change in the alcohol stability, suggesting it is microbiologically sound and has not been significantly altered during the processing. This is compared with UHT indirect processing where the milk lost stability at 80% alcohol. These results indicate that direct UHT processing is a milder treatment for the processing of milk.
The fat decreased from 4.10% in the raw milk to 3.60% in the direct UHT milk. Although Burton (1988) suggests that some free fatty acids are lost during processing, I believe this reduced reading is due to dilution, which has occurred from steam injection. This is confirmed by decreased readings in both protein, which was 3.39% in the raw milk and 3.00% in the direct UHT milk; lactose, which was 4.63% in raw milk and 4.11% in direct UHT milk; and SNF which was 8.70% in raw milk and 7.79% in direct UHT milk. Calculation of the percentage reduction in fat, protein and lactose is in accord with dilution of the milk, as the reductions are all very similar: 12.5% reduction in fat, 11.5% reduction in protein, 11.2% reduction in lactose and 10.5% reduction in solids non fat (SNF). Comparison with the readings for the shop-bought UHT milk and sterilised milk also suggests the milk is diluted.
Freezing point depression values of - 0.535 oC are normal. A freezing point depression value of - 0.512 oC, which was measured from the raw milk, would warrant a warning letter according to the Code of Practise for the Assessment of Milk Quality. A freezing point depression value of less than - 0.450 oC is indicative of considerable dilution. Values of freezing point depression nearer zero are indicative of diluted milk, as it is the solutes in the milk, which cause the reduction. The freezing point depression values for shop-bought UHT milk and sterilised milk were measured as - 0.513 oC and - 0.505 oC respectively, and are within an acceptable range, not indicating any dilution.
Calculation of the minimum residence times, and subsequent lethality has shown that processing at 142.0 oC with a minimum residence time of 2.35 seconds, is equivalent to a lethality of 4.82. This information suggests that the milk has been adequately heat-treated, as the minimum value for F 0 for a low acid food is 3.
The turbidity test is used to estimate whey protein denaturation. If whey proteins have been denatured they will not pass into the filtrate and as a result the filtrate will be clear. Negative testing indicates all whey proteins were denatured, and the degree of turbidity is an indication of the amount of remaining whey proteins. Whey protein denaturation is just one indicator of chemical damage and provides a fairly simple way of estimating the amount of chemical damage in general. The expected results from turbidity testing in increasing order of whey protein denaturation are raw milk, pasteurised milk, UHT direct milk, shop-bought UHT milk, UHT indirect milk, boiled milk and sterilised milk. This is because more severe heat treatment results in greater product damage. Sterilised milk should give a negative turbidity result as an indication of sufficient processing, as sterilisation usually denatures all whey proteins. UHT processing is claimed to denature between 60-90% of whey proteins, and should therefore normally give a positive turbidity reading. Our results are similar to the expected results with raw milk, then pasteurised milk, however sterilised milk did not appear to have a negative result. UHT indirect milk, UHT direct milk and shop-bought UHT milk all had very similar turbidity results as the treatments were very similar. Boiled milk, which has been subject to severe heating has a negative turbidity result. UHT milk produced by the direct method should have a greater turbidity than indirect UHT milk, because the process is milder.
The results from the microbiological testing show that the raw milk produced a high colony count. Pasteurised milk and boiled milk produced no colonies, whilst UHT direct milk produced some colonies. This was probably due to contamination from the container or from the air after processing. UHT indirect milk, which had been incubated for a week produced a high colony count probably due to any contaminating bacteria being able to multiply over the incubation period. The two shop bought samples also produced a few colonies, most likely resulting from contamination from the absence of aseptic conditions. In order to be considered safe, the milk samples are only allowed to produce a few colonies, usually 10, but high colony counts are indicative of a microbiologically unsafe product. The results seem to suggest that both the direct and indirect UHT processing were effective at destroying microorganisms, however the growth from the incubated samples shows how detrimental the effect of post process contamination is and how in the appropriate storage conditions the product can spoil.