The study looks at the interaction between the different species of ant present within the site, and the kind of influence a species of ant has on another species of ant. If one species of worker ants were present in one area of the site would it encourage other species of ants, or deter other species of ants from entering this area. The question this was looking at was; is one ant community dependent on the presents of anther ant community? The results from this study showed that Leptothorax nylanderi and Formica fusca had an effect on each other which was also true for Leptothorax nylanderi and  Tetramorium Caespitum. Were as Formica fusca and Tetramorium Caespitum had no effect on each other, there two communities were interacting randomly. The study then looks at as to why these species interact or coexist together.
The second aspect of this study is how the structure and types of habitats affect the structure of an ant community. Does the amount of coverage in an area influence the amount or the species of ant found at that location? The results produced in a T-test showed that  Leptothorax nylanderi and  Tetramorium Caespitum preferred the patches with a lower amount of cover, were as Formica fusca is mainly found in patches with 50% or more cover. This study then looks at why Leptothorax nylanderi and  Tetramorium Caespitum prefer low coverage and Formica fusca seems to prefer the high coverage.
Ants come under the category of hymenoptera and they are one of the groups within this order that are eusocial, ants belong to the family Formicidae, but because there are so many species of ant (9,000 worldwide) 10 subfamilies have been created (Dorling 2001). The colonies are structured with a queen ant which is the only Female to mate; the fact that she is the only one to mate means the queen is the only one that can produce a female. The male in the colony can be produced by an unfertilised egg so any female with ovaries in the colony can produce a son by Parthenogensis (Sudd and Franks 1987 as cited from Myrmica;Smeeton, 1981). However most females in the colony are infertile and without ovaries this is because it is the females in an ant colony that are the worker ants, so they are produced infertile. Reproduction in an ant is determined by the ant's diet, a rich diet will ensure the ant becomes reproductive, and reproduction is only carried out by the queens and males in the colony (Dorling 2001). The queen will remain in the nest while the worker ants will go out and forage for food and raise the young.
For the structure of the ant community to be maintained it requires the ants to be able to pass information between them. The ants' method of communication relies on pheromones which can be used to produce the 'colony odour' which allows nest mates to identify each other, this pheromone dwells in the cuticles of adult ants and is not present in young ants, the pheromones that are not linked to 'colony odour' are secreted from specialised exocrine glands. Another pheromone is the alarm pheromones which cause the ants to attack any foreign being that enters their colony. The other types of pheromone used are recruitment pheromones which help in obtaining recourses and sexual pheromones used in mating. It was Holldobler (1978 as cited in Sudd & Franks 1987) that placed the types of pheromones into these categories.
Within a community there is a verity of jobs that need to be done, the jobs are delectated by age, and this process is based on a polyethism system (Sudd and Frank 1987). The youngest worker ants remain in the nest were it is safe and perform duties such as tending to the queen, maintaining the nest and taking care of the brood. Foraging duties are given to old worker ants because this work contains more hazards and these ants are near the end of their life. It is these old worker ants that this study looks at, for they are what leave the nest.
This study was carried out at Rennes field centre in Paimpont, France. The study looked at the community structure of ants in different habitats, since the worker ant is the only ones to leave the nest it was the structure of worker ants that was looked at.
To be able to address how different habitats affect the structure of ant's community a site was needed that contained a wide rang of habitats. The area this study was conducted in was 15m by 18m and was on a very gentle slope that sloped downwards (fig1).
The site contained a variety of habitats, short grass lands, long grass, concrete, stones, rocks, mud, burnt grassland, mossy cover, dead bush, gorse and brambles. The pictures below show some of the variety of habitats contained within the site.
Grid the site out into1m squared squares and places the letters A-O along the top and the numbers 1-18 down the side. Make a map of the site including all the vegetation present on the site (as in fig 27). Randomly generate a set of coordinates and use this random system to select your locations for the quodrates. Take four quodrates sized approximately half a metre and place them together at the selected coordinates to make one large quodrate. Record the coverage within each small quodrate, and then spend a minute on the quadrate counting the amount of each species of ant that are present within a quadrate. Collect one specimen from each species of ant you find and take it back to the laboratory to be keyed out down to its species. When recording how many ants were present also record what activity they were undergoing, and what the weather was like at the time.
When the entire grid has been quodrated take you data and do a CHI 2 test and a t-test on the data for the amount of coverage present and the amount of ants present.
The table below show how many species of ant was found in each grid on our site and the percentage of coverage for each grid.
Research has been done on the types of interactions that accrued between ants, the interactions have been categorised into groups depending on how much the two species interacted. The groups ranged from cohabitation with no interaction to a complete association between a parasite and the host colony (Lenoir etl 2001). The ants that fall between these two extreams of interaction are the thief ants, which only interact when the thief ant steals pupae or the forage from another worker ant of a different species. Formica fusca tends to be a victim of Solenopsis fugax which raids the nests of Formica fusca (Sudd + Franks 1987). Another ant that steals pupae from Formica fusca is  Polyergus rufescens (Sudd 1967), however none of these two raiding ants were found on our site. The results gathered from our site showed Formica fusca to have a relationship with Leptothorax nylanderi, the chi squared test showed that Formica fusca and Leptothorax nylanderi benefited from each other, this is seen in the fact that you have a higher amount of them together than expected. Nether of the two species of ant have ever been recorded as acting as parasite or host ant to the other species. So this suggest another reason for the association, Leptothorax nylanderi has been recorded to form temporary mixed colonies in the summer, this fusion of unrelated ants can accurse due to the shortage of nesting site (Lenoir etl 2001). However in this study a nest was found for both species of ant, the fact that both species of ant now have their own nest dose not rule out the possibility that earlier in the year the two species of ant did coexist as one colony put makes this hypothesis unlikely. The other possibility is that Leptothorax nylanderi once was a large colony that split into two leaving one colony without a queen ant, so for this community of ants to survive they needed a queen ant, so formed a mixed colony with Formica fusca (Lenoir etl 2001). This behaviour from Leptothorax Nylanderi has been recorded before, if you look at fig 26 you can see around the nest site of Formica fusca there is quite a few Leptothorax Nylanderi species present. The behaviour of the ants was recorded in this study as well and none of the ants around this nest were acting acresavle to each other. The two different species of ants would have different 'colony odours', so the Formica fusca ant should have secret an alarm pheromone and attack the Leptothorax Nylanderi. The evidence from this study suggests that these two species of ant are reliant upon one another for their communities to survive, and it is quite likely they have formed a mixed colony to allow the survival of both colonies.
The results also show Leptothorax Nylanderi to have a relationship with Tetramorium Caespitum, though the reason for this interaction appears to be a different reason to that of the reaction between Leptothorax Nylanderi and  Formica fusc. Teramorium Caespitum has been recorded as beening a host ant to Anergates atratulus only when the colony of Teramorium Caespitum is without a queen ant (J.H.Sudd + N.R.Franks 1987). Teramorium Caespitum has also been recorded as having a range of ants which are parasitic off them. However the site of our study dose not contain the parasitic ants, instead it shows an interaction between two species of ant that apparently benefits from each others presents. Neither of these two species has been recorded as acting as a host to the opposite species or as an ant that raids the others colony for pupa. The reason for the interaction between these two species is highly speculative, the study shows no evidence to suggest any reason for there interaction, and there appears to be no records of these two species interacting. The two species could be beneficial to each other by providing each other with protection from predators, if they share the same predator its more likely that at least one ant from one species will spot the predator. H.A Gleason hypothesis as to why different species would interact is because they require similar abiotic factors (Cited from Campbell, Reece & Mitchell 1987). However F.E Clements came up with an interactive hypothesis that is the community is linked by biotic interactions without these links a community cannot function as a unit (Cited from Campbell etl 1987). Whether these two species of ant are interacting due to biotic or abiotic factors cannot be determined from this study. The reason for the interaction between them cannot be determined from this study only speculations can be made, for a more accurate reason for the interaction between the two species they would have to be observed in more depth.
Tetramorium Caespitum and  Formica fusca where found to have a chi 2 of 1.79430 which is lower than one degree of freedom (3.84), this means there presents in one area has no effect on the other species. There is no association or dissociation between these two species, the location of these two species is random and not influenced by the other species. The other species found on site were only located in small numbers that where not sufficient to do a chi 2 test. However if you look at the Location of formica pratensis's nest (grid A,6 fig27), you can see a behavioural pattern in the worker ants foraging routine. The nest is located at the edge of the site, then if you look at the location of each species found on site (fig 26) it shows formica pratensis is only located in the A column, this suggest that formica pratensis forages to the side of the site and only has its nest within the site. This shows an interesting structure to Formica pratensis worker ants, there worker ants only forage in one direction from there nest, which takes them off the study site. If you look at the location of Leptothorax Nylanderi nest you can see they use a different structure for there foraging techniques, instead of just foraging in one direction from the nest they forage all round the nest, this can be seen in fig 26. Formica fusca's nest is located on the opposite side of the site from Formica pratensis. Formica fusca's worker ants appear to forage all over the site but because the nest is located at the edge of the study it cannot be determined if they forage all round there nest or just to one side as Formica partensis dose.
Another aspect looked at in this study was whether the time of day effected the presents of ants. The start of the day when it was cool and still damp resulted in very few ants of any species being present, by the time morning had warmed up more ants are about, by mid day the majority of ants are out. In the evening the nest for Formica fusca was discovered and ants were located around the nest but other than that no ants were found in the evenings. All the species of ant in this study have a preference to warm conditions, all the colonies of these ants only send there worker ants out in the warmest parts of the day to forage.
The temperature is not the only aspect to affect the amount of ants present in an area, the type of habitat present also effect the location of the ants. Leptothorax nylanderi seem to have a slightly preference to a lower amount of coverage (see fig 8). There is only a slight difference between the amount of ants located in the 50% regain and the 90% reign. However there are a few more ants located between 10% cover and 50% cover than between 50% and 100% coverage. Fig 9 confirms that Leptothorax nylanderi does not like the high percentage coverage. Tetramorium Caespitum is another ant that prefers the lower percentage covering to the high percentage covering, (this is shown in fig 14 and 15). Formica fusca on the other hand was found mainly in the 50% to 100% coverage (fig 20); however fig 21 shows the high percentage patches to have more of Formica fusca absent, suggesting it's not a preferred coverage. The reason for this may be due to or site containing a high proportion of high coverage areas and only a few Formica fusca. Leptothorax nylanderi and Tetramorium Caespitum are never found in an area without any cover, a reason for this may be because they are to exposed to predators. Leptothorax nylanderi and Tetramorium Caespitum also avoid the high coverage patches, if they are in the high coverage patches it's to shaded for them, they like warm conditions, so the go for an intermediate between being exposed or being to cold and go for mid coverage. The other ants found on the site were only found in small numbers, so there was insufficient data to determine their preferences to coverage.
The structure of the ant communities found on site varied slightly from species to species. The structure of the communities were partly effected by the surrounding habitats, for habitat influences the location the ants are most likely to be found in, for example a Tetramorium Caespitum colony is most likely to be found in an area with 30 to 50 percent cover. However it is not just the habitat that affects the structure of an ant community, the abiotic factors also influence the way the colony is structured. All the species of ants in this study preferred warm dry conditions, worker ants only go out to forage in dry warm weather, on a wet day the structure of the colony changes, foraging is replaced with another task.
The biotic factors also contribute to the structure of the community. The majority of the ants found on this site had some kind of effect on another species of ant, though this study can only draw speculation as to why different species of ants are interacting, it dose appear that on this site Formica fusca and Leptothorax nylanderi are reliant upon one another. Should Formica fusca disappear from the site then the community structure of Leptothorax nylanderi would fall apart for it is likely this colony is dependent on Formica fusca queen. If this is the case then Leptothorax nylanderi cannot maintain a community on this site if this habitat loses Formica fusca. However the presents of one species is not interracial to all species Tetramorium Caespitum and  Formica fusca had no effect on each other so the loss of Formica fusca would not effect Tetramorium Caespitum, though another biotic factor would effect  Tetramorium Caespitum. Each colony of ants located on this site functions in a different way to the next and is affected by different aspects of the habitat. However it is not just the variation in habitats that affect the ants community structure but a range of factors.