Malaria can cost an individual and an organisation in a range of way, from the obvious financial cost to the cost of personal health and the not so obvious cost to the environment.
America spent $42 million on research for malaria in 1993. The amount spent on research for malaria in 2004 was around a billion dollars (M.Chirimi 2004). However despite all the money that has been spent on malaria no drug has been created that is 100% protective against all the strains of malaria and there still remain some resilient strains that present day drugs have no effect on.
The amount of money going on research is a significantly large sum, but unfortunately the results coming out are still not significant enough to combat malaria. However in the past more money has been spent in other fields of medical research, such as cancer research (the current amount spent on cancer depends on the type of cancer), than in malaria research. In 1993 America spent $2.4 billion on research into cancer and since then the treatment methods for cancer have improved. If more money was to go into researching malaria then it would increase the chance of finding a cure.
The economical cost of research is significantly high, since all the research is done in a developed country and then the products are shipped to a developing country, it buts a significant strain on the economics of a developing country. The estimated cost of malaria for a developing country such as Africa is $1.8 billion.
In 2001 300,000,000 people where infected with malaria and between 1,000,000 and 1500,000 people died, death is then the greatest cost of malaria. Malaria occurs in the 3 rd world country were recourses are limited and most people make a living by working ever hour possible, however when they become sick they are no longer able to work so there family losses one persons income, but it dose not stop there other members of the family have to take time off to look after them resulting in more reduction in further poverty.
If you are living in a country infected with malaria then there are several different types of malaria and different times when you are more likely to be susceptible to contracting malaria. There are night biting mosquitoes that transmit Japanese encephalitis this form has a working vaccine and cost an individual approximately 25 a dose, however one dose will not permanently protect you, so you will continuously be paying out on a monthly base. The most expensive cost to an individual comes from the day biting mosquito which in some parts of the world transmits dengue fever, and as of yet there is no cure or vaccine against this, there is a risk of catching this all year round but the highest period of catching dengue fever is just after the rainy season.
The cost to the individual then varies depending on were they live, if it is an area where vaccines work then the cost to then is in money, only when they cannot afford it dose the cost become there life. However for people living in areas were dengue fever and any other resilient strain is a high risk then the cost to them will be there health and or there life. Indisputably this is to greater price to ask people to pay, and research should then persist to try and find a cure or vaccine against all strains of malaria.
The cost to the environment is an indirect cost of malaria, malaria itself causes no damage to the environment but people's actions in preventing malaria have. The pesticide DDT was a very effective pesticide but the consequences of DDT were server to the environment. Another approach was to swamp Mashes with paraffin in the attempt to kill anopheles larvae (Forum. F, 2003 ). DDT provided a complete eradication of malaria in some parts of Africa, but it provided us with another problem. DDT was beginning to effect fish and was gradually making its way up the food chain until it started to effect bird populations. This approaches to prevent malaria had creating a far greater problem than malaria. The effects DDT had were not seen for a few years after use but they caused an entire population of birds too decline.
What if we find a cure to malaria that turns out to have devastating effects on the earth, is sacrificing part of the environment a fair cost? Should we then restrict the research to medical approach rather than a direct approach at the mosquitoes, so as to limit the amount of damage that could be done to the environment?
The ethical aspect of treating malaria can be viewed from two different perspectives Egocentric and altruistic.
Not treating malaria meant the 3 rd world populations remain at a low level. However
Parts of the 3 rd world were malaria had been treated the population grew, which caused a decline in the economical development of the country (E.J.Cohn 1972). Should we then not bother to develop new treatment? If new treatments where developed then would it be ethical to cure someone and let them live a life of poverty in a country that would be on the brink of economical collapse, this view that the country as a whole is more important than the individual is very much an altruistic view. Then on the other hand is it ethical to stop research just so there would be enough money and jobs to go around? Each individual has the right to existence. It would seam that at current what ever path is taken the out come will be unethical. The most immoral part of this paradox is it is concerned with making money and not human life.
Should it be decided to continue with developing drugs against malaria and administrating them to the 3 rd world countries, we are then faced with the problem of how to inshore that treatment is not stopped prematurely. If it was to be prevented in administrating it then that country would be vulnerable to malaria, the natural immunity that may once have existed would no longer be present within the population and an endemic would occur. A simple thing like a change within the government could result in the prevention of administrating the drugs, or inflation within prices could just make it to expensive for that country to continue buying them.
Once it has been decided that research into preventing malaria should go ahead, should we be restricting the methods used in combating malaria. One of the current proposed ways of overcoming malaria is the complete annihilation of mosquitoes, but do we have the right to extinguish an entire species to save lives? This was the approach taken in Africa in the 1950's they used DDT to try and eradicate mosquitoes, and it reduced the death rates of malaria by 70% (J. S. Shikwati 2003) However DDT was band for causing environmental damage, and the developed countries imposed this bane onto these countries, so it would appear that we already have restricted research away from a potential cure to save another species, which some people claim as being a noble act. However this then means they are again reliant on the drugs manufactured in the developed countries, which we then charge them a fortune for. We can not then tell them we are no longer going to research treatments for malaria, and they are not allowed to use DDT as a pesticide, it would be immoral.
Research should continue into the treatment of malaria it may just lead to the cure. Break through are still being made in malaria research only recently it was discovered that a gene on chromosome 7 of Plasmodium falciparum is responsible for the resistant strain of malaria, work has began on the modification of the drug chloroquine so as to combat the resistant form (C. Ward 2004). If we stop research how many people are going to die? The success of the drugs to data has not been astounding, but the drugs of the future could be far more successful, how will we know if we do not try?