DDT was introduced in the UK in 1947 as a pesticide, the effects this pesticide would have were not fully known then and we can still see the consequences today. DDT inevitably affected birds of prey such as Peregrine Falcons and Sparrow Hawks. Due to DDT's chemical composition it acts as a lipophilic molecule and accumulates in fats. So when DDT entered the environment and found its way into the food chains, where the birds of pray are the top predators, it started to accumulate in there fat reserves and effect them.
This experiment looks at the eggshell thickness of the sparrow hawk and the falcon and sees a decline in the shells thickness after DDT was introduced. Through this experiment it can be seen that the Peregrine Falcons eggs had suffered the greatest reduction in eggshell thickness as a result of the introduction of DDT into the environment. However no permanent damage has been done to either bird's eggshells.
This practical is looking at the effects of the pesticide DDT on the population of Sparrow Hawks and Peregrine Falcons. The practical enables us to calculate the eggshell index and see how the use of DDT has affected the eggs of these two birds of pray.
The eggshells are looked at because this is one of the aspects of the birds' physiology that is affected by DDT. DDT is the chemical 1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl) ethane, DDT then gets broken down into DDE which is 1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethane.
DDE is then stored in the fat reserves of the bird and accumulates to a large amount over time. The increase occurs because DDE has a relatively high half life, so remains in the birds tissue for an extensive amount of time. A build up of DDE in the bird's tissue starts to affect the bird; if the bird is female then its ability to lay healthy eggs is effected. DDE causes the eggshell to become thinner and weaker and if DDE gets into the yoke then the chick does not develop properly.
There only needs to be between a 16 and 18% thinning in the shell from the normal shell thickness for the population of these two birds to start declining. The normal weight for a Falcon egg is between 40-50g and for an air dried eggshell it averages out at about 3.8g. A decline in this thickness means when the eggs are being incubated they break under the weight of the parent.
A decrease in the birds' eggshell weights and not the size of the egg was noticed just after the use of DDT as a pesticide was permitted. This practical allows you to calculate the eggshells index thickness, and then see how the change in the shell thickness coincides with the use of DDT.
Take an eggshell from the batch, the contents which have already been blown out through a small hole in the egg. Measure the breadth and length of the eggshell using measuring callipers; record the date on the egg and the measurements in mm in a table. An example of the table is;
Weigh the egg and record the weight in mg next to its measurements and date. Then using the information collected calculate the eggshells thickness indexes, to do that use the following formula:
The data collected by my group.
Example of a worked out eggshell index.
Prior to 1947 the thickest eggshell had an index of approximately 2.31 for the Peregrine Falcon, following 1947 no eggshell has reached this thickness. The thickest a Peregrine egg has reached since 1947 is an index of 2.27 in the year 1993. The results show the Peregrine Falcon eggshell starts to improve in thickness following 1960. However the best improvements are found after 1980 where the majority of Falcon eggshells can be found with a thickness index between 1.6 and 1.9, which is close to the normal range of 1.5 to 2.3, whereas in between 1947 and 1980 the range is between 1.1 and 1.7.
The decline in all the eggshells thickness after 1947 indicates that all the population of Peregrine Falcons in England has been affected. The fact that all the eggshells show a decline in the same time period suggests the substance causing the decline in thickness was being widely deployed across England around 1947. This pattern coincides with the distribution of DDT.
The amount of eggs collected after 1960 for the Peregrine is considerably lower than the amount collected for the Sparrow Hawk. This could be due to a reduction in the Peregrine population, due to more of their eggs breaking while being incubated. To confirm this speculation data recording the bird's population for the last 100 years would be required. However it is extremely likely a reduction in the population has occurred, for it only requires a 16 to 18% thinning of the shell and these results show a greater reduction than that.
The graph shows the Sparrow Hawk had a longer duration before a recovery is started to be seen, compared to the Falcons. This suggests the Sparrow Hawks were exposed to more DDT in their diets than the Falcons. The more DDT in the bird's fat reserves the longer it will take to remove all the DDT from the bird's system and the eggshells to start to return to normal. If you look at the results for the Peregrine Falcon, by the early 1960's some of the eggshells are within the lower range of their normal range. Some of the eggshells are found between the index values of 1.6 and 1.8; just bellow their normal average value. The Sparrow Hawks eggshells start to show a movement back towards normal in the early 1980's, where you no longer find eggs with an index value lower than 1.
The results gained from this experiment show that Falcons are more sensitive to DDT than Sparrow Hawks. This sensitivity to DDT by Falcons can be seen in the amount the shell has reduced in thickness. If you look at the average thickness of the Falcon egg prior to 1947, you will find the range between an index's value of 1.6 and 2.2, giving an average index of 1.9. However between 1947 and 1980 the range moves to between 1.1 and 1.8, giving an average index of 1.45. If the same is done for Sparrow Hawks the average index prior to 1947 is 1.425 and between 1947 and 1980 the average index is 1.175. This shows the Sparrow Hawks average index falls by 0.25 i.e 25% decline, and the Falcons average index falls by 0.45, i.e 45% decline in thickness. So the Falcon's eggs decline the greatest in thickness, suggesting that Falcons are more susceptible to DDT than Sparrow Hawks.
As a result of the introduction of DDT into the environment in 1947 an unexpected consequence accrued, Sparrow Hawks and Falcon eggs were becoming more brittle. The Falcon's eggs where drastically reduced in strength, to a point were they where unlikely to survive incubation. Whereas the Sparrow Hawk remained affected for a longer period of time before a recovery was seen, their eggshells did not decline in strength as severely as the falcons.
It can be concluded from the results that the eggshells thickness were affected by the introduction of DDT. The results indicate that Falcons are more sensitive to DDT, so suffered the greatest reduction in their shells thickness. However no permanent damage has been done to either species eggs, as a slow recovery to the eggshells thickness can be seen in the results. Eventually both species eggshells have returned to normal thickness.