The law granted great power to men in marriages, suggesting women were completely subservient to their husband in early modern England; the ownership of her property transferred into his control- 'the husband hath therein an immediate and absolute property devolved to him by the marriage...which can never again revert to the wife'- and he could dispose of her income 'as he thought best'. Seemingly, the foundations of her life were in the power of her partner, forcing her to be utterly compliant to his wishes: 'Mine husband is my superior, my better; he hath authority and rule over me'. Arguably, spousal relations mirrored a slave-master relationship where women were totally dependent on their husbands to subsist. Indeed, this model of husband-wife relations is elaborated by the fact that, officially, women were the property of their husbands, as she had no separate legal identity. By analysing sources such as letters and diaries however, we gain greater insight into how women did have authority over her husband outside the law, especially emotionally. These sources have limitations- a diary can be written at times of intense emotion, often unreflective of normality- and the essay will address these. Nonetheless, if various sources are studied, a general trend on spousal relations can be discovered; namely, that 'women in...marriages...were mostly not docile and passive'. They were estate managers, for instance, in the absence of their husbands. But this authority was temporary, the majority of relationships containing women who were under the ultimate control of their husbands. The central task of the essay therefore is not to question whether women were permanently dominant in relationships, this was extremely rare, but to measure how servile they were to their husbands. The academic debate between Lawrence Stone and Alan Macfarlane is centred on two possible interpretations. For Stone, women were extremely servile since early modern England was 'a time of emotional distance.... with a corresponding lack of intimacy in mutual relationships', giving no opportunity for women to possess authority over his emotions. Contrastingly, for Macfarlane, women were virtually equal. This essay will side with the optimistic argument that women were 'like subjects and servants, though subordinate they had separate rights'. Also, this assessment of how servile women were may be affected by socio-economic background, a consideration that will be explored. For instance, women from the lower ranks of society were perceived as a greater economic asset, possibly establishing a more egalitarian relationship. Also, an assessment of other pillars of authority over married women- parents and social institutions- will be conducted. Essentially however, this essay will aspire to illustrate that women were not absolutely servile to husbands, their experience of marriage involving 'both partnership and hierarchy, love and mastery'. Nonetheless, husbands were the ultimate authority over their spouse in marriage, women having power within limits.
One model of spousal relations is strictly vertical, the wife controlled completely by the will of her husband. Evidence of this permanent servility to him is provided in the end of letters, which women regularly signed "Your faithful and obedient wife". Accordingly, her complete servility stems from the husband's control of the props that she needed to survive: her chattels and her income. This dependence on the man manufactured a situation where she had to be servile to his demands, just so she might continue to live. This is exemplified by the case of Lady Margaret Cunninghame. As she was financially dependent on her husband, there was nothing more she could do but obey the stipulations of her husband that once included leaving the house in the middle of the night naked. Further, women had to endure physical brutality as permission was granted to husbands to exercise violence over them as a means of correction: 'there was a level of tolerance for men beating their wives on the grounds that it was a wife's duty to be obedient to their husband'. As Anne Dormer possessed no power to prevent the 'oppressions I have lain', lacking in physical strength and the law unable to protect her, she simply had to tolerate the physical demands of her husband. This subservience is elaborated by the fact that though women theoretically could be granted separation a mensa et thoro, it was in practice almost impossible to achieve. Primarily, this was because remarriage was forbidden, wives thus pressurised into staying with their partner since a male-dominated public sphere meant she depended on living with a husband for adequate income. Furthermore, after the dissolution of a marriage, they sacrificed their property rights to the man and were denied access to their children. Literally, women just had to endure the demands of her husband, as there was no practical route of escape.
Keith Thomas supports this conception that the man possessed total authority and women were totally servile in marriages by advocating that wives were also subservient to the sexual demands of their husbands. Importantly, whereas infidelity committed by the male was 'mild and pardonable', adultery by women was seen as a severer crime as they did not have the inability, like men, to separate the powers of lust and love. This led to two situations; first, women had to endure the sexual indulgences of their husbands as male infidelity was often unpunished, divortium a mensa et thoro for such an offence almost never granted. Second, women could not have sex with anyone else as this was 'recognised as valid grounds for...divorce'- a nightmarish situation because of the inability to remarry and thus be without a husband they so desperately depended on. Also, the penalties imposed on women included the loss of her hair and the sacrifice of her inheritance. These repressive rules meant women were imprisoned to have sex only ever with her husband, reaffirming the concept that she was absolutely servile to him. Fascinatingly, Sharpe also outlines that man's desire for a chaste wife forced women to be unblemished because they needed a husband to subsist, creating a situation where faithful wives remained eternally the property of one man. This leaves an assessment that women in pre-1700 marriages were utterly subservient to their husbands.
Nonetheless, 'the most detailed information we have about ordinary marriages comes from the histories of marriages that went seriously wrong and ended up in court'. For most partnerships, the husband did not force his wife to be totally servile to his sexual or physical demands. Keith Thomas's supposition that women had to endure the sexual unfaithfulness of their husbands, for example, is countered by the unwillingness of an overwhelming quantity of men to indulge in adultery. Principally, this is because of religious teaching that infidelity was equally sinful for both sexes: 'Think not thy husband tied to this rule, O woman; nor thou thy wife tied, O husband, and the other free: the tie is equal'. Even if adultery was committed, the bulk of women from a lower socio-economic background were not pressurised to bear it because a viable option for them was abandonment. They were less dependent on their husbands than ladies of the gentry as most earned a wage being charwomen, street sellers, laundresses, carters, street cleaners or prostitutes. Moreover, poorer women could easily commit infidelity themselves as, debatably, the poor had a more unconcerned attitude towards it: 'the tradition of promiscuity was...strong'. Moreover, there were limits to the demands husbands could impose on their wives; society frowned upon a bully. Mr Littleton, for instance, was ordered to take his wife home after he had demanded she leave. Thus, for the majority of the population, women were not completely subservient to their husbands as they were hardly ever subject to any demands, and if they were, there was a limit to how much they had to endure before the court supported them or they in fact deserted their partner.
As women were largely not aware of their husband's power, she probably felt like a partner in marriage, equal to her husband. Certainly, women felt they had entered a horizontal relationship with their husband, not a vertical one, as seen by the couple showing their equality when declaring "I do take thee to my wife" and "I do take thee to my husband". Moreover, although letters were not supposed to use "Sweet" or "Sweetheart", the moral theologian William Gouge declaring in 1622 that only modes of address which indicated the authority of men like "Dear Sir" were to be used, 'women were clearly using familiar modes of address'. Vitally, the emotion a husband felt towards a wife meant that she became more than an object he could dictate; she was raised to the status of an equal. Largely then, women felt they had authority in marriages. This is exemplified by her monopoly on some work responsibilities including control of the daily personnel and finances of the estate. Alison D.Wall shows how Maria Thynne had equal power in the management of the estate when arranging her husband's livestock and advising him on what ought to be done about cutting woods and selling timber.
Nonetheless, the law ensured husbands had ultimate control- he owned all the movable property of his wife and could make decisions in contracts on her behalf. Equality, therefore, was a temporary status that could be quickly upturned. Consequently, we are left with a model of spousal relations that places women somewhere between being totally servile and totally equal in a marriage. The method this essay will adopt to discover her exact status will be to analyse how much authority she possessed over her husband; if she possessed little, one would be inclined to believe women were more servile, whereas more authority would indicate that, though subordinate, she had a great deal of power that made her a type of junior partner.
Indisputably, women possessed certain powers over her partner; a striking exemplification is her capacity to give or withhold sexual favours. Importantly, this control over his emotions positively supports the argument that women possessed substantial authority in marriages. Maria Thynne, who wrote a letter to her husband requesting money, manipulated the devotion he felt towards her so her demands were met. The actions of Elizabeth Pepys also highlight that women could 'contradict patriarchy by passion'. An argument arose where Samuel acted in 'the patriarchal role with a degree of assertiveness that, as he knew well, simply frightened her'. Yet, her authority over his emotions ensured that he bought an expensive new mohair gown in search of her forgiveness. Seemingly, the intense emotion that existed between most married couples led to a situation where women's 'legal and moral subordination to the head of the household' was concealed, the status of women in marriages for the most part equal to her husband.
However, Lawrence Stone's thesis stresses 'the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries were a period when most individuals found it difficult to establish close emotional ties to others'. In big houses, partners lived in separate bedrooms with separate servants. Thus, women's emotional authority over their husbands was uncommon, the power of Maria Thynne and Elizabeth Pepys rare examples. Allegedly, a wife was deemed simply as another member of the household, sharing a similar relationship to the head of the house as a servant would. Consequently, Stone advances the conception that the status of women tips in favour of servility as opposed to equality. This is advanced by his illustration that the archetypal family transformed from an open lineage family to a restricted patriarchal nuclear family by the early modern period, leading to a 'trend towards greater patriarchy in husband-wife relations...in the sixteenth century'. Prior to 1550, wives were less subservient to their husbands as there were more checks on his authority; her marriage was an 'intimate association with...the spouse's relatives, uncles, nephews and distant cousins', which ensured husbandly rule was moderated. Likewise, people in the medieval period experienced greater interaction with the community, the nuclear family therefore prone to 'neighbourly...scrutiny'. Indeed, violations of conventional spousal relations were frequently reported during archdeacon's visitations. Post-Reformation, the nuclear family became increasingly enclosed, less inspected upon by the wider family and neighbourhood. The abolition of the confession box, for instance, removed 'a counterpoise to potential domestic tyranny'. Additionally, the 'Lutheran Reformation' led to women being increasingly prone to an authoritarian husband; the head of the household 'replaced the priest' as spiritual leader, increasing power differentiation between the spouses, and the decline of Catholicism saw 'the elimination of the female religious cult of the Virgin Mary', downgrading the status of women in relation to the husband. Also, the purpose of educating women in early modern England was to create 'the docile housewife, the diligent upholder of holy matrimony in a subservient role to their husband'. Eight-year-old Molly Verney was sent to a school in Chelsea in 1682, for instance, to learn dancing and the art of japanning boxes, both of which were deemed necessary to helping her 'catch a husband'. Both education and religion in early modern England buttressed married female's subordination to men.
Major institutions in society may have underlined the servility of women to men in marriages, but this does not necessarily demonstrate that 'the private reality fully matched the public rhetoric'. Stone wrongly assumes that because materials such as homilies and conduct books frequently stressed the servility of women, 'it is reasonable to suppose that in a majority of cases reality conformed, to some degree, to the ideal'. Truly, this is overly dependent on sources that are probably more 'didactic in...nature' then reflective of actual relations between spouses. According to Alan Macfarlane, married women possessed substantially more authority than what moral theologians idealised. The law was not fully a "community system" where women lost all her rights to her husband. Instead, it had strong elements of a "lineage system" with 'rights continuing to flow down male and female lines'. A lady's real estate remained her own property: 'The husband only has rights in the usufruct (sub modo) of the wife's real estate. The two properties are not merged, but kept carefully distinct'. Furthermore, he had duties to her, being responsible for her debts and having 'a commitment to provide an income for life for the woman'. Similarly, he had to set aside a sum of money from his estate each year after his death as well as a third of his freehold estate that became her dower. These numerous rights over her husband, which 'could not be taken from her, waived or undermined', symbolise that the relationship between her and her husband was more egalitarian- both having a set of rights over each other and numerous obligations to each other- than hierarchical, a case where women would possess little or no rights. Chiefly, Macfarlane is therefore claiming that for the majority of early modern England, spousal relations matched the family model Stone subscribes to the era largely after the upper parameter of this essay: the closed domesticated nuclear family. This model saw 'a more equal partnership between spouses', where marriages contained 'mutual rights and obligations'. Certainly, Macfarlane has already outlined that women had a substantial list of rights over her husband in the pre-1700 epoch.
Undoubtedly, the reality of relations between spouses was less unbalanced than what contemporary thinkers wanted, creating 'the private existence of a strong complementary and companionate ethos, side by side with, and often overshadowing theoretical adherence to the doctrine of male authority and public female subordination'. Fletcher amplifies that 'the typical English gentleman certainly expected his wife to be autonomous and show considerable initiative in day-to-day household management'. When men had to leave the estate, women became substitute managers, their authority in marriages escalating when taking on powers such as advising the husband what leases need revising: 'Women, ostensibly...demure, compliant and submissive, proved in practice to be successful managers of estates'. Also, most marriages experienced a 'pooling of resources', women bringing vital assets such as the initial lump sum of money- the portion- and the ability to bear a child.
Lady Mary Verney never ultimately 'believed she was equal in any way'; she simply had to tolerate his adultery with a new maid when she was taken ill in 1650. But, there are instances when 'domestic patriarchy' was reversed. Mary wanted to name their child Ralph, but her husband refused, preferring Richard. In the end, 'Lady Mary got her own way and named their child Ralph'. Contrary to Stone's conviction that 'evidence of close affection between husband and wife is both ambiguous and rare', Ralph Verney of Claydon House is another example of a husband whose devotion gave his wife a degree of power over him. Fundamentally, there are other circumstances that served to counter 'the normal power relations between a wife and her husband'. Immediately after childbirth, only women could visit the mother, resulting in the husband's deficiency of 'her domestic labour and her sexual services', two ingredients of his patriarchal authority. This 'immersion of the mother in a female collectivity...elegantly inverted the central feature of patriarchy, namely its basis in individual male property', leading to his frustration and her temporary empowerment over his emotions. Also, women gained in authority when a husband was dyeing, having to nurse him. Elizabeth Freke could not 'exert any effective influence upon him' throughout their marriage. In the last six years of his life however, she became authoritative. Women also acquired power when a husband committed adultery, as opposed to what Keith Thomas claims about them having to endure it. They could tarnish his image within the community, forcing the husband to submit to her wishes if she threatened to leak his misdemeanours. When Samuel Pepys initiated an affair with their servant, seventeen-year-old Deb Willet, his wife triumphed in getting him to cease the romance with threats of publishing his infidelity to the whole world. Indeed, the ability to scold was a real source of power; Skimmingtons, common rituals that humiliated men who were easily dominated by their wives, shows authoritative women existed.
Blatantly, there are instances when women were not 'willing simply to match...the rule of prescription'. But these were atypical, husbands generally having ultimate power. Lady Anne Clifford was 'an individual woman holding out against the combined patriarchal forces of...uncles, husbands...and even the king' when refusing to accept the inheritance of the Westmoreland estate to her uncle. Yet, for the majority of time, she complied with her husband's wishes. Likewise, Katherine Knyvett managed the estate while her husband was imprisoned during the Civil War, but he did not permit her to have a say in her son's decision to leave University in order to fight. In essence, the set of powers a women had illustrate that she was less servile than what pessimists such as Stone assume, but the relationship was not quite equal, since the husband capped the powers his wife could have.
The personal sources employed have a number of problems that affect the interpreting of power relations in marriages. Letters are not always indicative of how husband and wife would react around each other when together. Sir Robert Harley invests emotion in letters to his wife, signing them "my dear Brill" and "my dear heart". But this does not necessarily infer that he behaved as if he was devoted to her when around her. Certainly, Brilliana replied with "Dear Sir", illuminative of a lack of emotion between the two and a feeling of servility to her husband. Notably, the formalities of a letter, as well as the potential to be more emotional as the very act of writing a letter suggests an extended period of time without each other's company, means letters were perhaps not wholly representative of the actuality. Equally, diaries are often written at times of great emotion, joyous or despairing. This could distort an interpretation of usual relations between spouses. Diary entries such as 'My dear husband borrowed of me not without some force and cruelty 1,560' signify a woman demoted to being completely subservient. But this could have been an isolated incident, the relationship democratic at other times. However, by focusing on a collection of sources from different women, it is easy to identify what is conventional, which the historian can take as the standard model of relations between husband and wife.
A major problem with diaries and letters is that they originate from members of society who were literate, mainly the upper and middle ranks. Evidence of plebeian women's relationship with their husband is 'often difficult to come by'. Consequently, it is wrong to automatically suppose that because the diaries of ladies from the nobility demonstrate a high degree of authority, the same applies for women of a poorer socio-economic background. This essay needs to take account of whether social status affected how servile women were. Ostensibly, the fact that wealthier women had the opportunity to be temporary managers of their husband's estate and brought a greater initial sum of money to the marriage highlights that they had more platforms to boost their authority. However, it is arguable that wealthier women were deemed with less economic value by their husband, their role in life to 'play the gentlewoman and good housewife'. Contrastingly, wives of artisans, shopkeepers, smallholders and unskilled labourers would find employment to elevate collective income. As 'husband, wife...tended to form a single economic unit, like the crew of a ship', this made spousal relations of poor people more balanced. Additionally, Mendelson and Crawford signify that plebeian women tended to marry later, their maturity earning more respect. The richer sorts, on the other hand, married men two to ten years older, the age difference reaffirming female servility. Coupled with earlier observations in the essay- poor women were less tied to their husband because of the option of abandonment and that they were not totally obedient to his sexual demands because infidelity amongst the poor was less of a moral outrage- this demonstrates that poorer women had more authority. However, as personal sources that decode actual power relations between partners is skewed, a lack of quantity and deriving from the lower ranks of society, it is dangerous to assert that poorer women generally experienced a more egalitarian relationship. Rather, it is better to claim that the degree of authority women had altered from marriage to marriage, depending largely on 'personality and relationship', but a poorer socio-economic background probably helped women acquire more authority. The same applies to geographical location. There is a lack of evidence to suggest it was a trend that wives in a particular location had extra authority. But Underdown shows how wood-pasture regions- as opposed to corn-growing areas and towns- contained scattered settlements, lessening the control of squire, minister and community over marriages, providing women with the opportunity to gain more authority than what was deemed acceptable.
If we accept Robert A. Dahl's conception of power- 'A has power over B to the extent that he can get B to do something that B would not otherwise do'- we have to recognise additional forces that women were servile to in marriages other than her husband. Strikingly, the father directed his daughter in marriages as 'he...could provide the necessary portion'. Many women were dependent on their father providing the mandatory sum of money that transferred to the husband's parents and thus had to obey his wishes if he was not happy with her match. Additionally, her inheritance could be taken from her if her father was unhappy. Women were not only servile to her own parents; inevitably, there were times when newly weds had to stay with the husband's parents, customarily after the ceremony and when finances or logistics did not allow independent living. Paternal power was also present over marriage because of concern for lineage: 'Whom one marries will be heavily circumscribed by which rank one is born into'. Largely, a son-in-law had to be approved by parents.
Nonetheless, unlike the husband, parents did not have ultimate authority over women in the context of marriages. For example, fourteen-year-old Mary Boyle rejected the match her father had arranged. Fundamentally, a woman was never actually servile to her parents. The portion that is allegedly an indicator of how women were forced to obey parents was only approximately three year's income from a man's estate. Moreover, parents were not the only providers of the portion. There were five additional sources: her employer, the community, friends, neighbours and herself. Also, the very poor seldom had to pay portions; even if they did, the father hardly ever provided for his daughter, as she was rarely reliant on him by the age of marriage, most leaving home between 7 and 14 years of age. Consequently, the portion was not a big enough financial sacrifice for parents to have vast control over their daughter. Moreover, the payment of the portion provided parents only with a temporary position of authority. Mostly, the father's payment was 'not a long, dragged-out affair perpetuating the financial link between parents and children'- a Tudor merchant family of Johnson actually paying the young couple before they wed. Therefore, although parents had some influence, it only really existed at the beginning of a marriage or when a couple needed to live in their house. Parental power also could be resisted, the daughter having 'the right of veto' over her father.
An additional conception of power is provided by Steven Lukes: 'A may exercise power over B by getting him to do what he does not want to do, but he also exercises power over him by influencing, shaping or determining his very wants'. This notion of power as indoctrinating people to do something means that shapers of social thought- the government, religion and education- also had authority over women, by making her believe that she was subordinate to her husband. This essay has largely stressed that the man kept his wife subordinate. But, what if society manufactured male authority, and husbands were equally as servile as women in fulfilling their prescribed roles? Religion emphasised that the inferiority of women was the will of God, making women believe they were secondary. As seen by Thomas Cecil's drawing entitled "A New Yeares Gift for Shrews", which shows men beating outspoken women, religious thinkers verbalised how an overly dominant wife was to be punished. It underlined that women should be obedient housewives but installed into men how they needed to show command in marriages to ensure order was maintained. Linda Pollock elaborates on this theory by claiming that the state- through education- socialised women and men into their prospective roles. Pre-industrial England sent girls to households so they could learn domestic skills that would improve 'their chances of finding an appropriate marriage partner'. The state was therefore implementing into the minds of women the idea that the purpose of their education was to live under the rule of a husband. Men were indoctrinated into their position of authority too, Sir John Lowther of Whitehaven empathic that his boys be taught to manage an estate. Nonetheless, we need to be careful not to assume that men lacked any agency in upholding marriage as a patriarchal institution. Although couples subscribed to the ideal of a hierarchical relationship, many did not. This shows that social institutions were limited in their authority over women. It is more likely that the husband was not servile but utilised contemporary religious thinking as a way of 'reinforcing his authority', accentuating that he was the central pillar of authority in marriage.
Significantly, women were subject to numerous forces when married, including social institutions and parents. But these could 'only partially control marriages'- women did not have to comply with their demands. Parents could refuse to pay the portion, but this did not stop women from going ahead with marriages as they could find sources of income from elsewhere and often strove 'to make some fortune for themselves'. Likewise, the education system tried to solidify the belief that a life subservient to her husband was 'the only option', but women were evidently not servile to this socialisation as many assumed positions of authority, including as estate managers. With husbands, however, women could rarely defy his command. Principally, this is because the law provided him with the tools she needed to subsist, including her movable property. It also permitted him to exercise violence or sexual demands on his wife. However, tyrannical husbandly rule was rarely enforced, denoting that they were not utterly servile in a marriage. Therefore, as women were neither utterly subservient nor equals, the central task of this essay has been to outline how servile they were. Variables in this investigation have been socio-economic background and geographical location; though the poor and those from sparse settlements had a greater chance of a democratic relationship, it is difficult to state this was a solid trend as this argument is based on assumption as opposed to sufficient evidence. Generally however, women seemed to possess a great deal of authority in marriages: over his emotions, after childbirth and immediately before his death. Although Stone believes women were almost 'not free persons', his evidence is based on what religious thinkers professed, not the actuality. Personal accounts demonstrate that many marriages constituted 'affection, co-operation, and mutual give-and-take'. Nonetheless, the extent to which women had authority in early modern marriages was ultimately controlled by their husbands.