A natural conservation officer is responsible for protecting, managing and enhancing natural habitats. This job involves quite a bit of field work and there is very few full-time contracts, a lot of the jobs available in this field are short term contracts and seasonal. The competition for these jobs is strong and to obtain a job experience is needed, it does not mater if the experience is voluntary or paid. This type of job is one that a new graduate is unlikely to go straight into.
The tasks entailed in this job vary from field work to administration and dealing with the public, the balance between these tasks depends on the employer. The types of job that can be expected of a conservation officer range from giving talks on nature and leading walks to producing leaflets and planning protection projects on the whole you have to be prepared to do anything and have the commitment to stick at the task. The working hours of a conservation officer are typically unsocial hours and most of the employers expect extra time to be put in on top of the normal day.
The skills required in this job are office skills, computer skills and planning skills along with good communication skills. Building up skills such as practical skills in conservation, management and field identification of species is essential for this kind of work. This kind of work also requires you to have a good understanding in the principles of ecology and habitat management. Along with these skills a relevant degree is required such as a degree in life science and experience is essential. The job also requires travelling as part of the daily work, be this travelling to and from conservation project sites, or to arrears around the country to give presentations and speeches to make people aware of conservation. To be able to accomplish this aspect of the job a full clean UK driving licence is required.
The opportunity for promotion is normally in the form of moving to work for another company. Normally a person working in conservation starts as a conservation officer and can work up to a more senior post such as a group manager or project co-ordination manager. However before becoming a conservation officer a minimum of two years postgraduate experience is needed.
Typical employers are people such as English Nature, Friends of the earth, Greenpeace UK, Wildlife trusts, RSPB, British Trust for Conservation Volunteers (BTCV), etc. Though they do not tend to advertise there jobs, but employ volunteers that have shown dedication and commitment. One way to obtain a job is to become a member of things like wildlife Trust and other relevant organisations, and to become known in the field so that when a job comes available you have the right connections to find out about it. In some case when the jobs were advertised applicants need to be in before the end off November.
Conservation is not a well funded organisation so depending on your employer and position the salaries that you can be expected to earn can vary from 15,000 to manger salary of around 40,000.
The appeal to this job is it is not a nine to five job that means your are constantly stuck in an office all day every day. Meaning you have to enjoy the outside and don't mined being out in all kinds of weather. However the draw back to the job is it's very hard to get a permanent contract, which means the job will be unreliable for providing a continues income, it will vary depending on how long and when a contract can be obtained. The other downside is once you reach around 40 it becomes harder to obtain a contract.
A conservation officer needs to be flexible in the hours they work and the type of work they do. The job requires some one with dedication and who is willing to travel around. To establish a job it is more than likely your need to have build up a background in experience, and show commitment by sticking at the job for longer than a few days. It is unlikely that an undergraduate will walk straight into this type of job, for a reputation need to be built up first; even then the competition for these types of jobs is high and it is unlikely a permanent contract will be obtained.