Lions maintain a unique social structure amongst cats; unlike other big cats lions do not lead a solitary life. The social structure of the Serengeti lion is most known about these lions live in a pride which on average consists of six members (David Macdonald 1992). However in different parts of the world it has been documented for a pride to have between two and thirty members (A and J Nacqueline 1991). The lionesses will normally remain in their mother's pride. However should a female lion be born into a large pride they may find there is a significant shortage of food due to not enough prey available, and in this case they may chose to leave the pride. If the female cubs are going to leave the pride they are born into they normally do this when they are around four years of age. These females will set up a sub group on the edge of their previous territory and may have an independent male or share the same male as the pride they left. It has also been documented that female lions have travelled great distances to establish a new pride, nevertheless very little is known about this, except that if they leave they are less likely to reach their normal life expectancy. The male lions will leave the pride when they reach sexual maturity of three years of age. These males form an alliance and are known as bachelors they hold no territory and subsequently hold no pride of females. They spend their time try to replace the dominant/resident male of a pride. The more bachelors within the group of nomads the more likely they are to succeed in taking over a pride. From a seven year case study in the Serengeti national park it was estimated that only approximately one percent of the lion population is made up of solitary lions.
The male lion's dormancy normally only lasts approximately three years, so the social structure within the pride is constantly changing. When a new dominant male takes over a pride of females the cubs of the last dominant male will be killed. It is estimated that 'one third of cub deaths are in the jaws of males taking over their mother's pride.' (D. Macdonalds 1992). This behaviour of the male lions cause the lionesses whose cubs have just been killed to come into oestrus sooner, so the new resident/dominant male can sire cubs of his own earlier. This is the other reason a female will leave her home pride, in order to protect her young from the new resident male. These deaths of cubs occur more frequently in the larger prides, the larger the pride of females the more frequently the resident/dominant male is replaced.
A lion's social life appears relaxed and lazy at first glance, they spend up to twenty hours a day at rest but this does not automatically make them lazy. There is no reason for the lions to waste energy during the day, they are the top predators and have relatively nothing to fear except man. C. Denis-Huots (2002) observed while studying lions that lions tend to spend the early part of the morning basking in the sun, they do this to dry their coats after the morning dew has left it wet (C. Denis-Huots 2002). They then find shade and settle down for the day. C. Denie-Huots (2002) believed lions have a seasonal preference to where they spend their time of rest. However there has not been sufficient study on this aspect of lions to justify this claim.
The social life of a male lion has more variety to it. They start for the first three to four years of their life with the pride they are born into, here they lean through their mother and through play the skills they need to survive. Around the age of three the male cubs are no longer tolerated by the resident male and are driven away. If the cub has no other male relations he will seek out other male cubs of the same age and form an alliance with them. However, should the male be driven out with other male relatives i.e. brothers and cousins they will form a group with their relatives. In either case the male lions become nomads at sexual maturity. DNA testing was carried out on groups of nomad lions and it was found that groups of four or more lions were relatives, whereas nomad groups containing three or less were not related to each other( C and M Denis- Huot 2002). The males spend the next three years in this nomad group where they develop their skill in fighting to get ready to replace a weakening/old resident male from his pride. They will then lay claim to this pride of females and spend as long as they can as their resident male, until another young group of bachelors comes along and replaces them as they did to their predecessors. The old resident males either die in combat, die later from injuries sustained in a confrontation or they become a nomad again.
The behaviour of a lion depends on its gender. The lionesses of any pride anywhere in the world are adapted to hunting. They form a coalition with a minimum of two lionesses ranging anywhere up to ten or so members. This cooperation between female lions increases their chances of success in hunting. A lioness hunting by herself is far less likely to succeed in a kill. David Attenborough (1990) observed the techniques used by lioness on the hunt. Once the lionesses have found a potential prey they will spread out, the spreading out ensures that if the prey spots one lion and tries to escape from it they are likely to end up in the jaws of another lion. Lions are not the swiftest of cats and have to get within at least twenty yards of their victim before they stand a chance of catching it. While the lionesses are on the hunt it is not believed they coordinate their attack but work on their own initiative, even though it appears the lioness at the flank drives the prey towards the rest of the lions, not enough study has been carried out to claim lionesses predetermine their hunts (David Attenborough 1990). This behaviour of hunting in a group is only seen amongst the lioness and no other big cat. The advantages to group hunting are that it allows them to bring down much larger prey and defend their kill from scavengers such as the spotted hyenas. The lions are unable to hide their kill in a tree, which is what a cheater would do, so lions must defend their kill by fighting off scavengers. However the kill does have to be split between the whole pride.
Should there be a shortage in food the behaviour of a lion only allows for the strongest of the lions to survive. In times of little or no food the largest and strongest lions will eat, this behaviour means that the cubs and the weak will starve. This is known as survival of the fittest and is seen in most species. Despite this behaviour no lion is banished from the pride for old age, the social structure remains up to death even if the lion is too old to contribute to the pride, by hunting or bearing cubs. The age of a lion can be estimated by its teeth, old lions have yellow-brown canines rather than white ones. Also the extent of melanism of the lions nose can be used to estimate the age, cubs have pink noses that become darker with age when they are adults in becomes black (Christine and Michel Denis-Huot 2002).
A lioness is a true predator and will eat and hunt a wide range of prey which classifies it as a polyphagous hunter. However they do have a preference towards antelopes and zebras. Their behaviour in hunting is adapted to bring down the prey in the quickest and most efficient way which will minimise damage to them. One way a lioness will bring down her prey is by suffocation. The lioness achieves this by placing her mouth around the nose and mouth of her victim and holding it there until the prey is dead. When lionesses hunt they will remain hidden until they strike, in order to improve their chances of not being spotted, the lionesses will normally hunt by night they can manage this because they have good night vision. Should the lioness have the opportunity to hunt by day they will take it, since there is no cover of darkness they will hunt under cover of long grass, trees or rocks. When there is no place for a lion to hide they adapt their behaviour, they will move closer to their prey but they will only move when the prey is grazing, as soon as the prey looks up the lion will freeze. This strategy makes it harder for their prey to spot them and escape.
Male lions do not contribute to the pride by hunting instead their behaviour is directed towards defending their territory and females. When a group of bachelors try to usurp a resident male's territory and females the lions display agnostic behaviourism. The resident males are capable of fighting to defend their territory nonetheless they behave in a way which minimises confrontations. The resident lions will use a vocalized display (Campbell et al1946) such as a roar 'as a sound mark' (C and M Denis Huot 2002) which tells nearby lions to avoid this area because it has already been claimed. The nomad group of lions will ether move on to another area or challenge this lion. Should they wish to challenge the resident male then the nomads will establish a hold at the boundary of the lion's territory, from here the nomads assess the strength of the resident male. Should the resident male appear at a disadvantage the nomads will instigate a fight. The fight may be initiated by the nomads roaring or sent marking within the resident male territory. The victor of the fight clams the territory and pride and the defeated lion is left to flee.
At first glance the lion's earn themselves a reputation of being lazy. However through observation and study the complex social structure and behaviour of these creatures has started to be unravelled. As more studies are carried out more surprising facts are discovered. It is only recently that people have discovered that female lions do leave the pride they are born into. The more information obtained on lions the more we see that their social structure and behaviour is quite unique. Their unique qualities extend even into their mannerisms, a lion yawns when nervous or just woken up. However elsewhere in the animal kingdom a yawn means different things; when a person yawns it generally means they are tired, when a primate yawns it is an act of intimidation (C and M Denis- Huot 2002). Through study and observation even more can be learn about the complex social lives of the lion. By studying the structure and behaviour of the lion it can seen that the world does not just contain a large biodiversity of species but each species' behaviour is also divers and unique to that species. By looking at the variety of animals and their behaviour it can help us to understand who we share the planet with.