The study looks at how biotic indices are used to determine the quality of water. The study used the biological monitoring working party test to establish the quality of two streams in France. The organisms that were identified and allocated a score were benthic macroinvertebrates, from the score of these organisms it was calculated that both stream were in excellent quality.
This study was conducted at Rennes field centre in Paimpont, France. The study was on benthic macroinvertebrates, the two areas of benthos organisms looked at were herpobenthos which live on the sediment and endobenthos communities living on or in rocks (Abercrommbie etl 1951). The site of the practical was the upper and lower stream that flows in and out of the lake E'tang du chtenany.
The study was carried out on a freshwater ecosystem because a slight change in the physiochemical environment will have an effect on the inhabitants of that stream, often causing them to die out or migrate elsewhere. This then means you can tell the quality of the stream by its inhabitants, if the stream is full of species that are very sensitive to pollution then the steam is in excellent quality. On the other hand if the stream is only inhabited by blood worms which can live in areas with very low oxygen, or any other benthic macroinvertebrates with a similar tolerance to low oxygen levels, then it suggests a very poor quality stream. This practical used the score system developed by the biological monitoring working party (BMWP) to assess how polluted the two streams at the Renne centre are. The BMWP system use a score method to determine the pollution levels, it identifies species down to there family and the assigns them a score based on how tolerant they are to pollution. The species with a high score belong to a family which has a low tolerant to pollution, and a species with a low score belongs to a family that has a high tolerant to pollution.
To establish how clean the two streams at Rennes centre are by using a biotic index to carried out a comparison of the quality of the two streams. Then to asses the accuracy of the biological test conducted.
Place a pond net into the stream, use one person to hold the pond net flat against the stream bed and the other person kicks at the stream bed. The kicking disturbs the stream bed and the inhabitants go into the net. The person kicking should kick for one minute then the net should be removed from the stream. Take a plastic tray and place a small amount of stream water into it, rub the pond net out into the tray so all the organisms are removed from the net. Take another sample of this stream by repeat this process. Collect two fairly large rocks from the stream and take them and the organisms back to the lab and key any aquatic life found in the sample and on the rocks. Once they are identified give them there BMWP score then calculate there Lincoln quality index. Repeat this process for the other stream
The results from this study show that the upper and lower streams that flow into and out of Lake E'tang du chtenanyand are both capable of supporting macroinvertebrates that are sensitive to pollution. Both streams score A++ or in words Excellent Quality on the BMWP test. However looking at the organisms individually shows the upper stream to have a lower proportion of organisms with a high tolerant to pollution, 46% of the organisms collected from this stream were allocated a BMWP score of below 6. The lower stream had 50% of the specimens collected with a score bellow 6. This suggested that should the two streams become polluted the lower stream would contain a higher diversity than the upper stream. The upper stream existed in a more fragile state, should the biotic or abiotic factors of that stream change then a large proportion i.e 54% of its diversity will be affected, this may result in the effected species disappearing, or changing in behaviour or morphology (Unknown author (a)as cited from Rosenberg and Resh, 1993).
This study has looked at the presents or absence of a species and determined the quality of these streams from this one analysis. Pollution comes in a variety of form from eutrophication to the presents of an exotic organism (Unknown Author (b)). By analysing the streams with just a biological test it has limited the results to only showing the types of pollution the BMWP test is capable of detecting. The two streams may be polluted by a form of pathogen that benthic macroinvertebrates are not affected by (Williams & Feltmate, 1992). On the other hand if there is a form of pollution present that affects directly the characteristics of benthic macroinvertebrates rather than the numbers of species present in this ecosystem, it may not have been detected. This would be due to the pollutant affecting a different aspect such as the physiology or behaviour of these organisms, rather than the amount present and this was not an aspect looked at in this study.
It is impossible to test every chemical for environmental effects, some chemicals used may be acting as pollutants, without anyone realising it, and if they are the effects they can have on the environment can be expressed in a variety of ways. The biological monitoring scheme looks at 4 types of effects pollution can have (Williams & Feltmate, 1992). The first type of biological monitoring looks at the presents or absence of a species, which is what this study has done. The second type is bioaccumulation of a pollutant, the third type is the effect of pollutants on organisms and the final type looks at changes in genetics. This study failed to look at the other effects of pollution and therefore deems the streams in excellent quality with out looking at all the aspects/side effects of pollution. From a study conducted on the quality of water world wide it was found that nearly all water bodies contain several different forms of pollution (Andrew.R.W etl 1996). So from only looking at one effect pollution can have on a stream it is plausible to assume that a form of pollution may be present in these two streams that we have not looked/tested for. To allow a more accurate analysis of these streams more tests have to be conducted.
Not only dose this study use one test which provides a limited view on the quality of the water but it also provides a 'snapshot' (Williams & Feltmate, 1992) into the quality. The BMWP test works on a biological monitoring principle, all biological tests can tell you is the quality of the water at the instant of time that the sample was taken. Should another BMWP test be conducted at a latter date the results may have a very different out come.
The result obtained from this study not only tell us about the quality of the two stream put also gives an indication of the quality of the Lake found between the two streams. If the stream flowing into the Lake was in excellent quality and the stream flowing out was in poor quality, it could have been likely that there was a pollutant in the Lake that was flowing slowly out of the Lake into the lower stream. However both streams are in the same condition so it is highly likely that the Lake is in the same condition as the two streams, however this assumption is not reliable, for a lake is far more susceptible to pollution than a river or fast flowing streams. A pollutant that is released into a Lake has anywhere between 10 and 100 years to build up, because that's how long it can take for water in a Lake to be replaced (Andrew.R.W etl 1996). A fast flowing stream or river can wash the pollutant away so it does not get the chance to reach hazardous levels. In this project the two streams looked at were slow flowing so it is highly likely that the streams and lake are in the same state, however to confirm this a test would have to be conducted on the Lake.
This method of testing water quality is acceptable for one percent of the world's water supply (Andrew.R.W etl 1996). The two streams were tested by using biotic indices that look at benthic macroinvertebrates which are only found in fresh water streams and Lakes. The other 99% of the worlds water is found in ocean, atmosphere, polar ice capes and aquifers, the method of testing used in this practical is limited and inappropriate for determining the water quality world wide.
This study shows both the upper and lower streams flowing in and out of Lake E'tang du chtenany to be in excellent quality. This conclusion was reach after the assessment of one test, which is incapable of assessing all aspects of pollution. The study on the quality of water for these two streams shows an important point, that relying on one test is insufficient. There is no single test capable of determining the quality of water alone, pollution can affect the environment in a wide range of ways. To be able to test for all the effects pollution can have on an environment a wider rang of tests need to be conducted. The results drawn from this study are obsolete by now, the BMWP test undertaken shows the quality of the two streams at the time the sample was taken. The accurate conclusion that can be drawn from these results is: at the time the sample was taken the two streams were found to be in excellent condition to support benthic macroinvertebrates. As to whether any pollutants were present that would not effect benthic macroinvertebrates put other inhabitants of the stream remains unclear. For a more accurate evaluation on the two streams water quality a more in depth testing process will need to be conducted.