The use of primates in laboratory experiments has a long and outstanding history. Experiments such as vivisections have been around for over 150 years (CMP 2005) and have yet to be proven that they are the sole responsibility for any major break through; there can always be the possibility that these discoveries in medicine would have eventually been made without the need to perform vivisections. The history of laboratory experiments is fixated around the ethics of the situation and as some believe the fact and others the myth that it is beneficial to humans to conduct these experiments. The history is also varied between countries, the law in the UK dose not out rule the use of primates in laboratory experiments but in fact states that it is permissible if it can be shown that the use of a "lower" species could not be used within the experiment (Animal act 1986). The use of the great apes in laboratory experiments was formally band in 1997 within the UK, the act also band the use of wild caught primates in the UK during the same year. However the ban of the great ape in laboratory experiments does not exist in all the countries of the world. The law does not always support the animals' rights, in fact in some case the law actually stipulates that animal testing must have occurred before that product can go to market.
It has been established that within the EU experiments on primates are only conducted when there is 'no alternative' option, however the interpretation of no alternative option varies depending on who's making that judgment. The problem then becomes an issue that is of world wide concern; within the EU 6994 primates where used in laboratory experiments within one year (European commission 2002). Within that 6994 primates Britain and France were found to be the highest users of non human primates within the laboratory for 2000 (Home office 2001). This demonstrates that across the EU the definition of 'no alternative' appears to be more lax within some countries than others. However primate testing is not limited to within the EU, America is the biggest contributor to primate experiments with 60,000 primates a year used within the labs across America (Hagelin 2002). It has also been discovered that Harvard and Yale under- reported their use of primate by over 1295 primates a year (Animal aid). This shows that across the world there is a large variation in opinion on the acceptance of primate testing, and regardless of the EU rules and policies primate testing is still going to occur out side of the EU.
The experiments that are deemed unsuitable to be conducted on a 'lower' species and thus are conducted on primates include: Drug testing, infectious disease research, brain research, HIV test, vaccinations, malaria, xeno research and neurological disorders. At the end of most of these experiments the primates' lives are terminated.
The argument that drug testing in primates is beneficial to humans is a very controversial topic. Since organisations like the national anti vivisection society and aid for animals has highlighted the circumstances for which some of the primates are kept in for experiments which have little or no value to the human health or well being. The debate has now become more than an ethical one and one that's concerned with whether it is even necessary to perform such experiments. It has been shown that the drug flosint is a very good cure for arthritis in monkey, however when used on humans it solved the problem of arthritis by causing them to die (Animal aid).
The use of aspirin causes deformities within monkeys that are pregnant and yet it has no such effect within humans. Another example is tobacco, the tobacco companies held back the warnings on cigarettes as there was no correlation between primates smoking tobacco and cancer. On the other hand the drug testing for vaccinations related to malaria show a good correlation between some species of monkeys and the response in humans (Herrera et al 2002). The results from a wide range of tests show that the response that the primates have to the drugs is not always the same as the response a human would have. This means that you are not going to know how the drug reacts to human anatomy until it has been tested on a human subject. This appears to negate the need for primate testing as the results obtained cannot be established as reliable.
The stand against vivisections is not just based in the unreliability of the results from an experiment, but also against the manner in which the experiments are conducted. On the issue of how vivisections are performing you do not just have the anti- vivisectors protesting. The people performing the vivisections themselves have been found to be campaigning on how immoral the experiments performed on primates are. 'One does not need to add emotive words to make experiments sound "unacceptable" for your own protocol descriptions do this for themselves.' is a quote from a former vivisector who is now campaigning against vivisections (Ryan 1994).
Alternative methods do exist yet these methods have a different meaning depending on what side of the argument the individual is on. For the people supporting primate testing, or the people conducting the experiments, biomedical researchers etc then 'alternative methods' take the view of a method that can complement the traditional method of animal experiments. However for the protesters the term 'alternative method' takes on a different meaning: of entirely replacing animal testing programs (Bennett 2000). A full range of alternative method exists from computer modelling and in vitro techniques, to the use of less well developed species such as insects and micro-organisms (BBC news 2002). Depending on whose side the argument for alternative methods supports depends on the person you speaking with.
The arguments put forward to prevent primate testing, tend to be filled with emotive words, such as 'brutally', 'fear', 'cruel' and 'emotional harm' etc. An emotive argument plays on people's feelings and heightens the impact on what is really occurring, this forms a more biased view and tends to stop people from investigating the other side of the situation. Primate testing is not all barbaric but has allowed medical discoveries to occur, which has allowed for the improvement of quality of life for some people. In 1996 1.35 million animals were used in experiments of that year and of that 1.35 million less than 0.5% of animal testing involved the use of primates (national primate research centre 2004).
Primates are used in laboratory experiments because they are genetically and physiologically more similar to humans than any other animal found on Earth. They are also more likely to catch illnesses and diseases which threaten human health making them far more valuable to study the effects of a disease on than a rat (national primate research centre 2004). Malaria is a prime example for the parasite will not take to rodents, so primates are used instead to test vaccinations on (European commission 2002). The alternative methods are used were they can be, but the technology is not yet at the standard researchers need it to be at to allow them to study the effect to a whole organism rather than just part of one. In neurological experiments it has been put forward that the UK is around a decade behind the United States (Goodman & Check 2002), due to restraints on the use of primates within the laboratory. The experimentation on primates in the USA has advanced their understanding of neurological disorders far beyond that of the UK, allowing the USA to make better diagnoses and treatment schemes for people suffering from neurological conditions. The ethical problem then evolves that if the EU completely bans primate testing and all the countries outside the EU do not, what happens if the other countries develop a vaccination for AIDS? If the countries within the EU use it then they have benefited from primate research, making it hypocritical to ban primate testing.
The suffering primates have to endure within these experiments is kept to a minimum; regulations exist to reduce the suffering a primate will endure due to testing and its living accommodation:
A quote from the regulation 1999/575/EC demonstrates the regulations are tying to establish a situation that can be justified by a utilitarian point of view. "..., accepting nevertheless that man in his quest for knowledge, health and safety has a need to use animals where there is a reasonable expectation that the result will be to extend knowledge or to be the overall benefit of man or animal, just as he uses them for food, clothing and as beasts of burden;"(European commission 2002). These regulations set out guidelines for accommodation and experimentation conditions. Although sometimes it is unavoidable and suffering will occur, like in the cases were aesthetics and pain killers can not be issued as they will affect the results of the experiment, however this only occurs in seven percent of all cases that have involved primate testing (Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research). Though the primate suffering is not in vain, during the 20th century virtually all medical advancements in knowledge were made using animals in the experiments (Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research 2004). The use of primates in laboratory experiments is declining as technology is improving as observed by the USDA, this supports the argument that primate testing is only done as a necessity.
Primate accommodation in laboratories is regulated by the law: it states that appropriate cage size and design must be used and the environment should be enriched. This means they should have something that they can entertain themselves with and a place to go where they can be social with other monkeys should they so wish to be. This is beneficial both to the primates and to the researchers to keep their primates in as much as possible a stress free environment. A stressed primate will affect the outcome of the results and could possibly end up invalidating the experiment. It has been but forward that the difficulty in procuring primates and the cost of keeping them insures that no experiments are preformed lightly, (Goodman & Check 2002) and most of the time the experimental and living conditions are designed not to impose excess stress on the primates. Due to the cost and difficulty in procuring a primate it is in a very few cases within the EU where primates living conditions are found to be unsatisfactory. However should unsatisfactory conditions occur there are then organisations and laws in place within the EU that deal with these situations.
The justification for the use of primates in laboratory experiments is a topic that has had many debates. From the view of a utilitarian argument it is unacceptable to cause intense suffering to any animal; it appears that using primates in laboratory experiments have the benefits gained from the procedures outweighed by the costs. The experiments conducted on primates have not had their costs limited to just the primates, but have also extended into the humans with the thousands of deaths that have occurred due to drugs having no effect on primates and devastating effects on humans physiology, these results are in conflict with the reasoning of a utilitarian. Just because primates are a close resemblance to human physiology and genetics, does not mean they are a suitable substitute for an exact match. The benefits that have been obtained are minute in comparison to the suffering and the loss of lives, be it human or primate. By conducting these experiments the researchers have not been able to find a cure to any of the disease such as AIDS, but have just made claims that they are closer to finding a cure. The use of Macaques demonstrates the potential for yet another catastrophe; macaques are infected with SIVsm, which develops into an AIDS like virus (European commission 2002). Humans develop AIDS not an AIDS like virus: what use is a vaccination against a form of AIDS humans do not contract? To have the benefits stand a chance at outweighing the cost then people would have to be cured and not just have their lives extended. From the point of a utilitarian argument this house concludes that the costs are too high and therefore concludes that primate testing should be band.