Over the last years, noticeable changes in the climate have been observed on the Earth. The term 'climate change' can be defined as 'the long-term fluctuations in temperature, precipitation, wind and all other aspects of the Earth's climate'. The terms 'global warming' or 'greenhouse effect' can also be used instead of climate change (CORIS glossary, 2003). It is estimated that in the future there will be significant changes in terms of the climate. The main cause for all these changes is the emission of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere including carbon dioxide (CO 2), methane (CH 4) and nitrous oxide (N 2O). In reality, these gases isolate the Earth from the sun's heat and therefore help in order to have a stable climate. Without the presence of the gases the heat that Earth absorbs from the sun during the day would not be trapped on the Earth. Instead of that it would escape. On the other hand, when the atmosphere has much of these gases, too much heat is trapped causing warming. (Environment Waikato Regional Council, 2003)
There are some indications that the climate in the UK is going to change in the future. The latest scenarios about the future UK climate were developed by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA) in April 2002 and are known as the UKCIP02 scenarios. According to these scenarios, the UK climate is likely to become warmer. By the 2080s, the average annual temperature in the UK may be 2 0C to 3.5 0C higher than it used to be. The weather is going to be warmer in the south and east in comparison to north and west and also there are going to be higher temperatures in summer and autumn than in winter and spring. High temperatures during summers will be a more frequent phenomenon while very low temperatures during winters will be rare. In addition to this, winters are going to become wetter while summers will become drier. These changes will be more noticeable in the south and east of the UK. The soil moisture during summer by the 2080s may be reduced by 40% or more. Also snowfall will be reduced. Apart from these changes there are several predictions about the sea level mentioning that the sea level will probably rise and extreme sea levels are likely to become a more frequent phenomenon. (UKCIP, 2003)
The predictions for the next decades make references to the rise of the sea level as well as to greater frequency of extreme sea levels. The harmful effects of the sea level rise on the horticultural field derive from the increased number of floods that are going to take place. Due to the floods, several areas that previously were appropriate for the cultivation of various crops will be waterlogged and therefore improper to support any crop. Apart from the floods, the phenomenon of sea level rise also causes the salinization of the soil, which is extremely harmful for the crops. When there is too much salt in the soil, it is difficult for the plants to take up water. (USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service, 1998)
Regarding the changes in temperature, the weather in the UK is going to become warmer accompanied with more frequent high temperatures in summer as well as more infrequent cold winters. An increase in temperature may result in the expansion of the growing season, the earlier maturity of the crops and therefore the earlier harvest. This earlier maturity and harvest of the crops means that growers could plant two or more crops during the same season and therefore take economical advantages. (European Parliament, 1999) In addition to that, the fact that the winters are going to be mild, means that fruits being originated in warm climates such as nectarines or peaches will now be feasible to be cultivated in other areas without being under threat of frost. (BBC NEWS, 2000)
On the other side, warmer temperature have negative effects on the crops as well. First of all, high temperature conditions may result in heat stress of the plants leading to reduction in both growth rate and production because stressed plants are far more prone to pests. Apart from that, crops require the higher the temperature the more water. Finally, many pests as well as diseases thrive under warm weather. As a result growers have to use greater quantities of chemicals so as to provide successful control of the crop enemies.
Several experiments have been done in order to highlight the significance of high temperatures for certain crops. To begin with the cauliflower, the growth of the plant is divided in three stages: juvenility, vernalization, curd growth and each one responds in a different way to increased temperatures. The experiments have shown that higher temperatures will delay curd initiation and in addition to this the periods of juvenility as well as curd growth will become short. Another aspect concerns the effect of temperature on the quality. It has been proved that high temperatures cause problems to bracts or leafy bracts and also cause curds to become loose. (DEFRA, 2003) On the other hand, warming can reduce the damage caused by frost.
Moving to the impact of temperature upon other crops, experiments have shown that high temperatures are going to increase the rate of growth on carrot and reduce the frost damage. The plants of onion require maximum vegetative growth before they develop bulbs and this is boosted when high temperatures occur. This means that high temperatures can lead to earlier bulbing and maturity but can also reduce yields due to the smaller period of bulb growth. Another example refers to top fruits including apples as well as pears that become dormant during winter and need to be exposed under low temperatures so as bud break can take place. On the contrary, high temperatures prevent bud break and therefore fruit set cannot occur. (DEFRA, 2003)
Several experiments have shown that the impact of the increased CO 2 concentrations in the atmosphere is likely to be beneficial for the majority of crops in the UK. The role of CO 2 is focused on the rate of photosynthesis as well as the use of water by plants. Under high CO 2 conditions the plants become more efficient in using water and the rate of photosynthesis is increased. As a result of the increasing rate of photosynthesis, the yield is also increased so the CO 2 is known as 'the fertilizer effect'. (European Parliament, 1999) All plants do not respond in the same way but this depends on their type. For instance C3 plants (e.g. vegetables) are benefited from high levels of CO 2 while C4 plants are less benefited. Finally, there are CAM plants that are not affected by the level of CO 2 in the atmosphere. (DEFRA, 2003)
Judging from the results of the experiments, the elevated CO 2 will lead to the formation of more potato tubers with no significant effect on the size of the tubers. The beneficial effect of high levels of CO 2 on root crops involves an increase in root yield rather than in total biomass. Onion was also affected by an increase in CO 2, which then caused an increase in dry matter. (DEFRA, 2003) Another experiment done on lettuce has shown that high levels of CO 2 resulted in increased yield. (Hadley et al., 1997)
The predictions for the next decades make reference to drier summers and wetter winters. Decreased rainfall during summer together with higher temperatures may lead to greater plant demand for water. Additionally, the insufficient rainfall is going to diminish the amount of water being available for use in horticulture with negative effects on plants' productivity. Finally, increased rainfall during winter may result in floods causing crops to suffer because the root system is waterlogged so there is lack of aeration and plants die. (Marta Moneo, 2003) On the other side, considering the positive aspect of increased winter rainfall, some areas may be benefited as rainfalls provide more water for irrigation with beneficial effects on plants' productivity.
There is no doubt that some climate changes are inevitable. Also, climate changes have positive as well as negative effects so there is a great demand for growers to make specific adaptations in order to avoid or at least minimize the negative impact deriving from the climate changes.
Several cultural practices would be useful towards the completion of this aim. Growers could make use of new varieties or even new crops. (TDRI Quarterly Review, 1999) Whereas the high temperatures constitute a serious problem for the cultivation of certain crops, growers could introduce varieties or crops being tolerant of high temperatures and with lower chilling requirement in order to have fruit set. A general practice being extremely useful is the relocation of the crops, which means that each crop is planted in areas with favorable and ideal conditions for its growth.
The fact is that certain climate changes in terms of the wetter and warmer weather are likely to increase the incidents of pests and diseases that attack crops. So an effective adaptation would be the increased use of chemicals. This may have negative impact upon the environment, so a better way can be considered the use of alternative control strategies such as the use of natural enemies.
Additionally, growers could take steps in order to reduce the emission of greenhouse gasses that is the main cause of climate change worldwide. A significant step towards this direction would be the application of fertilizers or manure at the appropriate time giving exactly the amount that is required by each crop. In this way, there would not be any loss of nitrogen to the environment.
Several other good practices refer to the successful soil moisture management. Due to the sea level rise and increased rainfall floods are going to take place leading to water logging of plants with damaging effects. A solution to the problem would be the improvement of soil drainage so the plants would not suffer from poor aeration and therefore growers would avoid any losses.
Finally, another thing that growers could do so as to minimize the deleterious effects resulting from the climate changes would be the practice of earlier planting. In this way the plants are likely to reach maturity and be ready for harvesting before extreme high temperatures have taken place to cause damage to crops.
Undoubtedly, future climate change is a fact not only in the UK but also all over the world. The climate changes that are likely to occur have both positive as well as negative effects on a range of sectors including tourism, health, fisheries resources, horticultural field crops etc. Bearing in mind the deleterious impact upon the horticulture, growers should take immediate action to adapt to these changes in a way that would minimize the negative effects and optimize the benefits deriving from them.