The farm is organic. A whole range of crops are grown in the farm and particularly 75 different crops all year round. The farm consists of the field, the polytunnels and greenhouses as well as the garden. The field is divided into 7 blocks and each block covers an area of 1 hectare. The polytunnels and greenhouses are used for over wintering salads. The garden, which consists of 9 blocks, is a unique site of the farm because of the special microclimate it has. So, it can get extremely hot in summer and extremely cold during winter. It also goes through floods every 5 to 6 years. Generally, it can either be very hot or cold, very dry or wet. The garden covers 7% of the farm land but it is very labour intensive since it takes 70% of the labour. In the garden, there are not grown any of the crops grown in the field apart from carrots. All crops grown in the garden are done in a relatively small scale, mostly by hand and are semi-mechanized. On the contrary, in the field everything is mostly mechanized. The garden is fairly challenging and very useful part since it produces early crops, is characterized by good fertility, it has remain water, electricity and propagation house for plant raising available and it is also close to the packaging house of the farm.
In terms of the farm's soil, it is medium clay loam, with high stone content and therefore not suitable for root crops. It is very prone to dry in summer and also tends to be fairly wet in winter.
The basic idea of the farm is that people owning the farm do not buy any plants but produce their own. All the plants are bear-root transplants raised by them and planted by hand. In terms of planting, there is a semi-automatic system, which requires some labour as well.
The farm supplies the central Reading and most of Oxford market.
The way they manage the field margins, boundaries and verges by the use of hedges brings biodiversity to the farm since the hedges planted all over the farm attract living organisms such as predators, insects, birds. The hedges need to be cut every 6 to 8 years. In particular, one side of the hedges is cut in one year and the other side is done 2 to 3 years later. So, the hedges need 4 years in order to become an interesting feature of the farm.
Apart from the hedges, another interesting feature of the wildlife and biodiversity issues of the farm is the way they manage the crop residues. After harvesting the crop the residues are left in the field and attract beneficial predators as well as birds since they act as feed source. The cut flower crop 'Sweet Williams' is also used to expand the farm's biodiversity. The flowers of the crop encourage predatory insects and over wintering larvae, particularly hoverfly and lacewing larvae. The predators then will pupate and move to the hedges. So, there will be a bank of predators for the following season and they will move back into the crop in summer.
Another conservation policy of the farm is the planting of a double row of trees within the field acting as windbreak and also as a bank of beneficials.
The field is divided into 7 blocks. Between the blocks there is a piece of ground planted with a mixture of different herbs, clovers and grasses, which acts as a bank for beetles. The idea behind this break is that it acts as a bank for them to move around from the hedges into the field during winter.
Moreover, there are hedgehogs in the farm. Special nesting places for the hedgehogs are prepared in the polytunnels. These nesting places are made of leaves and straw and help hedgehogs live during winter.
In terms of managing the soil fertility, the basic idea on which the farm is based is the avoidance of animal and fertilizer input. Instead of that, the basic principle of the farm is to keep the soil covered during winter. A wide range of green manure crops are planted to accomplish that purpose. The benefits deriving from green manure crops are the improvement of organic as well as nutrient content of the soil. Furthermore, if the soil is left uncovered during winter a lot of damage can be done to that since the rain will leach out a lot of nutrients and as a result the following spring the soil will be very compact and depleted of nutrients.
Obviously, the basic idea of the farm is to try keeping the fertility they have within the soil and make the best possible use of it rather than trying to bring in lots of fertility from outside the farm in order to plug all the losses.
Crop rotations are also another integral part of soil fertility management of the farm. Within the farm there are three rotations being in operation; the field, garden as well as the polytunnel and greenhouse rotation. If the crop is grown on the same piece of land for many years this may result in soil being depleted of nutrients. So, alternating the crops belonging to different groups such as Brassicas, legumes, roots, cereals etc, there will be a balance between those fixing and consuming nitrogen or between light and heavy feeders. In the crop rotation program there are also green manure crops that enrich the soil with nutrients and consequently minimize the need for adding chemical fertilizers.
Weeds are considered to be a significant problem for organic farmers since they cannot be eradicated by use of chemicals. A common practice for weed control used in the farm is the heat-based weed control. Weeds always come out before the crop. So, 3-4 days before the weed seeds break the soil surface and emerge they burn them off and then the crop comes up into clean land. 90% of the weeds are destroyed by this technique if it is properly applied and also the labour cost is reduced since hand weeding is too expensive. Other ways of weed control practiced in the farm is by tractor mechanization or by cultivation. There are several green manure crops used in the farm that are fairly good at suppressing weeds, such as clover.
Since the farm is organic, no chemicals can be applied to control pests and diseases. The use of rotations is of great value to the organic farm since it reduces the risk of pests and diseases. Growing different crops year after year interrupts pest life cycles and therefore keeps their populations down. So, as the crops are alternated the chance of pathogens build-up is reduced.
Also, the habitat management of the farm with all those elements encouraging predators, contributes to pest and disease control. As long as there is a suitable environment (food, water, place to be protected and breed), predators can successfully control pests and diseases.
The farm is environmental sustainable since it promotes wildlife and biodiversity. Integral parts of the farm's environmental sustainability are the hedges planted all over the farm, the nesting places, the grassy areas, the crop residues left on the soil. All these features attract living organisms and therefore increase biodiversity.
Apart from all these, there could be a water habitat in the farm, such as a lake for encouraging other types of organisms (e.g., amphibians) and therefore providing wider biodiversity.
Moreover, the farm is environmental friendly because it uses alternative methods for managing soil fertility and not inorganic fertilizers. However, there could be used animal manure as an input since there are horses in the farm.
The farm also addresses sustainability in terms of social issues. Since customers are interested to know what is going on in the farm, there are open days in operation. The social event of open days brings people together since customers can visit the farm and have a personal communication with the producers.
The fact that the whole system of the farm is based on semi-degree of mechanization provides opportunities for people to be employed in the farm.
The farm can be considered as economically sustainable since it is a profitable business. It covers the central Reading and most of Oxford market. Also, the fact that is based on a crop rotational system reduces the financial risk in the case that one crop does not yield or sell well. Apart from solving the problem of build-up of diseases and soil nutrient depletion, the system of polyculture (growing a variety of different crops) can provide important turnover since it gets over the financial risk being involved in a monoculture system. So, in the unfavourable event that a crop fails it does not necessarily mean that the whole business will fail since there are other types of crops. On the contrary, it is inevitable for the farm to have failures since 75 different crops are grown at the same time.
Another fact that makes the farm economically sustainable is the useful winter income obtained from over wintering salads grown in the greenhouses and polytunnels. Also, the fact that greenhouses and polytunnels bring early crops and extend the growing season makes them integral part of the farm's economic sustainability.