Since consumers expressed a disbelief in the safety and quality of the products that food industry provides, there is an emergency for proving the opposite. After several crises that industry has countered and the weakness to support its standards and solve the consumers' doubts, the development of Quality Assurance Schemes with multidimensional character took place across the EU. These schemes came to apply certification systems to individual products and therefore satisfy people's needs and requirements. The development of these schemes had a great impact upon the European horticultural industry as well as the consumers' attitude.
The word quality usually means different things to different people. A worldwide acceptable definition given by ISO describes the quality as 'the totality of features and characteristics of a product or service that bear on its ability to satisfy stated or implied needs'. (Handbook 22, Quality Assurance, 1992) In simpler words, a product can be characterized by good quality when it meets the customers' requirements.
Quality constitutes an issue for all enterprises as well as agricultural and horticultural industry. Therefore the majority of producers and manufacturers make great effort in order to accomplish the best quality for their products.
All organisations, including commercial as well as industrial ones tend to provide their products to customers aiming at fulfilling their needs and requirements. Nowadays, there is a great variety of products produced by different organisations that leads to strict competitiveness between all of these. This makes it extremely difficult for the customers to choose, so they have to use certain standards in terms of the quality and safety of the products.
As the needs and expectations of the customers become more and more demanding, there is a growing necessity for enterprises to be in a position to offer a better quality product, so as to be antagonistic towards the others as well as maintaining their economical performance. Therefore, the competitiveness between enterprises together with the increasing concern of customers for products of great quality and safely produced has led to the development of Quality Assurance Schemes.
According to ISO definition, the term 'quality assurance' is referring to 'the assembly of the planned and systematic actions necessary to provide adequate confidence that a product, process or service will satisfy given quality requirements'. (Handbook 22, Quality Assurance, 1992)
The aim of Quality Assurance Schemes is to ensure buyers and customers that the product in which they are interested has been produced in compliance with specific standards. These standards include the quality of the product, its safety in terms of the physical contaminants and chemical residues it contains, the use of the appropriate processes during its production so as to avoid any hazardous effects on the environment and also social ethics of the production system.
In other words, the producers and retailers have adopted the Quality Assurance Schemes in order to emphasize the quality assurance standards they apply to all stages of the production.
The Quality Assurance Schemes can be applied in the production of eggs, milk, pork, chicken and combinable crop sectors to an extent of up to 85% as well as to the production of lamb, beef and horticultural industry (fresh fruits and vegetables) to an extent of more than 65%. ()
Nowadays, there is a vast number of Quality Assurance Schemes being available for application to the area of horticulture all over Europe including Hazard Critical Control Points (HACCP), Assured Produce Scheme (APS) covering fresh fruit and vegetables, British Ornamental Plant Producers Assurance Scheme (BOPP), Enviroveg and EurepGap.
As far as the consumers are concerned, there was an increasing demand for being sure that the agricultural products are being produced safely without any trace of pesticides or insecticides and with the minimum environmental impact. On the other hand, neither the industries nor the public authorities were able to prove the goods were assured which resulted in consumers' poor confidence in the safety and quality of the food. The response to this controversy was the development of EurepGap.
The Euro-Retailer Produce Working Group (EUREP) was found in 1997 and is the first working group all over Europe. It is a certification system responded in 1999 to the increasing worry about assurance standards. The group represents food retailers in Europe such as Safeway, Tesco, Sainsbury, Marks & Spencer, Somerfield in the United Kingdom and Migros in Switzerland.
The EUREP uses the Good Agricultural Practice (GAP) as a standard in order to certify the good agricultural practice in both agricultural and horticultural industry. Among its aims is also the encouragement of enterprises to apply HACCP (Hazard Analysis of Critical Control Points).
The main target of EurepGap is to convince industries so as to use good practices in all stages of the production. In particular, it concerns about food safety, environmental issues, practices of Integrated Pest Management (IPM) and Integrated Crop Management (ICP) as well as 'the ability of the products to be traced back to the farm where they were produced'. (FloraCulture International, February 2003, pg: 28)
The EurepGap certification system is currently applicable in fresh fruits, vegetables and ornamentals. It is also appropriate to be used for all types of agricultural products that people consume. It is not yet applicable to grain, coffee, animal production and feed.
The development of Quality Assurance Schemes had a beneficial impact upon consumers as well as industries. Over the last years consumers have started seeking for top quality and safety in the products they consume. At the beginning they had expressed disbelief in these issues but the development of Quality Assurance Schemes increased their confidence and was a step towards the knowledge that each stage of the production was highly audited and certified in terms of the quality and assurance they look for.
There is also an impact upon the horticultural industry covering two aspects. The first one has to do with the position of the industry in the market. Different enterprises produce the same product using different production systems and different standards. The abundance of goods existing today has created confusion to consumers when making their choices so they need to set up certain criteria. The quality and assurance of the products have largely become an issue for most people and consist a priority, thus they show their preference for products being certified by a well-recognised organisation or scheme. From this point of view, the application of Quality Assurance Schemes has helped enterprises to provide a differentiated product and therefore gain a better position over the market and become more competitive towards the others.
According to the second aspect, by the development and application of these schemes to the horticultural sector the way that industry works has changed. One of the main principles these schemes have set up is to encourage growers to use the minimum inputs of chemicals and fertilizers that a crop needs, so as to avoid any hazardous effects on consumers' health or on the environment. Obviously, there is a shift movement suggesting the use of alternative methods for destroying pests.
Now, instead of pesticides, growers can make use of resistant cultivars, natural enemies such as parasites or predators, which attack pests. In addition, they can apply chemical treatments at the appropriate time and in the minimum quantity so as to avoid having any residuals in the products after harvesting. All these alternative methods provide adequate control of the crop enemies with the less impact on the environment as well as on the consumers' health.
Moreover, everything that has to do with pests' control must be recorded such as the number of applications. Well- trained staff according to certain instructions must do the application of pesticides. The staffs need to have the appropriate equipment providing protection against chemicals.
Apart from the benefits deriving from the application of Quality Assurance Schemes, there are also disadvantages as far as the growers are concerned. The supermarket chains such as Sainsbury have set up certain specifications for the products they desire to sell. The final product is checked before going to the market so as to be confirmed whether it meets these standards. In case the products do not comply with the standards of Quality Assurance Schemes are rejected and cannot supply the market. This failing consists a loss for the growers who have produced such products.
Over the last years people have strongly expressed their interest in the quality and assurance of the products they consume. On the other side, enterprises have recognised that and started implementing Quality Assurance Schemes in all stages of the production so as to come up with a product of high standards and therefore meet the customers' expectations. The fact is that despite the increased concern about such assurance standards the majority of consumers seem to be unaware of the kinds of Quality Assurance Schemes exist and are in operation by enterprises. Thus, there is a lack of appropriate informing. Having analysed all the benefits, these schemes seem to be a key factor for the horticultural industry as well as for the human and environmental welfare.