The farm is not organic but integrated. The whole area is divided into 2 sites. The farm itself is a horticultural unit, growing kohlrabi, cauliflowers, onions, spinach, Sweet Williams, coriander. The cultivation system practiced is the bed systems.
In terms of the soil, the farm is situated on a reclaimed gravel mining. The land of the farm has been gone from a gravel peat to this since 1978.
The farm supplies wholesale markets and restaurants without dealing with supermarkets. The farm also has machinery shed and a pack house available.
At the end of each field there are ditches for the accumulation of drainage water. The ditches remain wet for 6 months, are kept clear and function as corridors for promoting wildlife since they get beneficials closer to the field. Particularly, the ditches provide a wet habitat for amphibians and other organisms that live in water. The sides of the ditches are used as beetle banks.
Within the farm there is also a twenty-year old lake, which is a wildlife habitat for insects and predators. The banks of the lake also provide a wildlife habitat since they have holes where parasitic wasps nest. Being aware of the importance of the lake as a wildlife habitat the owners of the farm have put a protection all around in order to prevent enemies from destroying beneficials.
Apart from the ditches and the lake there are also hedges in the farm as a biodiversity source. The hedges consist of native deciduous species (e.g., black thorn, hawthorn) and operate as both wildlife habitat and windbreak. The way they manage the hedges is critical. The hedges are trimmed every year in A-shape allowing light to go to the bottom of the hedge. On the other hand, if the hedges were trimmed in V-shape the light could not penetrate and reach the bottom of the hedge, which may result in die back at the bottom of the hedge. Also, the time of trimming is quite crucial. So, trimming is taking place in February when there are not any nests to destroy.
Another policy of the farm that promotes biodiversity is the way they manage crop residues. Foe example, kohlrabi crop has been left to rot down in order to attract over wintering pests, parasites, predators and birds to the farm since they are used as a feed source for all these living organisms. Not only crop residues but also a cut flower crop (Sweet Williams) is used in the farm as a feed source for increasing biodiversity. Similarly to the kohlrabi residues, Sweet Williams constitute a feed source attracting both insects and birds.
Finally, the nests that exist in several places of the farm are marked so as to avoid damaging them whenever cultivation and spraying are taking place.
The whole farm has been marked on areas of 25m 2 using the GPS satellite system. Soil analysis is taking place individually for each 25m 2 areas and so they know exactly the variation between the different areas in terms of fertilization and how much fertilizer needs to be given to each area separately. Obviously, this is a much more precise and intelligent system than the one used in the organic farm. This is due to the fact that fertility and especially the basic fertility is done according to what is needed for this 25m 2 area, whereas in the organic farm the fertilization program they use does not take into consideration the differences between different soil types in terms of fertility levels as well as the changes that the soil is undergone with regard to nutrient content. The tractors are linked to the GPS system and apply fertilizers after the soil has been tested.
Since the farm is not organic but integrated there is a different approach towards the weed control. In particular, weeds are allowed to germinate and then are destroyed before the crop is planted. Rather than applying mechanical weeding the integrated farm uses chemicals for weed control, such as Roundup.
Since the farm is not organic, pests and diseases can be controlled by use of chemicals. The technique practiced by the farm towards pest and disease elimination is the application of chemical sprays. However, the whole process of spraying is done with special care since the farm is integrated and encourages wildlife. So, nesting places in the farm are marked in order to avoid being destroyed and also sprays are applied during that time of the season that nests do not yet exist in the farm.
The farm addresses environmental sustainability since it promotes biodiversity as well as wildlife by elements, such as hedges, wildlife corridors (ditches), the lake etc. Taking advice from English nature and other conservation bodies they manage these elements in such a way so as to contribute to wide biodiversity. Special attention is paid to the protection of the lake's beneficials and the nesting places within the farm.
The farm could organize open days within the season. By doing that the customers would have the opportunity to visit the farm and have a look at it, to come in contact with the owners of the farm and have a personal communication with them.
Social events like open days are very important for the farm in order to address social sustainability since customers are interested in the origin and quality of the products they consume. Especially the last years, people's awareness of food quality has increased and so it is useful to know where the products they consume are produced in case they find any trace of chemicals (traceability). Open days seems to be a good approach to that concern.
The economic sustainability of the farm lies in the fact that it supplies wholesale markets and restaurants but still looking for new markets in order to expand their sales. Moreover, since it is based on polyculture it does not involve the financial risk of a monoculture system meaning that a crop failure leads the whole business to fail. On the other hand, the farm is a unit growing a wide range of horticultural crops. So, if a certain crop yields or sells badly this does not necessarily mean that the farm cannot be a profitable business.
Additionally, despite the fact that there is a loss of 25,000 pounds every year because of the land that is managed in a way that brings biodiversity to the farm (plantation of hedges, lake etc.), it is still an economically sustainable farm since the final turnover outcomes this loss.