One of the criteria used by consumers when they make food-purchasing decisions is quality. In particular, there are certain quality cues which the consumers observe before purchasing a product. Quality cues can be divided into two categories: intrinsic and extrinsic. Intrinsic cues consist part of the physical product and can only be changed if the physical product itself is changed according to Ophuis and van Trijp (1995) (e.g. colour, aroma, taste etc.) (Dimara and Skuras, 2003). On the other hand, the extrinsic cues are related to the product without being physically part of it (e.g. brand name, store name, price, country of origin etc.) (Dimara and Skuras, 2003). Consumers use all of the above quality cues to make food-purchasing decisions easier for them.
In the past, consumers were not very concerned about a specific store and their purchases were made from the store offering the greatest variety of the most well known brands at the lowest prices. So, the store name was not important for them. However, nowadays, consumers have started building a kind of loyalty to a certain store and they are willing to change their preferences in terms of brands when needed instead of shopping from several different stores. The strategy behind this is the effort of retailers to pull their store name as a brand and Marks and Spencer is an example of this (Lisanti, 2000). In the case of other products, brand and country of origin are very closely related as far as consumers are concerned (e.g. Coca-Cola is seen as 'American' by consumers (Cai, Cude and Swagler, 2004).
In general, consumers use extrinsic cues in their food purchasing decisions because they tend to relate them with certain factors. According to Zeithaml (1988), price, brand and store name are positively related to quality (Dodds, Monroe and Grewal, 1991). From another perspective, price, brand and country of origin are related with authenticity (Groves, 2001). Finally, for other consumers, store name reveals a great amount of information and is connected with the physical environment, quality as well as service levels and therefore within this context is used as a useful cue (Grewal. Krishman, Baker and Borin, 1998).
However, consumers' purchasing behaviour has been found to be dependent upon socio-economic characteristics. Hoffmann (2000) found that those consumers who are aware of incidents like salmonella bacteria and antibiotics and are more concerned about health issues and animal welfare consider the country of origin of the product to a greater degree when it comes to making food purchasing decisions. Moreover, women and low-income groups rely more on the country of origin when they make such kind of decisions comparing with men and high-income groups. In another study also it was found that for low-income consumers as well as consumers from rural areas, price is an important factor (CSANR, 2005). This is due to the fact that there is the segment of consumers who receive price as a cost and they want to minimize it. Therefore they are not willing to pay high prices for brand, store name or country of origin cues. On the other hand, price is very important for other consumers because they connect it with high quality products (Brunso, Fjord and Grunert, 2002).
The survey method chosen to be used in this study is the personal interviewing and more specifically the mall intercept type of it. This method is suitable in this situation since the questionnaire does not include any kind of questions where the respondents need to refer back to records in order to provide an answer. So, obviously there is no need for them to be in home.
Another important reason for the selection of the method is that since the survey focuses on consumers of fresh food products and examines attitudes and perceptions without requiring special knowledge or information on a subject, by standing outside supermarkets large numbers of the target population can be easily found. Moreover, another reason for the selection of the method is that it takes place in a public place and participants do not have any reason to be concerned about their personal safety.
The survey has been decided to be self-administered (each respondent will be given a questionnaire and asked to read and answer the questions without an interviewer). This will help to avoid any interviewer bias (e.g. interviewer's reaction, changes in voice etc.) and will make respondents feel more comfortable and not under the pressure of giving socially acceptable answers. It has been found in a study by Colombotos (1969) that face-to-face interviews generate many socially acceptable answers (Bush and Hair, 1985). The majority of the survey would be self-administered, however, several trained interviewers would be there for two reasons. First of all, interviewers will be there to help respondents and explain them any unclear questions and prevent them from leaving uncompleted questions. Secondly, interviewers will be there in order to help people who are not able to carry out a self-administered survey for many reasons (e.g. they do not see well (elderly people), lack of reading and writing skills, low education level etc.). Obviously, the presence of the interviewer in such cases would reduce the non-response error attributed to factors like the above.
Even though the method is convenient for finding a large number of the target population, not many of them would be willing to participate because they are in a hurry, they are busy, and the weather is not favourable (e.g. rain, too cold etc.). So, in order to reduce the non-response error due to all these factors, a 5-pound voucher to be spent in the supermarket of their preference will be given to each participant as an incentive. Also, the questionnaire has been designed not to be very long, since the longer the questionnaire the lower the response rate and this method gives a low response rate due to the factors mentioned above.
Ideally, given a higher budget focus groups would have been organized prior to the survey as a means of gathering insights and ideas which could then be used in order to develop the questionnaire. Finally, the questionnaire could be pretested under real situations to check whether the questions address the objectives of the study and if not to allow for any possible changes or improvements.
The target population of this study is defined as Marks and Spencer's consumers across the UK and it is of particular interest to target different socio-economic groups. The interviewing method that has been chosen, where interviewers will be standing outside Marks and Spencer supermarkets is convenient for finding large numbers of the target population. In this case non-probability sampling will be used where the probability of selecting any particular consumer from the target population cannot be determined. Since different socio-economic groups are of particular interest for this study, the quota sampling method fits well into the current situation. Control categories (quotas) will be defined for the population elements, such as sex, age and interviewers will be using their judgment to a certain extent to ensure that quotas in the sample as well as in the population are the same (restricted judgmental sampling). This sampling method involves many sources of selection bias, however it has been chosen because it is quick and cheap given the time and budget constraints of the study.
Since results need to be taken from Marks and Spencer's consumers across the UK, surveys will be administrated in several different places of the UK, the number of which will be proportionate to the population of each place and the number of places is strictly dependent upon the budget and time available. Even though larger samples yield more accurate results, the sample size also depends on the budget and time available. However, using the table with the indicative costs for different types of surveys (Lobb, 2006) and assuming that the mall intercept method has similar cost with the mail survey, around 187 respondents is a rough estimation of the sample size.
It is important for the data collection to take place both on weekdays and weekend days and at different hours of the days. In the case of collecting all the data at a single time on a single day, the results could be biased socio-economically something that would not be desirable since in the current study different socio-economic groups of the target population are of great interest. For example, if all the data are collected only on weekday mornings, there is a big chance that people who do not work dominate the sample or they are retired and therefore have time to go shopping on a weekday morning.
For each of the following questions please circle only one response.