The highest amount for organic food is spent in Waitrose supermarket.
Consumers do not buy organic food from Kwiksave supermarket.
% spent in organic food is dependent upon yearly household income, number of children and household size.
Households bigger in size spent more money in organic food purchases.
The least amount spent in organic food comes from families without children.
Consumers under the age of 29 do not purchase organic food.
Only consumers with yearly household income of 30,783 and above spend money in organic food.
There was no significant difference between vegetarian and non-vegetarian consumers in terms of the amount spent in organic food.
Organic consumers of Azda, Safeway, Tesco and Waitrose are all rich, old, big spenders, while Kwiksave's organic consumers are family shoppers and car owners.
Over the last years it has been observed a rapid growth in the market of organic products. There are several factors accounting for that. First of all, consumers have started being more concerned about the quality of the food they consume with respect to health and safety issues. Secondly, they have become more aware of environmental issues (Tregear, Dent and McGregor, 1994) and finally, several food scares like E.coli, dioxins, worries over genetically modified foods, the use of antibiotics and hormones, the mad cow disease contributed to the growth of this market ((Lohr, 2006). The reasons why consumers purchase organic food include perceptions such that organic method of production being environmental friendly and leading to the production of healthier food, better taste of organic food against conventional (Tregear et al., 1994). Moreover, food produced organically is perceived to be fresher and is considered by organic consumers as an attempt to support local farmers (Lohr, 2006). On the other hand, there are factors that inhibit purchase of organic products and those are price and availability (Davies, Titterington and Cochrane, 1995).
In a study by Davies et al. (1995), organic consumers at Safeway supermarkets have been classified into four groups:
55% of the organic food market consists of supermarkets particularly Safeway, Sainsbury, Tesco and Azda. Small shops account for less than one third and farm shops 15% (Davies et al., 1995).
In general, the motivations behind consumers' organic purchases are similar across countries, however, consumers of different socio-economic groups perceive organic food in a different way. For example, according to Richter et al. (2000), the majority of studies describe organic consumers as people of high income and high education level, parents of young children or infants who are concerned about health and food quality and usually female (Lohr, 2006).
The data were analyzed using the SPSS statistical package and Excel. Initially, case summaries were performed which gave a quick view of what is happening with the data in order to observe any obvious trends they follow.
In particular, case summaries were performed for the % spent in organic food grouped by the supermarket and the number of children in the household. Also, case summaries were provided for yearly household income grouped by the number of children. Variables like the household size, the age of respondent and the yearly household income were banded and new variables were created. More specifically, the household size was banded into two groups, those households with one or two members and those with more than two members. A case summary for the % spent in organic food, grouped by the yearly household income was then performed and income was banded into seven groups. A case summary was also performed for the age of respondents and then this variable was banded into seven groups. After creating the three new banded variables of household size, income and age case summaries were done for each one of them.
The data set consists of vegetarians and non-vegetarian consumers. Two layers were created and shown that the mean % spent in organic food for both vegetarians and non-vegetarians were different. However, in order to check whether the difference between the two sample means is large enough to reject the null hypothesis (Ho: vegetarians and non-vegetarians spend the same % in organic food), t-test was performed in Excel.
Regression analysis was run in Excel to check whether there is any linear relationship between income and age. Multivariate regression was also performed in SPSS between the % spent in organic food and household size, number of children, weekly TV watching (hours), weakly radio listening (hours), surf the web, yearly household income, age of respondent, vegetarians versus non-vegetarians to check for any relationship between the % spent in organic food with any of those variables.
Finally, Waitrose's consumers were filtered out and case summaries were provided for the following variables: yearly household income, number of children, household size, age of respondent, weekly radio listening (hours), weekly TV watching (hours), surf the web, vegetarians versus non-vegetarians in order to check the profile of Waitrose's organic consumers. In addition to that, principal components analysis (PCA) was conducted in order to define groups of consumers and the selection of the principal components was based on the method of eigenvalues. At the end, cluster analysis was performed.
Organic consumers purchase most of the organic food from Waitrose with the amount of money spent accounting for 6.91%. Tesco comes second with 6.47% spent in organic food, followed by Azda (5.98%) and Safeway (4.53%). Consumers do not spend any money in Kwiksave for buying organic food (Fig.1).
Households bigger in size spend more money in organic food (5.82%) compared to smaller households (4.08%) (Fig.2). The least amount spent in organic food comes from families without children (4.04%), while those families with one or two children spend more money in organic food (7.11% and 7.67% respectively) (Fig.3).
The yearly household income ranges from 10,759 to 75,170. Those who spend money in organic food have income of 30,783 and above, while those whose income is less than 30,783 do not spend anything in organic food. The greater amount spent in organic food (10.33%) comes from households with yearly income between 52,977 and 60,374 (Fig.4) and the highest income have households with two children (44,025) (Fig.5).
Regarding the age of the consumers of the current study varies between 9 and 84 years old. However, it was found that consumers younger than the age of 29 do not spend anything in organic food. Those who purchase organic food are at the age of 29 and above. In particular, consumers at the age of 57-65 spend more in organic food (6.7%) (Fig.6).
Moreover, vegetarians spend more money in organic food comparing to non-vegetarians with the amount spent accounting for 5.24% for vegetarians and 4.36% for non-vegetarians. However, this difference is not large enough (p-value greater than 0.05) (Fig.7) and therefore we fail to reject the null hypothesis, which states that vegetarians and non-vegetarians spend the same amount in organic food.
In terms of income this proved to be significantly correlated to age (p<0.05, R 2=91.85) and the equation that describes this relationship is given below:
The multivariate regression analysis showed that % spent in organic food is dependent upon the household size, the number of children as well as the yearly household income (p<0.05, adjusted R 2=0.23) and the equation that describes this relationship is given below (Fig.8):
Waitrose's organic consumers have an average yearly income of 54,932, household consisting of two persons and no children as a result of this, at the age of 60, who listen to the radio 5.6 hours per week, watch TV 8.2 hours per week, surf the web 0.4 hours per week and are non-vegetarians in their majority (Fig.9).
With the PCA 5 components were extracted which explain 66.049% of the total variance (Fig.10) and the following labels were given (Fig. 11):
Those 5 components were then analyzed by supermarket and the profile of each supermarket's consumers was identified (Fig.13). The majority of organic consumers of Azda, Safeway, Tesco and Waitrose all had the same profile of rich, old and big spenders, while Kwiksave's organic consumers are mainly family shoppers and car owners.
In cluster analysis there were found 5 clusters with the following composition (Fig.14):
The biggest amount for organic food was spent in Waitrose (6.91%). In an attempt to give the profile of organic consumers, results showed that households consisting of more than two members spend more money in organic food compared to households with one or two members. An explanation of this might be that households with more than two members are those with children and in this study the greatest amount spent in organic food comes from families with one or two children. This finding is in agreement with those of Mintel (1991) according to which the major supporters of organic food are consumers with children with the worry about children's future being the second most important reason for purchasing organic food (Davies et al., 1995). In another study also, organic consumers are described as parents of young children or infants (Lohr, 2006), however, the presence of children should be examined in relation to children's age (Fotopoulos and Krystallis, 2002).
In the current study, households with two or more members (probably indicating the presence of children) have higher income (47,687) than one or two-member households (33,621) and spend more on organic food probably due to the presence of children but also because of the high disposable income. Regarding the household size, it has been found by Jolly (1999) that as the household size increases the willingness to pay for organic food decreases (Harris, 2000) and this might be attributed to high prices of organic food. So, Mintel (1991) stated that the presence of children itself is not a significant determinant of organic food purchases but also the household income needs to be added in the model for a better explanation. So, high-income households with children are the bigger purchasers of organic food (Davies et al., 1995) and the current study showed that households with two children have higher income than those with one child or without children at all. Households with yearly income of 52,977-60,374 spend more in organic food, which is in agreement with other studies that have identified the more affluent socio-economic groups as the major purchasers of organic food (Davies et al., 1995).
Consumers under the age of 29 do not spend any money in organic food. Even though younger people appear as more willing to pay for organic food due to increased concerns about environmental issues their actual purchasing activity is low because they do not have the power to purchase (Fotopoulos and Krystallis, 2002) and this might be the case of the current study. The results showed that consumers between the age of 57 and 65 seem to spend more on organic food. This is in contradiction with a study conducted by the Food Marketing Institute (1997) where older consumers were less concerned about organic food (Harris, 2000). However, there are variations in the literature in terms of the age. Others concluded that people of 30-49 years old are the predominant consumers of organic food, which they related to the period of having children (Davies et al., 1995) or 35-55 (Cunningham, 2001) or 25-34 (Cunningham, 2004). Finally, Jolly (1991) found no correlation between age and purchases of organic food (Harris, 2000).
There is not significant difference in terms of the money spent in organic food between vegetarians and non-vegetarians. However, this slight difference of 0.88% spent more by vegetarians might be attributed to the fact that the most commonly bought organic products are fruits and vegetables accounting for 55.6% (Radman, 2005) which dominate in vegetarians' diet.
The % spent in organic food was found to be dependent upon the yearly household income, the number of children as well as the household size. In general, the major purchasers of organic food proved to be households big in size, with children and yearly household income of 30,782 or more not younger than 29 years old. Most of the organic purchases were done from Waitrose supermarket and several information about Waitrose's organic consumers was provided. They proved to be rich, old, big spenders and more specifically with an average yearly income of 54,932, household consisting of two persons and no children as a result of this, at the age of 60, who listen to the radio 5.6 hours per week, watch TV 8.2 hours per week, surf the web 0.4 hours per week and are non-vegetarians in their majority. The same profile also had organic consumers of the competitor supermarkets, namely Azda, Safeway and Tesco apart from Kwiksave which had organic consumers who are family shoppers and car owners.