In the thirteenth century there was undoubtedly an immeasurable increase in commercial activity. Trade with the East flourished and as did that within Europe. This was brought about with such developments as the establishment of a banking system with a fundamentally different and adequate system of book keeping and re-development of the infrastructure necessary for vast amounts of goods to travel through Europe. There is much evidence, although not quantitive, such as the increased social status of the merchant and banker and the rapidly expanding nature of commercial ports and towns such as Venice. However, the extent to which this all occurred in the thirteenth century alone is questionable. Many of the roots for such an explosion of trade lay in earlier centuries, for example by 1200 many Italian bankers had extended their role from money changers, entering the field of banking proper. To be a revolution it is necessary for there to be 'a great upheaval' or 'a complete change', it will be illustrated that this did not occur in the thirteenth century alone.
There had always been a certain volume of trade in Europe. This was heavily reduced however during the period of invasion in the ninth and tenth centuries and was restricted mainly to luxury and religious goods. In the late tenth and early eleventh centuries the volume and range of goods that entered Europe began to increase. This first occurred in Italy and gradually spread to Northern Europe. It was a revival, not a new creation, but one with considerable differences. In the twelfth century there was a fundamental change in the balance of trade. Previously Europe had little that the Byzantine and Middle Eastern merchants wanted, so European traders acquired oriental and other such goods through the trade of slaves and mainly bullion. This trade of bullion had led to a vastly diminishing stock of gold and it was not until the later Middle Ages that Europe began to produce goods such as cloth, tin and pewter, with which Europe could trade, halting this bullion decline. There are very few statistics surviving to give an idea of the changing volume and type of European exports in the eleventh and twelfth centuries but there is little doubt that it did increase. The growth of port cities, dependent on sea borne trade, is however useful evidence. Amalfi, a pre eminent port of the eleventh century, was replaced by the larger port of Pisa, which was then immeasurably superseded by the more important ports of Venice and Genoa. This vast increase in the size of port towns shows a growth in wealth and attraction for workers and merchants all as a result of the increasing sea borne trade that entered Italy from the East and was then traded throughout the rest of Europe. However, it was not in the thirteenth century that there was this sudden boom in trade. As early as 829 the Will of the Venetian Doge Justinian Partecipazio mentioned among his assets a substantial sum (1,200 silver pounds) invested in overseas commercial ventures. Venice was then practically independent, but honoured her allegiance to Byzantium by supplying naval assistance, and used her eastern connections to unlock the gates of the Western Empire. She also maintained with Muslim Africa and the Levant as good relations. Thus she gradually built up a thriving triangular trade, based on the trade of eastern luxury goods and western heavy commodities. Moreover, the Venetians had two important commodities of their own: the salt of their lagoons and the glass of their furnaces. By the tenth century some glass blowers had made their way into the upper class, thus acquiring the unusual title of master craftsmen. The commercialisation process, of Venice in particular, had already begun in certain areas as early as the ninth century, indicating a gradual build up to the explosion of the thirteenth century and not revolution.
While the evidence on European exports is scarce, that for internal trade is non existent. It is through indirect means - the establishment of fairs and markets, the growth and prosperity of mainland towns in which commerce played a significant role, in other words the development of an infrastructure of commerce - that one becomes conscious of the vast expansion of trade within Europe. Land transport, even more expensive than that by sea, found huge limitations in the conditions of the roads. The huge road network of the Roman Empire had fallen into disrepair, with a lack of a coherent organisation and maintenance plan. What was left of trade within Europe relied primarily of internal waterways. However, slowly a new more flexible and complex, but flimsier road network began to take shape. Towns were linked to one another not by one single highway but by several winding trails of beaten earth and loose stones, sometimes bolstered by wooden planks. Although there were limitations to the reliability of this new road network, it provided better links between towns, bringing Europe closer together. In this way trade way able to flourish not only with foreign countries but within Europe, on a scale unknown since the fall of the Roman Empire. However, the programme of road building was not centrally co-ordinated and therefore sporadic, leading to a gradual build up of both the road network and thus trade along such routes.
In the ninth and tenth centuries there were no more than 1000 towns in Europe that began to be linked by such road networks, half of which were in Italy. In the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries this vastly increased to at least 4000, possibly nearer 5000. Some were still agrarian, but around 2000 were important places of local and regional trade and where craftsmen made goods for the local market. Most towns were founded in the late twelfth and early thirteenth centuries, suggesting a powerful urge to establish new settlements, therefore showing how strong the conviction was that trade was expanding. Not only were there many new towns, but many of the existing ones saw great expansion. The evidence consists principally in the extension of walls to enclose more extensive areas, but also the establishment of churches and urban parishes outside confines of the town walls. The towns of Europe, especially Italy, had broken free of the agrarian confines of the so called Dark Ages. The great landowners deserted the towns to their castle or manorial retreats, leaving behind a fairly large number of minor noble families, who owned land in the vicinity and lived in the town. However, their weight no longer offset that of the majority of people engaged in trade and crafts. Virtually all of the inhabitants were freemen, and took some part, albeit it very limited, in the municipal assemblies and lower administrative tasks. Merchants as early as 750 were able to serve in the military on an equal footing with landowners of equivalent income. These unique political and social circumstances enabled the Italian towns to react to the stimulus of demographic change and agrarian revival more promptly that did the rest of Europe. As early as the tenth century, the opposition between those who fight or pray and those who work was not as significant as the solidarity of townsmen versus men of the country. The embryonic town organisations that embraced craftsmen and merchants were at first generalised due to a limited number of the afore mentioned. Gradually larger and all embracing guilds gave way to those that were more specialised. This demonstrated a substantial increase in the numbers of merchants and craftsmen and the specialisation the latter achieved.
The increasing number of merchants went hand in hand with a rise in their status showing how important commercial activity was in the tenth to thirteenth centuries. Substantial shifts in the political status and social posture of the merchant class were evident in its top brackets if not in the lower ranks. Despite their influence in the Greco-Roman period merchants were never able to obtain the power and stature of the landed classes. They were at best second class citizens and the middle ages compounded their demise by reducing their numbers. However, in this period of the so called Dark Ages the remaining merchant class sharpened their wits, their organisation and aggressiveness. The entrepreneurs who emerged from this commercially stagnant period 'cared less for recognition than for autonomy, less for security than for opportunity'. They were perfectly adjusted for the warlike, disconnected society of their time. Their goal was to become masters of their own cities and make themselves the hub of territorial states where agriculture would be subservient to trade. At no other time has there been as many governments by and for the merchants, illustrating once again the great importance and rise of commercialism.
Along with the rise of the merchant class was the equally important establishment of banks and social weighting of the bankers themselves. The first references to banking are found in the Genoese records of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. The acts of the Genoese notaries reveal that the so-called bankers, who were previously merely money changers, had by 1200 already extended their activities beyond this role, entering the field of banking. In certain Italian cities, notably Genoa, money changers were now accepting deposits repayable on demand, transferred payments by order of their clients and granted them advances on their current accounts. From the last years of the twelfth century they began to arrange settlements, not only between their own clients, but between those of different banks. In the process of making themselves into genuine bankers, they started up the great companies which brought wealth to their towns of origin and were one of the motive forces behind big business in the thirteenth century. A network of agents was established and correspondents between their towns of origin, the fairs of Champagne and certain large centres of trade. The activity and profits of the Italian banking houses were founded on the use of the bill of exchange. This simple, but highly flexibly instrument allowed vast sums of money to be moved from one account to another, from one part of Europe to another in as short a time as it took for a courier to make the journey between them. Money could be paid into a bank in Florence and paid out at a branch in Champagne where the merchant could buy his goods, without having to carry the money. This was a key development therefore and without it the increase in commercial activity would arguably not have been possible on such a scale. Merchants no longer had to risk carrying vast amounts of bullion around with them, which slowed them down considerably anyway. However, the fragility of these banks can be seen with the collapse of the three largest, the Florentine companies of the Bardi, the Peruzzi and the Acciajoli. They had triumphed in the first half of the fourteenth century thanks to their perfect organisation, only to collapse as a result of lending vast sums of unsecured money to King Edward III of England on the eve of the Hundred Years' War, counting on a quick and profitable victory.
Just as important as the methods of paying money in and out of banks was the record keeping necessary to keep track of the ever increasing flows of cash this encompassed. The sophisticated manipulations of Italian merchants and bankers called for a no less developed method of keeping their accounts. Such early account books as have survived show a confusing medley of entries relating to purchases and sales, with occasional notes of an entirely private nature. Such methods were quite inadequate for the needs of the Italian banker and who dealt in bills of exchange as well as merchandise from all parts of Europe. In the course of the thirteenth century he learnt to keep his credit and debit entries separate from one another, either on different pages or ledgers. This method was latterly called double entry book keeping and is still used today. Some such as Sombart describe its importance as 'the cornerstone of capitalism'. However, 'it is very doubtful whether merchants "required anything more from their ledgers and journals than a clear and ready record of transactions for easy reference, and descriptive details of their cash, merchandise, and other assets bought and sold". Double entry book keeping was a convenience but its introduction clearly had no revolutionary consequences'.
Although the idea of a commercial revolution implies developments in trade and commerce, agricultural changes were also very important. 'As demographic growth was a prime motor of agricultural progress, so agricultural progress was an essential prerequisite the Commercial Revolution'. So long as peasants were only able to ensure their own subsistence and that of their lords, then all other activities were marginalised. When food surpluses increased, due to for example the introduction of the three field rotation system, it became possible for some people to spend more time following other pursuits. Merchants and craftsmen were given the opportunity to provide more than the mere fistful of luxury goods for the extremely wealthy, and it is in this respect that we can see the advances in agriculture leading to a vast increase in commercial activity.
The notion of a Commercial Revolution ensues a period of economic depression in the preceding years, known as the Dark Ages. However, the very fact that there were certain periods of economic upturns, although short lived and regional, in which the roots of the explosion of commercialism in the thirteenth century lie, illustrates the limited extent to which the period described can be called a revolution. In the early sixth century the Emperor in the East, Justinian, brought together Roman Law, built a huge church in Constantinople and recaptured Italy from the Goths. He also manages to claim the lands of Southern Spain and Northern Africa and hence there were many economic benefits of this great rule. The most important was that trade could continue between Italy and Constantinople, ensuring the ready supply of money and wealth, but the Lombard invasion of 568 disrupts this. However, Southern France by the late sixth century looks outwards in terms of trade to North Africa and Constantinople. This illustrated that cities and trade were not dead in the so called Dark Ages. Latterly the Charlemagne Empire that covered France, Germany and Italy, had many economic benefits mainly in terms of trade. From Italy came wine and from the North came cloth and fur to name a few. This cannot be overly exaggerated, but it does show signs of economic activity, building up towards the thirteenth century in which there was unquestionably a great increase in commerce.
The problem is whether all this change actually occurred in the thirteenth century alone and had such a profound difference to be called a revolution. There was a significant increase in external trade, but the roots lie in the expansion of the late tenth and early eleventh centuries, culminating in the fundamental change in the twelfth century when Europe began producing goods that it could trade with the East instead of trading bullion. The vast improvements to the infrastructure enabled internal trade to expand with the establishment of fairs and markets and the growth of mainland commercial towns. But the expansion of many of these towns and the new ones created occurred in the late twelfth century, continued in the thirteenth century. There was a rise of the merchant and banking classes, but as early as 750 they were able to serve in the military forces on an equal footing with landowners and the root of their sharp nature came out of the periods of depression of the Dark Ages. It has been argued by Pounds that even the establishment of the banking system that is seen to be synonymous with Commercial Revolution was a convenience and not revolutionary. Hence, there clearly was a significant expansion of trade and commerce in the thirteenth century, but the extent with which this can be called a revolution is very limited, with much of its roots lying in early centuries.