'Organic food, also referred to as organics, is food grown under a production system that, in addition to the avoidance of synthetic chemicals, also promotes soil health, biodiversity, low stress treatment of animals and sound environmental practices' (Cunningham, 2001). Nowadays, organic agriculture is in practice nearly in all countries with the total organic area being more than 24 million hectares worldwide (Radman, 2005). The market of organic food is growing fast and Mintel (1991) predicted that the value of the UK organic market would be 240 in 1993-1994 (Davies et al., 1995). The organic land in the UK has been increased from 40,000 ha in 1997 to 459,000 ha in 2001 (DEFRA, 2006) and today UK is dominating the European as well as the world organic market with a value of 1.2 billion in 2003 (Padel and Foster, 2005). Italy is the largest producer, Germany the largest consumer and Denmark with Switzerland have the highest per capita expenditure (DEFRA, 2006).
As appeared in the literature, fruits and vegetables dominate in the organic market. In Canada, fruits and vegetables account for 41% of the organic market (Cunningham, 2004). Davies et al. (1995) found that fruits and vegetables are the most frequently purchased organic products, while meat, cereals and dairy products are consumed in lower quantities. Fruits and vegetables were also the most frequently bought organic products (55.6% of respondents) among Croatian consumers (Radman, 2005).
55% of the British organic food market consists of supermarkets particularly Safeway, Sainsbury, Tesco and Azda. Small shops account for less than one third and farm shops 15% (Davies et al., 1995). What is remarkable about the UK is that British consumers have access to the biggest range of organic foods worldwide (DEFRA, 2006). Tesco is the leading supermarket in the organic food market with more than 1200 organic products and organic sales of 200 million in 2001. Sainsburys and Waitrose come second with similar range of organic products. So, British supermarkets are the European leaders in terms of the range of organic products they offer and only Denmark offers similar range of items (more than 800) (DEFRA, 2006).
A rapid growth in the demand for organically grown products has been observed during the 1980s.The main reasons accounting for this increased interest in organic food include the increased consumers' concern about health and safety as well as a series of food scares (Tregear, Dent and McGregor, 1994). Such food scares include the salmonella outbreaks in eggs in 1988 (Davies, Titterington and Cochrane, 1995). In addition to that, Lacey (1992) makes reference to 12 suchlike incidents in the UK in the short period 1988-1991. Food scares have also been observed worldwide with the case of Alar-sprayed apples in 1989 in Texas giving rise to worries about chemical residues (Fotopoulos and Krystallis, 2002). A third important reason is also the increased consumers' awareness of environmental issues (Tregear et al., 1994), however, environmental considerations are not as important as health concerns as determinants of consumers' willingness to purchase organic food (Magnusson, Arvola, Koivisto Hursti, Aberg and Sjoden, 2001). In a public survey it was found that 45% of the respondents in Scotland stated that they purchase organic products because they worry about their health while only 9% because of beliefs that organic production causes less damage to the environment (Tregear et al., 1994).
Health as well as environmental issues is considered to be the major motivations for consumers' demand for organic food in the literature worldwide. Organically grown products are perceived as very healthy and of good quality by Croatian consumers (Radman, 2005). This is also the case in a study by von Alvensleben (1998) (Wier and Calverley, 2002). In another qualitative study that examines what motivates consumers to buy organic food in the UK, it was found that consumers purchase organic food because of beliefs that it is healthier for them and their family and also because of lack of trust in conventionally produced food (Makatouni, 2001). Lack of trust in conventionally produced food was also the most important factor involved in consumers' demand for organic food in a study by von Alvensleben and Altmann (1987).
Not only health and environmental related concerns but other reasons also determine demand for organic food such as taste, however, there is little consumer evidence that organic products taste better than conventional (Tregear et al., 1994). Even though in some studies consumers perceive organic food to have a better taste (Makatouni, 2001), the improved taste is more likely to be explained by varieties that produce smaller quantities and are characterized by enhanced flavour (Davies et al., 1995). Nonetheless, Meier-Ploeger and Woodward (1999) found that taste is a quite strong motive for purchasing organic food in some countries such as Germany (13-24%) and the UK (40%) (Fotopoulos and Krystallis, 2002). Other motivations behind consumers' demand for organic food not as strong as health and environmental considerations include social aspects such as support of local producers and local economy in general (Makatouni, 2001, Padel and Foster, 2005), fair trade (Padel and Foster, 2005), ethical considerations, such as animal welfare (Makatouni, 2001, Padel and Foster, 2005), curiosity and additive concerns (Tregear et al., 1994). In another qualitative study, which involves word association, consumers expressed positive responses to organic food for various reasons. About two-thirds of the respondents were positive towards organic food. In particular, 40% of them associated organic food with 'chemical-free', which was the most frequently mentioned word association. Other responses mentioned include 'natural'/'homegrown', 'healthier'/'more nutritious', 'earth friendly', 'clean'/'pure' and 'fresh' (Raab and Grobe, 2005).
In general, the motivations behind consumers' organic purchases are similar across countries and organic consumers have a certain profile, which is mainly affected by socio-economic and demographic characteristics such as age, gender, income and education level. According to Davies et al. (1995), the organic consumers are predominantly female with a high level of disposable income. Factors like age and the presence of children proved not to be significant when examined in isolation, however, both of them had an effect when household income was also considered. So, high-income households with children were among the main organic purchasers and also consumers at the age of 30-49 with children whose income allows them to buy organic food. Another important finding of this study is that groups of consumers who express great interest and willingness to purchase organic food driven by environmental considerations do not necessarily coincide with those who have the highest actual purchasing behaviour (Davies et al., 1995). For example, young Swedish respondents (18-25 years) expressed positive attitudes towards organic food, however, their actual purchasing activity was low (Magnusson et al., 2001). This might be attributed to the fact that even though younger people may be more concerned about the environment, they do not have the purchasing power. Instead of young people themselves purchasing organic products, their impact may be seen as 'pester power', thus trying to convince their parents to buy organic food (Davies et al., 1995).
In another study carried out in Croatia, it was also found that women buy organic food more often compared to men. Apart from the gender characteristic, education was also important factor with people of higher education level showing bigger organic purchase activity. Finally, people from cities who live in urban areas purchase organic food more often. Any other socio-economic or demographic characteristic did not have any apparent effect (Radman, 2005).
Similar results have been observed across the literature in terms of the profile of organic consumers. Von Alvensleben and Altmann (1987) found that people from urban areas buy more organic food than those from rural areas. Moreover, the main organic purchasers belong to the age group of 25-35 years and there is a positive correlation between demand and income. An Italian study based on organic olive oil showed that the organic consumer in Italy is 40 years old and has a four-member family (Cicia, Del Giudice and Scarpa, 2002). Tregear et al. (1994) reported people with higher disposable income as the main socio-economic group of organic consumers. Among Swedish consumers women tend to have more positive attitudes towards organic food (Magnusson et al., 2001). According to several studies, the presence of children is an important part of organic consumers' profile. Thompson and Kidwell (1998) found that households with children under the age of 18 years are more likely to purchase organic products. However, the presence of children should be examined in relation to their age (Fotopoulos and Krystallis, 2002).
As it has already been mentioned there are various other motives driving consumers' demand for organic food apart from health and environmental considerations. However, the motives behind organic demand vary between different organic products as well as between different nations. For example, when it comes to organic meat and dairy products the ethical motive of animal welfare is predominant. In the case of fruits and vegetables on the other hand, where the skin is the edible part, the basic motive behind organic purchases is the absence of chemical residues which is more health and safety related (Padel and Foster, 2005). Regarding the nation effect, it was found by Worner and Meier-Ploeger (1999) that 'support to organic farmers' was the motivation behind German consumers' organic purchases, while for the British consumers Meier-Ploeger and Woodward (1999) found the 'animal welfare' to be the motivation (Fotopoulos and Krystallis, 2002).
Variations also exist between different socio-economic groups with respect to organic products purchased. For example, in the Croatian study by Radman (2005), it was found that consumers with children whose age is under 14 years are more frequent purchasers of organic milk and organic dairy products rather than those without children in their family. Certainly, some organic products are of greater interest to some groups of consumers than others.
Apart from the reasons that motivate consumers to buy organic food there are also certain reasons why they do not buy such products. Price and availability are the main obstacles in purchasing organic food. The majority of Swedish consumers (63%) stated that it is of importance that organic food is not more expensive than conventional indicating that price is a major inhibiting factor in purchasing organic food (Magnusson et al., 2001). Also Scottish consumers have stated that they would buy more organic food if the difference in price compared to conventional food was lower (Tregear et al., 1994).
Availability of organic products is also another inhibiting factor. The study by Magnusson et al. (2001) revealed that availability is also product dependent. For example, organic meat and bread were considered to be the most difficult to find (40% of the respondents). On the other hand, 81% of the respondents stated that it is quite or very easy to find organic milk.
Apart from the basic obstacles of price and availability there are also secondary inhibiting factors. One of these is habit and convenience. According to Jolly (1991), the extra time required to find the organic products was an obstacle for Californian consumers (Magnusson et al., 2001). Furthermore, according to Mathisson and Schollin (1994), habit is a reason accounting for consumers' refrain from purchasing organic food (Magnusson et al., 2001). Poor presentation of organic products is another obstacle. In a study carried out in Wales, 26% of the respondents did not know where to find an organic product (Padel and Foster, 2005). Among the reasons why consumers do not buy organic food is also the appearance of organic products (e.g. bruises and blemishes in fruits and vegetables) (Makatouni, 2001). Finally, consumers find it difficult to know whether a product is organically produced. This was the problem especially with meat for which Swedish consumers found it difficult to know whether is was organically produced (Magnusson et al., 2001).
To sum up, there are many motives for buying organic food, with health and environmental considerations being the most important. Increases in the demand for organic food have been observed over the last years and consumers have become more willing to purchase organic food, however, there are many obstacles, with price and availability being the most important.