A relationship between the market, the civil society and the state exists and each one of those sectors has its role and should act in collaboration with one another and not individually in order to address any failures. For example there is a specific circumstance where the state should intervene in order to address a market failure. More specifically, resources are allocated by the economic system based on the principles of demand and supply in the market. However, there is a category of goods, the so-called public goods that the market alone fails to supply. This category includes goods or services like street lighting, clean air, defense which are not restricted in use and non-excludable to non-payers, thus if they will be supplied they have to be supplied to everybody. In the case of such goods if the market has the entire responsibility and authority for providing them it would fail to supply them because it is not feasible to measure the amount consumed by each individual citizen and charge them accordingly like in the case of a private good for example (e.g. hamburger). So there is a need for state intervention according to which the state would supply public goods free at the point of consumption, however, all citizens would have to pay in order to gain access to those goods and services through taxation or other means (Moran, 2005).
On the other hand, in a centralised system all power and authority is concentrated in the central level, the state. A good example of a centralised system used to be the United Kingdom system known as the 'Webminster system' because institutions and powers were concentrated in a small part of central London. The state as it has been defined by the German sociologist Max Weber is 'a human community that (successfully) claims the monopoly of the legitimate use of physical force within a given territory' (Moran, 2005). It is known that the state exerts great power and control over the lives of people who belong in its territory and it has the responsibility and authority for the allocation of resources among citizens of the territory (Moran, 2005). However, there is a need for a more decentralised system in order to ensure participation of citizens in the decision-making process rather than citizens being entirely controlled by the central body that has concentrated all the power.
Decentralisation, in a more general context, has been defined as being about 'shifting power from some decision-makers to others' (McGinn and Welsh, 1999). More specifically, it is 'the transfer of decision-making authority and payment responsibility to lower levels of government' (Meinzen-Dick and Knox, 1999) and can be described as 'the redefinition of structures, procedures and practices of governance to be closer to the citizenry' (Miller, 2002). Decentralisation concerns 78 countries, developed and developing ones, however there is not a specific model of it but this varies between different countries (ODI, 2002). Decentralisation is generally transferring authority from a central to a lower level and several types of it exist with the most common being deconcentration, delegation, devolution and privatisation (Meinzen-Dick and Knox, 1999). Sometimes though, decentralisation has been used as synonymous of privatisation (Bardham, 2006).
In a centralised system all power is concentrated at the centre and those who already have the power tend to act for their own interest rather than the society as a whole. Within this context, decentralisation could be a way of devolving away some of the state's power and allocate it within the civil society. One of the strengths coming out of a decentralised system is the participation of the civil society in the decision making process. However, someone would argue why should people participate in making decisions if the decisions are good? (Gyford, 1987). Citizens' willingness to participate in decision making might be because they want to be consulted and involved in decision making since they are members of the society and those decisions affect their lives. So, they demand to be part of all this process. In addition to this, usually those who have the power act for self-interest. For example, the state has been described as being predatory (Bardhan, 2006). On the other hand, 'decisions taken closest to a local constituency are expected to better reflect the preferences of citizens and especially the poor' (ODI, 2002). In these terms decentralisation with the form of civil society's participation in the decision making process could be considered as a way to provide a check on state power and therefore reduce corruption. Within this context, citizens have now more opportunities for participation in governance apart from voting in elections and this leads to more democratic system.
Several examples of corruption or otherwise 'wasteful and ineffective decision-making in a centralised system include funds and supplies that never arrived, projects that remained paper proposals as well as approvals that could not be obtained unless one had a friend or relative in the central ministry' (Meenakshisundaram, 1994). All those failures arising from a centralised system indicate the potential for a decentralised system.
Decentralisation could be seen as a means to ensure that resources are equitably allocated between the centre and civil society. The state has great power over people's lives and it is responsible for allocating resources among different social groups. However, those who are at the centre and have concentrated the power allocate resources for their own benefit or for those being closest to them. Apart from that, the state also causes a form of inequality among different social groups since it takes money from some citizens (e.g. through taxation) and gives it to others resulting in unequal distribution of the social welfare (Moran, 2005). This kind of corruption could be fight off by the devolution of responsibilities and authorities from the central government to local governments. The term 'local government' refers to 'a sub-national level of government which has jurisdiction over a limited range of state functions within a defined geographical are which is part of a larger territory' or 'the institution or structures which exercises authority or carry out governmental functions at the local level' (Miller, 2002).
In addition to this, decentralisation in the form of 'transfer of state/national responsibilities or functions from central government to sub-national levels of government' offers opportunities for local sustainable development (Miller, 2002). Since resources will be allocated at the local level and several functions will be carried out at the local level this will help to support local economies as well as the development of local regions. As stated by Miller (2002), 'development will be driven locally based on the indigenous resources and comparative advantages of local entities rather than by external agents who are pre-occupied with many other priorities know little about local potential for development'. With the devolution of power, responsibilities and authorities are transferred to local governments and each region will have to make decisions and act for its own development (Miller, 2002).
The participation of civil society into the decision-making process can allow voice to minorities (e.g. marginalized groups). It also fulfills people's need to be involved in decisions that affect their lives. However, it is not only about that. Decentralisation in the form of participation has the potential of improved effectiveness and efficiency of public services provision. Since citizens can influence decisions about service provision they can determine the type and quality of services they want as well as their willingness to pay for this kind of services. All this process is a kind of market mechanism for determining service provision in a way that is according to citizens' wants and willingness to pay. This mechanism serves both as a way of maximizing citizens' fulfillment and provision of those kind of services that merge with their willingness to pay (Miller, 2002).
One of the main principles of decentralisation is the promotion of regional autonomy (Policy guidelines, 2006). Devolution of the power and authorities from central government to sub-national levels of government i.e. local governments, gives each region/locality the opportunity to articulate its own needs, which may not coincide with the needs of the central government. However, those needs may also differ within different regions within the context of local governments. The monopoly of the centre will no longer exist and new centres of power will be developed in a local level, which will serve to meet the needs of local entities. The fact that needs might be different within different regions/localities leads to a pluralistic society and there are contradictable aspects on that. On the one hand, regional autonomy is viewed as a way of dividing a nation. On the other hand, in a society with plurality of needs decentralisation is considered essential for maintaining the unity and integrity of a nation (Meenakshisundaram, 1994).
Moreover, another positive aspect of decentralisation results from the participation of citizens in the decision-making process as well as the devolution of the power from the centre to a local level. Since citizens are entitled to fully participate in decision-making they feel that their needs and interests can be better fulfilled. In addition to this, the devolution of power into local governments makes people feel that the needs of local constituents are met. All this brings citizens closer to the government and helps to develop a strong relationship between the government and the citizens. As a final result of this citizens do not show any disruptive or anti-social behaviour, which could lead to conflicts resulting when citizens feel that their concerns and needs are not taken into consideration. So, a potential advantage of decentralisation is the establishment of a better relationship between the governors and the governed as well as reduction of the conflicts between the two parties (Miller, 2002).
Despite the positive aspects arising from decentralisation there are also possible risks and negative consequences that should be taken into account. Among such risks and negative consequences one could make reference to greater inequality and greater poverty gaps (Miller, 2002). The fact that the devolution of centre government to local governments as it has already been mentioned is in favour of the devolution of government resources and allocation of some of them to regions/localities. This helps to reduce the gap between central government and local government in terms of resource allocation. However, even among a certain region/locality there are substantial differences in terms of natural resources and how are these allocated among its citizens. In a decentralised system there is always the risk of 'resources and power being captured by local elites or special interest groups' (Miler, 2002). It is similar to the case where in a centralised system people at the centre concentrate all resources and use them for their own benefit. Indisputably, decentralisation is effective for ensuring distribution of government resources from central government to regions/localities, however, safeguard mechanisms are required to prevent gaps between regions (Miller, 2002).
It has already been mentioned that decentralisation through people's participation in the decision-making ensures that local needs and interests are met. However, similarly to the case of not equitable sharing of resources between the centre and the regions in a centralised system there is also a similar risk arising from local governments in a decentralised system. That is to say, even within a regional/local community being governed by a local government system, the weaker and poorer sections of the society may have the experience of their needs and interests not being met by these local levels of government. A good example of this is India, where 39% of the rural households own only 5% of all assets while 5% of the households own 46% of assets. As a result of this it will take a long time until this gap is eliminated and poor groups of people will be able to raise their voice ((Meenakshisundaram, 1994). Undoubtedly, decentralisation helps toward the achievement of devolution of the power from the centre to a local level. It can also ensure a more equitable resource distribution between the centre and the regions/localities, however, poverty gaps between groups in the same regions/localities is inevitable to exist even within a decentralised form of government. Inevitably, corruption occurs both in a centralised and decentralised system because those people who have the power tend to allocate resources for their own interest.
Decentralisation is thought to be a more complex form of governance since it involves the distribution of responsibilities, power and authorities among local levels of government. Given that state/national functions are transferred to local levels of government there is a need for careful planning and adequate organization. There are examples of decentralisation schemes, which had not been well planned, and as a consequence of the bad planning and implementation they failed to meet their objectives (Miller, 2002). A good example of ineffective implementation of decentralisation is Indonesia. In particular, in the case of Indonesia, both central as well as local governments did not have the experience and knowledge required for the management, planning and implementation of decentralisation. There was also lack of organizational capacity in that governments were not efficient in allocating responsibilities and authorities among central and regional governments (Policy guidelines, 2006).
Despite the fact that decentralisation reduces anti-social behaviour of citizens and conflicts between governors and governed, it has the potential to be the reason for emergence of conflicts between national and local governments. The reasons lying behind that are two. Firstly, decentralisation in the form of participatory governance ensures that the needs and interests of local constituents are met. However, local interests may not necessarily agree with national interests and conflicts are possible to emerge between local and national levels of government. These differences of course mean that not only national but also local interests are considered which is an advantage of decentralisation is (Miller, 2002). Secondly, even though it has been said that decentralisation ensures equitable resource sharing between the centre and the regions, what happens in reality is completely different. Particularly, central governments tend to capture the bulk of power and resources leaving local governments with inadequate resources that makes them not capable in their role (New Agriculturist, 2006).
To sum up, decentralisation in the form of devolution of power, responsibilities and authorities from the centre to sub-national levels of government has positive aspects as well as possible risks and negative consequences. Even though decentralisation has been connected with the reduction of the centre it is necessary for any attempt of decentralisation to succeed to maintain a strong centre. This is particularly important for the successful planning and implementation of decentralisation schemes as well as for the establishment of coherence between local and national levels of government (Miller, 2002).