There is no doubt that climate changes all over the world and this is not a scenario but the reality. The term 'climate change' sometimes is referring to all form of climatic inconsistency, but as Earth 's climate is not always the same, the term is best used to pinpoint significant change from one climatic condition to another. Although 'climate change' has become synonymous with 'global warming' scientists use the term in a wider sense including also natural changes in climate. (Global Change Research Centre National University of Taiwan)
Comparing the last decade with previous it is easy to infer that climate has changed. In Europe, mean annual temperature has been increased by 0.8 0C with the last decade (1990-1999) being the warmest. During the twentieth century, precipitation has also been increased over Northern Europe by 10-40% (The Europe Acacia project, 2000). In the UK, the decade 1985- 1994 was warmer about 0.2 0C than the average of 1961- 1990 period. As a result the warmer months and seasons experienced in the UK especially the last year is a strong evidence of climate change. Finally the global atmospheric CO 2 concentration has been increased by 5% (1985- 1994). (Review of the Potential Effects of Climate Change in the United Kingdom, 1996)
According to scientists the UK climate will become warmer. It is estimated that by 2050s, the annual temperature in the south east of the country will be 2 0C warmer than now. By the 2080s temperatures may increase more than 3 0C. Generally south and east will be warmer than north and west. In addition, high temperatures during summer will become more frequent. By contrast, cold winters will become rare. It is also estimated that winters will become wetter and summer drier in the UK. By 2080s winter precipitation will increase by 20%. By contrast, summer in central and South UK will be drier, with 18% less rainfall than now. In addition, sea level will increase in the UK about 5cm per decade especially in south and east. (UKCIP, 2003)
Climatic factors play an important role in the UK and have great contribution from year to year production. Changes that may occur, in terms of the intensity and distribution of precipitation combined with changes in CO 2 and temperatures, will have great influence on the UK horticultural production. (Review of the Potential Effects of Climate Change in the United Kingdom, 1996)
There is no doubt that CO 2 concentration has been increased and taking into account the fact that plants respond positively to an increase of it, the UK horticulture will benefit from this change. Increasing the level of C0 2, the level of photosynthesis increases and the rate of respiration decrease, resulting in greater productivity by crops especially C3 plants such as vegetables. (DEFRA, 2003) For example, although temperatures have little impact on lettuce yield, it has been found that an increase in C0 2 from 350 ppm to 700 ppm enhances weight and as a result yield by 32% (Hadley et.al., 1997).
In cauliflower the increase of C0 2 has also a beneficial effect. Higher concentrations of C0 2 lead to an increase in total biomass and curd weight, which undoubtedly improves quality of the product (Wheeler et.al., 1996). In onions it has been found that crop dry weight was increased by 32%- 44% as a result of C0 2 enrichment. In addition, onion yield was increased due to higher level of C0 2 by 29-37% and 35-51% depending on the variety. (Hadley et.al. , 1997) Another example of beneficial effect of C0 2 is carrot. Elevated C0 2 concentration increased root yield by 34% (Hadley et.al., 1994). All these findings indicate that important benefits for the UK growers may happen in the future due to the increase of C0 2 concentration in the atmosphere.
It is known that C0 2 leads to more efficient use of water. In higher concentrations plants use less water but more efficiently, being more able to resist water stress. In consequence, growers will have more water resistant plants and this is beneficial for horticultural production. (Smithsonian Environmental Research Centre, 1999)
Apart from cultivated plants, weeds are also influenced by C0 2. The rate of their photosynthesis is stimulated by higher levels of C0 2, being more antagonistic towards plants and more difficult to control them. As a result, the C0 2 influences crop- weed competitiveness, sometimes for the benefit of the crop and sometimes for the benefit of weeds. Such changes will affect their distribution in the UK and some weeds like perennials, which have rhizomes and storage organs, will become more difficult to be controlled by growers. (IPCC)
Not only changes in C0 2 concentration but also changes in temperature will have great impact on the UK horticultural production. Escalated temperatures promote plant growth, but extremely high temperatures cause damage to the crops. It is estimated in the UK that rise in temperature will extent growing season available for the plants and will reduce the period required for maturation. This is beneficial for those areas of the UK where lower average temperatures prevail. An increase in temperature will expand the cultivation area of horticultural crops to north as well as to higher altitudes. By contrast, higher temperatures during summer will cause damage to crops and will increase the heat stress risk. (TDRI, 1999)
It is estimated that winters in the UK will become warmer and that climate change has great impact on horticultural crops. Plants such as apples, cherries and blackberries require a certain number of hours below a critical temperature to resume growth in the spring. In consequence, temperatures above average during winter will affect bud-dormancy and blossom during spring. In addition, taking into account that it is difficult to develop new varieties and rootstocks to respond to this rapid change of climate, the problem becomes more severe. As a result, warmer winters have negative effect and this is a concern for British Fruit Industry. (NC State University, 2000)
Apart from fruit crops, temperature affects salad crops such as lettuce. The minimum temperature for growth is between 3- 12 0C and the maximum 17- 28 0C, with the mean optimum temperature during maturity about 15 0C. Although temperature has been found to have little effect on yield, it affects germination and growing season of lettuce. Apart from the fact that warmer temperatures promote germination, they also allow growing season to start earlier and simultaneously extent it. By contrast, higher temperatures during summer have a negative impact, increasing the possibility of bitterness, loose head and bolting. (DEFRA, 2003)
Cauliflower is another example of crop affected by temperature changes. First of all, it has three different stages of growth with different response to temperature; juvenility, vernalization and curd growth. Escalated temperatures reduce the period of juvenility and curd growth but delay curd initiation. Although increasing temperatures promote maturity of summer- cauliflower, they reduce maturity of autumn crops and as a result a better management of transplanting will be necessary so as to have continuity of production. Moreover, higher temperatures reduce the possibility of frost damage but maximize quality problems such as bract, leaf bract and curd looseness. (DEFRA, 2003)
Changes in temperature undoubtedly affect root crops such as onions and carrots. Soil temperatures between 20-30 0C are the best for carrot growth. Taking into account that carrot growth is being promoted by an increase in temperature, crop production will also be increased. As frost damage will be reduced, the growing season will be extended resulting in earlier production especially under polythene. (DEFRA, 2003)
Not only carrots but also onions are affected by warmer climate. Temperatures between 23- 37 0C are the best for fast growing of onion seedlings and higher temperatures boost vegetative growth before bulbing. In addition, 24 0C promotes bulb diameter and increase the rate of bulb size. As a result, warmer temperatures will give earlier bulbing combined with faster bulb growth and maturity, but reduce yield as the duration of bulb growth is decreased. (DEFRA, 2003)
Finally, temperatures affect pests and weeds, which have great impact on horticultural production. As the climate changes and become warmer the problems for the UK growers will be multiplied. First of all, new pests are likely to be introduced to the UK, which are extremely harmful to other countries, due to warmer climate. Secondly, considering that winter temperature is crucial for the survival of many pests, increasing temperatures will promote their development and will reduce the time to reproductive maturity (Europarl, 1999). Such earlier reproduction will lead to high populations becoming difficult to control them. Finally, warmer temperatures will allow noxious weeds to become more common. To sum up, all these changes in climate make undoubtedly difficult the crop protection and as a result the horticultural production.
Apart from CO 2 and temperature changes, it is also predicted a sea level rise in the UK. Taking into account that higher sea levels will lead to penetration of salty water into groundwater, the impact upon horticultural crops will be great. The response to salinity varies among species. Some of them are very sensitive because salinity affects water uptake and their quality and quantity of yield is diminished. In addition, sea level rise causes water logging that undoubtedly damages crops as it leads to poor aeration.
Finally, increased rainfall as it is predicted during winter affects horticultural crops. Increased rainfall leads to water logging that has great influence on roots due to poor aeration (RHS, 2003). As it is commonly known O 2 is necessary for plants' survival. Water logging will be a serious problem for roots in those areas of the UK that heavy soils prevail.
While horticulture in the UK will be benefited from CO 2 and warmer temperatures, adaptation is necessary in order growers to take advantage of the climate change. There are short-term adjustments as well as long-term ones. The first aim at optimising production, which are the first tools against climate change, while the latter refer to structural changes so as to get over difficulties caused by climate change. (The Europe Acacia project, 2000)
Short-term adaptations for growers include changes in planting dates and cultivars and external inputs. As the climate in the UK will become warmer during winter and especially during summer, growers will be able to have earlier planting or sowing during spring. Earlier planting allows crops to reach maturity before high temperatures of summer take place. In addition, it allows growers to extend growing season and as a result to increase yield potential using long season varieties. Finally, deeper sowing will increase germination percentages due to higher temperatures. (The Europe Acacia project, 2000)
External inputs such as pesticides have to be taken seriously into account as the UK climate changes. The more warmer the climate becomes the more difficult for the growers is to control pests and diseases. The warmer climate will lead to higher incidence of these problems and simultaneously higher use of pesticides. In consequence, growers in order to optimise production and profitability have to adopt other systems, such as integrated pest management instead of empirical functions. ((The Europe Acacia project, 2000)
Long-term adaptations include the use of new and more resistant varieties and change of land use (The Europe Acacia project, 2000). As in many regions the climate is likely to become warmer, growers will have to either change crop or change land. For example apple growers will have to move north so as chilling hours to be fulfilled. To sum up, as climate changes the response of crops also changes and as a result growers have to adapt as soon as possible.
Another response to climate change for the UK growers is the use of new varieties (The Europe Acacia project, 2000). They will have to abandon traditional varieties and choose those that are more resistant to heat, pests, diseases and require less chilling hours for bud emergence.
There is no doubt that horticulture in the UK may be benefited from C0 2 and warmer temperatures in general. On the other hand, there are disadvantages as well. The impact of climate change varies among horticultural crops and cultivars. All these changes in climate are a challenge for the growers and in order to be successful they have to adapt as soon as possible and find alternative practices so as to take advantage of these.