The trip involved a visit to an integrated farm. Sustainability of the whole system was the main aim of the farm as in the organic farm but in a different approach. The farm is characterized as sustainable as it employs techniques that increase biodiversity and at the same time minimize the environmental impact.
The farm is integrated having the same aims as the organic farm. It splits over two sides, with the main crops being cultivated, cauliflower; coriander; sweet-williams, Swedes, kohl rabi, spinach and onions. The farm is on reclaimed gravel mining. All the land has been gone from a gravel peat to this since 1978. The cultivation method in this farm is based on bed systems, being prepared in the late autumn. They are stale seedbeds allowing weeds to germinate and destroy them before the crop is planted. What is really innovative in this farm is the use of G.P.S. The whole farm has been marked on 25m 2 using G.P.S. and soil analysis on this 25m 2. The fertilization as well as spraying take place separately on this 25m 2 making the application precise. The tractors are linked up to this satellite system making the whole system intelligent and innovative at the same time. With respect to nature, in the farm there is a pond 20 years old being a wildlife habitat. Apart from the pond at the end of the field there are ditches for accumulation of drainage water. The fact is that they are kept as clear as possible by spraying. In addition, the water that is being accumulated in the ditches goes back to the pond. Finally, hedges surround the field margins. They consist of native deciduous species, such as elm or blackthorn acting as wildlife corridor and windbreak simultaneously. In the field there are marked nests to avoid being sprayed and also to increase biodiversity. The turnover is about 8,000-9,000 per year. Finally the integrated farm is based on advice from English nature and other conservations bodies.
The farm is characterized by economic and environmental sustainability as it promotes biodiversity with respect to nature. Hedges, water and crop management make the whole system sustainable. The use of intelligent fertilization and spray application makes the farm not only innovative but also environmental friendly reducing the negative impact on nature. Compared to the organic farm the integrated farm is less sustainable in terms of social sustainability as it does not bring people and nature together (open days). To sum up, sustainability of the system has been achieved as in the organic farm.