Quality in horticultural products has started to increase in importance especially the last decades. People want to become more and more aware of what they eat, how it is produced and simultaneously what are the effects on the environment. The overuse of fertilizers, pesticides and water has increased people awareness and as a result led to the development of quality assurance schemes so as to protect both consumers and environment.
According to ISO definition quality is 'the totality of features and characteristics of a product or service that bear on its ability to satisfy stated or implied needs' (BSI Handbook 22 Quality Assurance, 1992). In other words one can say that a product is characterised by good quality when it fulfils consumers' requirements. There is no doubt that those who affect the quality to great extent are growers. Many of them strongly believe that it is difficult to control the quality of a product as climate or nature decides it for them. This may be true to some extent taking into account that something unpredictable may occur, but there are many factors, which are undoubtedly important affecting and simultaneously improving the quality of fruits or vegetables that can be controlled. The key factor is to specify the requirements for quality and as a result to plan the whole production system in such a way so as to maximise the amount of products that meets these requirements. (:sectID=306&tempID=99)
Nowadays, the competition between supermarkets for the sake of quality in horticultural products has been increased. This competition to satisfy consumers' needs has resulted in improving the quality of products in order to be more competitive in the market. On the other hand, the escalated expectations of consumers to have better fruits and vegetables has led to the development of quality assurance schemes. According to ISO definition, quality assurance refers to 'all those planned and systematic actions necessary to provide adequate confidence that a product process or service will satisfy given quality requirements' (BSI Handbook 22 Quality Assurance, 1992). All the assurance schemes that have been implemented across EU come to assure that growers and farmers produce horticultural products bearing in mind the consumers' safety, maintaining and simultaneously maximizing product quality with the minimum impact on the environment. The final ultimate benefit is that a confidence between growers and consumers has been established to assure that the products are safe.
Many quality assurance schemes have been developed across EU especially the last decade to provide the appropriate certification of safety in horticultural products. Some of the most well known are APS, which stands for Assured Produce Scheme, BOPP, which stands for British Ornamental Plant Producers Assurance Scheme, and EUREPGAP, which is a European Assurance Scheme about Fresh Produce and Ornamentals.
One of the most innovative quality assurance schemes across EU is EUREPGAP and has been evolved from the APS standards. EUREPGAP means 'Euro Retailer Produce Working Group' and represents leading retailers in Europe such as Tesco as well as Marks & Spencer. GAP comes from Good Agriculture Practice and is used by EUREP in order to certify the way that all agricultural products are being produced. At this time EUREPGAP standards focus on fresh fruits, vegetables, flowers and ornamental plants. Every horticultural product can be certified by EUREPGAP.
EUREPGAP incorporates principles such as risk prevention, risk analysis based on HACCP (Hazard Analysis of Critical Control Points). Also, it encourages practices such as Integrated Pest Management (IPM), Integrated Crop Management (ICM) and uses technology in such a way that improves continuously the production system.( )
At this point it is useful to be referred what led to the establishment of EUREGAP. It has been developed due to the increasing consumer awareness of quality and the way that horticultural products are being produced. Consumers speculate about the overuse of water for irrigation, fertilizers, pesticides as well as the impact that may have upon their health and nature in general. As a result, they want to be sure that the entire horticultural product is being produced with regard to consumers' safety and the minimum environmental impact. Moreover, EUREPGAP has increased consumers' confidence in the way that horticultural industry uses natural resources and the final impact on animals. There is no doubt, that with EUREPGAP consumers are sure that every step of the primary production is in compliance with international and national standards, taking into account the safe production of horticultural products. ( services/ certificationprograms/ eurepgap/ why/why.html)
The benefits deriving from EUREPGAP are undoubtedly of great importance as far as the growers are concerned. First of all, those having EUREPGAP certification have a better market access as most of the leading retailers across EU demand horticultural products to be in compliance with it. Furthermore, having this certification the market position of the growers is being enhanced. Finally, in the long run the cost of producing agricultural products in accordance to EUREPGAP standards can be decreased due to the continuous improvement of the production system.
The development of quality assurance schemes across EU has undoubtedly great influence on horticulture industry. The growers in order to be more competitive in the market, and simultaneously to meet the demands of consumers have changed the way of the production. The benefits for both growers and consumers are of great importance.
First of all growers that are in accordance with EUREPGAP standards keep records of the pesticides, fertilizers and generally any other application to plants that affect the quality. Consequently consumers are safe about these products and sure that have the minimum or the least acceptable harmful chemical compounds. Comparing this situation with previous decades or with other products lacking of the appropriate standards it is easily noticeable that the production system in horticultural industry has changed.
The second factor that has been affected by the development of quality assurance schemes is the varieties. Now there are some varieties resistant to enemies reducing the level of pesticide application. In addition, growers have to use those being in accordance with consumers' requirements so as to be more competitive. Furthermore, as GMP (Genetically Modified Plants) are not allowed in EUROPE until now, consumers are safe (those who worry about that) that do not consume those plants.
EUREPGAP and other schemes that have been established across EU have totally changed the way of pesticide application to horticulture. The overuse of pesticides especially the previous decades and the environmental impact have increased public awareness. Consequently, those who are in compliance with quality assurance schemes are obliged to follow certain rules about pesticide application. They have to use the appropriate amounts when and where is needed, only on target pests, taking serious into consideration the impact on natural enemies. This can be achieved by monitoring the pests' population and applying chemicals at the appropriate time, eliminating the environmental impact. Furthermore, all the applications have to be recorded. Finally, pesticides have to be kept under proper storage conditions and also growers have to take care of the empty containers to avoid pollution.
Not only pesticides but also the use of fertilizers has been affected in horticulture for the sake of quality and environment. Those who have EUREPGAP certification are obliged to record all the applications and to use appropriate cultural techniques that are in accordance with quality assurance standards. This means that they have to know beforehand what quantities of fertilizers to use, based on tissue analysis or analysis of nutrient solution, preventing nutrient loss especially nitrates which is one of the most important cause of water contamination. All these indicate that the production system has changed comparing to previous years where fertilizers had been used intensively and uncontrollably.
Horticulture and generally agriculture use water extensively. This means that overuse and waste of the water becomes a serious threat for the environment. Consequently, EUREPGAP standards assure that growers employ cultural techniques to manage properly water. It is applied only when is needed by plants and at the appropriate amount to avoid water loss. Moreover, quality assurance schemes certify that irrigation systems use water efficiently so as not to waste natural resources. Finally, the improvement of technology has led to more sophisticated systems that recycle water and therefore minimize water loss.
Finally, growers who have adopted EUREPGAP standards or similar schemes have to employ experienced workers. The workers not only have to be experienced in using pesticides and other chemical compounds but also they have to be well protected in terms of their health. Comparing the situation with previous decades where amateur did most of the work it is easy to infer that the impact of quality assurance schemes on horticulture production is discernible.
To sum up, the increasing people's awareness of what they consume, the impact on the environment and simultaneously the competition of supermarket chains to provide quality in their products, has led to the development of quality assurance schemes. Now, consumers are willing to pay more for quality than ever and these schemes assure that horticultural products are produced in a way that takes into consideration consumers' safety as well as nature.