For Task 1 I decided to analyse a music video (Aberfeldy's "Love is an Arrow") where I felt that the use of multiple modes deeply effected the meaning of the song, emphasising certain parts and offering meaning in others where previously things had been left ambiguous. The visual pictures also put the song in the context of a specific relationship instead of mere musings on the emotion of love.
For Task 2 I interviewed school age children to try and find out their thoughts on their own use of language and see what they thought about the use of non-standard forms in school.
As I will explain in my conclusion, both of these tasks are only small parts of far more wide reaching debates and issues in Applied English Language Studies.
I have chosen a number of scenes which I think show the best examples of the various modes combining to alter the message just a single mode on its own would give.
The ending scenes 34 to 37 (see Appendix 1) are a good example of where the visual images actually alter the meaning of the other two modes; the music and the words. Whereas the words here; (see Appendix 2) "it tells me how its gonna be," leave the song open ended (neither a positive or negative connotation can be perceived from this line), the visual mode gives the song a negative outcome.
The Paralanguage of "Eskimo Boy" throughout the piece strengthens and alters our perception of the song. The facial expressions of Eskimo Boy and Eskimo Girl in scene 10 for instance; both perfectly complement the jaunty instrumental playing at the time. Looking at scene 36 again, the facial expression of Eskimo boy is so blank and sad looking it gives the song a negative ending not conveyed in the words or music which stays quite upbeat throughout.
Certain scenes are made to fit in with certain words sometimes hinting at the outcome. For example in scene 20 as the singer sings the phrase "two faced liar" in the line "Love is a good way to lose a friend, It's a two-faced liar that you can't defend" the camera cuts to a picture of Eskimo girl. Given the ending of the song this is unlikely to be a coincidence. Scenes 7 and 8 which accompany the line "Love is an arrow and it points at you" indicate that Eskimo boy is going to fall in love with Eskimo girl. The word "arrow" in the above line goes with footage of a snowball (as though filmed from the snowball) hurtling towards Eskimo boy like a metaphorical arrow. The word "You" is combined with the impact of the snowball to emphasise this.
Early on in the song the three modes combine to show that the two main characters are in love. The visuals use "symbols" which; generally accepted convention rules, represent certain common signifieds. There is the giant heart in scene 14, the holding of hands in scene 10 and the rosy cheeks of scenes 9,10, 13 and 14 all of which have connotations of love. The music of the text stays fairly constant throughout and is fairly jaunty and cheery sounding which complements these early scenes well. Many of the early lines of the song such as lines 6 and 7, are cheery sounding and frivolous like the music and pictures.