The effects of gender and class on the way we speak is a question that has engaged much time with linguists and has also caught the interest of the general public as the bestselling success of books such as "Men are from Mars, Women are from Venus" shows. If asked, any person off the street could no doubt offer you an opinion on the way people of different genders and social classes speak. This is possibly because the effects of social class and gender on language are so easily noticeable and so easily stigmatised. It is also because of the huge effect these two social variables have on language. It is worth noting here before the discussion proper starts, an important distinction, that is the one between gender and sex. Whereas 'sex' is a purely biological concept, 'gender' is a social construct - an example for instance is what one might consider ladylike or manly behaviour - this is an example of gender difference. This is important here as differences in the speech of men and women can be both down to biological differences (pitch differences for instance) or gender differences, but only one - gender - is relevant here.
As I have implied, the effects of these social variables is huge and a huge amount of research has been done into it.
Labov's famous studies in New York into social class also highlight a trend we shall see again; that is the higher the class, the more likely they are to use the standard forms of that particular language.
Labov demonstrated this by looking at a few variables. In the case of the post-vocalic /r/ variable Labov looked at three department stores with three quite different clienteles and staff divided upon class lines. In New York use of a rhotic /r/ in a postvocalic system is considered the standard or prestige form. Labov would ask a question of staff to elicit (without them knowing it and hence avoiding observer's paradox) the response; "fourth floor."He was then able to look at the level of rhoticity in the speaker's pronunciation of /r/. He found that 83% of the staff of Kleins (the store with the lowest status) didn't use the rhotic /r/ compared to Saks (the highest status store) where only 38% didn't use it (i.e. 62% did) with Macy's in the middle of these two with 49% not using it. Labov also looked at the initial consonant of words in such as this and there. Again, "the standard [ ] was more likely to be produced by middle-class speakers whilst the working-class speakers were more likely to use the non-standard variant [ ]. The class division in the study "corresponded roughly to the white collar/blue collar divide" and both of these findings show how social class can have an effect on individual aspects of our speech and even just consonants.
In Norwich Trudgill studied a different set of variables but produced similar evidence. Amongst other things Trudgill looked at the percentage use of either [ ] or [ ] in words such as "walking," the use of [ ] instead of [ ] in words such as "butter" and the amount of 'dropped hs' in words such as "hammer." Like Labov, he found that differences in use varied along class lines. For every variable Trudgill found that the higher the class the more likely the standard was to be used and vice versa. For example for the [ ]/[ ] variable the relative percentages (% = use of non-standard forms) were MMC - 31%, LMC - 42%, UWC - 87%, MWC - 95%, LWC - 100%. Again therefore we see that the higher the class of individuals the more likely they are to stick to standard, prestigious forms.
The differences between Trudgill's and Labov's models of social variation, (i.e. Labov's sloping lines and Trudgill's pyramids) important though they are, do not concern us here - the fact remains, social class changes the way we speak and our time is better occupied documenting the different ways different linguists have shown this.
The trend we have seen above has been reinforced by many other studies; the study of English in Detroit again resulted in similarly proportionate figures, whereas the UMC only used double negatives (the non-standard, less prestigious form) 2% of the time, the LWC used it 70%.
As well as social class, Gender also obviously has a huge effect on the way we speak - both in single sex and mixed sex conversations. Again, much research has been done in this field and it is this research we will focus on. Males and females often have a markedly different style of language use.
Zimmerman and West looked into interruption in cross sex conversations. They differentiated interruptions from overlaps. An interruption they decided was a "violation of a speakers' turn at talk" which involved "a deeper intrusion into the internal structure of a speaker's utterance than an overlap." The important word here I think is 'violated' - it is not something the original speaker would want to happen whereas overlaps are more occurrences that happen when a speaker is finishing their turn/utterance anyway.
Over two studies Zimmerman and West have revealed men interrupt more than women. In the first study (1975) 96% of the interruptions where done by males to females and in the second 75% were. Both of these show overwhelmingly that males interrupt more than females and we can put this down to gender differences as we shall see later. There are many other instances where gender effects the way we speak. Herbert and Holmes have done significant (separate) studies into the use of compliments by the different sexes. Herbert concluded that compliments given by female speakers tend to have a personal base and use personal pronouns for example "I love your hat!" "You look great!" On the other hand compliments given by male speakers tend to be more impersonal: "Nice car!" or "Good job!" for example. Women also give and receive far more compliments to members of the same sex than they do to members of the opposite sex and also more than members of the opposite sex give to each other.
Many other studies into female and male language have been carried out with various differences noted. One particularly interesting area is that of directives and questions. These areas also help introduce us to the debates about why there are these differences in male and female language as well as leading us into looking at the links between social class and gender variables.
Goodwin's 1980 research into the different genders' use of language came to the conclusion that women were more likely to use mitigated directives such as "we could..." when speaking whereas males more often used explicit commands such as "leave me alone!" or "gimme!" Along the same lines as this research as we shall see is research by Fishman and Lakoff into the different genders use of questions, be they tag questions or simple yes/no questions. Put simply, both Fishman and Lakoff concluded that women asked more questions than men (263 out of 370 in Fishman's study) with Lakoff's research focusing on the use of tag questions (such as; "the war in Iraq is terrible, isn't it) finding that again, women used far more than men.
It is when we start looking for reasons for these differences that we start to see the role that "gender" has to play in the way we speak as well as helping us link the effects of social class and gender on the way we speak.
Lakoff has claimed that women's use of tag questions shows an uncertainty on their part and an unwillingness to assert their views. Lakoff called this "tentativeness" and it is associated with female weakness and male dominance in language. Lakoff argues that from an early age males are dominant in conversation. Different socially accepted gender roles/attributes mean different genders speak differently. Women are unwilling to assert their views in fear of being seen as unladylike. In the earlier of their works on interruption Zimmerman and West stated "men deny equal status to women as conversational partners" and "just as male dominance is exhibited through male control of macro-institutions in society, it is also exhibited through control of at least one part of one micro-institution." In other words, males are the dominant sex and this is expected of them and they therefore use conversational techniques which give them conversational dominance over women to assert their 'manliness.'
Although questions have been raised by many linguists, such as Janet Holmes for example, who claims that tag questions actually help draw people into conversations and that in this example therefore women are actually "facilitators of conversation," this idea of people wanting to fit in with certain socially accepted norms cannot be ignored and it is here we start seeing links with social class. Gomm showed that women for instance were much likely to use taboo language in same sex conversations (which tends to be with close female friends) possibly because the women did not want to look unladylike in male company showing women wanting to conform to socially accepted roles.
I believe a similar process probably happens in social classes. It's hard to imagine a working class person in a deeply working class area being able to talk in strict RP and not get an adverse reaction for
Further evidence of this idea of attempting to fit in with certain social expectations can be seen in the phenomenon of overt and covert prestige.
In Norwich Trudgill found that when asked women tended to over-report their use of prestige forms (i.e. they claimed they used them more than they actually did) whereas men tended to under-report. Assuming people report themselves as using the forms that have positive connotations for them we see that women want to be seen as using standard prestige forms whereas men don't. Trudgill concluded that "women aim at a publicly-legitimised (i.e. overt) prestige norm; men aim at a norm with covert prestige."Again we see then women aiming for a high use of standard forms which are seen as more ladylike than the more rugged non-standard forms men aspire to which broadly fits in with our everyday ideas of femininity and masculinity. Again we can see links between gender and social class here, a lot of the adjectives we use to describe masculinity; "ruggedness" etc can also be applied to working class language. For example "both Labov and Trudgill also suggest that working-class speech has associations with masculinity - with a 'roughness and toughness' that is characteristic of working-class life. These are generally not desirable, feminine attributes for women - and, correspondingly, they are desirable, masculine attributes for men."
In conclusion therefore the numerous studies cited above show in exactly what ways gender and social class effect the ways we speak. Social class and gender both influence the way we speak by giving us a set of values that we either aspire to or feel we should stick to so that we can be associated with and belong to a certain gender role or social class. The response when people break these social or gender rules is often overwhelmingly negative, were a boy for example to start playing with a Barbie doll instead of an Action Man they are likely to thought of as odd. Applying the same idea to language we can see why people adhere to socially accepted norms and speak the way we do.