For many years humans have tried to teach primates language. Whilst there have been famous cases of chimps being taught to produce signs I don't believe it can be said that Chimpanzees 'have language.' Whereas human children go on to be able to produce language spontaneously, as well as developing grammatical and syntactic systems, chimpanzees simply do not.
Chimps have undoubtedly been taught to use signs. In the 1930's for instance Winthrop and Kellogg raised an infant chimpanzee alongside their infant son. By sixteen months Gua had learned roughly 100 words, more in fact than their son could command at that point. However, this was as far as she got and she never went on to learn more words.
Likewise, a chimpanzee called Washoe was deliberately taught American Sign Language and by the age of four she had command of around 85 signs and could produce two word combinations of signs such as "you drink."
A chimpanzee called Nim, in an experiment designed to test out the various claims that had arisen from other experiments, learned about 125 signs and went on to produce two and three sign combinations.
Promising as all of this may look we must consider the great limitations of the chimpanzee's abilities. None of the chimpanzees developed vocabularies anywhere near that of a human child. They seemed to be able to learn about a hundred words but then never progressed beyond this to learn thousands of words like human children can.
There is an important point here, there is simply more to language than knowing a long list of words. Even knowledge of a thousand words would still be useless without the complex grammatical and syntactic systems we use. None of the chimps showed signs of getting to grips with either of these. Whereas Winthrop and Kellogg's son could understand the difference between "I saw what I mean" and "I mean what I say," Gua could neither differentiate between, nor understand either for instance. Washoe who could understand the sign for "coke" could not differentiate between singular and plural forms and Nim filled her utterances with redundant words and had little syntactic structure.
As Fromkin and Rodman conclude "unlike children their (chimps) language exhibits little spontaneity, is highly imitative, and reveals little syntactic structure."
In conclusion I don't believe it can be seen that chimpanzees have language. Despite the fact they can be taught to use signs their vocabularies are greatly limited and their utterances rarely progress beyond the two word stage in meaning. They do not seem to be able to develop either the grammatical or syntactic systems that are vital to language both signed and spoken alike. Their language is also highly imitative in that the often just repeat signs made to them and they display little spontaneous signing. All in all, they lack true comprehension and so cannot differentiate between different forms, tenses etc of utterances. Although chimps can unarguably be taught signs for different things I believe they do not possess language.