When acquiring language children are taught to read and write but seemingly pick up language and learn to speak without any formal instruction.
There are many ways in which it can be shown that children aren't taught language whereas they are reading and writing.
Children are supplied with both informal and formal tuition in the reading and writing systems. By the time children reach school age they are likely to have received some form of informal teaching of reading and writing from parents which as Crystal notes, is often in the form of a colourful alphabet book bought for the child by relatives. Whatever the source though, the point is; even by the time the child reaches school age they have received some form of teaching regarding reading and writing.
At school this obviously increases to formal teaching and schools are legally required to teach children reading and writing.
There can be no doubt therefore that children are taught to read and write - it is a simple fact.
We can now turn to look then at whether children are taught to speak. The answer is no, at least not in any formal way. By the time children start to attend school they are expected to be able to speak showing that children have learnt to speak without formal teaching. It has been argued that children learn to speak through imitating adults, which could be considered a form of indirect teaching. However the existence of virtuous errors where children produce utterances they couldn't have heard have disproved this idea.
Chomsky's idea of innateness and that children have a Language Acquisition Device and are as such are "genetically 'prewired' to acquire language" lends credence to the idea that children aren't taught language but instead acquire it naturally.
One example that also helps support the idea is that of the silent kids of Nicaragua. These were deaf children who had no language. Instead they simply created their own (with signs as the equivalent of spoken language). The fact that in places where there is no language, a language can be created also shows that spoken language is not taught.
The main issue here can be simplified into one short question; "without teaching, would spoken and written language exist?" In the case of spoken language we can see that the answer is yes, in extreme cases like that of Nicaragua a new spoken language can be created therefore without any teaching. In the case of more mundane everyday life we can observe that spoken language is acquired by children before they start formal schooling. Informal teaching through imitation is not enough to teach a child to speak (as we have seen, imitation theory simply doesn't stand up to close scrutiny) and hence children must acquire speech reasonably naturally. For written language on the other hand, the answer is the opposite. Without specific teaching, it does not exist. Many languages for instance have no written form. We can therefore conclude that children's reading and writing has to be taught in contrast to their speech.