In the sixteenth and seventeen centuries witches were seen as a real threat and object of fear, not just by ordinary people, but also those of education; hence from the outset of this essay the current dismissal of witchcraft must be forgotten. From the first witchcraft statute in 1542 to the repeal of the last in 1736 there were fewer than 1,000 executions for this crime; a figure of half this is probably closer to the mark. Even at the height of prosecutions, from 1570 to 1680, there were only about 4 to 9 executions per year, from a population of 3.5 to 5 million in England. Hence, unlike the so called witch hunts of the continent, except in a few isolated cases, '...the term witch-craze remains a misnomer for England'. 'Studies of witchcraft depositions in... England... reveal that many of those who were prosecuted for witchcraft were in fact women." As James Sharpe identifies this is 'one of the greatest problems facing the historian of witchcraft...',  with Scarre illustrating that '...conclusions have been difficult to verify." Before the 1970s little attention was paid to this issue, however the gender issues of the decade aroused more interest. Barbara Ehrenreich and Deirdre English argued that the witchcraft phenomenon 'was a ruling class campaign of terror directed against the female peasant population..." However, recent historiography has strayed from this simplistic line of argument and developed many other reasons for the high numbers of women in witchcraft prosecutions. As Brian Levack argues women were more likely to be accused of witchcraft but there was nothing that excluded men. This point is interesting, as although there were many more female than male witches, men were still prosecuted and found guilty, which does not fit into Ehrenreich's and English's thesis. One of the most common arguments in recent years has been that '...witchcraft was sex-related but not a sex-specific crime'. Understanding the witchcraft phenomenon as a 'persecution of women' must therefore come into question.
Before analysing the evidence, a discussion of the sources used is necessary. In terms of the legal sources that survive, transcriptions from testimonies and assize indictments are useful. The transcriptions give some background and evidence for the actual crime of the witch used in court, but were written by court officials, who were generally men, who could have lead the witness in the direction they wanted, and their survival rate is very rare, so it is difficult to make nationwide assumptions. The problem with many of these legal sources is that '...the status of the accused seems to have been mentioned only when it was slightly unusual'. This leads to problems of gathering data, as those accused that were not married, widowed and so on would be far more highly represented than those who were in fairly normal conditions. Gaskill argues that 'for the majority of English witchcraft cases, we have at best a few depositions or perhaps a pamphlet account, but more often only the basic court records survived which tell us little about what witchcraft actually meant to people'. However, more recently there has been '...the adoption of anthropological and sociological methodologies, and a greater attention to archival sources, and an interest in focusing on history from below' which has enriched the study of witchcraft.
The traditional view of women in sixteenth and seventeenth century England can go a long way to explaining '...why people found it more natural to associate witchcraft with the female than with the male sex..." In the bible women were described as "the weaker vessel" and led to the more general 'Judaeo-Christian view of women as the source of sin and the fall of man'. Aristotle also saw women as inferior and 'it was even questioned by some writers whether women were really human beings, or whether they belonged to some lesser species'. Luther however, praised women as the 'most beautiful of God's creations', but likened her inferiority to that of the moon in respect to the sun. One of the most important and widely cited contemporary views of women can be found in Malleus Maleficarum. This text depicts women as 'more credulous', hence the devil aiming to corrupt faith was more likely to attack them. They are also described as being 'naturally more impressionable, and 'more ready to receive the influence of a disembodied spirit', which when combined with their 'slippery tongues', meant 'that since they are both feebler both in mind and in body, it is not surprising that they should come more under the spell of witchcraft'. Especially pertinent for the actual crime of witchcraft was the notion that 'all witchcraft comes from carnal lust, which in women is insatiable'. This was because 'it was believed that the witch often made a pact with the devil as a result of sexual temptation and then engaged with promiscuous sexual activity at the Sabbath'. Hence, not only is there a clear message in the view of women in early modern England of moral weakness and inferiority from, for example, the Bible and Aristotle, but this is specifically related to the act of witchcraft by contemporaries, compounding existing stereotypes.
Such views of women have been used by some historians to illustrate England as a patriarchal society that manipulated witchcraft accusations as a method of controlling women. Marianne Hester is one of the leading figures promoting such a thesis, arguing that '... the witch hunts were part of the ongoing mechanisms for social control within a general context of social change and the reconstruction of a patriarchal society'. During this period in England the patriarchal ideal was that women should be quiet and subservient to their husbands. Hester argues that witchcraft must been seen in the wider social context of fears that 'women were by no means complying with the ideal of the compliant wife'. As a result of the Reformation and Counter-Reformation women became responsible for their own souls, with, for example, sermons referring to both men and women. The status of women thus became ambiguous; women had personal responsibility, but still lived in a highly patriarchal society. Christina Larner argues that witchcraft '...could therefore be seen as a rearguard action against the emergence of women as independent adults'. Those who were accused in this line of argument challenged the patriarchal ideal. It was not only men who were using witchcraft as a means of control, but women also accused if they conformed to the 'male image of them and felt threatened by any identification with those who did not'.
Some statistical evidence is necessary to back up such claims. Scarre has calculated that 80 percent of defendants for witchcraft prosecutions were women, whereas Sharpe states that in England it was not uncommon for 90 percent of those tried in assizes for such crimes to be women. Both such estimates indicate a significantly high proportion of women and would seem to support the arguments of Hester and Larner. In the second half of the seventeenth century in the Northern Assize Court Circuit of the thirty alleged witches, twenty seven were women, but three were men. Although such figures can be used in any thesis arguing that witchcraft prosecutions were a 'persecution of women', they do not in themselves illustrate this. Hence it is necessary to look for other possibilities for the high number of female accusations. 'Disliking women simply as women, and carrying this to the point of wanting to see them burnt alive can hardly have been very common'. It should also be considered, for example in the situation of the Northern Assize Court Circuit that some of those accused were men, and although the figure is low, it is still significant. 'It will not suffice to say that the stereotype of the witch had always been female..." as 'the problem with so many stereotypes is that... not only did a considerable number of... witches not fit the stereotype, an even larger number of people who did... were never accused'. And in any case '...there is some questions as to how influential the Malleus really was', as it had a distinct lack of influence on other English writers. The first English demonological tract by Henry Holland was only indirectly aware of the Malleus through Reginald Scott, but included no reference to a piece of work that is supposed to reflect wider opinion. English writing did discuss the issue of witchcraft in general, but observations were 'brief and uncontroversial by contemporary standards'. Alexander Roberts' A Treatise of Witchcraft of 1616 includes sentiments that are '...to modern eyes, without a doubt misogynistic, yet they are far removed from the prurient fantasies of the Malleus Maleficarum'. And Thomas Cooper in The Mystery of Witchcraft of 1617 went further saying that 'seeing as both [sexes] are subject to the State of damnation, so both are liable to Satan's snares'. Much of this evidence has led Larner to concede that witchcraft 'was 'not some complicated mechanism for persecuting women'.
One of the most important theses explaining the social and economic characteristics of the witch has come from Alan MacFarlane and Keith Thomas. Their work suggests that witches were generally women who were economically marginal, usually widows and old. Taking the issue of age, MacFarlane highlights that 'contemporaries suggested that witches were, almost without exception, old'. For example, in Essex the likeliest age for a witch was between 50 and 70 years old. MacFarlane goes on to argue that the 'pressures on economic resources and growing unease of the neighbourly values of village society... naturally tended to cause friction with the older inhabitants who... made demands on younger village families'. This problem was '... particularly acute when the methods and ideals of charity were changing..." Susan Cook, a widow, was refused relief at the age of 50 as she was deemed to be still young enough to work for a living. She was latterly accused of witchcraft by the refuser after some of his livestock was bewitched. This 'may be seen as a response to the changes in the age structure of the population..." Thomas identifies that the old manorial system provided for widows and the elderly through poor relief. For example, a widow had the right of freebench, the right to a portion of her husband's holding. However, during the period in question there was a '...decay of many of these arrangements'. Population pressure eroded many of the old customary tenancies, much of the common land was acquired privately, there was an increase in rents and a shift from copyhold to freehold tenancies. 'This deterioration in the position of the dependent and elderly helps to explain why witches were primarily women, and probably old ones, many of them widowed." The was exacerbated as '...the old tradition of mutual charity was being eroded...' by such developments as land hunger, increasing prices, agricultural specialisation, and the growth of towns and commercial values. Greater stress was put on the situation by the introduction of the Poor Law, as 'nothing did more to make the moral duties of the householder ambiguous'. The problem with widows for the local community was that they were outside the normal hierarchy of the family or household and therefore outside normal patterns of control. 'Increasing numbers of widows and spinsters threatened a society based on the patriarchal family units or that increasingly resisted helping to support poor elderly women in the village. Evidence for such a line of thought can be found in the Home Circuit between 1563 and 1682, in which only 32 women of the 102 recorded cases had a husband alive. According to such an argument it was therefore those who occupied ...'marginal positions in society', elderly, widowed women, who were more likely to be accused of witchcraft.
However, there are certain limitations to this argument. Gibson argues that 'far from being impotent with age or malicious beggars as they were often portrayed, they were people of significance in the community..." This possibly overstates the case, but the evidence for Kent shows that not all prosecuted witches were old widows. In Canterbury between 1560 and 1575 33 of the 44 prosecuted had husbands and in Kent as a whole between 1640 and 1660 the figure for widows prosecuted as witches peaks at only 30 percent. In terms of the marginality of the women 'many women accused of witchcraft in Kent were active and integrated in local society, rather than passive and isolated' and '...able to draw upon at least some support when they were accused'. Although MacFarlane's and Thomas' argument is by no means unfounded, it is flawed. 'It is logical to suppose that the integrated, and above all competitive person would be as vulnerable to such change as would a more marginal figure in the community.'
What can be said to be true of the thesis described is that it identifies that the positions that women occupied in society made them more susceptible to accusations of witchcraft; but here the argument diverges from that put forward by Thomas and MacFarlane, as those women who had greater opportunities to practice magic as, for example, cooks, healers or midwives, are considered. Witches had an important role to play in the community, hence people '...employed them routinely both in domestic industry and as healers'. However, they were in an extremely vulnerable position; if one of their patients contracted a disease, the healer was often accused of malpractice and tried as a witch. The text Malleus Maleficarum illustrates one of the contemporary views of such women: 'who knows how to heal, knows how to destroy'. Joan Jurdie of Rossington near Doncaster in 1605 described the problems of holding such a position. On being asked for advice on how to cure a child, Jurdie 'bode this examt... not to disclose it to her husband nor any person lest... I should be thought a witch'. Midwives were also in a similar predicament. One fifth of all babies died at birth or in their first few months and so midwives, on the whole women, were easily blamed for such deaths, as it '...offered the bereaved parents a means of revenge'. What made women in this position even more vulnerable to such claims was the fact that witches required unbaptised babies to sacrifice to the Devil. Not only were midwives vulnerable but 'more numerous... among the accused were women who were engaged in caring for other women's children'. For example, in a Yorkshire sample twelve of twenty cases described the bewitching of children or adolescents. This point is vital; it was not so much that there was a conscious effort by a patriarchal society to control women, but the positions they occupied made them far more susceptible to accusations of witchcraft.
'What is interesting about these accusations is that they originate in tensions among women rather than between men and women'. In 1675 in Morpeth, Northumberland, Margaret Milbourne while washing her clothes in the stream, her mother-in-law of the same name came over and chastised her. Margaret the elder had been left to look after the child and complained that she was too old to do so; hence she accused her daughter-in-law of being a bad housewife. The young Margaret answered back, her mother-in-law made a threat and the younger Margaret felt ill thereafter. This episode occurred entirely within the female sphere as a result of an 'inter-generational' conflict. Allegations arising from tensions between women came to light in the most common form of accusation of witchcraft after the refusal of alms to women by another woman. 'Women were often the ones in charge of the domestic goods the witch requested, and it was between women that the related transactions of lending and borrowing were likely to take place. For example, in Heptonstall in 1646 Henry Cockcroft, a local yeoman, described how a suspected witch 'as it seemed by his wife's relation', was displeased with the alms she gave her. As in this instance and many other allegations of witchcraft 'it is evident that the accusations from the quarrels which generated them were about the exchange of goods and services...' of which women in the domestic sphere generally dealt only with each other. Hence, any disputes that resulted in a threat could quite easily lead to an accusation of witchcraft and it is once again the position that women held in society that made them vulnerable, and vulnerable to their fellow women, not men.
Such disputes were often the result of jockeying for position and power within society. Witchcraft was more appealing to women, not because they were more susceptible, but 'because their social and economic position imposed greater constraints on their possibilities of action'. Normal channels of expression were often denied to women, and witchcraft gave them power in a position when they could not better themselves. 'The power to bring about harm by magical means was one of the few forms of power available to women', as it 'offered a source of power to the powerless'. Thus, accusations of witchcraft were often made, not against the marginal women that Thomas and MacFarlane describe, but powerful women, who could threaten society. As Thomas concedes by quoting an essay from 1615 that such women were 'so feared as few dare to offend them, or deny them anything they ask'. There is, however, a subtle distinction to be made. Witchcraft prosecutions were not a conscious 'persecution of women' by a male dominated society, but were a result of such a society that made many women feel isolated, with no other option. It is also argued that men often channelled their frustrations through physical violence, whereas women were more likely to use verbal cursing. Such threats were often construed as curses, hence women were more likely to be accused.
Witchcraft not only gave women a channel for expressing power, but 'certainly areas of female angst can be identified in witchcraft confessions'. Margaret Moore, one of the Ely witches of 1647, distinguished herself by confessing to both making a pact with the devil and maleficium. After the deaths of three of her children (the fourth survived) Margaret Moore heard voices asking for a drink, to which she responded she did not have one. The voices demanded Margaret Moore's soul otherwise it would take away her fourth child, which she did rather than having her only child die. With hindsight it can be seen that her imagination was operating in the context of a witch hunt shaped by the severe stress of bereavement.
Changes in the actual crime of witchcraft also gives some explanation for the predominance of women as witches. In the early sixteenth century witchcraft was regarded more as a crime of heresy. However, after the reformation protestant preachers sought to transform the notion of a witch as being directly linked with diabolism and maleficium. By the mid seventeenth century the relationship with the devil was the foundation for any prosecution of witchcraft. In early witchcraft trials 'judges were much more concerned with the heretical aspects of witchcraft than maleficium'. Heresy, unlike maleficium, was generally not sex-linked; hence both men and women were as likely to be accused. If the European example is used, 'the fact that heresy was not sex-linked may also explain why the Spanish and Roman inquisitors tried a higher percentage of male witches than most other European courts'. In the first half of the seventeenth century 72 percent of those tried by the inquisition were male, when heresy was the key. However, as diabolism gradually became crucial to a prosecution of witchcraft, the number of women accused naturally rose, as it was very difficult and unusual for men to have such a relationship with the devil. Not only does this give a clear reason as to why more women were prosecuted, it shows a dynamic factor and therefore one must be careful when discussing the period as a whole; the early part of the sixteenth century saw far fewer women prosecuted than towards the end of the seventeenth century. Another legal aspect that adds to this change over time is the fact that 'the judiciary were no longer prepared to entertain indictments for stock damage...' in cases of witchcraft, and that over the period there was a decrease in the number of property offences coming to court for all cases. Hence, gradually crimes against property, generally men, were less likely to be tried, so as there was a decline in the percentage of men there was an increase in the percentage of women tried. The wording of the law was anyway not gender specific: '...laws tended to be written in gender-neutral language'. And in any case '...more women were actually beneficiaries of witchcraft legislation than were its victims'.
'We must reiterate that it was not just that the people accused of being witches were women; it was rather than in many cases the business of deciding if an individual was a witch..., how witchcraft should be coped with and how suspicions should be handled seems overwhelmingly to have been a matter which operated... within the female sphere." A large proportion of those who were witness to and testified against witches were women. In the Northern Assize Court Circuit in the second half of the seventeenth century, of all the witnesses nineteen were men, but twenty seven were women. From table 1 it is clear to see that the majority of witnesses testifying in the home counties in the mid seventeenth century were women. This seems to discount the notion of witchcraft as a 'persecution of women', as it is women themselves who are giving evidence brandishing their own sex to be burnt alive. This can be qualified, as some women may have been coerced into giving evidence, but even so there are so many more women testifying that this point is still valid. In relation to other offences, for example in Hertfordshire between 1610 and 1619, 572 men and 36 women were called to give evidence in felony cases. In the same period 92 men and 82 women testified in cases of witchcraft and although more men than women gave evidence, women were fifteen times more likely to give evidence in witchcraft trials.
Women were also greatly involved in the prosecution of witches '...as examiners for the physical marks which were increasingly seen as key evidence in prosecutions'. These marks were seen as a sign of a diabolical pact between the defendant and the devil, hence clear evidence of a witch. The jury directed that 6 honest matrons should be appointed to strip the accused and determine if she had 'any bludie marke on hir bodie which is a common token to know all witches by'. In the Northern Assize Court Circuit 18 women were involved on 5 occasions in the search for physical marks in just 30 cases. Holmes suggests that the jury of women embodied the sentiment of the court and the wider community in favour of mercy in a particular case'. In other words not only were women central in the obtaining of evidence for the prosecution of witches, but their findings reflected the attitude of the neighbourhood, not of a patriarchal machine aiming to subordinate independent women. Thus the significant involvement of women as witnesses and examiners '...suggests that there might be more to the accusation of women as witches than simple misogynistic attacks by men wishing to exercise domination'.
Although in the minority, it is also important to consider men accused of witchcraft. 'The idea that witch prosecutions reflected a war between the sexes must be discounted, not least because the victims and witnesses were themselves as likely to be women as men." 'The place of gender in witchcraft accusations requires careful contextualisation and awareness of its subtleties, complexities and contingencies', especially as '...contemporary definitions of the witch were varied and vague, especially over the question of gender'. In 1560 Robert and Katherine Fisher of Ruchinge were accused for using ars magica for incarnations, and Nicholas Hardwyn of Kingsdown and his wife were accused of maleficium. 'This indicates that both husband and wife might be seen by local people as equally active in the exercise of harmful magic." There does not seem to have been any obvious objection to the idea of the male witch. In 1652 6 men were tried for maleficent witchcraft in Maidstone. Many other such examples can be given, but it needs to be explained why men were also tried and found guilty of witchcraft. Surely, if witchcraft accusations were a 'persecution of women' then there would have been no such cases and so it is important to understand why they arose. As already discussed, during the early sixteenth century witchcraft was tried more often as a crime of heresy and therefore there were a greater number of men prosecuted. However, this figure did decline over the period with diabolism becoming central to prosecutions in the latter period. 'Another situation in which men tended to be prosecuted for witchcraft was when the crime involved political sorcery." It has already been established that women often used witchcraft as a means of increasing their power, but this was also open for manipulation by men. Many men used such tactics to further their political ambition if they felt that normal channels of advancement were cut off to them. Although not very common, 'when witch hunts got out of control' there was a vast increase in the numbers of men tried for witchcraft. The traditional stereotype of the witch was abandoned and wild accusations were levelled at all sorts of people in a fit of hysteria. Although this was not the norm, it demonstrates that although there was such a traditional view of what type of person the witch was, when people were really scared they were not influenced by this and could accuse virtually anyone of this crime. It should also be considered that the historian needs to try and be a part of the community he or she is discussing. Therefore, 'because a witchcraft trial was such an extraordinary event it is easy to see how anyone prosecuted, regardless of their sex or social status, by the very fact of their prosecution had more in common with all other accused witches than with the overwhelming majority of people who never attracted so much as a hint of suspicion'.
So far the issues concerning witchcraft have been discussed as if they were homogenous throughout England. Although this is necessary to get a broad picture, it is also crucial to understand that regional and local variations are significant. 'In the bulk of cases the decision to bring a witch to the attention of the authorities appears to have been undertaken entirely within the neighbourhood." And during the trial process the examination for marks, as already described, often was '...simply an expression of local sentiment concerning the innocence or guilt of the accused'. Prosecutions therefore were a very local issue. They may have been governed by a national legal framework, but the actual crime of witchcraft was quite ambiguous and could be used to '....resolve local disputes'. Witchcraft accusations in Kent were often accompanied by other forms of unneighbourly conduct. Alice Robert of Gandhurst was tried at Canterbury Church Court in 1560 for witchcraft because she had 'raysed stryffe between Rycharde Rode and his wiffe'. In 1563 a Cranbrook woman was accused of running a brothel in the same hearing as for witchcraft and in 1569 in Aldinton Margaret Dale was accused of being a witch when it was found out that she no longer lived with her husband. The problem with witchcraft was that '...vaguely defined legal provisions against witchcraft gave an unprecedented power to all members of the community to solve their conflicts and to take revenge for anything'. It is possible therefore that such accusations were used by a patriarchal society as a means of controlling women, but it also means that witchcraft could be used to solve all kinds of other issues, such as local disputes. The patterns identified on a national level explaining the high level of women prosecuted for witchcraft are important, but they cannot be applied blas to every individual case or every community. Some communities would often have their own superstitions, which would greatly influence future accusations of witchcraft. For example, in Lancashire there were two allegations of witchcraft in the same place, but at different dates, on Pendle Hill near Clitheroe in 1612 and subsequently in 1634.
'Although legally and culturally male privilege dominated society, in practice patriarchal ideals were tempered by pragmatism and thus many women emerge from a close examination of the evidence as important actors in their own right." In the process of witchcraft prosecutions women played vital roles as witnesses and examiners and without their input most prosecutions would have been difficult to make; they '...were not the passive victims or dupes of patriarchy'. Many of the accusations of witchcraft resulted from tensions between women and not between the sexes and some prosecuted witches were even men as '....it [prosecutions] did not always rely on gender or social stereotypes'. What was of decisive importance in the prosecution of witches and therefore the preponderance of women, was the position that women occupied in society. As midwives, cooks, healers, child carers, women were vulnerable to accusations after disputes because their circumstances made it feasible for them to be a witch. As a Gaskill concludes, '...a rise in prosecutions does not necessarily presuppose a crisis in gender relations." Witchcraft was a sex- related but not a sex-specific crime, and it must be remembered that early modern England was essentially patriarchal and women operated in areas more vulnerable to accusations of witchcraft.