The purpose of this practical was to apply the method of nested quadrats for recording the relationship between quadrat size and number of recorded species over an area of 640*640cm 2. About 23 species were expected to be found.
The purpose of this practical was to find out if tree distribution in a beechwood is random, in a planted pattern or clumped. Plotless sampling was used as a way of measurement.
The Chiltern Hills result from earth movements of the southernmost extension of the MIOS 12 or Anglian glaciation. The underground material is clay with flint, producing acid soil conditions. Wood shortage in the 15 th century led to an Act of Parliament in 1483 by Edward IV which decided on the enclosure of woodland for 7 years after coppicing to keep out all beasts. Ditches and banks were built to enclose woodland.
In the mid 18 th century sheep farming became unrentable in England. Due to soil and economic factors about 150 years ago beech trees were planted here. Nowadays the NVC vegetation type on the plateau is W 15 Fagus sylvatica-Deschampsia flexuosa woodland, a species poor forest with holly in it.
Going down the slope a less acid underground material is found (brown earths), there W 14 Fagus sylvatica-Rubus fruticosus woodland with abundant holly, brambles and bracken is found.
On the valley bottom and the other side of the slope an alkaline, free draining soil favours the W 12 Fagus sylvatica-Mercurialis perennis woodland, with ash, yew, hawthorn and field maple present. Holly is sparse here, the herbaceous flora is comparably richer as on the first two sites. W 12 contains indicators of ancient woodland like Acer campestre.
A transect was made through a hill at Broadmoor heath in this practical. The purpose was to distinguish between different types of vegetation along a gradient, and to relate them to the underground material.
Silchester Heath was visited in order to examine differences in vegetation which result from regular burning. Cyclical succession results from traditional management practices.