'A common assumption held until the late 1960s was that the five year old had mastered the syntactic structures of her native tongue, and that later development mainly consisted of the addition of a sophisticated lexicon,' (Karmiloff-Smith 1986: 456). In this assignment, I intend to challenge this notion by not only illustrating examples where significant development occurs after the age of five, but by comparing this knowledge with previous development to discover how far development after five differs from what has gone before. I will do this by exploring three main areas of development: the syntactic development of relative clauses; the cohesive devices used within extended narratives; and the awareness of social roles.
Carol Chomsky proposed that the development of syntax fell into two stages: the acquisition of the basic tools of language before five, and the mastering of complex constructions after five years (Karmiloff-Smith 1986). She explains this using the notion of linguistic competence, which is composed of rules that can be applied to the majority of grammatical structures. However, according to Chomsky, complex constructions violate these rules, thus forcing the child to reorganise its internal representations to account for such exceptions.
Relative clauses are an example of such a complex syntactic construction, whereby a secondary clause modifies a noun phrase, such as 'we played with the boy who wore blue trousers,' where the clause 'who wore blue trousers,' modifies the noun phrase, 'the boy.' Foster-Cohen (1999: 173) describes children aged five as having 'a good grasp,' of this kind of grammatical construction. However, as Ingram (1989) points out although they may have some understanding of relative clauses 'in the speech of children between two and five years (...) there are relatively few relative clauses.' This was demonstrated by Ingram's 1975 study into the use of relative clause structures in the opening of narratives, which showed that relative clauses are rarely used and only start to become frequent by the age of five (Ingram 1989: 477). This may seem to provide some evidence that relative clauses are acquired before the age of five because they are present in the speech of five year olds, but as Ingram (1989) highlights, even when used (which was not frequently) the relative clause structures were formulaic and did not contain any relative pronouns, perhaps supporting Chomsky's hypothesis that complex structures are a property of later development. Sheldon, (cited in Ingram 1989) further supports the notion that relative clauses develop later, using the results from her comprehension study which tested children's understanding of imbedded relative clauses such as 'the dog that jumps over the pig bumps into the lion,' (where the 'dog' remains the subject in both clauses) and 'the pig bumps into the horse that jumps over the giraffe,' (where the horse changes function from patient to agent). The results found that as age increased there was a significant improvement in comprehension across all sentences (Ingram 1989) although in all age groups the highest scores were gained on sentences where there were no changes in function, whilst the lowest scoring sentences showed a change in function occurring across clauses; an observation that Sheldon described as the 'parallel function hypothesis' (Karmiloff-Smith 1986: 458). As a result it could be proposed that imbedded relative clauses showing function change, violate one of the rules of Chomsky's linguistic competence in an under five, (providing a possible explanation as to why it is a feature which only seems to be understood fully after five) supporting her doctrine that complex constructions such as these are acquired in later development.
These studies confirm that the full understanding and adult use of relative clauses are not totally acquired by the age of five. For instance before five relative clauses if used at all do not include relative pronouns (Ingram 1989) and embedded relative clauses are not likely to be understood if the function changes between clauses (Karmiloff-Smith 1986). My discussion has also pointed to possible differences in development up to and beyond five years. For example, taking Chomsky's notion of the linguistic competence of under fives, it would appear that development before five is based upon general rules of syntax construction to fit the majority of sentences, whilst development after five is about the acknowledging and understanding that not all constructions (i.e. complex structures such as relative clauses) adhere to these rules and as a result a reorganisation of them has to take place to account for such exceptions.
'Developing the structure of extended pieces of discourse is a very significant part of later language development,' (Foster-Cohen 1999: 176) and therefore it is this which I intend to examine next, in particular the way in which cohesion is constructed and develops within extended narrative. Karmiloff and Karmiloff-Smith (2002) state that this an important functional change in development, as children, in constructing extended narrative are learning that markers that they initially used to create grammatical sentences with, also have discourse functions, for instance the use of articles in introducing new and given information. To chart the developmental progression of cohesion within extended narratives Garton and Pratt (1998) cite a study where children between the ages of four and nine were given a specially designed picture book (to limit narrative options) and asked to tell the story that the pictures described. The results showed a distinct difference in the cohesive devices used by older and younger children to construct narrative. For example the way in which pronominal ambiguity is resolved. In the under fives the protagonist is introduced using either a definite noun phrase or a pronoun: 'the girl,' 'she,' which although ambiguous if the interlocutor was not present in the room (as the two characters in the story were of the same sex), was disambiguated through extra linguistic actions such as pointing. In the six to seven year age group this reliance on exophoric references was less evident, with characters being identified by placing them in specific syntactic slots. For instance the main character was always in the subject slot, a strategy known as the thematic subject constraint (Karmiloff & Karmiloff-Smith 2002: 173), which syntactically disambiguated the two characters. However this very rigid structuring of intra linguistic cohesion did lead to poor coherence. Finally in the oldest group the thematic subject strategy continues but is used with more flexibility, allowing the coherence of the discourse to go unaffected. This is achieved through the use of 'differential linguistic markers' (Garton & Pratt 1998: 113) which help to point out the different roles of the characters. For instance the main character is introduced using an indefinite noun phrase, which is subsequently referred to using pronouns, whilst the subsidiary character is referred to using a definite noun phrase.
One noticeable trend which is consistent across all the results of this study is the tendency for children as they grow older to move away from the dependency on exophoric references towards endophoric references within the text. This is exemplified by the way in which the under fives although forming a coherent narrative did not integrate the different events of a narrative, (Karmiloff & Karmiloff-Smith 2002); this observation was not however present in the six to seven year groups where single thematic units helped to create endophoric cohesion; whilst the oldest group were able to rely solely on intra linguistic features to identify characters. These observations support Hickman's claim (1995: 197) that 'endophoric uses evolve out of exophoric ones in acquisition,' suggesting that this shift enables children to anchor their references within the discourse without the reliance upon extra linguistic features.
The examination of extended discourse has provided yet more evidence that language development continues after five years, whilst at the same time also showing the difference in development before and after five. For example as Singleton and Ryan (2004) point out, after five there is a reorganisation of the semantic and syntactic knowledge to serve a new discourse function, suggesting that development until five prepares the child with the basic knowledge of language and that after five the different functions of the knowledge is explored to enable 'a sense of self (...) and (to) get a better understanding of the world around them' (Karmiloff & Karmiloff-Smith 2002: 156).
Social roles 'are the conventional modes of behaviour that society expects a person to adopt when holding a particular status (...) the chief marker of social position is undoubtedly language' (Crystal 2002: 41). This statement illustrates the importance of social roles within society and in particular the role that language plays in their denotation, but when do children become aware of these roles? Once more the development of a child's understanding of social roles and status are by no means complete by the age of five (Clark 2003) (Grunwell 1986), as a result I now intend to outline the development of a child's knowledge of social roles using evidence from role play.
In a study by Andersen (cited in Clark 2003) children (aged between 4;7 and 6;10) enacted different social roles by representing the voices of different puppets such as doctor, patient, mother, father or child, in order to discover what children knew about how social roles were distinguished and signified. She found that all children were sensitive to power relations between social roles, for instance more powerful roles used less polite requests, whilst those in less powerful positions employed indirect requests and mitigating devices such as hedging (Clark 2003). This indicated that the children were not only aware of different roles but the status of roles in relation to each other. In distinguishing roles all children made use of prosody, for example the use of pitch in denoting masculinity and femininity as well as reducing tempo when talking to foreigners and babies. Although these are examples of general trends, there were also some definite progressions which could be seen as the children grew older, for instance in Clark and Andersen's study of children's role play, self repairs were examined to see whether children 'were aware of the need to adapt their speech to particular roles' (Grunwell 1986: 47). They found that although almost all children corrected themselves when using the incorrect type of voice, especially with regard to prosody, only lexis and syntax were found to be repaired by the older children, perhaps showing a tendency for roles to be distinguished by younger children using prosody and suprasegmental features whilst those over five differentiate social roles using lexical and syntactic signifiers as well.
These findings suggest that the development of social roles although beginning before the age of five are not complete representations by this age. Instead development continues from the initial prosodic differences which mark social status, (Clark 2003) and progresses to incorporate lexical and syntactic differences in determining social roles (Grunwell 1986). This shows the way in which children's knowledge and schemas are being created and extended all the time, as Clark (2003) points out 'as children do the voices for puppets they reveal what they have observed so far (...) children have a long way to go. They will discover more and more roles and learn how to mark those too.'
In conclusion there is definite evidence that significant language development occurs after five from research into relative clauses, extended narratives, and the construction of social roles. From examining the research in these areas it seems that five marks a functional shift, for instance the function of discourse markers move from their use in constructing grammatical sentences to their role as cohesive devices within extended narratives (Karmiloff & Karmiloff-Smith 2002). It is also appears to be an age when internal reorganisation of syntactic rules occur, (Karmiloff-Smith 1986) and previous knowledge is added to, as shown by the increased number of ways that children distinguish social roles (Clark 2003). However it must be noted that I have only been able to touch on a few of the aspects of later linguistic development and would need to consider further research to make more valid and robust conclusions. Nevertheless I feel that I have been able to demonstrate a few of the systematic ways in which development after five differs from what has gone before.