In this essay I intend to compare and contrast an example of conversational talk with an extract from a political radio interview. The methods that I will employ to do this will be the Ethnography of speaking, Conversation analysis and Interactional sociolinguistics, all of which are methods used in applied linguistics and specifically in the analysis of spoken discourse. I have chosen several approaches because as Lakoff (2001: 200) points out 'To do a thorough job of talking about discourse or a discourse, the analyst must have recourse to the findings and methods of other sub disciplines.' The three that I have selected in particular, reflect both the macro and mirco analysis which is conducted within the field, yet at the same time all focus their analysis on language that has occurred naturally (Schiffrin 1994) (Hutchby and Wooffitt 1998) (Cameron 2004). Before I begin to conduct my analyses though, I will first highlight the importance of transcription, in particular the decisions made about what it should represent, as this is influenced by the methods of analysis used to examine the discourse (Ochs 1999). Therefore I will explain the difficulties that I encountered and try to explain the choices that I made in compiling my transcripts.
'Recordings are essential tools in discourse research, but are not sufficient by themselves for the systematic examination of interaction'
(Edwards 2001: 321), therefore in order for the tape recording that I made to be useful I had to be selective. The selection was not however random, instead it systematically reflected the aims of the approaches that I wanted to employ, as advised by Ochs (1999). With this in mind I decided to follow some of the transcription conventions proposed by Jefferson, a major contributor to the conversation analysis approach (as cited by Atkinson and Heritage1999). This meant paying particular attention to the structure of the talk, by indicating features such as latches, overlaps and simultaneous speech (see appendix 2 for the notations used) to highlight the distribution of turns (reinforced by the colour coding of turns). I also decided not to omit hesitations, false starts and discourse markers because they are characteristic of spoken language and specifically valued by Interactional sociolinguists. With regard to the Ethnography of speaking I incorporated a small introductory summary at the beginning of the transcript to place the discourse in context (an important principle within Ethnography).
I will begin my analysis with the Ethnography of speaking. One of the most integral parts of the approach, according to Schiffrin (1994) is placing the discourse within a cultural and social context, which enables the 'big picture' to be seen (Cameron 2004: 52). To do this the Ethnography of speaking uses certain analytical frameworks, which I will employ, to characterise culturally meaningful behaviours to help highlight 'the differentiation (between) languages, varieties and styles' (Schiffrin 1994: 143).
One theorist who has contributed to this is Dell Hymes, focusing his investigation on what he defines as 'communicative competence' (Cook 1989: 6). This is the subconscious knowledge that a speaker requires about context to be able to interact appropriately. To analyse this Hymes put forward three units of analysis: the speech situation, event and act, as well as the SPEAKING Grid which is used to describe the components of the speech event (Cameron 2004). As a result I intend to use these tools in my comparison of an excerpt of conversation and a political interview.
The interview can be broken down into the units of analysis described by Hymes relatively easily, for instance the speech situation is a radio broadcast; the speech event a political interview; and the speech acts within the speech event include greetings, statements, questions and replies. This is in contrast to the example of conversation, which is much harder to define in Hymes' terms, for example the speech situation could be described as being at home in the evening reviewing the days events, but this is not as neat and as easily classifiable as the speech event for the radio interview. Also, although the speech event can be identified as a conversation, the speech acts are not so well defined as the question answer sequences that are found in the interview. Instead it is composed of many different speech acts such as interrogatives, replies, exclamations, expressions of opinion, agreements, disagreements and proposals.
However both examples of discourse can be placed into Hymes' SPEAKING Grid. For example the setting of the interview is a live radio broadcast conducted between a studio and a radio car, whilst the conversation is set during the evening in a living room in one of the participant's homes. The interview's participants include the interviewer (a journalist) and the interviewee (the Prime Minister) as well as the radio audience (who although not an active contributor to the discourse, might still be considered as a participant, as they help to construct the context and content of the discourse, shown by TB's acknowledgement of them: 'that I think your listeners would probably like to hear about'). The participants in the conversation are Emma and James both of whom are twenty and have shared a relationship together for five years. They both take the roles of addresser and addressee within the discourse. The ends (or purpose of the interview) broadly speaking is for the interviewer to impart information from the interviewee (as shown by the distribution of question and answer acts between interviewer and interviewee) what information should be imparted however seems undefined between interviewer and interviewee, as within the discourse the different expectations are made explicit: 'ten minutes into the interview, you've not asked me a single question on the economy, on schools...' The purpose of the conversation is phatic; to construct and enhance a relationship (contributing to the Ethnographic notion of discourse being a social action). The act sequence for the interview begins with an introduction of the interviewee: 'When Tony Blair...' which is then followed by greetings from both active participants: 'Good morning... Good morning,' after which a series of question and answer pairs follow '...has it been? Well I think,' with the conclusion to the discourse denoted by the interviewer's thanks 'many thanks... OK thanks.' The act sequence of the conversation opens with an anecdote, 'you know the girl...' it is then followed by a series of question and answer pairs and statements of opinion in relation to some confectionary that the participants are eating: 'Is it chocolate?... Mm... Quite nice.' Finally it concludes with exclamations and another anecdote which is then evaluated using declaratives and judgements: 'My God... when I went back down... I don't mind you worry about it too much.' The key of the conversation is informal and colloquial reflected by the terms of address: 'we've got this left hunny' and idiosyncrasies: 'thingies,' 'biscuity.' In comparison, the key of the interview was relatively formal with any breaks in formality such as 'I mean John really!' quickly disregarded by the interviewer 'There are many big questions are there not?' The spoken medium is used in both examples of discourse but interestingly in the interview the visual communication channel is unavailable (due to the interview being conducted across different locations) depriving the participants of the visual and context dependent cues which are so prevalent in the face to face interaction of the conversation as shown by this deictic expression, 'you've got this one left.' The norms of interaction in the interview seem to be that the interviewer controls topic management and the timing of any topic shifts: 'let's deal with some more,' 'Well let me just before we leave that one.' The interviewer is also the only participant to ask questions directly: 'So was that a yes or a no?' whilst the majority of sentence moods used by the interviewee are declarative: 'where people have fallen down then action's been taken.' This is in contrast with the conversation where both participants initiate topic shifts, ask interrogatives and use declaratives: 'we've got this one left hunny,' 'was it the last one of those?' 'I prefer the cinnamon one,' 'They're nice though aren't they?' However this in itself is an important observation as it shows that the roles of the participants are on more flexible than those within the context of a political interview. The genres can be defined as a result of the above components as examples of an interview and of phatic conversation.
In contrast to the Ethnography of speaking Conversation Analysis (CA) takes a micro analytic approach to the study of discourse, however like Ethnography of speaking CA does consider language as action, although it does not place it within a social context unless made explicit within the data (Cameron 2004). CA, as the name might infer does not only study conversation but all forms of 'talk in interaction' (Pomerantz and Fehr 1997: 64) making it an appropriate tool to conduct a comparative analysis with. It views talk in interaction as 'methodic,' 'systematically ordered,' and 'deeply organised' (Hutchby and Wooffitt 1998: 23) and attempts to describe these structures to explain how participants create social order (Schiffrin 1994). Areas of enquiry that CA is concerned with, and which I plan to investigate are adjacency pairs and overlaps.
Sacks observed that talk in interaction is constructed from a minimum of two turns, some of which are 'adjacent, produced by different speakers, ordered as a first part and a second part' (Schiffrin 1994: 236), this occurrence is what he later defined as adjacency pairs. The observation of such constructions can be found in the interview, in the form of a greeting: 'Good morning Prime Minister, Good morning John' and in the conversation as a question and answer pair: 'Was it the last one of those? Yeah' These examples both show what (Hutchby and Wooffitt 1998: 41) describe as the 'participants orienting to the relevance of adjacency pairs;' that by displaying a relevant answer (a feature which CA relies on to infer understanding, known as the next turn proof procedure) the addressee is displaying his knowledge of what the prior turn was trying to achieve. However not all instances of a first part of an adjacency pair receive the relevant or expected second part (as noted by Wood and Kroger 2000), for instance: 'Is it chocolate, it tastes toffee treacly?' (3) 'Doesn't it?' 'Mm...' In this example taken from the conversation transcript a question is asked: 'Is it chocolate, it tastes toffee treacly?' (the first part of an adjacency pair) but no response is given to complete the pair (note the three second gap) and therefore its noticeable absence prompts the addresser to append a tag question 'Doesn't it?' in order to gain the relevant second part of the adjacency pair, which it achieves: 'Mm...'
The study of overlaps also examines the organisation of turns and in spite of their apparent unstructured nature Jefferson (as cited in Hutchby and Wooffitt 1998) has provided evidence that overlaps are in fact systematic, in that they adhere to specific distribution rules. Firstly to identify overlaps as organised she examined their onset and observed three types: transitional (where the next speaker interjects at a possible place of transition); recognitional (when the next speaker projects what the current speaker is saying); and progressional (when there is disfluency in the current turn which is resolved by another speaker). Examples of these can be found in both of my transcripts, in particular transitional overlaps: '...the tax burden isn't going to go up] [No actually what I said...' 'There were three cinnamon things] [Oh the box...' However an example of recognitional onset is only present in the conversation data: 'More like] [[lemon curd sauce,' where one accurately projects what the other was about to say and simultaneous speech occurs. Having said this though, there is an element of recognition in some of the overlaps that occur in the interview data. For example 'the big questions as you put it are discussed all the time as you know Prime Minister, but let me] [Well really they are not discussed here...' in this TB overlaps not at a transitional onset (because it occurs after the speaker begins a new clause: 'but let me...'); or a progressional onset as the speech had not become disfluent; nor was it recognitional in the sense that TB does not complete what the speaker is about to say (as found in the conversation transcript). This led to problems in categorising it, however when looked at without preconceived definitions (as CA aims to do as a data driven approach) it might be possible to say that this is an example of recognitional onset because although not continuing what the speaker would have said TB would have to project what the speaker was likely to say in order to disagree with it (TB is protesting against the speaker's unwillingness to discuss the big questions- which JH signals by his use of 'but').
Finally I want to approach my data using Interactional Sociolinguistics (IS). This is an approach which studies 'the interaction between self and other and context' (Schiffrin 1994: 105), enabling it to combine aspects of the Ethnography of speaking and CA. For instance it makes explicit the subconscious structures and techniques which CA is concerned with, but correlates the observations with external factors such as context (which is so central to the Ethnography of speaking). To demonstrate this I intend to study the role of discourse markers (a microanalytic observation) in relation to context in both sets of data.
The function of a discourse marker according to Stubbs (1983, as cited by Pridham 2002: 30) is 'to relate utterances to each other or to mark a boundary in discourse.' In my own analysis I would not only like to find out the specific functions of the discourse markers in my data but to see if there are any interactions between the function of discourse markers and the context or speech event they appear in.
To begin the analysis I took Schiffrin's example of trying 'to specify the conditions that would allow a word to be used as a discourse marker' (Schiffrin 2001: 58) and found that the two most prominent discourse markers were the interjection 'oh' (occurring only in the conversation data) and the adverbial particle 'well' (found in both sets). Firstly 'oh,' which appeared when an anecdote was being recalled but its distribution was incredibly specific, preceding any direct quote: 'She said oh um,' 'she um said oh I'm really sorry,' 'I was jokingly said oh yeah.' These systematic examples seem to indicate that the condition for 'oh' is to precede a direct quote, functioning as an introductory marker. This reinforces what Schiffrin (1999: 286) describes as 'oh's' role in marking 'information state transitions.' 'Well' only occurred once in the conversation data: 'Well sorry I thought we were sharing it' where it is in initial position framing an exclamation; a function supported by Stenstrom (1994: 207). In comparison to the interview data this observation remained relatively consistent, with 'well' almost always occurring in initial or near initial position: 'Well I think' 'Well let me' 'Yes well let's.' In this context it is again acting as an introductory mechanism although to both the beginnings of questions and responses: 'Well let me just... you are proud of them?' 'Well I think where we haven't been... what we have done.' The one exception to 'well' not occurring in initial position occurs in JH's introduction when he questions whether the government has been 'purer than pure': 'Well has it been?' In this example 'well' although not initiating the turn does however begin a new clause which introduces an opposing view. To introduce an opposing view is also the function of some of TB's replies: 'Well of course they do but...'
From this analysis it would appear that the distribution and primary function of some discourse markers, in particular 'well' can be maintained across different speech events ('well' occurring in initial position and as an introductory, framing device). However this is only a small sample, of not only data but of the discourse markers present in both transcripts and as a result it would not be possible to generalise these findings.
In conclusion I think I have provided an insight into three quite contrastive but complementary approaches to discourse analysis and by ordering them as I did was able to address some of the weaknesses of each approach. For instance Ethnography of speaking pays little attention to the micro structures of discourse (Schiffrin 1994), which is integral to Conversation Analysis (Cameron 2004), whilst Interactional sociolinguistics attends to the criticism of CA that it ignores the important role of context (Jaworski and Coupland 1999). As a result I feel that I have both learnt and demonstrated the importance of triangulation within discourse analysis. However in this assignment I have not been able to present a representative view of these approaches, as I have only offered small examples of how such approaches can be applied. Also there are many more features which these approaches may well have included in their analysis but due to time and word constraints I have been unable to acknowledge. Nevertheless in spite of these limitations 'the alternative is not to engage at all, which undermines the rationale for applied linguistics as a whole' (Cook 2003: 68).