'Only a few centuries ago the English language consisted of a collection of dialects spoken mainly by monolinguals and only within the shores of a small island' (Cheshire 1991:1). However by 2002, it was estimated by Crystal (2003: 67) that 'well over a third of the world's population' had some command of the English language (be this as a native, second or foreign language speaker and to varying degrees of proficiency). As a result of this global spread of English, Cheshire's Anglo-centric description of English is no longer relevant. Instead classifications such as Kachru's concentric circle model are far more reflective of the current situation of English (Jenkins 2003). The model separates Englishes into three main types: the inner circle (composed of countries where English is the predominant native language, resulting from the first diaspora); the outer circle (countries of the second diaspora who use English as a second language) and the expanding circle (those countries which use English as a foreign language).
In this essay I will examine what Kachru would describe as the outer circle English of Hong Kong. I will particularly focus on the introduction and development of English; its role in a post colonial Hong Kong; the consequences that its introduction has had for other languages; and what place there may be for English in a future Hong Kong.
Hong Kong English would be categorised by Kachru as an outer circle English because it is used as a second language (second to Cantonese), and was introduced as a result of its colonisation in 1842 (the second diaspora). As Melchers and Shaw (2003: 163) recount, Hong Kong 'came under British control as a result of the Opium wars with China,' it was ceded to Britain in 1842 by the Treaty of Nanking and was officially leased from China in 1898 for ninety nine years (Crystal 2003).
According to Li (2003: 8) 'Hong Kong was untypical of other colonies,' in that 'from the outset it was meant to be an outpost of the British empire (...) (designed) for the sole purpose of facilitating or reinforcing trade and commerce' (Li 2003: 17). In addition, unlike other colonisers, the administration delivered non intrusive ideals which the Chinese had aspired to since the times of Confucius (Li 2003: 9). The colonial era of Hong Kong also coincided with political unrest in China which led to many Chinese fleeing the main land in search of the stability and opportunity which the British rule provided (Bolton 2002). Hong Kong was quickly becoming a centre for business and commerce generating employment and trade opportunities. Li (2001: 18) points out that these kinds of socio-economic trends did not 'conform to the usual pattern of colonisation' and therefore has greatly shaped the development of English in Hong Kong.
According to Jenkins (2005) for the first one hundred years of British rule the British and Chinese led relatively separate lives; coexisting alongside each other and only interacting for the purposes of business and trade. This led to 'the development in the eighteenth century of Chinese Pidgin English' (Pennington 1998: 25) which actually survived right through to the twentieth century. However this was not the English promoted by the British administrators, as it was a mix of English derived vocabulary and Cantonese grammar as Pennington (1998: 25) exemplifies:
In spite of the use on non standard British English, Pennington (1998) points out that the pidgin did flourish in the early period of British rule, although not as a lingua franca, as most Chinese would speak Cantonese. Instead it was a language which was employed to trade with powerful foreigners. However Bolton (2002: 5) states that 'by the early twentieth century (...) there was (...) increased access to educated varieties of English through mission schools and other sources and some Chinese speakers of English developed a distaste for pidgin,' resulting in its decline.
British English was promoted through its use in the law, education (missionary schools) and administrative institutions; a common practice for many of the British colonies in the second diaspora (Crystal 2003). However unlike many other colonies, English was not necessarily viewed negatively as representing and perpetuating the imperialism of colonial rule as Phillipson (1992) has described of colonies such as India and Kenya. Hong Kong, as a growing financial centre in the 1950s found that the demand for English in fact came from the people of Hong Kong. According to Li (2001: 21) it was partly as a result of 'the colonial government's social selection policies' which had implications for those citizens who were proficient in English, enabling them to have access to higher paid and more prestigious jobs than those who had little or no knowledge. English had become a competitive advantage providing higher social status and increased opportunity. However as Li (2001) points out, far from providing opportunities for everyone, English became a perpetuator of social divide. This is because it was only the middle and higher social classes who could afford the private education needed to reach the required standard in English, therefore creating a privileged elite of Chinese Hong Kongese who were closely tied to the British centre.
Yet in spite of this unequal distribution the number of English speakers has increased since the1970s with the introduction of educational legislation which provided a free and compulsory education system (Bolton 2002). Under these reforms the medium of instruction was English in both primary and secondary education (as it had been in the missionary schools previously). Although this is a clear example of what Phillipson (1992) would describe as linguistic imperialism (the imposition of a coloniser's norms and ideals), it was nevertheless as Brutt-Griffler (2002) proposes, providing a certain economic and monetary benefit to the students of English, which resulted in parents supporting the use of English in schools.
In 1997 British colonial rule came to an end and Hong Kong was returned to China. The British administration had prepared for the handover by reducing the number of English medium schools, which as a result of public pressure had been in the majority. This goal was described by Pennington (1998: 28) as 'belatedly realistic given that Putonghua, the mainland standard of spoken Mandarin, is the national language in all of China, which now again includes Hong Kong.' Indeed, after 1997 the strength of English in education was weakened when it was decided in 1998 that secondary education should be conducted in Cantonese. However due to public demand 100 schools were permitted to continue using English as the medium of instruction. Yet even this did not subside the public outcry which followed as Boyle (1998: 36) recalls:
But was this a response conditioned by imperialism? Phillipson (1992) argues that it was, citing the influence of the colonisers which was maintained even after their physical presence had gone: 'The ideal way to make people do what you want is of course to make them want it themselves, and to make them believe that it is good for them' (Phillipson 1992: 286). It is possible to see the truth in Phillipson's argument as in Hong Kong, English is and has historically been viewed as desirable; 'a value added commodity' (Li 2001: 24). However, whether this opinion is justified or whether it is a tool to perpetuate neo colonialism is unclear and difficult to clarify. For example Brutt- Griffler (2002: 50) points to the genuine importance and economic benefit of English speakers in commercial colonies such as Hong Kong, especially with a growing service industry that is dependent on an international lingua franca such as English. Conversely though it would be nave and selective to think that there was no evidence of linguistic imperialism during the colonial era and that it ended as soon as the handover took place. For instance a typical example is the language policy which benefited English speakers, putting those who were not proficient in English at a distinct social and economic disadvantage. Ultimately though I agree with Li (2001: 24) who concluded that:
The introduction and development of any foreign language, (in this case English) in any country and for whatever reason will inevitably have some impact on the existing indigenous languages, and Hong Kong of course is no exception as I have already highlighted. However unlike many other British colonies (such as in Africa) there is little evidence to suggest that the introduction of English has been at the cost of other languages. For instance, Li (2001: 26) states that 'one of the clearest indicators of English linguistic imperialism in former British or American colonies is that the vitality or existence of local languages is under threat.' Yet Cantonese is in a period of continual growth (Pennington 1998), as the native tongue of Hong Kong is the dominant language at home, as Bolton (2002: 11) describes: 'in personal domains such as family, friends, social activities (...) the use of English is superseded by Cantonese.' It is also the predominant medium of instruction in most schools (in spite of parent's demands) as well as having a growing influence within the government and the law, where it is the norm for spoken interaction to take place in Cantonese (Bolton 2002).
Although I have found no evidence of Cantonese being subsumed or negatively affected by English (at least after decolonisation), one language which may be threatened or which the policy on English may have serious consequences for is Putonghua. This is primarily because according to Boyle (1998: 37) 'time given to learning Putonghua will probably be borrowed from time given to learning English,' and therefore any increase or decrease in English in schools is going to impact on the time dedicated to Putonghua. The use of Putonghua, which is spoken by mainland Chinese, was expected to rise following the handover to Chinese sovereignty in 1997 and according to Melchers and Shaw (2003: 164) it has grown, citing that it is 'becoming more and more important in administration and for interaction with people from the rest of China.' It has indeed benefited from the governmental strategy to pursue a 'trilingual, biliterate language policy that recognises Cantonese, Putonghua and English as spoken languages and written Chinese and English as written languages' (Bolton 2002: 8), but in spite of these measures there are some concerns for its future which Boyle (1998) raises. For instance,
So far I have examined the consequences of English on other languages but perhaps the most profound influence of English in Hong Kong is the way it has contributed to mixed codes. Crystal (2003) points to this as one of the characterising features of New Englishes highlighting in particular a mixed code between Tagalog and English which is exemplified in the following excerpt from a leaflet issued by the Hong Kong Bank:
This shows the way in which English is integrated with indigenous languages to form a new variety (in this case Taglish) and as Crystal (2003: 165) states it is an illustration of 'the extent to which it is possible to go and still retain an identity which is at least partly English.' This is only one example of code mixing however, for instance 'Yinglish' has also been documented (Vittachi 2002: 211), as a mix between English and Cantonese. Vittachi (2002: 210) explains that although 'indecipherable to people outside Hong Kong (Yinglish) is spoken by taxi drivers, tailors, Indian business people and anyone positioned between the Cantonese and English speaking communities,' thus demonstrating that code mixing is not necessarily confined to the uneducated or to certain social groups but restricted to a geographical area, conditioned only by the surrounding linguistic profile. Indeed, Pennington (1998: 27) even points to a study showing the growth of 'mixed mode' in Hong Kong classrooms. In the nineteen eighties mixed mode teaching grew from nine per cent to twenty per cent and in subjects such as science and mathematics it had even become the 'dominant mode' (Pennington 1998: 27). Pennington (1998: 28) concludes by reaffirming Hong Kong's most important linguistic feature: 'The most significant fact about Hong Kong language in the present era is the vitality of the mixed code which has resulted from this process of linguistic flooding, diluting and blending and which in a sense carries on the traditions of the previous generations of pidgin speakers.'
So what to the future of Hong Kong English as perhaps a new variety of English? This seems a little far off and to explain why perhaps once more Hong Kong's unusual relationship with English must be considered. For instance Jenkins (2003:136) states that 'despite the growth in English amongst the Hong Kongese (...) it appears that Hong Kong English does not have widespread acceptance as a variety,' pointing to the norms to which Hong Kong learners try to follow: 'it's existence is acknowledged, but it is apparently not the variety to which Hong Kong English speakers aspire. Instead (...) English teachers remain firmly attached to British English norms of correctness' (Jenkins 2003: 136). This employment of exonormative standards instigated and perpetuated by an educated elite (not necessarily the colonisers) perhaps demonstrates some form of post colonial imperialism, as described by Phillipson (1992) whereby the enforcing of the coloniser's norms only serve to reinforce the coloniser's influence. Yet it may also be argued that without a standardised International language the need to follow Inner circle norms is stronger than ever in order to gain from the international opportunities which English can offer. Whatever the reasons behind Hong Kong's exonormative stance however, without the codification and acceptance of Hong Kong English its place as a new variety of English looks to be uncertain.
In this assignment I hope to have provided an account of how English was brought to Hong Kong and the conditioning factors under which it developed. I have also described its effect on other languages as well as considering what the future may hold for English in a post colonial Hong Kong. Although the account has been relatively brief and there are many issues that I have not been able to touch upon I hope that I have at least pointed to the most significant developments and issues concerning its progression.
My information is from a range of sources to avoid a bias approach, although inevitably this is very difficult when researching a former British colony because as Li (2001: 7) highlights 'whoever writes history is likely to be defending the interests of the group the historian belongs to,' as a result I have tried to neutralise this effect by selecting texts and accounts written by academics based both in and outside of Hong Kong. Similarly there are problems with the reliability of the estimated figures of the number of speakers of English, as they are beset with the inevitable problems of approximation and definition, but whatever the number of English speakers in Hong Kong it is clear that English has had an enormous impact on not only the teachers and students of English but on other languages, and the history of Hong Kong.