Nestle's and other Infant Food Manufacturers' (IFM) marketing of infant formula could be argued as unethical and immoral to a certain extent.
Many boycotts have been launched against these companies, particularly Nestle, by the church and other activists who claim that the infant milk formulas are being promoted unethically in the third world.
They take the view that people in these less economically developed countries are being exploited. Their poor standards of education leave companies like Nestle free to manipulate them through persuasive marketing techniques such as pamphlets showing breast feeding to be 'old fashioned' or 'inconvenient'(Kotler, Wong, Saunders and Armstrong). Activists believe that Nestle are encouraging people in the developing world away from the well known scientific fact that breast is best. In Nestle's defence breast milk may not be best in the developing world as the Mother's may not be able to produce nutritious milk as they do not receive the nutrients themselves.
Activists also argue that the free samples of the formulas given to the hospitals is an immoral marketing technique used to make the company look charitable but which has led to the death of many babies. The infant soon becomes dependent on the formula which requires the Mother to purchase more. Mothers in the third world cannot afford to buy the required dosage and so dilute the formula, often with contaminated water to non-nutritious levels.
Nestle deny that they are marketing the formula unethically. They sued their activists, winning the court case on the basis that they were complying to the infant formula marketing code adopted by the World Health Organisation (WHO). However, this code is said to eliminate almost all unethical marketing in adverts, promotions, samples and direct contact with consumers. From the activist's arguments above it seems that Nestle have not eliminated any of these in their practices which is one of the reasons the controversy continues. This particular code is only a set of recommended guidelines, which do not become compulsory unless the government adopts it as a national code. In this case it might be that the governments of these third world countries have not implemented such codes allowing Nestle to practise unethically without legal constraints.
With respect to the numerous deaths caused by diluting the formula, activists have published pamphlets entitiled, 'Nestle Kills Babies' (Kotler et al.) and produced statistics showing that up to '4000' (Kotler et al.) babies a day die from unsafe bottle feeding. Nestle argue that the formula is designed to 'Save a child's life' (Kotler et al) and that it 'is the only processed foodstuff that wholly satisfies the nutritional requirements of infants' first four to six months of life' (Kotler at al). They claim on their current webpage that they are in agreeance that 'Breast is best' and that their product is designed solely for babies who cannot be breast fed due to health problems relating to their Mothers or those who are abandoned at birth.
Activists would dispute this, arguing that it is the way the formula is used and diluted that kills the babies rather than the formula itself and that if the formula was designed solely for infants whose Mother's cannot breast feed, why the need to market breast feeding in an unpopular light?
Nestle remain convinced that if they were to withdraw their supplies completely it would cause more harm than good. A study on the Ivory coast showed that withdrawal of the formula led to hospitals not being able to afford to buy enough to feed abandoned babies or those whose Mother's were ill.
Activists argue that Nestle is exploiting third world countries to boost its profit margins. However, the third world infant formula market is a tiny proportion of Nestle's product range, being the world's largest food company so it is unlikely that profit is their main objective. Nestle have been repetitively attacked by activists and have received a lot of bad PR on this issue which they could have easily put an end to by withdrawing their free supplies of infant formula and restoring their public image. However, their decision and determination to continue supplying the formula perhaps reveals that their real objective is as they claim, 'to save a child's life'. (Kotler et al)
It could be argued that the governments should set the guidelines for ethical standards because they have the money and resources to research and advise the population generically through codes of practise and labelling regulations. They have the authority to imply rules that would benefit the country as a whole.
Consumers, on the other hand might argue that the government should not have full power in implementing such guidelines and that individuals should be free to make their own choice as to whether something is unethical. A compromise which often takes place is that the government works together with organisations such as WHO and UNESCO to provide guidelines for the consumer so that they are then able to make an informed personal choice. An example of this is smoking. In the UK the government have provided the population with the facts about how smoking damages your health, have imposed strict regulations on advertisements related to smoking and have made it clear they it is not advisable. However, the decision is left largely to the educated consumer. Some would argue that the government should be able to impose stricter regulations, for example an outright ban on smoking to stop people harming themselves and to save economically on the NHS, while others feel that in a democratic country the consumer has the right to buy what they want even if it is bad for them.
This compromise is not always favourable. In less economically developed countries governments do not possess the resources and financial backing to research unethical issues and so cannot provide their citizens with the level of education needed for them to be able to make their own informed decisions. In the case of Nestle the WHO code of practise is only compulsory in countries where it has been adopted as a national code by the government. It does not therefore apply in the third world countries as they do not possess the knowledge of such codes. This leaves the market in these less-economically-developed-countries open to exploitation through its ignorance. The population are insufficiently educated to make an informed choice about purchasing the infant milk formula and largely unaware of the advantages of breast milk that are so widely accepted in more economically developed countries such as the UK. They are therefore manipulated by Nestle's persuasive advertising encouraging them against using their own resources of breast milk which would not cost them anything, to using formula milk that is expensive and requires sanitation that they do not have.
From this case it seems that the question of who sets the ethical standards depends on the economic status of the country and its level of education, which usually go hand in hand.
In MEDC's setting ethical guidelines can be left mainly to the well educated market which can make decisions based on advice proposed by the government and well known organisations. Whereas, in LEDC's the government cannot provide this advice and so ethical standards need to be regulated by worldwide organisations that can reach out to those countries, work with their governments and implement stronger rules that prevent the population being exploited. The rules in these countries need to be more compulsory to protect its under educated, vulnerable community.
'We won the legal case, but it was a public relations disaster'. (Kotler et al.) This comment from a Nestle executive summarises the argument on whether the company benefited from confronting the activists directly.
The British charity War on want criticised Nestle's marketing amongst other IFM's in their pamphlet entitled 'The baby killer' (Kotler et al.) in 1974. A German based third world action group took this further publishing, 'Nestle Kills babies' (Kotler et al.) a pamphlet focused on Nestle actions that they consider to be unethical.
Nestle took their activists to court. They won the legal battle which managed to convince some people that there were not in fact breaking any rules but it was not long before controversy was reiterated and new activists launched further boycotts against the company. These were eventually called off in 1984 when Nestle agreed to abide by the World Health Organization's International Code of Marketing of Breast-Milk Substitutes. However, activists soon recognised that Nestle were not in fact abiding by the code and the boycott was re-launched in 1988, continuing today.
It could be argued that Nestle benefited from confronting its activists in court by convincing some people that that they did not have any unethical practices to be ashamed of and that their real objective is 'to save a child's life'. (Kotler et al)
However, the two year court case generated a largely unwelcoming public image for the company with a far larger proportion of people adopting an unfavourable view. Nestle was soon scrutinised in every area and new claims of unethical behaviour arose.
'Corporate watch' a not-for-profit research and publishing group conduct research on the social and environmental impact of large corporations, particularly multinationals. They have found that there is much more to Nestle than the baby milk issue. The company has been criticised for using genetically modified ingredients, purchasing coffee from areas that have been found to involve child slavery and voting against vaccinating livestock during the foot and mouth outbreak. Nestle have also faced accusations of destroying Brazilian environments, intimidating Colombian trade unionists, demanding millions of pounds in compensation from Ethiopia and appearing to be charitable in donations to breast cancer charities. Corporate watch claim that 'Nestle is easily one of the world's most hated companies' (Corporate watch). This public image, however, could have been more severe if Nestle had not confronted its activists as people would be more inclined to think that the company has something to hide.
In general, the question of whether firms should confront their activists or withdraw from the market depends on the circumstances. In the case of Nestle some would argue that the company should withdraw its supplies from the infant formula market because of justified claims from pressure groups asserting that its unethical practices are exploiting the third world and that the World Health Organization's International Code of Marketing of Breast-Milk Substitutes is clearly not being adhered to. From a corporate perspective this would also give Nestle the chance to begin to build back a promising public image. However, as discussed in question one, the company feels that the effects of withdrawing its free supplies to abandoned babies and Mother's with poor health would have detrimental effects. Their determination to some extent overrides their unethical behaviour.
If activists actions are justified it could be argued that firms should withdraw from the market because they are acting unethically. However, a far better alternative would be to adopt a code of practise which satisfies activists and banishes the need to withdraw supplies. Nestle should therefore adopt the WHO's code of practise ruthlessly in every country as a minimum standard as it claims to do on its website.
Prescription drug companies have also attracted criticism for unethical marketing.
In 1997 the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued a special 'guidance' allowing pharmaceutical companies to market prescription drugs directly to consumers. Before this, advertisements of such drugs appeared only in medical journals published for the use of health professionals.
Activists claim that the pharmaceutical companies see this as a profit making opportunity and have invested in unethical advertising that overstates the benefits of the drugs and downplays the associated risks.
AstraZeneca pharmaceutical company market the tamoxifen drug (under the brand name Nolvadex) as a 'risk reduction' (J Norsigian) for breast cancer. The drug is proven to be beneficial in treating certain types of hormone dependent breast cancer but activists argue that its misleading slogans, implying that the drug can prevent any type of breast cancer, are deliberately designed to target a much wider market.
The FDA has reacted to this by sending out letters requiring companies to withdraw their adverts.
However, pharmaceutical companies have recently gained the right to promote off-label uses of the drug without any constraints from the FDA. Activists fear this will exasperate the problem of misleading promotions.
In response to these problems a group of women activists 'Prevention first' plan to launch a campaign to alert the general public and encourage greater caution towards such highly advertised drugs. A media campaign may generate the necessary public pressure to influence more authoritative organisations that a code of practise is needed to eliminate unethical behaviour.