The food industry has been criticised for the increase in obesity in the UK. Consumers argue that labelling on foods is misleading and that marketing ploys are used to trick them into buying unhealthy products. While these may be valid points, and perhaps we are occasionally tempted by the aptly placed confectionery selection at the till, personal responsibility and consumer choice cannot be rendered blameless.
In the following essay I intend to explore the extent to which the food industry can be blamed for the increase in obesity in the UK taking into account the changing lifestyle of the consumer.
Obesity in England has tripled over the last 20 years and continues to rise. Most adults are overweight and one in five is obese. Treating obesity costs the NHS at least half a billion pounds a year. It is associated with an increased risk of heart disease, high blood pressure, diabetes and respiratory problems and contributed to 30,000 premature deaths in 1998. It is a serious problem for which the concern to pinpoint the cause is understandable.
Obesity can be caused in a number of ways. Psychologically a person might eat in response to emotions such as boredom, sadness or anger. Physiologically, the hypothalamus gland in the brain regulates our appetite and if damaged can cause over-eating. Genetic links have been found but it is very difficult to separate genetic factors from environmental ones, as families often not only share genes but also diet and lifestyle habits.
While there is evidence to suggest psychological, physiological, genetic, hormonal and drug-related causes of obesity, the most influential cause in the UK today is environmental. This is the lifestyle led, the amount of food consumed and the level of physical activity undertaken.
The food industry obviously has an influence on consumer choices but is it solely to blame for this modern crisis?
Consumers remain confused by misleading health claims such as 90% fat free products that are in fact no healthier as instead of fat they are packed full of sugar to enhance the taste. The Food Standards Agency is currently pressing for legally binding EU standards on nutrition claims and clear nutrition labelling on all foods. However, in this instance it could be argued that it is the consumer who is to blame. The food industry is required by law to state the correct nutritional content of food products, so if the consumer was so concerned about eating less calories then perhaps they should have looked more carefully at the label.
The food industry is also blamed for targeting children with advertising campaigns that promote foods high in fat, sugar and salt. MacDonald's is a prime example. Happy meals are used to market burgers and chips (both full of fat and salt) as a fun meal for children. Each child receives a free gift in their happy meal. These are often part of a set which the child will want to complete and so Mum and Dad are likely to be persuaded to take their child there again.
The Food Standards Agency recognises these problems and plans to work with consumers and the industry to develop a new code of practise on the promotion of foods to children. MacDonald's has recently made an attempt to rectify the problem with the introduction of healthier options such as the salad range.
Marketing ploys like this are also common in supermarkets. BOGOF (Buy one get one free) offers are more likely to be on multipacks of crisps and chocolate than fruit and vegetables. Unhealthy snack foods are displayed at the tills and commodities such as bread and milk are often shelved at the back of the store to encourage the customer to buy other items that they see on route.
This may be a fault of the food industry but we as the consumers cannot be considered passive to marketing. Adverts may make a marginal difference but we cannot ignore personal responsibility and consumer choice. It is also important to remember that the food industry is governed by consumer demand.
A survey published in the British Medical Journal in January 2001, measured the body mass index of thousands of boys and girls in England and Scotland, aged between four and eleven. The first measurements were taken in 1974, then different children were measured in 1984 and more in 1994. The results showed that the proportion of overweight or obese children remained steady between 1974 and 1984, but increased dramatically between 1984 and 1994. 5% of English boys tested in 1984 were overweight, this figure increasing to 9% in 1994.
This is significant because there have been many changes in the last 20 years which have changed consumer lifestyles, dictated consumer choice and therefore affected the increase in obesity levels.
The last 20 years have seen various technological and economic developments leading the UK into a cash-rich, time scarce community where consumers are demanding food stuffs that are quick and easy to cook.
Our rising real income levels allow us to pay extra for the added service which is why eating out and take-away meals are also increasing in popularity.
As a society, we are moving away from generalised feeding. Families rarely have time to eat three times a day together anymore, but are more likely to graze on snacks throughout the day. Snack foods have many advantages in a time scarce society as they do not require any special storage or preparation and can be eaten on the go, but are often full of salt, fat and sugar and contribute considerably to weight gain.
Working hours in the UK are amongst the highest in Europe with 1.5 million men working more than 60 hours a week. Less time at home means that convenience foods such as ready meals, pre-prepared food and snacks are becoming increasingly popular. These foods are again full of additives, salt, fat and sugar.
The modern lifestyle as a whole not only encourages snacking on unhealthy foods but also sanctions a distinct lack of exercise.
Occupations are far less physically demanding than 20 years ago as we have seen industry move from manufacturing to the tertiary sector. Information technology has become fundamental for most businesses therefore more and more people are sat stationary at a desk for most of the day.
People have less free time due to longer working hours so technology has been used to develop strategies to make life easier. These strategies however, are often labour saving and therefore exasperate the problem of obesity. For example, Internet shopping means people need not even leave their home to do the weekly shop.
Three quarters of households own cars and with this number increasing, fewer people are choosing to walk or cycle, therefore less and less calories are being used up.
Professor Andrew Rugg-Gunn of the Human Nutrition Research centre at the Royal Victoria Infirmary in Newcastle carried out his own diet surveys of 12 year olds and found that although too much of their energy was coming from fat, the children's energy intake did not increase between 1980 and 1990, but their energy output decreased. "In short they are not doing as much exercise as they should".
In conclusion, the food industry cannot be solely blamed for the increase in obesity in the UK. The increase in obesity has occurred due to a combination of bad diet and lack of exercise. Clearer labelling on products and less unhealthy marketing ploys may be needed to help get society back on track but the essence of the problem lies in consumer choice.
Consumer lifestyle changes are mostly to blame for the increase in obesity. Technological and economic development have changed the way people live their lives and therefore dictated the types of foods demanded and amount of exercise taken.
Obesity is now known as the disease of the affluent societies and appears to grow hand in hand with economic development.
Levels are increasing in Mediterranean countries due to globalisation, westernisation and trade despite their initial diet, famous world-wide for being healthy.
In order to reduce levels of obesity the government needs to create an educated population that understands the reasons for the recent increase, alongside the implementation of clearer labelling and reduced levels of fat, salt and sugar in particular food products.