The aim of the following project is to discover what is currently required for a UK food retailer to be successful.
It will include an exploration of the strategies and techniques employed by Tesco that have led to their recent prosperity.
Tesco assumed the position of leading food retailer from Sainsbury in the mid 1990's (Anon, retail property website) and have since continued to dominate the oligopoly, this year on course to make a record 2 billion pound in profits (BBC1 News) with sales up more than 7.5% on last years. The company currently operates more than 1,878 stores in the UK with a further 81 opening this year (BBC News). Tesco has branched out to provide a range of services from financial to telecom, now also the UK's leading online retailer.
Within the food retailing oligopoly, competition is strong and strategic. Stores look to each other for guidance and often try to predict their competitors' plans. It is therefore important to bare in mind that the recent success of Tesco is relative to its competitors, meaning that it may not only have come about due to its own improvements but also due to opponents downfalls, for example Sainsbury who have suffered greatly in the last few years.
In order to address this aim the following objectives will be answered:
Who are the leading retail chains?
How marketing strategies differ between stores and the extent to which the most successful have aided in Tesco's recent prosperity.
How e-retailing schemes differ between stores and whether this has had a profound affect in Tesco's dominance.
Perhaps the most fundamental aspect of any company is understanding the nature and needs of their customers. The 'Marketing mix' (Borden 1964, cited in Brassington and Pettitt, 2000, p.23-28) is used to illustrate how this can be put into practise effectively.
The marketing mix consists of four major marketing tools; product, price, promotion and place.
A successful product in the food retailing industry requires initial innovation, effective management, continual differentiation from competitors, attractive packaging and clear benefits.
It would be very difficult to compare and contrast all products from different retailers; however, stores own brand ranges are designed to reflect the company's core values so would provide a representative comparison.
The companies that produce own-brand products for the supermarkets have very low overheads so the retailers can afford to keep prices low and still make a profit. Therefore own branding is a good investment both for retailers and customers.
Tesco own brand range cleverly targets a wide range of differing needs with its contrasting slogans, 'Tesco value' and 'Tesco's finest'. Both are cheap, have distinctive packaging and target appropriate consumers.
Asda own brand range follows the store's famous 'Asda price' slogan with very low prices reflected in the packaging which is kept minimal but sufficient enough to prevent damage to the product. The packaging is very plain, usually white or transparent to save costs. This can have two affects on the consumer. From one perspective the customer could see the product as diminished in quality due to the low price and unattractive packaging, or on the other hand, the minimal cost packaging may serve the purpose of the low price therefore not affecting the quality of the product itself.
Waitrose own brand range is typically much more expensive than its competitors but is thought to be of exclusive quality which gives differentiation to the brand. Packaging tends to be much more elaborate and eye catching, and to those who can afford the premium prices, very appealing. Perhaps one of the reasons why Waitrose is not as successful as Tesco is because only a small market is targeted. John Lewis who own Waitrose have their own farms where all their food is grown. This exclusive practise provides assured quality and traceability increasing customer loyalty but only to those who can afford it.
Sainsbury own brand features somewhere in the middle of these two extremes. Like Tesco, Sainsbury also attempts to target a wider market with its 'Be good to yourself range' alongside Sainsbury's own products. This range creates differentiation for the company and is very much in tune with consumers' lifestyles. The packaging is attractive, promoting quality and healthy living, both very appealing to a section of the population. Sainsbury's own products on the other hand take the same characteristics as Tesco value and Asdas 'smart price' range but at a slightly higher price.
From the above analysis it seems that Tesco and Sainsbury have the most effective product ranges in recognising that there are different types of consumers to be targeted using separate techniques. This fundamental aspect of marketing is known as segmentation. Consumers differ in their needs and wants for a product or service and as it would be impractical, impossible and too expensive to custom make products for each individual in the market, consumers are split into groups with similar needs and attitudes. A profile of this particular group is created and they are then targeted with specific messages relevant to their requirements.
In 2002 Sainsbury analysed their customer segments based on reward card data. They sectioned their customers into the following groups and subgroups:
The information gained from the reward cards allows Sainsbury to identify the growing segments in the market (which ones have brought them the most profit) and adjust their stocks, products and promotions to more specifically target these people.
In the food retailing oligopoly the retailers have a slight monopoly over the manufacturers in that they have the power to set the market price of goods. Consumer perception has to be thought about in the pricing of goods. A low price can be perceived as poor quality while a high price could be undercut by competitors wanting to steal market share. Most low cost retailers such as Asda and Tesco set low prices but avoid the association of diminished quality by offering discounts on bulk buys only, so the consumer will then think that the lower price is due to bulk purchasing and no longer associate it with the quality of the product.
The above table shows Tesco's prices to be the lowest in the market. They are very similar to Asda's with 5750 items at the same price but considerably cheaper than Sainsbury which has 4812 items at a higher price. Morrisons has the most items at a cheaper rate than Tesco relative to the other stores but the majority of its products (2791) are more expensive than Tesco's.
The actual differences in these prices, however, are not given by this table so it is difficult to gauge how much cheaper the products are. In most cases as with the example below the differences are minimal but if consistent throughout a store can contribute to a considerable saving on a weekly shop.
Tesco is proud of its low prices and claims to '...create value for customers to earn their lifetime loyalty' (Sir Terry Leahy, Tesco Chief Executive)
Customers tend to be regular in what they purchase but can be influenced by special offer programmes such as BOGOF (buy one get one free) and seasonal events.
BOGOF is a key marketing tool used to increase spend by encouraging repeat purchasing as people rarely store away one item from this sort of promotion. High value BOGOF promotions can therefore result in 900% increases in sales. (Richard Hopkins, manager of Sainsbury's Winnersh branch)
Manufacturers and consumers alike rely on the retailer to promote products, maintain stocks and provide a fulfilling shopping experience. Much of this depends on store location, layout, image and ambience.
'Cutting costs doesn't have to mean cutting corners when it comes to store design' according to the team at Tesco (Anon retail property website). Tesco believes that the needs of its customers are far more important than awards for store design. However, it recognises the essential factors of a successful store as simple, easy to navigate, clean and uncluttered. This no-frills approach cleverly reinforces the 'Tesco value' philosophy.
However, as with price, one of the dangers associated with economical endeavours is that consumers use it as an indicator of quality. Tesco have recognised this factor, managing to reduce the costs of building new stores by 25%, while constructing some of the most innovative and attractive shops in the sector.
A new 60,000 square foot 'store on stilts'(Anon retail property website) set to open in Altrincham, Greater Manchester this winter, demonstrates Tesco's commitment to keeping low costs without compromising on quality. The store is designed to stand on stilts above the ground in order to accommodate a car park underneath.
The novel idea provides differentiation for Tesco against other competitors, while incorporating many of the company's key values:
(Sir Terry Leahy, Tesco Chief Executive, Tesco.com)
The design is economical both in terms of the saving in costs for Tesco and the saving on land environmentally. The practical principles behind the design are clearly in tune with changing customers' needs. In a money-rich, time-scare community customers seek convenience and efficiency. This new store will reduce the distance that customers have to walk to their cars and save them getting wet if it is raining therefore providing a unique and pleasant shopping experience.
Tesco is thought to have led the new face of modern supermarkets with the introduction of its glass fronted, steel buildings creating a more modern, open feel.
Kevin Pleass, the company's operations director of property services believes initial innovation and differentiation in the market to be the key to Tesco's success, '...we have a history of doing things first and that is what has set us apart from the competition and made us number one. '(Kevin Pleass, retail property website)
Having looked at all four areas of the marketing mix it is important to remember that although some stores may have the comparative advantage over others in certain areas, the key to a successful retailer is an effective combination of these elements. (Brassingtonal. 2000)
Kevin Pleass, Tesco's operations director of property services demonstrates how he thinks the company has an effective combination of these elements, '...by having no queues at the checkout, having products for sale at whatever time somebody shops, making it easy to navigate around the store and making it easy to park. These are the important things. '(Kevin Pleass, retail property website)
Aside from the marketing mix which provides the basis for the stores' operations, other, more quantifiable aspects can be compared to help explain Tesco's dominance.
Tesco operates on a 24 hour basis. Despite little or no profit being made during these extra opening hours Tesco's theory is that it does not cost much more to have a couple of people on the checkouts and therefore be able to provide a service which is valued by customers. This sort of endeavour, also practised by Asda, builds considerable customer loyalty and is where Sainsbury in particular, with trading hours from 7am - 10pm, loses out. 1
Sainsbury believe in stocking a wide range of brand types to give their customers plenty of choice. Tesco and Asda, on the other hand, have a smaller range which allows them to have more of those particular products and therefore rarely go out of stock.1
Sainsbury ensure that the majority of their stock is received in store within 48 hours of ordering while Tesco and Asda efficiently run to 12 and 24 hour schedules. 1
When Sainsbury owned Homebase they introduced a loyalty card that could be used in both stores. Tesco recognised that this idea boosted customer return and brought out their own 'clubcard'. When this was launched Sainsbury lost customers overnight. Sainsbury also made a mistake when they decided to stop using airmiles in conjunction with their reward cards. Many customers reverted to other supermarkets in search of recognition for their purchasing.
Sainsbury have now introduced the 'Nectar card' which can be used to collect points at a number of outlets and redeemed in the form of money off purchases, day trips and holidays depending on the number of points collected. The idea came from Canada and is said to be very expensive to operate. 1
Tesco, however, is winning in terms of customer loyalty. With over 10 million members and generating more than 100 million incremental sales every year, 'the Tesco club card is the world's most successful loyalty scheme' (Humby C and Hunt T, 2003)
Tesco has recently become the UK's leading online retailer due to the innovative use of web services and XML technology.
Jon Higgins, head of e-commerce development at Tesco.com believes that "Using existing strengths, such as IT infrastructure, was one of the most important factors behind our success," (Daniel Thomas, 2003, computer weekely.com).
UK shoppers buy their groceries online more than any other country with Tesco accounting for half of the purchases. (Datamonitor cited in Caroline Gilmour computerbuyer news 2001).
The figures below in '000,000 show the value of food sold online in the year 2000 for the top four retailers. The extent of Tesco's lead in the e-commerce sector is very apparent:
Tesco's approach to online shopping differs to Sainsbury's for example.
Tesco deliver the products from their stores to online customers whereas Sainsbury have separate warehouses where the items are collected. Tesco's approach is more cost effective in terms of savings on land space, while it is also probably easier to administer due to in store labelling and promotions.
According to an article in the Guardian, Tesco is, this year, to become the largest convenience store operator. Accounting for 5% of neighbourhood retailing last year behind the coop at 5.5%, Spar at 5.4% and Budgens at 5.3 %( verdict report cited in The Guardian, David Winning and PA, February 2005) Tesco is more than likely to exceed its rivals having experienced a market share rise of 1% in 2004.
Tesco also has a strong partnership with Esso petrol stations while Sainsbury is in partnership with Shell. These convenience stores fit in with modern consumers' lifestyles in our cash rich, time scarce society serving to increase customer loyalty.
(Tesco's and Sainsbury's annual reports  and  )
From the above table, Tesco's success is very clear, with a particularly large difference between figures occurring in the last two years with Tesco's investment in hundreds of new stores and Sainsbury's supply-chain breakdown.
The chairman of Sainsbury claims that the '...sheer amount of change in the business clearly distracted us from delivering as good a service as we should'. The drop in profits is claimed to be due to the introduction of the business transformation programme in October 2000, the scale of the changes involved, the associated disruption and the weakening of the dollar. Tesco, however, managed far more extensive investments while generating record profits.
An enormous contributing factor to recent profits, particularly for Tesco and Asda has been the expansion of the non-food sector. The revenue gained from this is typically reinvested allowing food prices to stay low. Recent developments include:
Referring back to my initial aims and objectives, it cannot be concluded that any one aspect has led to Tesco's success but that each of the following factors have played an essential role in creating the winning combination needed:
Tesco has expanded its range of non-food merchandise to keep the lowest food prices in the market.
Tesco strike the right balance between prices and quality - demonstrated in their products and store designs
Inefficient supply chain management from Sainsbury left Tesco to pick up extra market share
Tesco is in tune with its changing customers needs - demonstrated in all of its endeavours which reflect the company's core values, examples include; becoming the largest convenience store operator, no. 1 online retailer and providing a 24 hour service.
This last point is perhaps the most important, particularly for the future of the company as the current retail oligopoly is driven by the consumer.
Further quantifiable research is needed to ascertain the suggestions made in this project. A more in depth study of Sainsbury's and other competitor's downfalls would help to provide an idea of Tesco's success relative to its environment.
Perhaps a section on the oligopoly hierarchy, how it has changed over time and the outlook for the future.
It would also be interesting to extend this project to an international level as from the research conducted it is apparent that globalisation is also an area that has aided in Tesco's dominance.