Using official statistics the following project attempts to determine establish of wheat, barley and rice for the year 2000.
From the data it is clear that the area and yield of wheat harvested in the UK in 2000 was larger than the area and yield of barley harvested. The UK may produce more wheat than Barley due to more products in our modern diets having a wheat basis, for example cereal foods, biscuits, pasta. UK climatic features may also influence the yields produced.
The above data shows that wheat was imported in the largest quantities, followed by rice. Taking into account UK production levels, this suggests that wheat is in higher demand than Barley and perhaps rice (although no data exists for UK production of rice) as the volume produced and imported is much higher.
The six main exporters of these products overall appear to be North and Central America, France, Europe, Oceania, Australia and Canada. The majority of these countries were well economically established in 2000, therefore had the facilities and technology to aid mass production and exportation. They also have the appropriate climate needed to produce wheat, barley and rice.
There is no official data stating the average UK consumption per head of wheat, barley and rice.
However, there is data available on the consumption of breakfast cereals, buns, scones, cakes, biscuits and fresh pastries, all of which to a certain extent are produced from wheat or barley.
Patterns in consumption of these food products have evolved over time. People in today's world are turning towards ready meals and pre-prepared products because they fit in with the modern lifestyle:
Improved education systems and increased affluence in this day and age
means more people can afford to study at university
therefore an increasing number are taking on high-powered jobs.
Career paths mean increased salaries
but often involve long hours
so more and more people are making use of convenience foods such as ready meals that need minimal preparation.
They do not have the time to prepare their own dinners and can afford this luxury.
These evolving lifestyles explain the following patterns in consumer behaviour:
Between 1975 and 2000 purchases of flour fell by 65%, purchases of cake mixes also fell. Many people no longer have the time to make cakes, and with the increase in convenience food services it is easier to buy them. There is an enhanced variety to choose from and people can afford them.
Over the last 25 years consumption of cereal as a convenience food has risen rapidly.
The price of rice has fallen and consumption has risen due to greater availability from take-away outlets.