Obesity has fast become an epidemic in the UK with the number of cases trebling over the last 20 years. Today nearly two thirds of men and over half of women in the UK are overweight or obese. 2 Obesity is linked to many forms of life-threatening illnesses, the most prevalent being coronary heart disease, type two diabetes, osteoarthritis, cancer and high blood pressure. The seriousness of these illnesses suggests that obesity poses a substantial burden on the economy. This is confirmed in the NAO's estimates in 1998 where obesity was responsible for 18 million days of sickness and 30,000 deaths over the year. Costs to the NHS were estimated at 1/2 billion with wider costs to the economy due to the loss of labour at 2 billion. 1 These figures may not seem extortionate but it is important to bear in mind that the obese population is still young and so the effects on the economy are likely to be more profound in twenty years time. 1
Introducing a value added tax on fat is one of many suggestions designed to curve obesity levels, addressing the issue by attempting to reduce the amount of fat in people's diets through increasing the price of foods containing high levels of saturated fats. Examples of these foods include; full fat milk, cheese, butter, biscuits, buns, pastries and ice-cream. 3
VAT is a tax levied at each stage of production and distribution where value is added to the good or service. Registered firms pay VAT when buying from suppliers (input tax) and charge VAT when selling to customers (output tax). The net VAT (the difference between the input and output taxes) is paid to customs and excise while the end consumer pays the full amount of the tax. 2*
The British Medical Journal recently claimed that such a tax could help prevent 1,000 premature deaths from heart disease a year in the UK. 3* It is based on the theory that consumers will chose to buy the cheaper, lower fat alternatives which will improve their health, in turn reducing NHS costs and creating a stronger labour force, with the end result of strengthening the economy. It could however, be argued that a larger percentage of people who die from obesity are approaching retirement age which means that the economy does not lose out in terms of productivity but actually gains from not having to grant pensions. 1
Food is generally exempt from VAT because it is an essential commodity; however, EU policies, particularly the CAP (Common Agricultural Policy) have impacted on food prices.
Between 1947 and 1973 a deficiency payments policy was used to support the UK's agricultural sector. 4 Designed to increase farmers' incomes, it involved the government setting guaranteed prices to farmers (above world market prices) for their goods. If the price of the good fell short of the market price then the difference would be made up to the farmer. In terms of influencing consumer choice the deficiency payments policy has the effect of pushing up food prices and therefore reducing consumer surplus. (See fig 1.) Other effects of the policy can also be seen and are later discussed.
In 1973 the UK joined the EC which practices the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), a different system used to support farmers. 4 CAP uses variable import levies (a tax on imports from outside the EU) and subsidises exports from the EU in order to protect UK farmers from foreign competition by raising the EU domestic price above world market price. This means that EU consumers pay much higher prices for commodities than the rest of the world, examples include European Dairy and meat products which are twice the global market price and European sugar costing 3 times as much 1.
In the beginning, the CAP introduced subsidies to encourage the production of specific goods in order to help secure availability of supplies. These goods included sugar, dairy products and meat. Geoffrey Cannon argued, in a statement published in The Sunday Telegraph in June 1990, that the systems of agricultural subsidy introduced by the CAP 'have made fatty, sugary, chemicalised food artificially cheap. ' 5 Admittedly, healthier foods such as fresh fruit and vegetables were not given the same support from the CAP but this actually meant that the price of these goods remained low. In contrast the prices of sugary, fatty foods were pushed up, for example butter became more expensive relative to margarine. 5
So from a health perspective the CAP could be considered advantageous. It could be argued that without the CAP, foods high in saturated fats would be cheaper and therefore encourage unhealthy eating. However, if there was no CAP the world market price would move up to meet the falling domestic market prices resulting in a still higher than equilibrium price so this outcome is unlikely.
Current amendments in the CAP such as the Fischler reform are beginning to bring the price of goods such as butter down but it is unlikely that they will be reduced significantly enough to become cheaper relative to healthier alternatives. 5
Introducing a VAT on foods containing high levels of saturated fats is likely to lead to a fall in supply of these goods and a consequent reduction in the quantity demanded. In other words the size of the market for the goods will shrink. 6 In order to determine whether the reduction in demand is significant in terms of influencing consumer choice we need to look at the elasticity of demand for high fat foods. Most fatty foods such as milk and cheese are considered necessities (or close to) for which it is assumed consumers would have an inelastic demand. The British Heart Foundation confirms this assertion, recently stating "...acknowledging that people largely enjoy foods that are high in fat is vital, as few people would seriously consider avoiding these foods altogether." 7
Economists believe that when the price of a good rises, consumers will substitute towards the relatively cheaper alternatives (the substitution effect). 8 This, however, works on the assumption that consumers are initially indifferent between the goods. Consumers are clearly not indifferent between fatty foods and non-fatty foods and so the substitution effect is only present to a certain extent.
Despite having insinuated that these particular goods are near necessities, a consumer's response to the increase in price will still depend slightly on their individual income elasticises of demand.
The tax will have a greater impact on low income families because they spend a larger proportion of their income on food than rich people so are more sensitive to price changes. 6* Poorer people are likely to be forced into substituting fatty foods for cheaper alternatives. From an equity point of view it is unfair that the tax bears down more heavily on low income families. Proposals have been made to compensate for this imbalance, for example diverting some of the VAT revenue generated into low-income benefits. This however, results in restoring the poor people's spending power in which case they are likely to buy exactly the same bundles of food that they were consuming in the first place. It also ignores those on low incomes but not poor enough to be claiming benefits.
At the other end of the spectrum are the high income consumers who, generally speaking, have high standards of living and are interested in maintaining their long term health in order to enjoy their status, but who equally can afford to choose not to adjust their purchases regardless of the increase in prices. 6*
Poor people who may be struggling to survive on a day-to-day basis and may therefore be less concerned with long term health issues may well view fatty foods as a huge comfort in such a desperate environment in which case a price increase is unlikely to deter consumption. 6* This scenario is demonstrated in the case of cigarettes. Despite rising taxes on tobacco, smoking remains more prevalent amongst the less affluent. 7*
The purpose of introducing a VAT on fat is to influence consumer choice. Consumer surplus will inevitably fall as a result but so too will producer surplus. Which one bares the burden of the tax will depend on the elasticity of both supply and demand.
The tax burden will fall on side of market that is less elastic. In this scenario both supply and demand are relatively inelastic for the same reasons therefore it is fair to assume that the impact of the tax is likely to be spread fairly equally between producers and consumers. This suggests that the tax will have to be substantially high in order to have any impact on consumer choice, which again raises the equity issue, as the poor would be the hardest hit.
As in the case of VIL and DP schemes, creating a binding price floor for a good creates a surplus of the good 10 (see figure 1 page 2). The price increase of goods as a result of the CAP led to huge surpluses which became known as wine lakes and grain mountains. The EU responded to this problem in a variety of ways; from selling wheat mountains to third world countries at very low prices, selling it back to farmers to feed animals, offering it at reduced prices to those in need within the EU, destroying the produce and introducing quotas to limit the amounts of milk and dairy produce. 8* A VAT on fat is also likely to result in a surplus, this time of fatty foods, which may then lead to the introduction of quotas on production of these goods and perhaps government intervention to buy up the excess supply.
Having seen the likely impact that a VAT on fat will have on food choice and diet, the tax can now be assessed in terms of whether it will effectively meet the objective of reducing obesity levels.
If it were assumed that the tax would influence consumer spending, despite the contrary being more probable, substitutions between foods faced by low income families as a result of the tax might reduce a consumer's fat intake, lowering their risk of obesity related diseases but at the same time could pose other health risks such as malnutrition. For example consumers may be forced to substitute full fat milk for skimmed milk which contains considerably less of vitamins A and D. They are fat soluble vitamins so are removed with the fat. None the less they are essential vitamins for healthy vision, teeth and bones. 10*
These families may also be forced to buy other unhealthier alternatives, for example Ice-creams that contain less fat often include more sugar. Sugar is stored as fat if it is not burned off by the consumer and can also lead to other health problems, so whether the VAT will actually save on NHS costs or help to reduce obesity levels is negligible.
Recent research has shown that even consumers that are likely to switch to lower fat alternatives in at least some products tend to eat higher quantities of food to compensate so that they end up taking on board the same levels of fat anyway 9, so again the impact of the tax on tackling the problem of obesity is questionable.
A vat on fat assumes that obesity is caused purely by the amount of fat people consume. This is not the case. Despite the recent rise in obesity levels, The National Health Survey shows that fat consumption in the UK has actually fallen. Consumption of butter per week in 1965 was 173g but only 39g in 2003. Total fat consumption follows the same pattern, falling from 339g per person per week in 1970 to 186g in 2003. 11The British heart foundation also highlights the relative innocence of fat as a sole cause of obesity; "Individual foods that are high in fat, eaten occasionally, within the context of a balanced diet that is low in overall fat should not pose a health risk for the majority of people."
12
There is much debate over the causes of obesity in the UK today, with evidence to suggest psychological, physiological, genetic, hormonal, drug-related and environmental links which together highlight the need for a multidisciplinary approach in targeting the problem.
In summary, the introduction of a VAT on foods high in saturated fats is not likely to impact on consumer's food choices and diet sufficiently to reduce obesity levels and their costs to the economy due to the UK's relatively inelastic demand for fatty foods and the limitations of the policy with regard to the wider causes of the epidemic.