C. B. MacPherson's Political Origins of Possessive Individualism was published in 1962 and has caused great controversy. The book set up a model of a fully competitive market society and examined, with its aid, the political theory of Hobbes, the Levellers, Harrington and Locke. This essay will concentrate on the thesis it proposed on the Levellers and their position regarding franchise reform in the seventeenth-century. MacPherson's thesis has resulted in a lively debate between himself, supported by Christopher Hill, on the one hand, and J. C. Davis, Peter Laslett, A. L. Morton and Keith Thomas, on the other, although many other historians have made valuable contributions. MacPherson essentially argues that the Levellers 'always intended... a franchise excluding servants and alms-takers; and that they saw no inconsistency between this exclusion and their assertion of the natural right of every man to a vote, because of certain assumptions they made about the nature of freedom'. The greatest criticism of this thesis has been directed at MacPherson's definition of the term servant, which he argues encompassed all wage-earners. Objections have also been raised concerning the use of statements made by Maximillian Petty at the Putney Debates and the inferences made therein, the interpretation of what the Levellers meant by alms-takers and the use of statistics from Gregory King's Natural and Political Observations and Conclusions upon the State and Condition of England. In 1973 MacPherson replied to his critics in Democratic Theory: Essays in Retrieval, yet many of the problems with his original arguments still remain.
The main criticisms of MacPherson's thesis that this essay will highlight, and consequently argue as being fundamental to understanding the position the Levellers took towards the issue of the franchise, are twofold. First, that it is not possible to make a single theory applicable to the whole of the movement; it was full of internal differences of opinion, and was therefore not the homogenous party required for MacPherson's thesis. Second, that the Levellers were prepared to compromise their position on the franchise according to political events and to secure the acceptance of other equally important parts of their programme, and thus their standpoint changed. This essay will focus on evidence from the authoritative documents on the franchise, the Agreements of the People and the Case of the Armie Truly Stated, and a plethora of other Leveller tracts and especially the debates at Putney, around which MacPherson's argument centres. An attempt will be made, therefore, not only to dispute much of MacPherson's argument, but to propose a different hypothesis of how the Levellers interpreted franchise reform, based around the notions of compromise and heterogeneity.
The starting point must be the Putney Debates, for it is from here that MacPherson commences and from which he makes all his later inferences that form the crux of his argument. The Levellers set out their franchise proposals to be debated at Putney in Article I from An Agreement of the People, the first Agreement, which stated:
To some this has indicated that the Levellers stood for manhood suffrage, arguing that if any exclusions were implicit, then it would be phrased something like, 'according to the number of electors' and not 'inhabitants'. However, it is very difficult to come to any conclusions from such an ambiguous statement, and thus the debates should prove more conducive to a clearer assessment.
Once the Agreement was read, Ireton began the discussion by demanding to know whether the Levellers intended to enfranchise all men:
MacPherson highlights Petty's response:
MacPherson argues that in this first Leveller statement on the franchise in the debate, 'one category of inhabitants was excluded'. Even at this early stage in the proceedings however, the full range of interpretations have been made by historians, with Morton stating that such a response illustrates a 'note of ambiguity almost weakness', and Thomas arguing that 'in modern terminology' this 'stood for manhood suffrage'. Yet, if MacPherson's interpretation is correct, and the Levellers proposed a small extension of the franchise, it is curious that Ireton objected so strongly, supported by Colonel Rich who stated that:
It is important to notice that Rich clearly understands Ireton's argument 'to be directed against someone who would include servants in the franchise' and that there is 'no dissenting voice to this imputation'. Rich's remark would also appear strange if, as MacPherson argues, both the Grandees and Levellers tacitly agreed that they were discussing a non-servant franchise.
However, when the debate reaches the discussion of the details of the franchise extensions MacPherson uses another statement by Petty to interpret his initial declaration:
He argues that it becomes clear that the Levellers had always been assuming the exclusion of servants and alms-takers and this was understood by their opponents; Cromwell starts from this agreed point. Petty does not refute the exclusions, which MacPherson asserts would be expected if the Levellers advocated manhood suffrage, but actually states the reason.
However, MacPherson's interpretation of the debate does not seem to concur with the progress of discussion. Colonel Rolfe realised the debate had entered a position of stalemate, recommending that:
Ireton consequently introduced the argument about the dependence on the will of other men:
Cromwell continues this line of argument, taking up Rolfe's suggestions and does not start from an agreed point, as MacPherson argues, but responds to a period in the debate. Hence 'Petty's remarks after this could be interpreted as an examination of the proposal rather than an endorsement of it'. If it was a Leveller proposal, then it can be assumed that it would have been suggested far earlier in the debate to appease the Grandees, who were obviously concerned about the rights of property. 'It is much more likely, therefore, that his [Petty's] initial remark about inhabitants who had lost their birthright was a reference to the exclusion of the supporters of Charles I.'
The position of the Levellers becomes far clearer if the section that MacPherson neglects is considered. After interpreting the opening exchanges of the discussion, he leaps to Cromwell's interjection ignoring nearly 30 pages of debate. In this section each side set out their position on the franchise. Ireton advocated the freeholder franchise, those with a 'permanent fixed interest', whilst the Levellers proposed enfranchising 'any man that is born in England'. On more than six occasions in the next 20 pages 'one or two of the other protagonists reiterates the basis of the issue that divides them'. Nonetheless, MacPherson explores the idea that the claims by the Grandees that the Levellers advocated manhood suffrage were merely exaggerations, but he concludes that 'we cannot tell whether these phrases as used by Cromwell and Ireton in the earlier part of the Putney debate were hyperbole or not." John Boy's record of Cromwell's subsequent speech to Parliament 'reveals he [Cromwell] sincerely believed his own and Ireton's rhetoric about the thrust behind the Agreement'. The Levellers never denied these accusations, for example Wildman, when asked by Cromwell 'where is there any bound or limit set?' replied:
Yet when falsely accused on other issues the Levellers were quick to repudiate such allegations. For example, when charged that they intended the abolition of property Rainsborough retorted 'that it is fully answered: God hath set down that thing as to propriety with this law of his, Thou shalt not steal'.
Nevertheless, MacPherson argues that in light of Petty's statements it is possible to infer that servants and alms-takers had 'lost their birthright', and were therefore ineligible to vote under Leveller proposals. There is the question therefore, which MacPherson addresses, of how the unqualified statements at Putney are to be understood, if the Levellers always intended such exclusions. He argues that they 'may quite as well have been understood to exclude servants as they undoubtedly were understood to exclude women'. Therefore, broad terms such as Rainsborough's 'poorest man in England' and 'every man born in England' are assumed to have been the equivalent of 'all free born men who have not lost their birthright'. In this case MacPherson is able to illustrate consistency in Leveller proposals, despite the apparent advocation of a manhood franchise.
The main problem for MacPherson's argument is his use of Petty. Not only is there great doubt as to the way in which Petty's later statement on the exclusions are interpreted, but there is a significant question concerning him as a Leveller spokesman. MacPherson assumes that Petty's views were synonymous with those of the Levellers, but apart from this appearance, the fact that he sat on some of the Leveller committees, and that he later became a member of Harrington's Rota Club, whose aristocratic republican tone was very different from that of the Leveller's, little is known about him. In any case Petty's proposals for the exclusion of servants and alms-takers, whether they are taken as implicit throughout Putney or as a response to the suggestions of the Grandees, do not commit the other Levellers. For, as will be described at length, the Levellers were a disparate movement with a wealth of opinions. Petty explained that he came to Putney 'to give my own reason why I do assent to it [the Agreement]'. Moreover, on the first and third days of debate Petty said nothing, whilst Wildman and Rainsborough acted as Leveller spokesmen. On the second day when he made the statements upon which MacPherson places so much emphasis, it was once again Wildman and Rainsborough who did much of the negotiating. There is no reason therefore to take Petty as more representative of the Leveller proposals than, for example, Rainsborough whose response was far clearer, and arguably was 'the simplest claim for equality ever made in English history':
If this is to be accepted then it is far more likely that the Levellers were more democratic than MacPherson would admit. Yet Rainsborough was also somewhat of a peculiar figure in terms of the Levellers. A trend is therefore becoming apparent in analysing the individuals of the movement and subsequently trying to find any consistent principles, which will be explored.
In considering Petty's position at Putney it is interesting and important to note a change, for which MacPherson does not account. Petty began as a supporter of the Agreement and manhood suffrage, but soon recognised the need to gain the support of the Army Grandees if the Levellers were to maintain their political importance. Once it was clear that manhood suffrage would not be accepted by the Cromwell and Ireton, Petty was prepared to compromise towards the end of the debate by excluding certain groups. On the 4 th November 1647 the General Council of the Army agreed to extend the franchise to all men except beggars and servants: 'the Agitators and their Levellers allies regarded this as a substantial victory'. Although they had to compromise on their original proposal for manhood suffrage, they had secured an agreement on a much wider franchise than ever before. MacPherson, therefore, was correct in using Petty as representative of the Levellers, although for a different reason. His shift 'was the first sign of the movement the Levellers subsequently made on the issue for tactical reasons' that will be fundamental to the argument of this essay.
Even if MacPherson is incorrect in asserting that the Levellers always implied the exclusion of those who had lost their birthright, they eventually compromised and agreed to a non-servant franchise. It is therefore necessary to understand who they understood to be servants and alms-takers. One of the greatest controversies surrounding MacPherson's thesis has been regarding his interpretation of the term servant. In The Political Theory of Possessive Individualism MacPherson stated in a footnote that 'in seventeenth century usage servants meant wage-earners, anyone who worked for an employer for wages', discussing the matter further in an appendix. Although this came under much criticism he reiterated his statement eleven years later: 'it can also I think be shown that my more sweeping statement - that servants meant wage-earners - remains valid generally'.
However, Laslett, who has been one of MacPherson's greatest critics, argues that 'the word servant in seventeenth-century England simply did not cover all persons receiving wages'. Laslett regards servants usually as residents within their masters' household, not always a domestic servant, but those who by patriarchalism were 'included in the persons of their masters'. In responding to Laslett's criticism MacPherson argues that, from the evidence of King, there were 260,000 male adult in-servants and 312,000 out-servants, a substantially larger figure. He also uses the Quarter Session Wage Assessments to validate his theory, identifying that 6 of the 13 wage assessments described wages for servants who were living out, going some way to refuting Laslett's assertion that servants usually lived in.
Laslett, supported by Morton, also argues that being a servant was merely a stage in life. The typical servant was young and unmarried, living in the household of his master. Once married the servant set up a household of his own, and would then be classed as a labourer, craftsman, cottager or husbandman. This is confirmed by evidence from Claymouth, in which of the 67 servants listed in 1676 only 1 of those was still in service in 1688, and similarly from Cogenhoe, in which of the 31 servants listed in 1618 only 1 of those was still in service in 1628. Once again this is refuted by MacPherson with the use of statistics from King and the Quarter Session Wage Assessments. From King MacPherson simply highlights that there were around 100,000 'servants in husbandry' who were described and living out. The Quarter Session Wage Assessments illustrate that 3 of the 13 assessments describe servants, not labourers, as men working in husbandry at daily or weekly rates, thus there is evidence from both sources that some servants retained such a title even when they moved out and became labourers and masters in their own right.
However, the statistical evidence used by MacPherson is 'open to considerable criticism'. The main problem with his use of King's figures is the projection of evidence from 1688 to 1648. The ten percent rate of growth he assumed seems fair, but this 20 year period was one of rapid change; England was in a transitional period towards proto-industrialism and agricultural capitalism. Thus there was a massive expansion in the number of wage-earners in such a short space of time, and consequently MacPherson 'exaggerates the proportion of the population who in 1648 were wholly or partly dependent upon wages'. Moreover at a time when the class of wage-earners was rapidly evolving it is 'nonsense to draw a hard and fast line'; there were many intermediary categories. For example, cottagers, with common rights and some land, who maintained a living by sporadic wage-earnings, would not have been regarded as servants. In any case 'Gregory King set no great store by his own figures', as his notes show great variations in the size of different classes. There is also doubt as to the validity of the evidence produced by the Quarter Session Wage Assessments. Out of the 40 wage assessments MacPherson discovered, only 13 were complete enough to be able to use for statistical purposes. Therefore over two thirds of the assessments were not used by MacPherson, and this illustrates the fragile nature of his statistical analyses and surely casts doubt over the assertions he makes.
MacPherson's case does not however rest solely on statistical evidence, as he looks to the literature of franchise proponents. James Harrington defined servants as those who have not the 'wherewithal to live of themselves', those without enough property to live independently of employment. The Levellers did not define servants as specifically as Harrington, but gave the reasons for exclusion, thus showing what the criterion was; the dependence on the will of other men for employment. This was 'as great in the case of employees living out as in the case of employees living in'; in fact, as those living out were on less than an annual contract, if anything, were more dependent for employment. 'Since the dependence on others for a livelihood was the criterion of servanthood, the presumption must be that the wage-earners living out were equally regarded as servants' and therefore excluded under the Leveller franchise reforms. MacPherson goes further to refute Laslett's dominant patriarchal model identifying that the cause of dependence for the domestic servant was the 'need for employment, not the pattern of household discipline'. Thus the inclusion of the in-servant in his master was not a result of Laslett's patriarchal model, MacPherson argues, but due to a market relation and 'in this fundamental respect he was in the same position as the out-servant and common labourer.'
It is difficult to argue against MacPherson's assertion that the dependence of in-servants and out-servants on their masters was, in part, of a market nature. However, the out-servant had, in general, a greater level of independence from the employer, due to short term contracts. Although he clearly depended on the will of other men, the out-servant had a certain level of freedom to choose, or at least leave, his master. The in-servant was bound to his master for the whole year during which he was in a patriarchal relationship. This is of importance when related to the process of voting, as part of the reason for excluding servants was to avoid intimidation at the hustings. 'It was not likely that the general body of wage-earners would be intimidated, but the servants of single employers would certainly have feared to vote by publicly lifting their hands against the wishes of the lord and master." Under the existing economic situation servants and beggars were therefore not free to follow their conscience, and for this reason could be justifiably excluded.
In addition, there is more evidence to suggest that there was a difference between servants and the general body of wage-earners. The language of the Agreements differentiates between domestic servants and wage-earners. The second Agreement of the People excluded both servants and persons 'receiving wages from any particular person', thus thought of as two separate categories, whereas the final Agreement of the Free People of England only excluded servants. The Statute of Artificers (1563) distinguished servants, who served by the year, from artificers and labourers being hired for wages by the day or week. A servant's contract could only be broken with the consent of the Justice of Peace, whereas the day-labourer was employed casually, frequently changed employers, often worked on a piece-work basis and could be dismissed at will. In the wage assessments by the Justices of Peace, wages of servants were given by the year and labourers by the day or week.
MacPherson does accept that there were certain administrative and statistical classifications the term servant was sometimes only used for a sub-class of wage-earners. For example, parish lists by household detailed the composition and the occupation of the head of the household. The term servant was used to indicate an in-servant, whereas wage-earners living out and being heads of their own households were listed by occupation, such as labourer or thatcher. MacPherson argues that 'in each class of cases there is a simple reason, of logic or convenience, for the narrow usage' and thus can be treated as 'subordinate or exceptional'. It is clear therefore that it was possible in seventeenth-century usage for the term servant to mean a domestic in-servant, especially when used in a narrow sense describing occupations. Yet, MacPherson does not consider that the Levellers and their opponents at Putney might both have understood that servants in this narrow sense, domestic in-servants and not the whole body of wage-earners, were being discussed.
Disregarding this MacPherson concludes that as a 'general rule' the term servant meant all wage-earners. This, he asserts, is strengthened by the historical continuity of the terms master and servant. Where social and legal relations were being described, he argues, the most natural term for a wage-earner was servant, as it described on part of the master-servant relation, which had been in usage far before relations of a contractual nature were common. Yet, Thomas argues that the contemporary usage of the term servant was inconsistent, and reflected the antiquated vocabulary describing feudal relations of the master and servant, being related to the new employee and wage-earner association. This is also highlighted in MacPherson's other reason in asserting the 'general rule', that there was a lack of any other suitable term, as 'some word was needed to denote those described in our day as wage-earners'. Labourer, for example, was sometimes used in this context, but it was generally not suitable as it could have a status connotation reflecting those a grade below skilled tradesmen. But why, therefore, if labourer was not appropriate due to its other possible meanings, was servant, for it too, as MacPherson concedes, had other implications. In any case why is 'some word needed' for all wage-earners? This period was characterised by the rapid increase of wage-earners and it is very likely for there to have been a 'time lag between development of new social relationships and the invention of a vocabulary adequate to describe them'.
The term servant therefore had a great number of connotations in the seventeenth-century, but the Levellers when they excluded servants were more likely to have been describing the traditional meaning of the term, the domestic in-servant, than the emerging wage-earning class as a whole. The Leveller programme contained proposals that increased 'the opportunities for apprentices and servants to become masters'. If the they believed that servants were only under the temporary control of their lord, and could under Leveller reforms break free of these shackles, then it is 'easier to explain why their spokesmen apparently attached so little importance to the disenfranchisement of servants and took so little pains to justify what would otherwise have been in glaring contradiction to their very sweeping and emphatic assertions of the rights of every man to have a voice in choosing the government he lived under'.
There is also a certain amount of ambiguity concerning the term alms-taker. The Levellers used both terms alms-taker and beggar, which can have significantly different meanings. A beggar is different from a cottager forced to seek emergency parish relief and different again from those habitually dependent. Until the second Agreement only beggars were excluded; they were formally voted out in the resolution passed after Putney, and were excluded in the terms of the Earnest Petition. At Putney it is only Petty that mentions 'those that take alms' and, as described, this can be understood as an examination of the proposals put forward by Cromwell and Ireton. In any case Petty continued to describe 'those that receive alms from door-to-door', which is surely a reference to beggars and not those in receipt of parish relief. Even the 'persons receiving Almes' excluded from the franchise in the Officer's Agreement were taken by a contemporary, Marchament Nedham, to be synonymous with vagabonds. The Levellers evidently did not want to exclude from the franchise those who sought emergency parish relief, for the Levellers felt great sympathy towards them. Such people had been temporarily impoverished by the Civil Wars, and 'we know that they regarded alms-takers as capable of taking their own decisions'. The Levellers therefore certainly wanted to exclude beggars from the franchise and, until the Officer's Agreement around which there is an element of doubt, wanted to enfranchise alms-takers. However, MacPherson argues that the Levellers sought not only to exclude beggars, but also alms-takers that were 'notoriously marked out as dependent'. Although this fits in neatly into his theory of exclusion from the franchise as a result of the dependence on the will of other men, it is not corroborated by evidence that was unfortunately not available to him. On 23 rd December 1647 Cromwell reported to the House of Commons that the London Agents had insisted that 'such as received alms' were persons 'competent for elections'; 'perhaps drawing a distinction between door-to-door beggars and those who were supported by the poor rate'. The statistical difference between these two groups is enormous. From MacPherson's estimates for 1648 there were 343,000 alms-takers, but only 10,000 beggars. The Levellers therefore only intended to exclude a marginal minority of adult males, and this can hardly been seen as contradictory to the principle of manhood suffrage.
It has therefore been ascertained that the proportion of adult males that the Levellers excluded was far less than MacPherson proposes, with a narrower interpretation of the terms servant and alms-taker. But was there an underlying principle that resulted in such exclusions, as MacPherson has illustrated. He argues that for the Levellers, 'property in his own labour made a man free'. This freedom was a man's birthright and could be forfeited by 'the alienation of the right in one's labour'. Hill supports this assumption stating that Leveller franchise reforms were restricted to 'freeborn Englishmen.' Wage labourers and alms-takers had lost their birthright as a result of their economic dependence on others; they had lost the property in their own persons and were therefore not entitled to vote. This is clear for the servant who had forfeited his birthright by alienating the propriety of his labour. This labour had not been completely 'abandoned' but the right to such labour had been transferred to his master. 'Accordingly, in respect of the right to a voice in elections, the servant is included in the master." For alms-takers the case is not as clear. MacPherson argues that the impotent poor were by definition 'incapable of useful labour' as 'they had no labour either to alienate or gain', and were therefore dependent upon the will of the community, their master. The partially dependent poor who could work, but relied upon the community for relief had a similar relation. Finally, the vagrant beggars can be 'assumed to have been left out of the Levellers calculations entirely', because they had put themselves outside of society by refusing to 'work usefully'. However, Hampsher-Monk has identified a significant problem with this argument. First, it must be remembered that, as identified, the Levellers were considering the exclusion of beggars and not those temporarily reliant on alms. Moreover although MacPherson regards beggars as outside of the community, they 'would seem to have retained the politically significant aspect of their personality, their labour, by refusing to work for others'.
MacPherson's theory also does not take into account the enfranchisement of the soldiers, who as a reward for successfully defending Parliamentarian freedom were granted the vote. Yet they had alienated their labour and accordingly lost their birthright, and under MacPherson's thesis should not have been enfranchised. Therefore although MacPherson's theory of 'self-propriety' neatly explains the exclusion of servants and alms-takers, it does not account for the exclusion of beggars, or the inclusion of the soldiers. The Levellers did believe that the birthright could be forfeited. Crimes against the state were frequently highlighted by Levellers in such terms, but MacPherson fails to include the exclusion of Royalists in his theory. Delinquents, as they were often described, were excluded in the Case of the Armie and a number of other Leveller tracts. Apprentices were also seen to have forfeited their birthright temporarily, and therefore this did not involve permanent disqualification from freedom. Lilburne, along with Petty, Sexby and Walwyn, was a former apprentice, yet declared:
Thus 'criminal delinquency and apprenticeship apart, there is little indication in the Leveller writings of other circumstances under which the birthright could be forfeited." It is possible that MacPherson, while creating an impressively original theory, went too far in trying to find a consistency not present in Leveller reforms, which will be discussed at length. He was only able to link such a hypothesis tenuously to Petty's statements at Putney. The reason Petty gives for excluding servants and beggars is as a result of their dependence on the 'will of other men' and should therefore be 'afraid to displease [them]'. Although Petty does state that servants and beggars will be included in their masters, there is no discussion regarding the alienation of labour, and it is therefore difficult to put any great weight behind such a theory.
MacPherson also uses Petty's remarks at Putney to make inferences about the nature of Leveller franchise reform proposals in the pre-Putney pamphlets. He argues that none of the pre-Putney documents were specific concerning Leveller proposals for the franchise, and that only by understanding the issues at Putney, where the extent of the proposed franchise enlargement was 'first made explicit', can interpretations be made about earlier statements. That none of the pre-Putney pamphlets stated specific exclusions is not significant for MacPherson, as the Levellers were in a period in which they were concerned with other matters. It was only at Putney that the franchise became the pre-eminent issue, because the Levellers had reached a strong enough political position to be able to think as far ahead as to the extent of the franchise reforms. As noted MacPherson argues that at Putney, in light of Petty's statements, when the Levellers talked of, for example, 'freeborn men', they were not considering all men, but those that had not lost their birthright. Thus, MacPherson argues, this interpretation can be used to construct a better understanding of The Case of the Armie Truly Stated:
In light of the assumptions made at Putney servants and alms-takers therefore 'deprived themselves' and were not eligible for the vote under Leveller reform proposals. The same approach can be taken with A Remonstrance of Man Thousands of Citizens, when it demanded that 'all men that have a Right to be there' in elections. Joseph Frank argues that this statement illustrated the Levellers' commitment to manhood suffrage, but 'the proposal is for compulsory voting by 'all men that have a right', not for all men to be given the right to vote'. MacPherson continues to cite numerous other examples accordingly from England's Birthright Justified, London's Liberty in Chains, Jonah's Cry from the Whale's Belly and Rash Oaths Unwarrantable.
However, much of MacPherson's thesis concerning the use of Petty's statements at Putney, and the inferences made thereof regarding the implicit exclusions of such groups, has been disputed. Thus the pamphlets and other documents published before the Putney debates can therefore be taken at face value, and do not need to be re-interpreted. To cite just one example, The Case of the Army Truly Stated, Morton can see 'little justification' for MacPherson's interpretation of the phrase 'all the freeborn' as being exclusive. He goes on to assert that it is 'improbable that a document of this sort, having specified delinquency as a reason for disenfranchisement, would have included these other grounds in so unspecific and ambiguous a way'. It is also interesting to note that in 1945 when MacPherson first considered this pamphlet, he recognised it as 'the only clear claim for manhood suffrage'. It should more importantly be acknowledged that 'the pressure of debate at Putney... revealed internal divisions and uncertainties over a programme which had clearly not been worked out in all details." The Levellers held a diverse range of opinions and at this point in the movement's existence there was no necessity to formulate such specific demands as they were simply a pressure group petitioning Parliament. Once they reached the zenith of their political influence around the Putney debates they had to begin debating what they actually wanted in terms of an enlarged franchise, and it is here that the impracticality of attempting to find consistency in Leveller proposals can be most easily identified.
One of the greatest problems with MacPherson's thesis is the notion that the Levellers 'presented a coherent and unified programme'. This has been a problematic theme that has followed much historical work undertaken on the Levellers. MacPherson's Levellers are unified in proposing a non-servant franchise, whereas pre-MacPherson Levellers were all seen to advocate manhood suffrage. Most historians have thus looked for consistency, in a highly inconsistent movement. MacPherson therefore attempts to establish an unnecessary uniformity by interpreting the statements of the other Levellers in accordance with Petty's apparent exclusions. However, it is the aim here to show that to find one consistent view on the Levellers' franchise reform is to misunderstand the movement entirely. It was heterogeneous, with members being drawn together with shared grievances, but with a diverse range of solutions. This is supported by Henry Denne in the Leveller's Designe Discovered:
Thus although MacPherson suggests Rainsborough's comments about the 'poorest he' meant the same as Petty's 'all inhabitants', they could easily have meant exactly what they appeared to, providing it is understood that the Levellers held different views on the extent of franchise reforms.
The evidence from the Moderate supports this interpretation of the heterogeneity of the Leveller movement. It has been little used as a source of evidence for Leveller attitudes and although MacPherson based his arguments on 'the standard Leveller documents', he makes no references to the intriguing editorial comments of the paper. The editorial in issue 19 equated 'the people' with those who had voting rights and similarly the editorial comments in other editions illustrate that the term was not restricted to those who paid taxes, owned property, or were non-servants, although they were all included. It is also important to note that the Moderate did not support proposals for a limited franchise. The Officers' Agreement, which included a rate-payer franchise, was not printed or referred to by the paper, and neither was the final Agreement, which called for a non-servant voting body. 
The Moderate also made references to alms-takers in terms of 'the people'. The implication was that such people had been discarded from society by government mismanagement or hard times as a result of the Civil Wars, and if order was to be restored then they would be able to support themselves. Thus there are 'indications that the Moderate would have considered giving alms-takers the franchise'; although they probably would have differentiated between the various different groups within this term. Many Levellers, however, objected to such a broad definition of 'the people'. 'The Moderate's position', therefore, 'should be considered as one element in the theory of the Leveller movement, and it points to the fact that the movement itself was not always consistent or unified in its attitudes or its objectives.'
The attitudes of William Walwyn are the best example of individual diversity within the movement. He has been described as 'one of the most thorough-going revolutionaries in an age of revolution', by questioning commonly accepted ideas challenging the whole social structure. Not long after the second Agreement Walwyn appears to have ceased playing an active part in Leveller affairs for some time. When he, Lilburne, Overton and Prince were arrested on 28 th March on the charge of publishing the second part of England's New Chains Discovered, Lilburne was surprised as Walwyn had played no part in its preparation:
There were several possibilities for such a retreat, yet most interestingly for the purposes of this essay, there was a 'hint of a tactical difference' between Lilburne and Walwyn concerning the Officer's Agreement. Lilburne, presumably speaking for most of the Leveller leadership, heavily criticised the document in England's New Chains Discovered. In A Manifestation it is however clear that Walwyn wanted to accept it as a first step:
It is also possible to see other differences between Walwyn and the majority of the Leveller leadership. His opponents constantly tried to show that he was in favour of equality of condition and the abolition of private property and to therefore infer such beliefs on the movement. On the latter point Walwyn responded unequivocally, referring to Article XXX of the final Agreement:
Thus the Agreement repudiated all charges directed against the Levellers, especially that they favoured levelling. But Walwyn, who wrote the preface 'was a convinced egalitarian, favouring equality in education and advocating a near approach to equality of income'. Thus, on Walwyn's personal views 'we are less certain ground'. Walwyn's Wiles, while obviously exaggerated, gives an explicit and lengthy account of what ideas were attributed to Walwyn. He was, for example, accused being of communist:
'The arguments here are so apt, and the tone of the actual speech so well caught that it is very hard to think this passage is pure invention', for Walwyn never denied having made such comments. Walwyn was thus quite different from much of the Leveller leadership who, whilst many being close to advocating manhood suffrage, were staunch defenders of private property.
The Levellers were therefore a group of radicals drawn together in the 1640s by shared grievances. At the zenith of their political influence, between 1647 and 1648, the Levellers had to begin formulating concrete proposals for political, social and economic reform. It is in this period that the extent of the diversity within the movement became pronounced. The Levellers were heterogeneous and therefore, to look for a single theory on the franchise that all Levellers supported is to misunderstand the movement. What can be done instead is to understand what the Levellers proposed at a given time concerning the franchise and why this was the case. For the Levellers were astute politicians, more than political theorists, and it is therefore necessary to interpret the development of their franchise reform proposals in terms of political reality and not abstract theory, as MacPherson has done.
MacPherson dismisses the notion of a 'temporary change in the Leveller position', but this is to misinterpret the Levellers and the political situation. Morton argues that the Leveller pamphlets were not merely abstract statements of political theory, but 'they were party programmes, weapons in an active political campaign and modified from time to time in accordance with the changing political situation and the political needs of the struggle'. It is here that the second fundamental reason for Leveller inconsistency can be found. As the Levellers became increasingly politically influential and made a serious bid for power, their programme underwent frequent tactical changes reflecting political developments, which will be assessed chronologically. It is also necessary to remember that Leveller franchise proposals were 'not meant to be taken in isolation but as part of a programme of democratic reform which would transform England'.
The first sign of Leveller compromise was at the Putney debates. This has already been discussed in depth and therefore it should suffice to merely highlight the main developments. The compromise was first suggested by the Army Officers, and Petty was the only Leveller to accept the need for concession. Petty realised that although the Levellers were in a politically strong position, for them to further their cause they required the support of the Army. Compromise was therefore necessary, for the Grandees would never have accepted manhood suffrage. This tactical compromise 'had the desired effect of winning moderate opinion to their side'; only three officers dissented in the resulting vote. Although the Levellers had conceded a certain amount of ground from their initial position of manhood suffrage (yet it must be remembered that due to internal inconsistencies not all advocated such reforms), they had obtained an agreement for the extension of a far wider franchise than ever considered possible.
The Putney debates were followed by a resolution proposed by Rainsborough for a general rendezvous of the Army, where the Agreement was to be endorsed as a step towards national implementation. Yet Cromwell and Ireton were 'soon able to launch an effective counter-strike', for the Levellers were becoming too powerful within the Army and they felt the need to reassert their control. It was therefore announced that there would be three separate meetings. At the first rendezvous at Corkbush Field in Ware the Grandees were to present their Remonstrance to the seven invited regiments, designed to reunite the Army. However, two further regiments joined the rendezvous uninvited, those of Colonel Robert Lilburne and Colonel Thomas Harrison, the latter wearing copies of the Agreement in their hats. The Army leadership responded by ordering the radical officers off the field, some were arrested and one was shot in an attempt to regain control of the situation. In the aftermath of Ware and the recovery of full control by the Grandees, the General Council once more became exclusively consistent of officers; 'the Levellers had therefore lost their platform inside the Army'. Thus there was a greater necessity for the Levellers to compromise with the Generals to gain their support once again, but in the short term the Levellers were forced to renew the emphasis on petitioning.
Accordingly the Large Petition of 11 th September 1648 was published. It was a compromise document and therefore extreme proposals, notably demands for manhood suffrage, were omitted in an attempt to regain moderate and especially Army support. It still contained demands for much far-reaching reform; it rejected any treaty with the King, advocated religious freedom, equal justice, the end to oppressive tithes and taxes, but unlike the first Agreement it said nothing on the dramatic reform of the franchise. It was not a document written theorising about a Leveller utopia, but was a reflection of the current situation in which the Levellers had been marginalised and were striving for reincorporation. Such sentiments were echoed by Wildman regarding the Earnest Petition, which contained the exclusion of servants and alms-takers from the franchise. Wildman stated that the authors 'inserted no such particular grievances as might disengage any considerable party, and so continue our distractions." Thus the Leveller leadership recognised the need to be politically astute and whilst proposing radical reform, in order to for such proposals to have the best chance of being implemented they required widespread support, at least with the politically powerful. The Levellers were therefore willing to compromise and continue with the exclusion of servants and alms-takers, if this provision was to enable the movement to further its other causes.
This is best illustrated by the second Agreement, in which the franchise clause 'embodies the greatest concessions which both the Levellers and their opponents were prepared to make'. Facing the apparently imminent conclusion of a treaty between Charles I and the Presbyterian majority in Parliament, Cromwell and Ireton decided it was necessary to reopen relations with the Levellers, and a new Agreement was thus drafted. MacPherson argues that 'we can dispose at once of the complication of [this] the second Agreement', as the ratepayer franchise it proposed was only slightly narrower than the non-servant franchise of the previous Agreement. However, this takes a far too statistical approach. What is of more significance is that the Levellers, and the Grandees, were prepared to make yet more concessions in order to maintain their political influence, and for the acceptance of the Leveller programme as a whole: 'it shows the Levellers at their most practical and realistic'. 'The Leveller's proposals would have destroyed the domination of the landowners as the ruling class', and the concessions on the franchise were therefore worth conceding if the rest of the Leveller programme was to be adopted.
Despite the best efforts of the Levellers to maintain their political influence, by 1649 the Army leaders and their parliamentary allies were in firm control of events. The King had been executed and the country was in a state of peace; taxes were being collected, and law and order was imposed. The 'new rulers seemed to be setting up as tight-knit and oligarchical regime as any which had been seen in England before'. The Levellers were therefore intensely dissatisfied with the situation that had developed and published England's New Chains Discovered, which criticised the increasingly tyrannical nature of the regime. As a result of the publication of the second part of England's New Chains Discovered Overton, Prince and Walwyn were arrested on 28 th March 1649 and imprisoned in the Tower of London. It was from the Tower that they produced the final Agreement, which in terms of the franchise 'may fairly be taken as the final expression of what they considered practicable under existing circumstances'. This Agreement was not necessarily a manifesto of proposed reforms, but an attempt to produce consensus and 'unite all democratic elements'; thus it was radical, but was not extreme. In the Agreement therefore the Levellers 'stripped away the qualifying causes found in the second Agreement'; it demanded the franchise for all men over 21 except for servants, recipients of alms and those who had served for the late King, thus removing the ratepayer qualification. The Levellers still did not demand manhood suffrage, as they had to compromise in order to regain their broad base of support. 'The lineaments of their vision of England stood out not as much as democratic as libertarian and decentralist.'
Throughout the short life of the movement it is clear that the Levellers were prepared to make tactical concessions for political gains. Yet MacPherson refutes this; why does he assume that the Levellers could not be democrats if Petty was not and why does he believe that they could never be democrats it they were not at Putney? MacPherson asserts that 'the Levellers were zealots for principle and had they ever embraced the full principle of universal suffrage they could scarcely have withdrawn it from the agricultural labourers on such wholly expedient grounds'. 'Such uncompromising zeal for principle is not, however, a feature of the Levellers' record on, for example, tithes." The Levellers thought that the issue of tithes was a matter of principle, and in 1645 Overton devoted a whole pamphlet to the subject. The March Petition and the July Appeal, both of 1647, demand the abolition of tithes, without compensation, but in the first Agreement there was no clause relating to the issue. It was again deliberately left out of the January Petition of 1648, but reintroduced in the Humble Petition and second Agreement. It is not necessary to assess why the Levellers compromised on the issue of tithes, but should indicate that the concessions on the franchise were not isolated. The Levellers were 'capable of compromise, when they thought they were being taken seriously', and had a real opportunity to affect political reality. Similar actions can be traced on the issues of local government, position of the King, of the House of Lords and parliamentary reform in general. The Levellers were able to make such concessions as they were political realists and not simply theorists. Their real zeal did not lie in one particular issue, but in the demand for a more equal and just society, and they were prepared to make concessions for the acceptance of their radical programme as a whole. 'They were interested in political and constitutional arrangements as a means and not an end in themselves'.
The aim of this essay has been not only to highlight many of the problems of MacPherson's thesis, but also to propose an alternative interpretation of Leveller franchise reform proposals. MacPherson's analysis centres round his understanding of the proceedings at the Putney debates. He uses remarks made by Petty on the exclusion of servants and alms-takers to argue that the Levellers assumed such exclusions throughout the debates and infers such an interpretation on pamphlets published before Putney, which include no such qualifications. The main criticism of this understanding has been levelled at his use of Petty as representative for the rest of the movement. Moreover greater controversy has surrounded his assertion that the term servant meant all wage-earners. There is much evidence that has been highlighted to question such an understanding, and it seems that 'this was simply not the intention of the Levellers'. For MacPherson's analysis does not consider the great social changes that were occurring in this period; the Levellers 'are more likely to have been thinking in terms of a social order that was passing away than one still incompletely developed'. Thus the Levellers only intend to exclude domestic servants from the franchise. There is also a certain amount of uncertainty regarding the exclusion of alms-takers, for it appears that the Levellers only wanted to exclude beggars and those habitually dependent on alms relief. MacPherson has therefore vastly over exaggerated the number of men that the Levellers would have excluded from the franchise, under their non-servant franchise proposals. MacPherson took his thesis further by attempting to find an underlying theory that guided their franchise demands. His proposal for a Leveller theory of the 'self-propriety' of labour seems to have some credibility when analysed in the case of servants, but it does not explain why beggars and soldiers would have been enfranchised and not supporters of the King.
Not only does this highlight the main problem with MacPherson's thesis, but illustrates one of two fundamental factors that this essay has stressed as vital in understanding the Levellers and the franchise. The Levellers were political realists, willing to compromise on specific issues if it meant that there was more chance of the acceptance of their programme as a whole. Throughout their short political life the Levellers had changed their demands accordingly with political developments; the final goal was more important than single issues. The Levellers 'adopted a democratic stance when they believed it was indispensable to their purposes, and equally they abandoned it when it was a hindrance to their achievement'. What also needs to be stressed is that when the Levellers are analysed it must be understood that they were not the homogenous movement necessary for MacPherson's thesis. They came together with shared grievances, but often they did not share the same solutions. The Levellers were thus 'a more heterogeneous party advocating a programme that has not been fully worked out in all its details, but prepared to make a series of compromises to achieve its ends." Thus any attempt to discover a single principle that guided the Levellers on the issue of the franchise would seem fruitless, for there were a myriad of opinions. Yet certain generalisations can be made. The Levellers were not necessarily all democrats, although it was manhood suffrage that was being discussed at Putney, but they strove to create an egalitarian order. There would be greater opportunity to own property in a Leveller society, and thus people would not be reliant on others for wage-labour or alms. The voting body would be widely extended, significantly more than stated by MacPherson under the non-servant franchise for there would be fewer servants and beggars, and thus there would be greater political participation, heightened by a decentralised state. Thus it is questionable whether so much emphasis should be placed simply on their proposals for franchise reform. They proposed an incredibly radical and 'modern' set of ideals that were far more important than one issue, proposing a written constitution that England has not adopted to this day.