By calculating your  Body Mass Index . This is calculated by dividing your weight in kilograms by your height in metres squared . 20-25 is the desirable range ,27-30 is slightly overweight and values over 30 are associated with obesity . except where you are extremely muscular or have excessive accumulation of water in your body .
On starting a diet , the reduced amounts of food you are consuming may not be meeting your body's normal needs. Your body has the ability to override the mechanism which controls energy intake when food supply is unpredictable or reduced suddenly and your basal metabolic rate ( the energy needed to maintain basic body functions such as breathing and heart beat, body heat ) is lowered to correspond with this decrease in food intake.
During the first few weeks there is a loss of stored carbohydrate (glycogen) and its water that it is bound up in . This can be as much as 4kg after which the fall in weight slows down . Your fat stores, however , remain unchanged. Fat is lighter than glucose and water and it takes more time to lose weight by burning fat .
Also as you lose weight , your smaller body, requires less energy to sustain it and the difference between the energy you need to take in and energy your expending decreases, hence your rate of weight slows down .
Losing weight gradually can be advantageous because you will not have to make drastic reductions to your food intake so it is easier to accommodate and this allows you time to get accustomed to and maintain a new style of eating.
It is recommended that you exercise as you lower your calorie intake. This way , you can improve blood supply to the muscles, and as you exercise your body is gradually transformed to burn fat more efficiently and as energy requirements from exercise demand . Physical activity has benefits not only for controlling body weight over the long term, but also in controlling appetite.
Estimated Average Requirement = Basal Metabolic Rate x Physical Activity level
When we consume substantially more energy than is required, excess energy is stored in the body as fat  consequently if you wish to lose weight you must expend more energy than you are taking in.
This can be done by increasing your current physical activity, l imiting your calorie intake or both. The extent to which you need to pursue each of these depends on your average daily energy requirement which is largely determined by your BMR and levels of physical activity.
The average UK recommended daily energy intake is 2000kcal a day for an average woman .
Identifying your current average weekly intake of food and monitoring your physical activity is a good first step. It will allow you to plan how much you may need to cut down and how much more exercise you might need to do.
This can be done by keeping a food diary and noting down calorific values of foods where available. Remember to take into account any drinks or alcohol you may consume .Many pre-prepared foods now have detailed nutritional information and though these are average typical values they area useful guide.
A nutritionist can use your diary or a more accurate 'weighed food diary' to calculate exact intake using computer software. Alternatively, nutritionist's indirect calorimetry facilities can be used to measure your energy output based on how much oxygen you take in and carbondioxide given off and a suitable diet can be designed for you based on this
Eat a variety of foods so as to achieve the right balance of proteins, carbohydrates and fats and vitamins and minerals to promote health. Instead of cutting out fat, limit your fat intake to no more than a third  of your calorie intake (eating more unsaturated fats) .Carbohydrates should provide no more than half  of your daily calorie intake. Taking in too much protein could also have a detrimental effect on your bones health on future.
Smoking affects your taste preferences and your diet tends to improve after you quit
i.e. you have increased appetite this may result in weight gain .
There are anorectic drugs that help weight loss by decreasing appetite, but these drugs are commonly used to treat obese people and are only used as a last line of action after a combination of diet and physical activity. Pills and preparations to lose weight should never be taken except on medical advice.