The syllable is the minimum possible unit of speech. As Katamba holds (1989:153) "It is the unit in terms of which phonological systems are organised." Consequently, the vowels and consonants that our speech is composed of can be regarded only as aspects of syllables. Speakers, based on their intuition, have no difficulty in deciding on the number of syllables a given word of their mother tongue contains. Phonologists, however, have faced great trouble in providing a single definition of what a syllable is that would stand for most of the languages of the world. Moreover, there is a great degree of disagreement upon how the internal structure of a syllable is perceived. The aim of this essay is to argue in favour of the onset-rhyme model of syllable structure given in Roach's book (2000) and to compare it with the flat structure model. Furthermore, suggestions will be given on two aspects that Roach could have included into his description of the onset-rhyme model. The second part of the essay will be focused on the teaching implications of the syllable in a second language learning situation, explaining why it is crucial for a teacher to bear a good understanding of the syllable structure when teaching the English pronunciation.
The syllable is a unit which can be analysed in both phonetic and phonological terms. According to Roach (2000:70) in phonetic analysis syllables consist of a centre "which has little or no obstruction to airflow" and of a periphery where "there will be greater obstruction to airflow". For instance, in the monosyllable word "park" /pa:k/ the vowel /a:/ is the centre which does not prevent the passage of the air while for the surrounding plosives /p/ and /k/ we have complete obstruction.
According to the onset-rhyme theory, the vocalic part at the centre of the syllable is called the "nucleus" or "peak" while the consonants that precede it are called the "onset" and those that follow the "coda". From a phonological perspective, Roach (2000:71) maintains that this involves examining the possible combinations of phonemes according to which words begin and end. This study is called "phonotactics" and the constraints of the possible combinations are language specific. For example, in English no word begins with more than three consonants. In addition, in English monosyllable words
can begin and end with a vowel as in "it" /It/ and "cry" /kraI/. This means that the coda and onset are optional elements of the syllable whereas the peak is obligatory.
The element which is of paramount importance in the system that Roach describes is the fact that the peak and coda are grouped together to form the "rhyme". As Giegerich (1992:138) holds "The reason for its name is obvious: it is precisely this part of the syllable that plays an important role in the rhyming conventions of poetry-for example in lie-die, man-ran, milk-silk etc. " As a result, the syllable has two constituents the onset and the rhyme which consists of the peak and whatever follows it (Appendix 1).
The majority of the work done by phonologists on the syllable structure favours the onset-rhyme theory against alternative methods of analysis, for instance the flat structure theory. This version of syllable structure, proposed by Clements and Keyser (1990), assumes that the syllable is a flat constituent without any internal structure (Appendix 2). Clements and Keyser (1990:20) based on the assumption that "cooccurence restrictions holding between the nucleus and preceding elements of the syllable appear to be just as common as cooccurence restrictions holding between the nucleus and following elements" rejected the recognition that the relationship between the vowel and the following consonant is closer than between the vowel and the onset. In fact, there is a number of certain restrictions in the combination of onsets and rhymes. Nevertheless, as Fudge (1987:361) argues restrictions between the peak and coda are more frequent and stricter than those holding between the onset and peak in most languages of the world. For instance, one of the most significant constraints which occur between the peak and the coda, according to Fudge (1987: 369) is the fact
that "Word-final syllables must be closed if they contain a short vowel." This means that in cases where there is no coda the stressed-final vowel must be a long one or a diphthong. For instance /fI/* and /dU/* are incorrect forms in English whereas /fi:/ and /du:/ are considered acceptable. Consequently, short vowels can occur only in positions before a consonant. It is clear from this example that the form of the nucleus depends on the coda while the onset remains unrelated to the rest of a syllable. As Giegerich (1992:145) argues "Expressed in terms of syllable structure, the generalisation would be that a syllable has minimally two X-positions in the rhyme." Thus, a stressed syllable would be illustrated like this according to the onset-rhyme theory (Appendix 3). Although Clements and Keyser's model has the advantage of being simpler than the complex onset-rhyme theory, a hierarchical rather than a linear order of structure is more widely accepted.
One suggestion is that Roach could have elaborated on how long vowels and diphthongs are illustrated in terms of the onset-rhyme theory. As we supported earlier, this is perhaps the soundest argument to support that the syllable should be seen as a sequence of an onset and a rhyme. Roach (2000) does not mention anything about what happens in cases where we have a long vowel and how this is depicted in the onset-rhyme structure.
A second suggestion that could be made is concerned with the sonority theory. Although Roach (2000:70) defines the syllable as a part, the centre of which does not prevent the passage of the air and sounds louder than the rest, he does not mention anything about the sonority theory. The sonority theory holds, as Giegerich explains (1992:132), that "The pulses of the air stream correspond to peaks in sonority." and "The sonority of a sound is its relative loudness compared to other sounds."
Consequently, the distribution of segments in a syllable is not random but follows the pattern of the sonority hierarchy with the centre of the syllable being more sonorous, that is more audible than the
surrounding parts (Appendix 4). As Harris (1994:56) argues "Viewed from left to right, segment-sequences within an onset thus have an upward sonority slope, while those in rhymes have a downward slope." For instance, in the word train /treIn/ the /t/ is less sonorous than the /r/ which is less sonorous than the /eI/ which is more sonorous than the /n/. Thus, the syllable begins and ends with the less sonorous segment. As Ladefoged maintains (2001:246) one possible interpretation of the theory of syllable is that peaks of syllabicity correspond to peaks of sonority which accounts for the fact that native speakers can very easily predict the correct number of syllables in a word.
However, there are cases where consonant clusters, that is patterns of two or more consonants together, violate the sonority scale. For example, in the monosyllable word sting /stI/ instead of one we find two sonority peaks, the /s/ and /I/, which contradict the principle of the sonority theory by allowing two peaks to make a single syllable instead of two. This exception is mainly found in s-initial and final clusters. As Giegerich (1992:139) argues the /s/ "... has a special status: it can occupy an otherwise consonant inadmissible position in the onset and it violates the generalisation that onset sequences increase in sonority." Roach (2000) does not elaborate on the fact that the initial /s/ contradicts the sonority scale. Instead, he considers the /s/ part of the onset and names it pre-initial. Thus, the onset can contain three expositions with the first one of these the /s/ violating the sonority principle (Appendix 5). On the contrary, Giegerich (1992) and Collins & Mees (2003) in their analysis propose a different interpretation. They conclude that the initial consonant /s/ which violates the sonority sequence is neither part of the onset nor does it belong to the syllable but
to a higher node in the phonological structure. As a result, /s/ forms a prependix which is a constituent of the word and not of the syllable (Appendix 6). Perhaps, a better proposal to Roach would be to conclude that when an onset contains three X-positions the first one will not conform to the sonority theory and will form part of the word and not of the syllable.
In a foreign language learning situation, students are overwhelmed with a huge amount of information that they have to process about the new language. Because the load of the new vocabulary and grammar is too heavy, teachers usually do not teach the pronunciation of the target language explicitly. Instead, through plenty of language exposure and experience they help learners deal with this difficult situation. Nevertheless, as Dalton and Seidlhofer (1994:67) hold "...one may claim it is necessary requirement, that teachers of a language should know about the language they are teaching." As a result, a good understanding of the syllable and syllable structure is crucial from the part of the teacher. Only then, will teachers be able to make learners aware of the various problems that they will encounter and help them build the right expectations. More specifically, a good comprehension of the basic syllable structure helps the teacher predict and deal with difficulties in the pronunciation of certain English consonant clusters, in the process of connected speech and in assigning stress to words.
According to Katamba (1989:166) "Constraints on syllable structure serve as a filter allowing only certain sound sequences to occur. These constraints are specific to a particular language." Consequently, every language permits different kinds of combinations of consonant clusters. English language has a more complex clustering pattern than other languages allowing two or more consonants to occur in a sequence. The teacher should be able to predict which types of consonant clusters will present problems and make learners notice them. As Celce-Murcia et al (1996:82) hold "These sequences of consonants can present a challenge for speakers of languages that have a strict CV pattern, with no clustering." When learners' native language sound system is radically different from the syllable structure rules of the target language, then learners employ a number of strategies in their effort to pronounce them. The most frequent one as Celce-Murcia et al argue (1996:82) is the tendency of learners to insert extra vowels in order to make clusters easier to pronounce. For instance, they tend to pronounce train /treIn/ as /treIn/. Furthermore, according to
Dalton and Seidlhofer (1994:119) another common mistake which in fact applies to my short experience as an English language teacher is that Greek learners are likely to omit the final nasal consonant in words like "send" pronouncing it as /sed/.
But elaborating on consonant clusters is not only significant for improving learners' pronunciation but also for making them competent enough to understand every day native connected speech. It is a common belief among foreign language learners that it is difficult to understand where syllables begin and end in words in everyday casual speech. As Dalton and Seidlhofer (1994:37) maintain "The difficulty of the non-native listener is due to the fact that the conditions under which rapid speech is produced affect the syllable structure of the utterance." Thus, the boundary between words in rapid talk is obscured due to the fact that syllables are pronounced differently when found in isolation. For instance, speakers tend to restructure syllables by making final clusters sound as initial. According to Dalton and Seidlhofer (1994:123) "...watch out CVC+VC becomes wa+chout CV+CVC." As a result, in genuine speech words are linked contrary to non-native speakers' expectations of waiting to hear a pause after each word. It is very crucial for the teacher to be aware of such linking phenomena and arouse certain expectations from the part of the learners.
Lastly, one of the most important features of the English pronunciation is that some syllables are strong, that is stressed while others are weak, that is unstressed. When we say that a syllable is stressed it means that speakers put a greater amount of emphasis in this syllable. Explicit attention of attributing stress is quite important in the English language classroom for "Rhythm is seen as a by-product of the alternations of weak and strong syllables, rather than something which exists independently and in its own right." as Dalton and Seidlhofer maintain (1994:108). Drawing learners' attention to this alternation of stressed and unstressed syllables will enhance not only their listening ability but also their intelligibility to others. Only then, will learners be able to approach the English rhythm of speech and intonation.
In this essay we analysed the onset-rhyme model and the flat theory of syllable structure and we argued in favour of the former. The nucleus together with the coda seems more to behave as single unit called the rhyme which is independent of the onset. Then we suggested that Roach (2000) could have illustrated how long vowels stand in the onset-rhyme model and could have elaborated on the fact that the /s/ initial in a consonant cluster violates the sonority theory that defines what a syllable is. Lastly, the significance of a deep understanding of the syllable and syllable structure from the part of the teacher was highlighted.