The aim of the experiment is to determine the kinetic parameter (Km and Vmax) of a fumarase- catalyzed reaction. (Fig.1.) The extinction of L-malate and fumerate was measured using a spectrophotometer in optical density at 250nm at 25 oC. Using the initial rate of extinction change per minute for different L-malate concentration, a Lineweaver-Burk plot was produced and used to estimate the value of Km and Vmax of fumarase.
The ambient temperature in the laboratory during experiment was 21 oC. As the initial rate of change per minute in optical density for a fumarase-catalyzed reaction varies by 8% per degree change in temperature between 20-30 oC, the initial velocity was corrected to 25  oC. Examples are as below.
Given the initial velocity for fumarase-catalyzed reaction with malate concentration 0.01M is 0.471moles/min at 21  oC,i.e. The ambient temperature varies by 4  oC to the standard temperature 25  oC
Therefore, Initial velocity for fumarase-catalyzed reaction with malate concentration 0.01M at 25  oC= 0.471*(1+8%)4= 0.641moles/min
Else of the methods were as described in the schedule supplied.
The graph showing the relationship between the absorbance of fumarate at optical density 250nm shows a sigmoid shape. It is a common phenomenon that shown in all assays with addition of different concentration of L-malate, there is a gradual decrease in rate of the fumarase-catalyzed reaction decrease with time. In those, which have an addition of relatively, low concentration of malate e.g.:0. 001M, the graphs flattened off towards the right, showing the maximum rate of reaction. The initial velocity of the fumarase-catalyzed reaction decreases as the malate concentration decreases. The assay with addition of 0.01M L-malate shows an initial velocity of 0.641mole/min at 25 oC, correspondingly, the assay with addition of 0.001M L-malate shows a relatively low initial velocity of 0.124mole/min at 25 oC. The lineweaver and Burk plot was produced and the kinetic parameter of the fumarase-catalyzed was estimated according to the Michaelis/ Menten equation. The estimated value of Vmax and Km was 0.833mol/min and 6.06*10 -3M.
The graphs showing the relationship between the absorbance of fumarate at 250nm and time shows a sigmoid shape. This indicates that there is a decrease in rate of fumarase- catalyzed reaction over time. This is due to the change in proportion of enzyme, substrate and enzyme-substrate complex. The enzyme's active sites are occupied by the substrate, forming an enzyme-substrate complex, which then being converted to product and a free enzyme. This enzyme kinetics was first characterized by biochemists Michaelis and Menten, which can be summarize in the equation below.
The fumarase-catalyzed reaction finally reaches the maximum rate, as indicated by the tailing of the graph absorbance of fumarate at 25nm versus time. The rate of reaction is limited by a wide range of factors: substrate depletion, production inhibition and reverse reaction.
Although the general trend shows that there is an increase in initial velocity of reaction with increase of concentration of L-malate. Assay with addition of 0.006 L-malate has a higher initial velocity than that for assay 0.01L-malate. This is due to the delay in recording of data, it is very important to start the recording quickly after the addition of fumarase in order to catch the initial velocity of reaction. Other errors of the experiment include: inaccurate addition of L-malate and fumarase, failure in mixing the reaction mixture thoroughly, failure to record the reading in regular accurate time intervals.