In this experiment, we have examined some eggshells of Peregrine falcon (Falco peregrinus), and Sparrowhawk (Accipiter nisus) ageing form 1960 onwards from the Monks Wood Experimental Station. The eggshell has been contaminated with DDT/ DDE in different levels. The eggshells were weighted by the electronic balance and its length and breadth of eggshell was measured by the vernier calipers. The data recorded was used to calculate the eggshell index. Eggshell thinning is a biomarker which connected to the p, p'-DDT and its metabolize DDE. It has been shown in Peregrine and Sparrowhawk that the higher the level the contamination of the parent by DDE, the greater DDE residue levels in the eggs, thus the greater the degree of eggshell thinning. In fact, this dose/ response relationship is logarithmic, so the even quite low levels of DDE produce appreciable shell thinning. By combining the data obtained in the practical class and the data from the paper published in Nature in 1967, a complete graph showing the change of eggshell index (1900- 2000) of Sparrowhawk and Peregrine falcon was produced. A trend line was added and particular change can be discussed in both ecological and political levels.
DDT (Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane) Fig.1 is the best-known chlorine containing pesticide. It was first synthesized in 1874 but its insecticidal properties were not reported until 1939. Later in 1948, Swiss scientist Paul Mller received the Noble Prize in medicine for his discovery of the insecticide property of DDT. Since then, DDT was manufactured in large quantities in the United States and Britain, during the second half of World War II. During the 1940s and 1950s, DDT was used extensively on the maintaining of hygiene and preventing epidemics of insect and acarine borne diseases, such as malaria and typhus. By 1958, massive spraying of DDT occurred extensively thought out Africa, Asia and South America as an insecticide to control the malaria-transmitting mosquito, Anopheles. Initially, the use of DDT was very successful particularly in the control of malaria, as well as against agricultural pest. However, by the 1950s, resistance problem had developed. As soon as the DDT spraying ended, the number of malaria cases each year quickly returned to its pre-DDT level in most of the tropical countries such as Africa and India. Besides this, the serious environmental impairments such as poisoning and eggshell thinning, which people thought was caused by DDT were manifested.
In the early 1950s, Derek Ratcliffe of the British Nature Conservancy found that there were number of broken eggs in eyries of peregrine occurring in several regions of British Isles, which he considered to be an abnormal phenomenon. Soon after that, a national wide survey has undertaken by the Nature Conservancy. The result of the survey was astonishing, the population of the new generation of peregrine had declined greatly and that less that one-fifth of the birds successfully rose young in 1961 and 1962. The paper gave a strong impact in the USA, leading to an examination on the population of peregrine and the other birds of prey. The outcome was even worse; the species was extirpated in the North America and had decreased markedly in many countries in Europe.
In mid-1966, Derek Ratcliffe suggested that the phenomenon of eggshell thinning was likely to be the possibility of egg breakage. Shortly, the formula of eggshell index was invented; this formula helps to cut down the measuring time of the large number of specimen without damaging. Using this technique, Ratcliffe examined large amount of Peregrine and Sparrowhawk eggs collected in UK since 1900. His findings show that there was a marked decrease in eggshell thickness in both species in the mid-1940s.
Large amount of research was done neither on Sparrowhawk nor Peregrine but in the brown pelican (Pelecanus occidentalis), which was experiencing the most dynamic degree of eggshell thinning. The colony on Anacapa Island showed almost complete reproductive failure. Most of the nests were abandoned and remains of crushed eggshell were found throughout the colony. The thickness of eggshell has decreased by half on average. A similar massive study was carried out by the Canadian wildlife service on colonies of cormorants on lake Huron during 1972- 73. The outcome was not as severe as that was found in California but it was bad enough to cause almost completed reproductive failure.
The evidences showed the clear linkage between egg breakage and the reproductive failure. A widespread of analytical work was carried out, showing that there was a relatively high concentration of organchlorine resides in the combination of eggshell compared to the pre-war level. Also, it was shown in raptorial birds, included Peregrine that the higher the level of contamination of the parent by DDE, the greater the degree of eggshell thinning in its eggs. This dose-response relationship is logarithmic, so that even quite low levels of DDE produce appreciable shell thinning. Fig. 2 Further, the relationship was demonstrated on the laboratory studies and the result was the same as that found in the field.
Cooke (1979) has shown by light and electron microscope examination that shell thinning in peregrine eggs involves roughly proportional decreases in thickness of outer and thicker palisade layer and inner and thinner mammillary layer of the shell; suggesting that thin shell result form a decreased rate of deposition. Though the precise physiological and biochemical mechanism involved are still imperfectly understood, there is one common hypothesis suggested by Paul Miller: DDT is readily metabolized into a stable and equally toxic compound, DDE. DDT and DDE are fat-soluble and are stored in adipose tissues. DDE is re-released into the bloodstream when adipose was used for energy during reproduction or from levels of metabolites obtained via recent prey. While in the uterus, DDE inhibited the enzymes carbonic anhydrase and calcium ATP-ase. This enzyme disruption caused partial blockage of the layering of calcium and carbonate on the eggshell, which induced eggshell thinning, and disruption of embryo gas transpiration. This, in turn, facilitated eggshell breakage; embryo toxicity and the resulting crash of the peregrine falcon and Sparrowhawk.
As the consequence of the severe eggshell thinning, the use of DDT was banned in the Scandinavian over the period 1969- 72, and in Holland in 1968. In the Great Britain, voluntary restrictions on both DDT and dieldrin started in 1962, and completed at the end of 1975. DDT was banned in the USA in 1972.
The population of Peregrine and Sparrowhawk started to recover as soon as the DDT was first banned in various countries in the late 1970s according to the decline to the organochlorine residues in the populations of both species. Reintroduction and breeding programmes also started in areas, which the species totally disappeared such as the eastern United States and Southern Canada. The population change for Peregrine and Sparrowhawk are shown in figure 3 and 4.
At the beginning of the experiment, the practical group received around twenty peregrine eggs specimens and seventy sparrowhark egg specimens. Before the practical start, each student should produce a table with species, egg number, mass, length, breadth and eggshell index. (a) The practical group then divided into three sub-groups, for each have two students. Each sub-group received a batch of eggs allocated by the demonstrator. Two vernier calipers (b) and an electronic balance (c) were supplied for each sub-group. Using the vernier caliper, the length and the breadth (d) of eggs were measured and recorded in millimeter. The display of the electronic balance should show zero before measurement. Press the reset button if the display shows any other values. Wait for a few seconds until the display become zero. Open the balance door and hold the eggshell carefully. Place the eggshell on the metal plate in the balance, then close the door. Wait for a couple of seconds until the display become stable, record the weight of eggshell in milligrams. When the measurements were done, representative form each sub-group had to write the data on the blackboard. The data was organized in order using excel. And together with the data from the he paper published in Nature in 1967, a scatted graph showing the change of eggshell index between 1990-2000 was produced.
The introduction of organochlorine insecticides into the environment causes a serious of severe environmental impairments. Besides the eggshell thinning in raptorial and fish-eating birds, organochlorine insecticides is also toxic to birds, mammals and especially fishes in high concentration.
Cylodiene insectides aldrin, dieldrin and heptachlor cause lethal toxicity in raptorial and seed- eating birds such as finches, bunting, sparrow, wood pigeon, rook, partridge and pheasant. These species were found dead in the fields in 1961. Most of the bird remains were in excellent conditions and the only possibilities for cause of death seemed to be disease or poison. The examination of dead bird specimens rapidly showed the connection between the seed dressing and the bird deaths, were reinforced by dieldrin and aldrin or their lipophillic metabolites in tissues such as liver, brain or muscle. The lethal concentration to predatory birds is 10ppm dieldrin and heptachlor in its tissue. Dieldrin and heptachlor kills by acting as a nerve poison. It affects the central nervous system by inhibiting GABA receptors. Laboratory work also proves that there are sub-lethal effects on the nervous system such as irritability, disorientation and convulsions before the lethal effects are produced. These sub-lethal effects cause the decrease in ability on co-ordination of the predatory bird and thus their hunting skills. Both of the sub-lethal and lethal effects increase the mortality rates of the species and thus may result in the population decline.
Long-term administration of DDT has brought about neurological, hepatic, renal and immunologic effects in animals. Research has shown that DDT prevents androgen from binding to itsreceptor thereby blocking androgen from guiding normal sexual development in male rats and resulting in abnormalities. Evidence has been found in alligators in which hatchlings from DDE-painted eggs are sexually indeterminate; possessing both male and female reproductive characteristics. In humans, DDT acts as an environmental oestrogen and has antiandrogenic effects on foetuses and breast-feeding infant. In addition, DDT leads to the decrease of fertility. The neonatal deaths are common and there are congenital defects among children of chronic exposed workers. A single doses from 6 to 10 milligrams on human leads to the neurodevelopmental effects such as nausea, headaches, diarrhea, and irritation of the mucous membranes, tremors and convulsions, nervous system abnormalities. A single or repeated dose of (5mg/kg) DDT on rats causes liver damage, tremors, decrease in thyroid function and impaired neurological exposure. The chronic exposure of DDT on birds and mammals affect the estrogenic properties, antiandrogenic sexual development and feminization of males (alligators and Florida panthers).
Because of all these severe environmental impairments bought by DDT, the global ban of DDT is necessary. DDT is still being used in many poor developing countries such as Africa, and India for the controlling malaria. Although resistances are shown in many of these areas, it is very difficult for them to stop the use of DDT. DDT is a cheap man made chemical, which can be manufactured easily during the reaction of chlorine and double benzene ring in optimum temperature and pressure. In addition, DDT can be store and carry easily. The application of DDT is also simple. Therefore, DDT is still very popular in those poor developing countries. Invention of new chemical to replace DDT is needed before the global ban of DDT. The new chemical should be easy to make, store, handle and apply. More importantly, it should be cheap enough those poor developing countries to afford. On the other hand, education is also very important. Besides the application of insecticides, keeping the hygiene in a high standard can also decrease the cause of malaria.
According to the graph in the pervious result section showing the change of eggshell index of peregrine falcon (Falco peregrinus) and Sparrowhawk (Accipiter nisus) during 1900-2000, the changing trends of both species are very similar. This fact supports the idea that the contamination of DDT affects both species in a very similar way.
The eggshell index of Peregrine falcon, Falco peregrinus in 1905 was 2.0. The eggshell index decreased rapidly to 1.8 between 1905 and 1910. After that, the eggshell index remain very stable until 1930, there was a slight decrease during 1930- 1940. A marked decrease started in the late 1940s, dropping to its neap, 1.4 in 1960. This is due to the introduction of DDT into the agricultural use at that time. Although the problem was not noticed before 1950, laboratory work shows that the eggshell index started to decrease very shortly after the introduction of DDT. The eggshell index started to rise between 1960 and 1970, contribute to the ban of DDT in Scandinavian and Holland. The eggshell index increased very rapidly after 1970, reaching its peak 1.8, in 1990. This is due to the various reintroductions, breeding program and the banning of DDT in many European countries. According to the graph, there was as slight decrease in eggshell index in 1900-2000. This maybe because the egg has been collected form polluted areas; the population of Peregrine had in fact recover to its pre-war level in 1985.
The pattern of the eggshell index change in Sparrowhawk, Accipiter nisus is very similar to that of Peregrine. However, the eggshell index of Sparrowhawk started with a lower level. The eggshell index of Sparrowhawk was 1.3 in 1905. There was a general increase of eggshell index since 1905, level off in 1930 at 1.5. Followed by a sharp decrease in 1930, reaching its neap, 1.2 in 1965. The eggshell index stated to increase since the serious of banning of DDT from 1965 inwards. The index finally returned to its pre-war level, 1.4 in 1990. There was a drop in 1995 and the index became 1.3 in 2000. This maybe again because of the collection of eggs in more polluted area and I suggest that should be only a fluctuation.
The relationship between the degree of DDT contamination and eggshell thinning is clear. The correlation is negative, the higher degree of DDT contamination, greater degree of eggshell thinning, thus the smaller the eggshell index.