The aim of this report is to compare and contrast the three egg production systems in the UK. The systems are battery, free range and perchery/barn. Each system is different and will have advantages and disadvantages but the intensification of all three is the critical issue in this report. Factors such as productivity, efficiency, health, finance and many more, all need to be considered and this is what this report will also focus on.
There are 30,000,000 chickens in this country and 85% are under the battery system. Battery consists of a shed with cages all along the sides of the walls and there are 6 stacks. The cages hold 4 to 5 birds and the space for each is nearly an A4 piece of paper, this is the legal requirement. `
The average chicken will produce 338 eggs a year but that's with help from a 17 hour "artificial sunrise and sunset's" to encourage egg laying. (). When a chicken lays an egg, an automatic system removes it from the cage. It is taken away on a conveyor belt and packaged. Finally, the birds stay in the cages for 72 weeks before they are slaughtered.
The chickens tend to go into pies, pet food, soups, school meals, and even sold to restaurants. When buying these chickens to put into your sheds, the price for each bird will range from 50p to 2 each. They will lack many feathers and have scars due to the confined space they are in. Their beaks are removed to stop them pecking the other birds and causing damage.
This system is very different and the opposite to the battery system because it encourages birds to be outside and also give them what they want. Consumers have realised what battery farming involves and the shift is moving to the buying of free range chicken. Even this trend is popular with retailers and restaurants now as consumers wish to know the meat is from a decent place and of good quality. Free range tries to create a natural environment with only 1000 chickens to an acre. A good case study for free range is The Manydown Company near Basingstoke. They are fed a GM free diet and are free to roam and use their instincts.
Barn production is when the hens are indoors but like the free range system they are free to be themselves. They also have a perch space of 15cm each and an area on 1 metre squared will be for 25 hens. The floor has straw, shavings, sand and turf for them to scratch around in. A nest box will hold 5 birds and the food and water are slightly raised so the food does not go all on the floor. Natural lighting is available and electric lighting may also be provided.
The free range system would be ideal due to the freedom and environment that the chickens experience. However, financially this is the most costly and requires many resources and time. Battery production is the opposite and requires very little as the chickens are inside caged up. In 2012 this will be changed but all those farmers producing battery chickens will have to find alternative methods. Perhaps a compromise is the barn system. This system allows freedom and more of a natural environment; the one drawback is that they can not exercise outdoors. Maybe as only 5.8% of the consumers in the UK buy barn eggs, as battery is being banned, the movement could go towards the barn system. Perhaps the barn production should be encouraged for the future and then eventually to a free range system which would be ideal for the chickens, buyers and even the farmers.