Sheep and goat production is on the increase in the UK and throughout the world. Sheep and goat milk production makes up 3.4% of the world's milk but in many countries it can be up to 90%. The exact percentages for world milk production consist of cow's milk being 84.6%, goat's milk being 2.1% and finally, sheep's milk being 1.3%. Obviously, cow's milk is a cheaper, produces more and is less maintenance, causing competition for sheep and goat production. However, this method of milk production has been occurring for many years especially in Less Economic Developed Countries (LEDC's). Sheep and goats milk is becoming slowly more popular in the UK due to it being an alternative to cow's milk.
There are about thirty three thousand dairy goats in the UK and twelve thousand dairy ewes from 200 flocks. Generally, sheep and goat production is seen to be an enterprise that is an alternative to cow's milk and also a way of diversification for farmers. There are many advantages for both goats' milk and sheep's milk hence the increase of demand in the UK. Goat's milk gives an alternative for those who are allergic to cow's milk: allergies such as S1 and gamma Casein. Also, for babies that are allergic to milk through breast feeding, goat's milk can help stop eczema and colic symptoms especially as 11% of children have eczema. The milk consists of different fatty acids than other types of milk and this then forms a softer curd in the stomach. Goat's milk is available in most supermarkets and costs between 1 and 1.20 and now the demand for more stock of goat's milk is on the increase.
Sheep's milk it is also an alternative to those allergic to cow's milk. People who suffer from asthma, eczema and skin problems can benefit from this milk. It also contains more solids than cow and goat's milk and therefore consists of more zinc, phosphorus, calcium and vitamin B. Unlike goat's milk, sheep's milk is often bought as a solid and is hard to buy in supermarkets. It is nutritious and has a sweet taste and will keep frozen for up to four months. Looking closely at the products for these types of milk, goat's milk is 20% liquid, 75% cheese, 5% cream/yogurt and is continually growing market. For sheep's milk, it tends to be a solid and unlike other countries such as Greece which has the famous cheese called Feta, the UK has no specific cheese brand. Sheep's milk is therefore a smaller market than goat's milk and is struggling on the market.
Below is a table that shows what each type of milk consists of. Sheep's milk tends to have a higher percentage for fats, proteins and more. Goat's milk and Cow's milk have similar consistencies but the fat and protein structure may explain why some people are allergic to cow's milk and not goat's milk. The fat in sheep's milk is high and many people worry about the fat content in milk. However, sheep's milk contains three important vitamins: A, D and E as well as saturated fatty acids. It is the acids that helps there to be a higher lactose absorption which helps those people who are allergic to lactose.
For the farmer to be successful in these enterprises, one will need to work long hours and manage time efficiently. Good stockman skills will be needed, as well as a steep learning curve. Sufficient capital will also be an advantage to the farmer as one learns how to survive with this milk production that is hard work and slowly being demanded. To achieve a high quality product, many factors will need to be considered and managed effectively. Milking methods, maintenance of the goat or sheep, feeding and storage of the milk all play a part in order to achieve high quality. Stress is also a huge factor because the animals need to remain calm when being milked. Demand will be higher during winter months, so accounting for this is important. Perhaps breeding cycles need to be regulated because an all year round supply is essential for success.
Stress is a very important and needs to be controlled efficiently. The behaviour of the goat or sheep should be observed and understood to help the farmer identify any problems. Stress can affect the immune system and breeding. Looking at sheep, the calm and placid ewes that are not affected by stress will respond well. An important method is to adopt a milking pattern where the ewes are milked at the same time each day. Consistency is needed, dogs should be kept at a distance and lastly, at weaning, the lambs should remain near their mothers. All these tactics will help keep stress to a minimum. This will help to improve the milk and make it a better quality.
Breeds are also important when deciding to go into goat and sheep milk production. For sheep the best breeds are the British Friesland, Colbred and the Dorset and for goat's the breeds include the British Sannen, British Alpine and British Toggenburg. A strong stock is essential in order to succeed in this enterprise of milk production.
The performance of the sheep and the goat are important when producing milk. For goat's the average lactation is two hundred and eighty days and can be up to fifteen months. Each goat can be used for up to ten lactations but are culled at seven years old. Depending on inputs, each goat will produce yields between five hundred and twelve hundred litres of milk a year. Generally on a high peak day, a goat will produce four litres of milk. For the sheep, they have an average lactation of two hundred and ten days with yields between one hundred and fifty and six hundred litres. Normally, the average is two hundred and fifty litres.
Naturally there are costs and also revenues. Costs will include buying the goats, the parlour and the equipment. A good quality goat will cost between one hundred and seventy five pounds and two hundred and fifty pounds. A big parlour conversion for goats costs around fifty thousand pounds and a pasteurizer and packager machine will costs about ten thousand pounds. For a good Friesland ewe one can pay about three hundred pounds compared to other breeds costing between one hundred and fifty pounds to two hundred pounds. A small parlour conversion with about fifty ewes will cost between three thousand and ten thousand pounds. Extra equipment such as a milk pasteurizer, cheese maker and a packaging machine will individually cost between three thousand pounds and five thousand pounds. It is advised that a unit of around 450 ewes should produce milk only and have the necessary equipment for this, for example a rotary parlour.
However in order to break even the revenues must be quite substantial. Goat's milk is a seasonal product but if it is a good quality it can be sold between thirty and fifty pence. Good surplus milk does can be sold around two hundred pounds and if a market can be found then culled males can fetch twenty pounds each. Sheep milk can be sold at seventy five pence a litre and wool sold in fleeces can be sold at two pounds each. Culled ewes can be sold for about twelve to eighteen pounds and lambs between thirty and forty pounds a head. Milk prices are very variable and will depend on the market, timing, quality and the quantity.
Farming systems in the UK for goats and sheep have similarities but also differences. Goats are usually housed throughout the year whereas sheep tend to be housed only in winter when the conditions are harsh. Goats are a very domesticated animal which are easy to handle and manage. They are adaptable and can survive harsh conditions. In Europe, countries such as France, Greece and Spain still use traditional methods for goat milk production. Goats are fed on a TMR diet consisting of maize, hay, brewer grains, sugar beet and soya bean meal. Sheep have an intensive summer grazing pattern and in winter they are fed a hay and protein diet. Goat's can suffer from parasites and listeriosis while sheep can suffer from ketosis and milk fever. Both animals can suffer from the same problems such as mastitis and foot rot. Lambs are weaned at thirty days or sometimes earlier if they are using replacement milk. Kids are weaned at fifteen days and the does have reasonable dry periods.
There are advantages of sheep and goat dairy farming such as there is no quota, therefore free marketing will occur. This way of farming is a good opportunity to process and market one's own products. For example St. Helen's Farm which is owned by Angus Wielkopolski and was one of the first big goat milk producers in the UK. The business now has its own processing and pasteurizing plant and produces around half the UK's goat milk which is about eight million litres. It supplies all the big supermarket chains and farms two thousand of its own goats using a rotary parlour. It buys in six million litres of milk from other farms and the company hopes to expand its production by fifteen percent. It will do this by taking on two or three additional producers a year as the demand for goat's products is on the increase.
To convert from a cow dairy farm to a goat dairy farm is affordable and often worth taking the risk. For goats there is a large market for their products whether milk, cheese or yogurt and it is growing continually. However, naturally there are disadvantages to these types of dairy farming. Being a free market can cause the risk and problem of over production which can be dangerous for many. It is fairly labour intensive, for example one man for two hundred and fifty goats. One can not start from the beginning with out any experience perhaps from managing a cow dairy farm. Processors can be the main problem in this business because they pay low prices and also the products will have to be produced on a reasonably large scale and in a large area if the farmer wants to succeed. For a sheep dairy farm, processors will prefer all year round milking. Finally, for all dairy farms whether cow, goat or sheep, the hygiene laws are very tight and for small farms producing their own milk with very little investment means they will find it hard to cope.
In conclusion, there are definite opportunities for goat dairy farms but for sheep dairy farm there seems to be a limited opportunity. The free market does help this type of farming, as the products can be marketed easily and there is less paperwork. Families struggling with a cow dairy farm should perhaps consider swapping to a goat dairy farm. There are many questions that need to be asked about goat and sheep milk production such as will the market continue to grow? This will tend to concentrate more for goat production rather that sheep production which is struggling on the market. Also, what if over production occurs? Will there really always be a demand for this type of production and how long will it last. The answers to these questions are difficult but goat products are becoming popular in the UK and may continue to be for a long time.