Venice and Amsterdam is a comparative history that attempts to 'encapsulate the character and life style of the patriciate of these two cities' during the long seventeenth century, 1580 to 1720. It endeavours to essentially argue that there was a fundamental difference between the elites of Venice and Amsterdam; a difference between formal and informal structures respectively, although this did not hinder a great number of similarities. To this end the book is divided into nine lucid chapters that follow a clear progression, enabling the reader to understand Burke's development of ideas with relative ease. Introduced by The Study of Elites, a brief assessment of the methodology used and problems encountered, Burke then analyses and compares different aspects of the patriciate - Structure, Political Functions, Economic Base, Style of Life, Training, Attitudes and Values and Patronage of the Arts. The book concludes with a chapter devoted to change, analysing the 'decline' of the elite, which he identifies in terms of numbers but certainly not in wealth or power. This encompasses Burke's second, and most interesting, argument, that there was a shift in the outlook and economic activities of the elite in both cities from one of an entrepreneur to a rentier; a move from innovation in trade to the accumulation of rent from landed estates.
The most successful chapters of the book are those that describe the social, political and economic structures of the patricians of Venice and Amsterdam. Such sections are able to combine coherent analysis of each city separately, with interesting comparisons, as well as some conclusions. Burke generally argues that the differences between the groups were a result of their differing structures; the Venetian patriciate was part of a formally defined nobility, whereas the burgomasters in Amsterdam were not in any formally defined elite, but were high in the social ladder due to their power and wealth. However, the chapters on the beliefs and attitudes, and the culture of the patriciate are less successful. This is not to say that they do not provide some noteworthy details, but as a chapter they often provide less comparison and are more descriptive. This is however surprising as Burke is Professor of Cultural History.
Burke's enquiry focuses on evidence from 563 biographies of doges and proctors in Venice and burgomasters in Amsterdam respectively, thus there is generally an analysis of the elite from within. This provides a detailed and informative picture of patriciate life and attitudes, enhanced further by Burke's comparative approach. Although such a methodology was not new when the book was written, many of studies undertaken 'generally focussed on one region, and were comparative only by implication'. This has led Richard Grassby in a review to state the Burke 'practises what others only preach'. Understandably therefore, given its evident success, Burke 'expected comparative history to attract more interest and to develop more quickly that it in fact did in the 1970s and 1980s'. Such comparisons allow Burke to highlight similarities, differences, and attempt some explanations, but also enable the author to encounter facets that were apparent in one group but not the other. On some occasions this does mean that there is a lack of conclusion, with greater emphasis on comparison; resulting in questions being raised but not answered.
The evidence used means that the book generally lacks the perspective from the lower echelons of society, from women and from children. It would have been fruitful to consider the Venetian patriciate from the viewpoint of their poorer noble counterparts, who often resented such increasingly oligarchic bodies as the Council of Ten and the State Inquisitors, that tended to favour members of the great families. It would have also supplemented Burke's study to use evidence from even further down the social scale. For example the guilds, who acted as the main link between society and the state, 'are useful observation posts from which to view grandiose processes'. The experiences of the patriciate were not only those between each other. Recognizing encounters with other social groups would have represented a greater portrayal.
The fundamental argument of Burke's study is the discussion of a shift from entrepreneur to rentier of both the Venetian and Amsterdam patriciate. This contends that the elite moved to their country villas, exploited the land and collected the rent, no longer interested in innovation in mercantilism. The evidence for Amsterdam is quantitative; an investigation into whether or not members of the elite had an occupation, signifying an entrepreneur, and the same for ownership of a country house, indicating a rentier. This evidence seems to indicate a shift in Amsterdam towards the country house and thus a rentier approach around 1700, later than traditionally thought. Burke is wary of the fact that it is possible for there to be an entrepreneur landowner, as well as a rentier without a country residence, but he argues that the overall picture created should be enough for analysis. Unfortunately a similar investigation is not possible for Venice from the tax returns, as being noble the elite did not give any indication of occupation. However, Burke still asserts that there 'is some evidence for a shift out of trade into land in this period'. For this he looks towards factors pushing the Venetian elite out of trade, the loss of Cyprus and the arrival of the English and Dutch merchant ships, and the pull of the land, namely the trebling of wheat prices between 1550 and 1590. It is not contested that there was a general move towards the land by the patricians of both Venice and Amsterdam. However, this was done initially, especially in Venice, with the same profit seeking spirit with which the elite once engaged in trade, and Burke identifies this important chronology of evolving attitudes. Once they became comfortable in their terraferma estates, the different investments in which the patriciate engaged encouraged a change in their outlook, more towards that of a rentier.
It is also important to place such an evolution in context. Burke argues that there was a decline in the mercantile activity of Venice. The city was certainly no longer at the heart of trade between the East and West. However, Venice was still 'the metropolitan market for a rich, densely populated area' and thus there was expansion in smaller scale and shorter distance trade, mainly in local products such as olive oil. The Venetian patriciate had, in the main, moved out of trade, although it is necessary to remember that a significant minority of noble families did still participate in mercantile and more importantly industrial activities during this period, most notably in the production of woollen cloth, soap and glass.
Venice and Amsterdam was one of the first true comparative histories, especially in this area and was therefore extremely important in paving the way for future research. This relatively new approach sometimes created problems for the author in finding a balance between comparison and conclusion, although this is not a problem with his main argument. The book provides an important portrayal, not only of the structure of the patriciate, but also investigating further into their attitudes. What needs to be considered is that it is such a large subject, condensed into a relatively short study; hence, it is not necessarily every detail that is of great importance, but the main ideas and overall character of the patriciate that Burke manages to create.