Site formation processes are the ways in which artefacts or other types of evidence of past cultures are preserved within the archaeological record. These have been divided into two types, cultural and natural processes that have been named C-transforms and N-transforms by the archaeologist Michael Schiffer. In this essay I will be looking at the different ways in which these two processes come about and how they affect the survival of the archaeological record. I will also discuss their role in the interpretation of archaeological remains and what they can tell us about a site. I will outline some of the factors that affect formation, pre and post deposition, and I will examine a few ways in which archaeologists can study and analyse formation processes.
Cultural formation processes relate to the activities of human beings interacting with the artefacts or buildings or the land. These might include the stages of use of a flint, from it's finding in the source area and shaping to when it is discarded or broken, and occasionally it's re-formation for further use. It is important for archaeologists to understand these because from these we can gain knowledge of the kinds of tools that past societies were able to create and how they used them. An example of this is the hunting equipment found with the "Iceman" - these tools show us how advanced his culture was in making things from leather and other organic materials.
But it must be recognised that artefacts do not always have to have been lost or discarded to enter the archaeological record. Many races in prehistory, such as the Hopi tribe of the American Southwest, produce examples of deliberate deposition. They left prayer sticks, clay figures and vessels of water in underground holes as votive offerings to the supernatural forces and the rain-cloud spirits (Hodder 2001: 45). They also buried eagles and other birds in formal graves that would then carry their gifts to the spirits in the hope of bringing rain. It is important for archaeologists to understand this because misinterpretation leads to confusion of the archaeological record.
Deliberate deposition also covers burial artefacts which were buried with the dead to be of use to them in the next life. From what it was felt that was necessary in the afterlife we can learn a lot about a culture. As well people buried things which they meant later to retrieve but didn't and so they enter the archaeological record. These artefacts are useful as they provide information about the customs of a society.
Natural formation processes are events occurring naturally that affect the preservation of the archaeological record. This is usually gradual covering by sand or soil blown by the wind, but can also include burial on a much larger scale, such as mud slides or volcanic eruptions. It is crucial to understand the ways in which a site has built up naturally over time through changes in the landscape.
Natural formation processes can also lead to the destruction of archaeology. Sediment deposition can harm and destroy artefacts or organic remains. Repeated wind erosion of land on exposed sites strips off the topsoil and then removes the natural deposits made by past cultures.
Extreme natural events are excellent at making sure that a site survives, the best example of this being the destruction and subsequent survival of Pompeii and Herculaneum when Mount Vesuvius, the volcano in the south of Italy, erupted, both being preserved almost perfectly due to their coating in ash. Along with volcanic activity, mud slides and rock or snow avalanches can preserve a site incredibly well due to the fact that they cover everything in a protective "blanket" almost.
It is important for an archaeologist to recognise the context in which the artefact in question was deposited. There are three types of depositional context; primary, secondary and tertiary. Primary is rare because it means that the article was deposited where it was used, such as a spear being left where it was used to kill an animal while hunting. Secondary is more common for this is when the artefact has been left away from where it was used, such as in a rubbish dump. Tertiary contexts refer to re-deposition of secondary contexts, such as the use of rubbish to infill a ditch or building. The understanding of these is crucial to the recording of an artefact for it becomes meaningless without its context and correct interpretation of the circumstances.
Site formation is affected by climate. Severe climate conditions such as water logging, for example bogs, or very arid places like caves are very good for preservation of archaeology. In the majority of cases temperate climates, such as in Europe, are not suitable for this but tend to increase the rate of decay. Tropical climates are the worst, the heavy rains and warm temperatures combined with high acidity levels in the soil destroy a site very quickly. The rate of growth in tropical rain forests is particularly detrimental as it is so fast.
Deserts, due to their aridity, are beneficial to archaeology, in particular organic materials such as bone and flesh. Some of the best examples of this are the tombs of the Egyptian Kings, especially the tomb of Tutankhamun (Renfrew and Bahn 2000: 62). This was discovered in 1922 by Howard Carter and Lord Carnarvon and has been preserved remarkably well owing to the dry air in the tombs and in the surrounding climate. Everything the King was buried with survived, including wreathes placed on his coffin and a large number of papyri. The bodies of the King and his two stillborn children were also preserved due to their mummification.
Water logging of sites such as rivers or bogs are also favourable to preserving archaeological remains. Organic material survives particularly well in these conditions, a common find being wood which means that archaeologists often discover boats or wooden huts when exploring underwater sites. Many boats have been found in the recent excavation of the banks of the Severn Estuary.
The pH of the soil affects what is preserved. According to Schiffer, and more recently Evans and O'Connor, an acidic soil with a pH of less than 5.5 will preserve pollen and charcoal. An alkaline soil with a pH of greater than 7.0 will preserve bone, charcoal and shell. Tests can be done on soil to determine its pH.
These can be divided into two categories; cultural and natural. Cultural alterations are caused by humans. A common way in which this happens is through building work. Many archaeological sites have been obliterated by towns that are built over them. For example major towns in Roman times that then evolved into modern cities, such as London where large amounts of Roman and Victorian archaeology has been and continues to be built upon. This situation was improved in the nineteen eighties when the Planning and Policy Guidance Notice was introduced to prevent the destruction of archaeological sites without proper records being made. Many sites have suffered from scavenging and looting, especially during medieval times when building materials were often robbed out to build new settlements.
But construction is not the only method of cultural alteration; farming is a destructive force to archaeology. Ploughing disturbs the topsoil and although this sometimes turns up artefacts for field walking, it can also cover organic remains and destroy them with heavy soil deposits. Land drainage systems damage what is under the soil by putting in pipelines and the loss of water breaks up some of the building materials or soil and pollen samples that may be present.
Natural alterations are caused by the weather, animals or vegetation. Plant and tree roots damage archaeological evidence by tearing up the soil as they grow outwards. Gravity plays a part through slumping and collapse of soil mounds, which although the covering can preserve, it can also destroy in some cases. Animals that alter the depositional context are underground animals such as rabbits and moles which burrow and therefore disturb important remains. Bacteria and fungus destroy any wooden remains which is why so little is recovered except in special circumstances of preservation.
Archaeologists must be able to identify the fact that a site or a piece of evidence has been altered and how. I think this because otherwise they could record a context that actually has no relevance to the site in question and this would severely alter our interpretation of the past.
There are a number of ways in which site formation processes can be examined to gain a clearer understanding of archaeological data. One of these involves the sorting and examination of artefacts found on a site. This is a lengthy processes including flotation and sieving to gather evidence of what may have happened to that artefact; how it was used and later deposited, along with its size and traces of burning or weathering.
Another method is chemical and physical analysis. There are several ways of using this technique, such as particle size analysis, examining the pH of soil to determine alkalinity/acidity, X-ray diffraction, and study of the organic residues present like fats or lipids.
Sedimentology is also useful for learning more about a site. The sediments can tell us what a site was used for, for example an area used for animal management will produce plant materials and dung. This also tells us what types of animals they kept and what crops and plants they grew. Areas used for sacred purposes are easily identified as there will be a residue of ash and the floor will have been kept clean. From this method we can form a reconstruction of the activities that took place in a building or area of land.
An easier method is field observation, in which the deposit components, the stratigraphic sequence and the post-depositional alterations are studied. The frequency of deposits will vary across a site and drawing this out can help to build up a plan of which areas were living spaces and which areas were used for rubbish disposal. Stratigraphy shows how a site has built up and how the layers relate to each other. "It is often used as a relative dating technique and to assess the temporal sequence of artefact deposition" (Renfrew and Bahn 2000: 572).
These techniques all help the archaeologist to construct a picture of how a site was formed and how it has developed through time. It is essential for archaeologists to use some of these methods in their work because they provide firm evidence to support theories or assumptions about the formation of a site.
As explored in this essay, site formation processes are the methods in which a site enters the archaeologist's record. They can be caused by humans, or animals, or more natural occurrences. There are many different methods of studying formation processes available to archaeologists, and these contribute to site reconstruction.
The formation of a site is also affected and changed by later activities and it is crucial to recognise these. For as we can see, the understanding of site formation processes is an essential part of every investigation into any archaeological site. They can tell us how a site was built up, in the case of N-transforms, and how the site or artefacts discovered fitted into the society present, in the case of C-transforms. Every archaeologist should research the processes which led to the formation of the site they are studying to expand their understanding of the background of that site.