Publius Vergilius Maro wrote The Aeneid from 29-19 BC at the time that Augustus was Emperor, for the purpose of glorifying the Roman state and in particular the Emperor himself. Augustus had just recently defeated Antony and Cleopatra in 29 BC at the Battle of Actium and had promised to restore the republic and the city of Rome to its former glory. The Aeneid tells the story of the origin of Rome through the deeds of a Trojan, Aeneas, who leaves Troy under divine command to sail to a place called Italy, where he is to establish a city and found a new people. Throughout the Aeneid Virgil is trying to make his readers draw a favourable comparison between Aeneas and Augustus. Aeneas is constantly described as a hero and displays all the heroic qualities considered to be essential for a Roman citizen in that age. His quest to found Italy takes him through many trials all of which were designed by Virgil to emphasise these necessary characteristics. He also shows himself as a good leader and here he reflects many of Augustus's merits.
The central theme of the Aeneid is duty. This was a matter of great importance in Ancient Rome. It is very Roman that Aeneas sticks to his duty and his divine path throughout the book in spite of all the obstacles in his path. The main diversion is of course his affair with Dido Queen of Carthage. Aeneas falls in love with her but then is reminded in a dream that he has a duty to fulfil and that he must continue on his journey to Italy. Dido is distraught and reproaches him for leaving her and begs him to stay but he readies his ships and sails away. She then builds a pyre and commits suicide. Virgil writes very little on Aeneas's actual feelings about this event. Aeneas feels sympathy for Dido and for himself a kind of pain mixed with necessity. Love is portrayed as a morally dangerous compulsion which at the time was a reflection of the recent defeat of Antony who put love before the Roman state and forgot his duty. Virgil is showing that Aeneas is Roman because he puts his destiny before love and does not turn away from what he has to do. This is made more poignant by the fact that Dido is the founder of Carthage, which was the main enemy of Rome for many years.
Other diversions come in the form of wanting to stay in lands in which he has become accustomed to and with people he knows. When he stays in Epirus with other Trojans who escaped from Troy and have already set up their new city he is most reluctant to leave because he thinks there it will be easier for him to settle there than to carry on his so far perilous journey to an unknown land.
In Ancient Roman society piety, or 'pietas', was essential for a good citizen. Piety was felt towards the gods and your family. Aeneas displays the utmost piety to the gods all the way through the Aeneid. Firstly he leaves Troy carrying his household gods and it becomes his duty to take them safely to Italy. He is guided by messages from the gods and he has to rely on them completely. It was at their bidding that he left Troy even though, in true Roman fashion, he would have preferred to stay and die defending his country, as he tells Dido in Book Four. Aeneas is ultimately faithful to divine wishes even though he finds it hard to be and would often rather take another path.
Another thing that Romans were supposed to show piety and loyalty to was their homeland, or 'patria'. Aeneas is going to Italy because that is to be his new homeland and once there he has to defend it. Even when he has just arrived he is faced with a war for the land which he knows has been appointed to him and it is his destiny to settle on. He fights Turnus, a Rutulian, who resents foreigners coming into Italy and has particular grievance against Aeneas because he is destined to marry Lavinia, who Turnus was going to marry. Having won the war Aeneas does agree though to leave the kingship and customs of the king of the Latins, Latinus, alone in respect for their gods and culture.
Aeneas also shows piety through his dedication to giving his companions proper burial rites. This was very important in the Roman world because it meant that the person's soul could progress into the underworld. In the book he holds elaborate funeral ceremonies for his father and Pallas, the latter being the more outstanding because Aeneas actually collects living sacrifice victims from among the prisoners they have taken from the Rutulians.
Another quality which was central to the Roman way of life was revenge. Augustus himself cited revenge as the reason for his raising army at the beginning of the triumvirate. He claimed that he had to avenge the death of his father, Julius Caesar, by going after Mark Antony and killing him and the other conspirators involved in the murder. The Romans, in particular Augustus, claimed that all their wars were carried out for revenge and there were numerous temples to Mars Ultor, or Mars the Avenger, in the City. Aeneas displays this all important quality in Book Twelve. When he first arrived in Italy he had sought support from King Evander in Pallantium, and the King had sent his own son, Pallas into the battle for Aeneas. In Book Ten Pallas was cruelly slaughtered by Turnus and it is for this act that Aeneas seeks revenge. Right at the end of the Aeneid, Aeneas sees that Turnus is still wearing the sword belt of Pallas on his shoulder and flies into a rage. So despite the fact that Turnus surrenders and begs Aeneas to spare his life, Aeneas kills him harshly and mercilessly saying: 'Its he, its Pallas who strikes this blow- the victim shedding his murderer's blood in retribution!' (Virgil, The Aeneid, Bk.XII: l.948-9).
In spite of this Aeneas principally hates war. This was one of Augustus' main claims during his rule: that he had brought peace to Rome. Aeneas does not want war when he lands in Italy. This is demonstrated in Book Ten as he is about to kill Lausus and he says to him: 'Why rush upon death like this? You're too rash, fighting out of your class;' (Virgil, The Aeneid. Bk.X: l.11-12).
The relationship between father and son was of great importance in the Roman world. The head of the family, or the paterfamilias, had a duty to his son but the son also had to be loyal to his father. Aeneas displays both of these duties. As a son he is dedicated to his father Anchaises in carrying him from the ruins of Troy since he was unable to walk himself. While he is alive Aeneas shares the rule of the Trojans with his father and is guided by him in all matters. It is Anchaises who urges Aeneas to leave Troy and it is his ghost who chides Aeneas in a dream for staying to long with Dido when his destiny awaits him. When Anchaises dies Aeneas buries his father and builds him a burial mound to commemorate his death. When, one year after his death, the Trojan ships reach the place where Anchaises was buried Aeneas holds the Trojan Games in his father's honour and performs a sacrifice for Anchaises. In the middle of the book Aeneas is told he has to go down into the underworld and it is only really his love for his father and his desire to see him again that gives him the courage to make the terrible journey.
Aeneas is frequently referred to as father, or 'pater' in the Latin, usually in context of the care he takes of his men. He is constantly concerned for their welfare above his own. An example of this is when he confronts Turnus in Book Twelve and demands that they fight each other alone, for the quarrel is between them and should not involve the lives of their men. He is also called father as he is the father of the Roman race. In founding Italy Aeneas is responsible for his son's future and all the sons that shall come from him and it is this that drives him once he has seen all the unborn heroes of Rome during his visit to the underworld. Aeneas' shield bearing the deeds of Augustus at Actium reminds us that this is one of his descendants and that this is what Aeneas is going to Italy to start. We also see this in Book One when Jupiter recounts to Venus the future of the Roman race and how great they will become through the dynasty of Aeneas.
Aeneas has great respect for the bond between father and son and Turnus plays on this when in Book Twelve he begs for his life to be spared, not for his own sake, but for the sake of his father Daunus: 'But if the thought of a father's unhappiness can move you- a father such as you had in Anchaises- I ask you show compassion for aged Daunus,' (Virgil, The Aeneid, Bk.XII: l.932-4).
Aeneas is a father himself as he has a son Ascanius who he loves dearly. An example of this is when in Book One Aeneas is ship wrecked in Carthage and having discovered that his men and his son have also been saved, he sends one of his men down to the shore to fetch Ascanius at once. 'Aeneas whose love for his son would not allow a moment's delay, now sent Achates running down to the ships, bade him tell Ascanius the news and return with him,' (Virgil, The Aeneid, Bk I: l.643-5). When Pallas is killed by Turnus Aeneas feels so much distress because he feels that he has let Evander, Pallas' father, down in not looking after his son as he promised.
The Aeneid was written as indirect propaganda for Rome and Augustus' rule. Virgil has made Aeneas a typical Roman hero who displays all the qualities that were important at that time, such as piety to the gods, commitment to your family and dedication to your duty. Virgil is discretely comparing Aeneas to Augustus as he is seen in the book when Aeneas visits the underworld and sees the future kings and leaders of Rome. He is also heralding the start of Augustus' new regime in Rome, in which he promised to restore the republic and the quality of the Roman state as a whole. Aeneas was seen as the prototype of the ideal Roman as he embodies all the qualities that a citizen should have displayed at the time. The Aeneid glorifies everything about Augustus, his deeds and his rule. But The Aeneid is not just an exercise in propaganda. It expresses pathos for the human condition and tries to involve Augustus' concern for the welfare of the Roman people. It raises the question of the worth of human struggle through the journey of Aeneas. Aeneas is a new wave of hero and he is everything a Roman ought to be in his heroism and life style.