The dominant theory that Whittle employs in his article is Phenomenology (the study of human experience and consciousness in the every day life) instead of thinking about the monuments as texts that were read in different ways theorists such as Chris Tilley have thought about how people move through the monuments, what they see from different points, how the physical experience of the monument effects its perception and how people perceived the landscape through this. (Johnson 2001 p114)
Whittles argument is implicit in approach, arguing that the site of Stonehenge cannot be assessed from a purely scientific point of view and was understood by the people that visited or worshiped there at a deep implicit level. He feels that the way the monument has been addressed thus far by archaeologists' leans too heavily on the scientific and socio political. He holds a belief that the 'sacred settings of Stonehenge cannot easily or plausibly be reduced to ideological device' and that the 'power of Stonehenge was that it was believed in - if not fully understood - by all'.
Whittle sites 27 different authors in the text, including frequent references to his personal previous works. Of these authors he makes particular reference to the works of Tilley who is a prominent theorist of phenomenology and Bender.
He leans on the idea of Symbolism 'the strong symbolism of circularity' and 'earth symbolism' for his interpretation of Stonehenge with mention also of Ceremonialism in association to the veneration of ancestors and use of the site 'an intense ceremonialism in spaces defined by digging into the earth' and 'commemorated by intense participatory ceremonialism.'
In his analysis of the Archaeological record Whittle uses direct referral to the material remains of the site, the aesthetic qualities, form, and layout of the stones themselves as well as the monuments composition within the landscape and within itself. He draws on social comparison with strong emphasis on circularity as associated with the symbolism 'It drew on the basic symbolism of the circle, which served both to include and to exclude'. Whittle studies the monument in three dimensions using its physical presence and not just the patterns that appear in the landscape.
In the article Whittle describes much of the detail of the physical appearance of the stones themselves, focusing on features such as the shape and detail that may have led to the choice of these particular stones for construction. He observes them as pairs and concludes that; 'The pattern in the trilithorn horseshoe....suggests that some kind of principle of opposition or combination was being expressed, between smooth and rough, shaped and natural, and slim and bulky'
Whittle looks less at the ritual landscape that Stonehenge is a part of and refers more to the monument itself and the orientation of the person within and around the setting of the monument. He identifies that it is the orientation of the viewer within the monument that is important as well as the monument itself 'the general orientation of Stonehenge... ...implies directionality' and the importance of movement 'To be understood, Stonehenge had to be experienced by movement.'
A programme of radiocarbon dating undertaken in 1995 (Cleal et al) placed the 'great stone phases of the monument' in the Later Neolithic. Whittles review published in 1997 is influenced by this dating information and sees the stone phases as contemporary to monuments such as Conebury, Woodhenge, Avebury, Silbury hill, and further a field Skara Brea and Barnhouse. Whittle draws parallels to these sites and more one example is with Avebury when he is trying to ascribe meaning to the form of the stones 'that variation in height and shape among the sarsen stones at Avebury may have been to do with representation of gender difference'.
He also adopts cross cultural referencing in an attempt to try and understand certain orientations and to give evidentiary support to his ideas and assumptions. Looking at the significance that left and right might have played in the sense of orientation of the monument he makes a parallel between Stonehenge and the Mapuche Indians of Chile 'associate the right with among other things good, life, day.....and the left with evil, death, night'.
Whittle approaches the monument from a theoretical point of view, with the theory being dominant over the scientific data. Whilst he does draw on others data collection, he prefers to look at the monument in a more contemporary, phenomenological, way.
As I have commented there is a particular emphasis on symbolism in this article by Whittle. The ancestors are important whether or not they are understood, and he identifies the cosmological emphasis associated with the site of Stonehenge that previous studies have thought. He Draws on Christianity to help explain his implicit argument, 'The central ideas of the kind explored above are not in themselves more strange or less powerful than the beliefs in parthenogenesis and resurrection at the heart of Christianity.' the idea of resurrection and how this might not be understood fully by Christians but is believed, and so his suggestion is that the symbolism and ceremony attached to Stonehenge may not have been understood implicitly by its contemporaries but were still believed.
He draws on a variety of sources for evidentiary support, the use of contemporary sites such as Avebury and the female-male stones and when using ethnographic parallels, in both cases when he draws on he draws on other sources he uses a minimum of two examples to back his theories. In fairness his arguments although not necessary obvious when looking at the stones is an interesting one, its credibility could be seen by some as a little vague because it is not based on scientific findings. But all the support is there, the stones themselves, their orientation and layout the parallels drawn from other culture and contemporary sites all provide evidentiary support for his idea.
The passage is more a presentation of the author's views, rather than an argument, and those views are supported by evidence but based on his own theory.