Roman occupation is a fact easily identified from the material remains that they left behind them, a coin dropped by the roadside to the standing remains of an entire town. But what are not so obvious are the activities that were carried out there that define their functions. Problems arise in archaeology when we have only the foundational remains of a site with which to reconstruct a whole above ground structure and identify the function of a particular site. Here is where archaeologists employ the use of historical archaeology, whereby we may consult the historical evidence of a site rather than just its material remains.
When identifying the functions of Roman town's archaeologists may look at the main features of roman urbanism, these include; a centre of administration (the forum), sites of public entertainment (theatres/amphitheatres), religious worship sites (temples), places of private occupation and sites of trade and commerce (markets). These particular functions can be identified through looking at the physical shape of buildings and creating a model which can then be applied to new and existing town plans to identify the functions just by looking at the physical appearance. 'Although it may be justifiable to say such and such a building is a basilica, a forum, or a bath-house, it is seldom possible to state the precise function of each and every constituent part of the building, except in the most general terms.' (Grew & Hobley 1987). It is important to note that although a plan can help it cannot be deemed an entirely accurate way of identifying functions and should not be taken as unquestionable fact. There is also the individual primary function of any single town to consider. Is it primarily a centre of administration, or possibly is it primarily a centre of trade and distribution?
A Centre for trade and distribution can be seen in the links that a certain town has with other towns. This can be identified from roads, present in the archaeological record through aerial photography, archaeological excavation and indeed the very roads that penetrate modern towns today. Also water proximity, for example if the town is situated with a harbour on the sea or a major river it is likely to be a centre of commercial trading importance with far reaching trade networks. Also the remnants of storage facilities, such as granaries and a market centre indicate that towns functioned as places of distribution and redistribution much as they do today. The covered hall of Trajan's market represents the ancient equivalent of the modern shopping centre, housing no less than 150 shops and offices. The offices are believed to have been used to administer the corn dole.
A place of public administration is an essential area of function in a roman town, and most often this came in the form of the roman forum. The town would have two main roads, one heading North-South and the other East-West. At the point where these roads met was the town centre and it was here that the administrative centre, the forum and the market could be found, from here the town would radiate outwards.
This basic internal layout of the forum basilica can give archaeologists a model to go on that would enable them to identify the forum and its basic functions just by consulting the foundation plan of a site. However 'A Roman forum is a Roman forum, but there were probably not two exactly alike anywhere in the Empire, so that, while the general identification is easy, interpretation of the individual elements often depends on restoration of the buildings parts.' (Grew & Hobley 1987) it would then seem that a model cannot be lightly undertaken as a means of identifying the individual functions of the site but merely a basic overall one.
Places of public entertainment were an important part of the structure of roman towns. They consisted of often the most massive structures and were built not only for their obvious function as a place for public congregation to delight in the entertainment of the theatre or gladiators but they also had a function as a status symbol and popularity booster. The Emperors it is known often built amphitheatres such as the 'Coliseum' in Rome in order to gain public adoration and raise their public profile. These huge public structures are very much a characteristic of the major towns, and because of their vast size are often easy to identify in the Archaeological record. 'Theatres, Amphitheatres and temples are in some ways easier to identify, provided that they have reasonably conventional plans' (Grew & Hobley 1987)
'Most public buildings were associated with a religious aspect, whether they were temples, theatres, amphitheatres, basilica or markets. However, there is also a secular dimension to these buildings. Their construction by an individual enhanced that person's prestige and position in society.' (Laurence 1996)
Other public buildings included public baths, one good example being those that are preserved in full working order at 'Aquae Sulis,' modern day Bath. Bath-houses were often given to the people as a sign of generosity by the emperor who would pay for the construction and running of the baths. Again we see the function of public buildings not only for its obvious public service of enjoyment and sanitation but as a sign of goodwill from the emperor and a sign of his generosity towards his people in order to gain their support and keep them contented. 'Bath-houses in general present few difficulties of interpretation unless structural survival is poor' (Grew & Hobley 1987) The presence of baths are fairly easy to identify in the archaeological record from their material remains due to their highly developed structure of hypocausts etc that are not generally seen in other buildings.
'This makes monuments very different from domestic structures. They take on roles that express the power, the ideology and the identity of the society' (Laurence 1996). Private occupation sites tend to grow outward from the areas of public amenity.
A highly developed infrastructure is a key aspect of Roman urbanism, and can be identified particularly in the material remains of the aqueduct system, the famous roman roads, and roman town walls. Aqueducts and the movement of water were an essential part of urban living. All human beings need water whether for cleaning, drinking and in the cases of the rich for its aesthetic pleasure (e.g. Fountains). The function of Aqueducts is highly important to urban life and the physical remains of such structures are still highly prolific in the archaeological record as standing structures, enabling us to study and realise their function. The use of roads was highly important during the roman period much as it is today. Roads enabled the towns to trade with both merchants and farmers. They also assisted travel and established connections between culturally diverse areas.
This map of the Roman town of Silchester provides us with proof of the formal layout of Roman towns that enables us to use a model to identify its functions. The forum basilica is to be found, as expected, at the centre of the town with right angle roads radiating from this centre. The presence of a clear outline to the town produced by the presence of town walls enforces the idea of a developed infrastructure. And if one consults the page -  the presence of buildings such as temples, a bath-house, an amphitheatre, the forum and other public buildings, all the basic features of roman urbanism are evident.
And again if we look at this map of Roman London the relative features exist.
This forming of a model enables archaeologists to identify the functions of particular buildings just by looking at their foundational structural layout and to an extent (this works particularly with the constant central position of the forum) by their position in the town.
Archaeologists also need to consider the regional and cultural diversity and chronological change. 'One has only to compare visually a modern village in Kent with one in Northumberland to appreciate the differences, which must have been equally marked in the roman period, caused by variation in building materials and local vegetation.' (Grew & Hobley 1987) We must take into account when comparing different sites the differences regionally, we cannot assume that just because Roman towns were occupied at the same time that they will necessarily have identical functions in the same places. Similarly we must take into account chronological differences; a town from republican Rome in Italy will again differ from one that was constructed in the late imperial occupation.
The city of Rome's physical appearance was immortalised in Virgil's work 'Aeneid'. In book eight he describes Aeneas' arrival in the city and greeting and guided tour by the king. 'It is a poetic tour de force, a journey through time as well as space' (Coulston & Dodge 2000) The picture of Rome that Virgil describes in his work can be matched up to the archaeological remains of the city to create a full picture of the site as it was in the Rome of the Kings. Indeed ancient documentation is highly valuable when assessing the functions of different sites and areas. 'Trawling through the byways of Ancient literature has yielded a rich trove of abstruse knowledge which has been used to reconstruct everything from the history of the early Roman calendar to the topography of the Roman forum' (Coulston & Dodge 2000).
The documentary evidence of a detailed plan of the correct construction of a Roman town provided by Vitruvius gives us a few indications of location being linked to function.
'Town streets should be planned first, then the forum. In a seaside town the forum should be by the harbour; elsewhere it should be central. Next the theatre site should be chosen. Temple sites should be fixed with due consideration for the deity involved. For baths as warm a site as possible is advocated.' (Grew & Hobley 1987)
Not only can we consult the layout remains of a building and site but by looking at its other material remains within the building; 'buildings given to industrial use may contain traces of the processes carried out within them.' (Grew & Hobley 1987) This is an idea highly developed in archaeology especially in such cases as Iron Age huts where the physical remains of loom weights, butchery tools, leather working tools and other such tell tail signs help to identify the function of a building. Similarly a roman building used for metal working in the Roman era may have remains of metal slag or a potter's site could contain remnants of clay and the signs of a kiln.
Many Ancient Roman structures after the fall of the empire were incorporated into new structures or employed for new uses. An example of this incorporation can be seen with the 'Temple of Fortuna Virilis' which was converted to a church and renamed 'Santa Maria Egiziaca.' The basic function of the building has not changed and by being incorporated into a new building it ensured that the structure remains standing today although it was returned to a temple ruin in the 19 th century.
It is important for archaeologists to incorporate not only what the remains indicate a site functioned as, but all forms of archaeology. To consult documentation and in particular pictorial evidence can provide information that would have otherwise been unobtainable. Pictures can tell a lot about a sites function by showing us things that could not otherwise be identified in the archaeological record such as a painting of the Coliseum that showed an awning covering the higher tiers of public seating and market stools set up outside the arena. These are all functions that are not visible in the material remains of the site because they were movable structures and their function although an important one at the time is lost in the archaeological record.
'It is seldom easy convincingly to associate functions with buildings, and, more often than not, attempts at restoration stop at the structures and forget the people who had to use or work in them.' (Grew & Hobley 1987). It is what we cannot see then in the physical remains that really tell what the true function of a site may have been; these 'invisible' functions can however to an extent become visible. By consulting recorded historical documentation and by looking at contemporary images whether it be a relief on a coin, mosaic on the floor, or graffiti on the walls of Pompeii these resources can tell us invaluable otherwise inaccessible information about activities carried out that identify the functions of a certain site.