The following report focuses on assemblage AA4 from the Palaeolithic site of Albert's Apron excavated by Professor Bryn-Ashton McNabb in the late 19 th century. The artefacts are associated with ancient lake deposits suggesting activities represented by these lithics were carried out on or near a lake shoreline. I will attempt to make some preliminary analysis and interpretation of the assemblage data, looking at the general patterns to identify common trends.
AA4 is an assemblage of flints including 2 cores, 1 biface, 27 flakes and a collection of micro-dbitage.
Core tools: Flake tool ratio - 1: 10 such a high retouched flake tool percentage would indicate site activities such as woodworking and skins processing.
Dbitage: tool ratios - 17: 11 a relatively even percentage. Flakes that have not been retouched aren't necessarily waste flakes they could and very likely to have been tools but without use-wear evidence it's hard to identify them. The unmodified, dbitage flakes could just be the initial stages of roughing out of a tool but the relatively low number doesn't give huge support for a production site. I would suggest from the evidence that assemblage AA4 is the remains of an activity site.
Hard hammer flakes: Soft hammer flakes - 26: 1 - this proportion would suggest that the finer finishing work associated with soft hammer flakes was not carried out here. Hard hammer (early stages, of handaxe making: see later); soft hammer (later stages: thinning & finishing). Assumption being made (Roberts & Parfitt 1999: 384 - 395)! Remember to clarify your assumptions in the report.
When looking at the reduction sequence on site AA4 there is a large proportion of hard hammer flakes which are associated with the initial stages of roughing out. However there are only 27 flakes in the assemblage and only 16 of these are 'dbitage'(non retouched flakes), if this was a tool production site there would be a much higher proportion of dbitage. We know this from evidence produced by experimental archaeologists such as Newcomer, who, in his experiment of 1971 produced 4 bifaces & generated 195 flakes (size unspecified) in the process. This is further supported by Wenban-Smith who completed a similar experiment in 1996. He created 4 bifaces and generated 210 flakes 20 mm, this gives an average of around 50 flakes removed for the production of a single biface and assemblage AA4 only contains around half this amount.
A high proportion of cortex in a flake deposit could suggest the earlier stages of production of a biface, 2/3 of the flakes from assemblage AA4 have remnants of cortex. This may represent a deposit of the initial stages of flint knapping but the fact that there are so few flakes and that 11 of the 27 have retouched edges, leaving only 16 dbitage flakes, I would suggest that the flakes do not relate to core tool production and were being used for whatever activity was taking place at the site.
The x axis does not represent the artefact number, merely the number of flakes measured.
The flake statistics indicate no evidence for any one size of flake being over-represented there are a couple of outlying results of weight but other than these there is a fair distribution of flake size. This suggests that the site does not represent a specific stage in the flint knapping process, which supports my theory that assemblage AA4 relates to an activity and not a production site.
This table shows the different Flake tool types represented in the assemblage AA4, if we break it down further by looking at the tools that make up the combination category All four of them have a combined notch and a scraper per flake while one of them also has a third denticulate tool edge. Wymer (1999) suggests that scrapers were employed as animal hide processing tools; there is speculation for other tool uses, that notches were used for stripping leaves/twigs etc from larger branches and that denticulates are possibly associated with woodworking. I will address the significance of these tools later in my analysis.
The two cores in this assemblage have received light work with minimal flake removal which would suggest an abundance of raw material in the area. 6 of the non-retouched flakes refit to cores 1 and 25 which would suggest that these were knapped in situ which would account for a proportion of the micro-dbitage present on site.
The presence of a single biface in the assemblage does not tell us a huge amount because of the sample being so small, normally you would look for patterns in the data but there is no other data to compare it with or identify patterns within. Typologically the handaxe can be classified under the Wymer classification as FG (pointed) and under the Roe Method also as pointed. The evidence provided above concerning flake and micro-dbitage remains, and the ratio of soft to hard hammer flakes (1:26) would suggest that the handaxe was not produced on site but brought in as a finished tool from elsewhere, possibly to aid in the activities taking place. It is difficult to know what the handaxe was used for without use-wear analysis, Wymer (1999: 35 - 38) suggests that such tools were employed in animal butchery but had other possible uses. The assemblage context, being that of a shore line could suggest not butchery of animals but an association with fishing and the processing of fish.
The presence of micro-dbitage on site tells us that some knapping activity has taken place and also indicates good preservation, that fact that the micro-dbitage has not been removed by taphonomic processes such as; wind-winnowing, fluvial activity, animal disturbance or human activity. In 1971 Newcomer set out to knap a biface from a 3 kg flint nodule, he produced a hand axe of 230g, had removed 51 larger flakes and produced over 4,600 small flakes & chips (all over 1mm across). Assemblage AA4 has a total of 65 micro-dbitage flakes weighing a total of 19.8g. I would be inclined to see this collection of micro-dbitage came from the two cores when their refitting flakes were knapped from them at the site, and that these flakes were used as tools for the activity that was taking place there. It may also have been produced as the result of some form of modification to a tool in order to suit it better to the activity for which it was made, for example the sharpening of a tool.
Preservation can cause differences to occur between assemblages, and although lithics generally have a high survival rate there are several natural occurrences that can affect their presence in the archaeological record. Of particular concern on this site is the affect of fluvial disturbance, due to the proximity of the ancient lake shoreline however the presence of the micro-dbitage would suggest that there was no water disturbance in this instance.
Consulting all of the data collected and analysis I have made I am inclined to suggest that assemblage AA4 was an activity site, taking the site context of a lake shoreline into account I would further conclude that the tools relate to some form of fishing practices, the notches and denticulates perhaps relating to the production of traps and the scrapers with the processing of fish. These are purely assumptions that I have made from the evidence that I have collated in the report, further analysis and comparison with the other site assemblages could help to clarify these ideas given more time and looking into the site in greater depth.