According to the Encarta Encyclopaedia environmental archaeology by definition 'examines the relationship between human societies and the natural world and takes as its point of departure the premise that environment governs human life.' It would therefore be reasonable to assume that the task of environmental study and reconstruction is an important one, as in order to understand how humans function and interact with their environment, we firstly need to know what that environment was like.
The study of environmental archaeology can be split into two main categories; off site and on site. Off site consists of evidence that is gathered from natural deposits such as peat bogs, lakes, marine sediment and ice cores all of which give archaeologists evidence of long term environmental change. On site evidence comes from excavation sites, it consists of environmental remains such as plant and animal deposits, which provide local information about a particular site often giving us information about diet, lifestyle (hunter gatherer or farming community), trade links and local weather/landscape changes as opposed to the global climatic information provided in off site studies. Plant and animal remains that are found in an onsite context during excavation are often seen in terms of resource exploitation.
Off site analysis is extremely important in archaeology to the understanding of the environment in a wider context. Water covers three quarters of the earth's surface, it therefore seems sensible to begin the search for information about past climates here. One method undertaken is that of deep sea coring, whereby a piston corer is employed to extract a thin core of sediment, usually between 10-30m in length, from the ocean floor. Dating of the different layers in the core is usually carried out using radiocarbon, or the uranium series method. Changing environmental conditions of the past are then deduced by tests on microscopic one celled organisms found in the sediment. One 21m core from the Pacific Ocean can present a climatic period of over 2million years; this sort of information which can be gathered from the coring techniques is invaluable to archaeologists when studying periods of climatic change.
One of the most crucial effects of climate is that it determines the amount of land available for habitation, measurable by studying ancient coastlines. For example at the end of the last ice age sea levels were substantially lower than they are today providing the inhabitants of Europe with a much larger land mass, England and Ireland were joined to France making them a part of the continent. An example of the rise and fall of sea levels can be seen at the early man site at box grove, which over 500,000 years ago used to be on the cost, it is now 7miles inland, this is an example of the coastline retreating.
Coastal erosion can dramatically change the overview of a site; one example of this is the late roman signal station at Scarborough, half of which has now been lost into the sea due to coastal erosion showing that coastlines have changed even in relatively recent time periods. The opposite effect to erosion may also take place this is known as silting and instead of land being lost, it is created, one example being the roman fort at Richmond which used to be on the coast and is now 1  miles inland. It is important to identify these environmental changes in order to understand the context of a site, the roman fort of Richmond was not built 1  miles inland it has just ended up there, so we must recognise that the resources and surrounding area looked very different to the Romans that occupied it. The interesting thing about this study of changing coastlines and past climates is that it comes into great relevance today in helping us to understand climatic changes such as global warming. We are able to recognise from the archaeological study of the environment, that the earth has gone through temperature fluctuations in the past ranging from the glaciations of ice ages to major heat blips such as in the Middle Ages when cultivation of the land was much more plentiful and grapes and wine were being produced much farther north such as in Scotland. Archaeological examination of our environment can help us to understand the present and future as well as the past.
One extremely important area to consider when addressing any archaeological site but particularly in the case of environmental archaeology is factors affecting preservation (or differential survival).
These include; matrix or soil type in which artefacts are preserved, chalk and limestone present good preservation of bones and shell, acidic soil is bad for bone, the acid dissolves the bone away, however sometimes an outline of the body is left in the soil indicating the former presence of a burial, for example at Sutton Hoo. Metal salts will preserve organic material to a certain extent, an example of this could be seen from a wooden helmet with a metal band, the wood under the band would be preserved due to the metals protection from rotting bacteria, however this only really occurs with copper and not all metals. Peat bogs provide excellent preservation conditions for skin and hair but not bone e.g. the Bog bodies, 'Lindow' man.
Another highly influential factor leading to differential survival is climate; Tropical climates are very poor for organic preservation due to high bacterial activity, temperate climates are usually poor conditions for organic preservation because the temperature fluctuates a lot. Arctic and arid conditions are the best climates for organic preservation, one obvious example of arid climate preservation would be that of the mummies in Egypt, in the Nile valley, pre-dynastic burial, c.3000BC presents an example of natural mummification in arid conditions.
The final hugely important aspect affecting preservation is local site factors. A cave creates an isolated environment from the outside, it is a more stable climate not affected by daily temperature fluctuation. Waterlogged conditions can produce some of the best preserved organic artefacts, e.g. the Vindolanda tablets found near Hadrian's Wall. These tablets have given archaeologists extensive information about everyday life in a roman fort during their occupation of Britain. They provide such information as shopping lists and inventories, even a birthday party invitation giving us information about social structure. One of the most amusing comments on one tablet is from one of the commanders stating he would not travel because the 'roads are so bloody awful' these sorts of snippets into peoples lives are fascinating and would not be evident if it were not for the organic preservation and environmental conservation of the finds. One of the best examples of organic preservation and its importance to archaeologists when trying to reconstruct and understand a site is the urban waterfront of Jorvik (Viking York). Organic preservation was extensive, finds included wood, thatch, leather, textiles, animal bone and grain. Almost everything from the Vikings activity consists of organic material; it is only because of the ideal preservation conditions in which they were found that we have been able to identify and reconstruct the activities that took place and the items used there in Viking times.
Organic preservation therefore is usually limited to extremes of temperature or moisture, water logged, arid or frozen conditions.
Excavation of the early Mesolithic site Starr Carr situated south of Scarborough in Yorkshire has yielded an excellent collection of organic and flint remains together with other data of the site that has enabled archaeologists to reconstruct the way of life and ecological conditions experienced by inhabitants at the time of occupation. Archaeologists have identified that the site was built on a birch wood platform on the edge of a Mesolithic lake; the organic remains have survived due to the 'damp' or waterlogged nature of the site. Evidence from the deer antler (which have a seasonal growth) and from other plant and organic remains suggest a hunter gatherer community and that occupation of the site took place in winter and spring over several years.
In the late Mesolithic, Neolithic and Bronze Age peat blankets formed, making land that had previously been farmed unavailable. We know that the land had previously been cultivated because the field systems can still be detected under the peat. In the Somerset levels an ancient track way known as the 'sweet track' dating c3806-3807BC has been detected. Its construction has been dated to spring/autumn using Dendrochronology and analysis of pollen remains preserved in the peat.
Otzi the 'Iceman' was discovered in the Austrian mountains; his body was preserved in almost perfect condition due to the immediate covering of snow and consequential freezing of his body. Dr. Klaus Oeggl has reconstructed the Iceman's last meal using microscopic analysis of a tiny sample (.0016 ounces) removed from the mummy's intestine. What he discovered was einkorn, one of the few domesticated grains used in the Iceman's part of the world at this time, suggesting that he had contact with an agricultural community. The sample also contained many different varieties of pollen one being from the hop hornbeam tree, which grows in a warm environment. This told archaeologists the side of the mountain he had been travelling on and the season in which he died (The hop hornbeam tree blooms between March and June.) Another example of a frozen burial that yielded many interesting organic finds is the Pazyrick 'ice Maiden'.
Pollen is one of the most resilient organic substances; it has the capacity to last for millions of years, and is best preserved in waterlogged conditions. As such pollen analysis is the one discipline in environmental archaeology that can be applied to most excavated sites. Pollen can tell us about times of year depending on when certain plants produce their pollen; it also gives us a great deal of information about climate change. Where pollen and spores have accumulated over time, a record of the past vegetation of an area may be preserved. Changes in the vegetation of an area may be due to changes of climate, and this is made evident through the presence or absence of specific pollen species. Sediments containing fossil pollen have been taken from peat bogs, lake beds, alluvial deposits, ocean bottoms and ice cores.
Environmental archaeology is also an important area to consider associated with other archaeological processes for example radio carbon dating. The levels of co2 in the atmosphere have fluctuated considerably over time due to environmental change. Therefore it is important to consider as it will affect the accuracy of our dating techniques. Archaeological reconstruction also includes a need to study the environment of a site, it enables the artist to produce an image that is more accurate by placing sites and finds in a suitable context that often makes a previously unrecognised function obvious.
When introducing the topic of environmental archaeology Greene states that 'It's strength lies in the unchallengeable assumption that man, his sites and his artefacts can only be understood properly if full account is taken of their surroundings, landscape, climate, plants and animals.' It is clear then that the discipline of Environmental Archaeology is key to our understanding of archaeological sites. By putting them in context we are able to begin to understand the complex structure of human habitation. Not only that but environmental archaeology spans from the vary broad to the extremely detailed, it can tell us about differing sea levels around the world throughout the Aegean all the way to minute details such as the last meal of a Tyrolean man 5,300 years ago. The information we gather from the environment is invaluable in understanding the source of human life and the change and continuity of habitation throughout time.