Our knowledge of the medieval peasant comes predominantly from historical sources. However, during the medieval period education was not common. It was restricted mainly to the upper classes who would therefore be the ones writing these sources. This generally causes primary texts to be biased towards those of a lower class, in this case the peasants. Therefore the impact that archaeology has had on our knowledge of the medieval peasant is that it allows us to see their lifestyle without the prejudice of an earlier time clouding our understanding. It gives us information that the authors of our historical texts may not have seen fit to write about. I will discuss the various branches of information that archaeology has presented to us. This will include excavation at various sites, field work, and scientific methods such as the investigation into climatic change. All these aspects of archaeology will link together to provide us with an unbiased and factual account of what life would have been like as a medieval peasant.
I will begin by looking at the various house types that existed throughout medieval Germany. In early medieval Germany peasant buildings were constructed from wood. There were two main types of house style. The main style, starting in the earlier stages of medieval Germany and continuing throughout, was the sunken pit homes known as 'Graubenhauser'. These were small, one roomed houses of about 4m by 4m. However, these were gradually replaced by ground level houses from the middle of the medieval period. In later medieval times, starting from the 13 th century onwards these houses began to evolve into buildings with subdivisions and even stone foundations, preventing the previous problem of the decay of the wooden foundations.
Farmsteads were also an important aspect of rural life and consisted of numerous buildings used for a variety of functions. The excavation of the 8 th to 9 th century settlement at Warendorf, Westfalen shows that these farmsteads were enclosed by a fence and were dominated by the Long Hall of the Lord. These Long Halls are similar to the excavated palaces built for the English regional kings and were surrounded by smaller building for the Lords workers (Graubenhauser). There have also been many excavations of sites on a much smaller scale than the one at Warendorf. Buildings in these sites tend to have three-aisled buildings containing both the living quarters and the area for the animals. The huge contrast between these two settlement types suggests significant variation in the wealth and property ownership of the peasants, and that the larger settlements must have been owned by wealthy landowners.
During the middle of the medieval period there was an advancement in building techniques, meaning that practically all the functions of a farmstead could be encapsulated in one or few buildings, thus concentrating the business and making it more efficient. This technique of building has been seen in many excavations of sites from around the 12 th century, including one deserted site of Konishagen. Excavation of sites including cemeteries has proven that there were often villages of closely grouped farmsteads along a grid system of streets. This suggests that there were families of people who worked closely within the same area of land, supporting the idea of a Lord in charge of the workers. This also supports the evidence of fencing around farmsteads to distinguish between closely plotted farms.
Excavations of English medieval villages show a similar kind of house structure. The excavation of a village site in Gloucestershire called Ebley, in 1995, tells us something about house structure. There is documentary evidence of the site beginning in 1287 and continuing right throughout the period. The evidence at Ebley is of house remains in the form of limestone footings and postholes. The limestone wall footings are slight; they could not have held a substantial wall and were probably used for some kind of lean-to building with dwarf walling. The postholes and structural remains indicate post built buildings around 4m by 6m in size. There are remains of hearths inside the buildings; evidence for this is the charcoal rich soil and ash accumulation. The floors of these buildings are set at a reduced level to the surrounding area, as with Graubenhauser. There are also postholes around the remains; evidence of fencing which was probably used in part to keep animals to a specific area. Other examples of medieval villages come from alternative excavations. For example the excavation of the medieval village site of Thrislington in County Durham is different from Ebley in the sense that it included a manor house and chapel; the peasants here were under the control of a Lord. We know that this occurred from looking at historical sources. Villages, to some extent, are the creation of the state, as it is easier for a centralised King to control the peasants if they are grouped together and under the control of one of his or her supporters.
We can see the evidence of medieval farming on the landscape through various archaeological methods. In Germany from the 9 th and 10 th centuries onwards we can see that ploughing was used in fields. This is evident from the left over 'ridge and furrows' in the soil of flat land. These obvious marks can help us to see the extent of fields used. Another method which can help us with this is the method of testing the soil for phosphates. We know from historical texts that a kind of manure called 'plaggenesche' was used by medieval peasants in Germany. This was used for so long that it gradually formed layers up to a meter in depth. When excavation takes place we can see the areas farmed by the layer of manure found. Another way of testing for this without digging is by simply taking a sample of the soil and testing it for phosphates which are present in the manure.
Rural settlement in Germany through the medieval ages was predominantly of an agrarian economic structure. We know this because the animal bone remains found at medieval settlements have been very few; often less than 1% of the finds5. This is be due to the decreased importance of hunting, which we can see through the forest clearance and intensive cultivation of the land at that time; also perceived through analysis of the soil. The bones found can tell us a lot about the animal husbandry of the time and also about the life of the animals; when they died. For example it was found that the cattle were slaughtered after their third year so that they could be used for traction until then5, stressing the importance of agriculture. On the other hand, the pigs were slaughtered relatively young as their meat was preferred then. The animals kept were generally used for traction, their hides, wool and meat. Animal bones can also be used to investigate trade. For example, bones have been found in Bremen from Ostfriesland5. These 'foreign' bones are identifiable through traits such as being bigger in size. This shows that there was a certain amount of trading occurring between villages.
Farming can also be investigated by looking at the earthwork remains of field boundaries seen through aerial photography and the charred or fossilised remains of crops grown by the peasants.
Trade between villages was limited and any production that occurred was generally for self consumption. We can tell that textiles were made in medieval Germany through finds of Spindle whorls and loom weights in Graubenhauser. Also, in the settlement of Konigshagen the production debris of a small kiln was found6. This suggests someone was producing things for the whole settlement. There were areas of industrial settlements for things like mining and smelting. These were found near other rural settlements and probably would have intertwined with them to a certain extent. These industrial settlements were bound to Manors and Castles showing that the Lords were the instigators of industrial undertakings. This in turn shows that there was some economic linking between the nobility and the peasants; from looking at historical texts it is known that the nobility held power over the peasant villages that they were linked to.
The excavation of Ebley turned up a lot of pottery in post pits. These finds show that the dominant style of pot was the cooking pot7, indicating that it was mainly a farming village consisting of agricultural families. It was not of a high status or there would be finds made of decorative or table wares. There were few glazed wares found, which further indicates that it is not a site of high status. We can tell this village was in use during medieval times as the dominant material that the pots are made from is Oolitic limestone, which was extremely common during the 12 th and 13 th centuries7. These finds are mirrored in many excavations of medieval rural settlements, such as Stonehouse, also in Gloucestershire. At these medieval sites there were also finds of crops that were grown. These were mainly found in hearth deposits as charred material and included cereal grains as well as pulses and mostly wheat. This supports the evidence that medieval peasants lived in agricultural settlements.
Throughout the 10 th and 11 th centuries there was what is called a 'little optimum' which is a climatic warm stage. This caused an increase in crop yields and population. However, this increase in population applied great stress upon the land which eventually couldn't support them. There is archaeological evidence of most families farming plots of less than 10 acres and in some cases of two families living and working in an area previously worked by only one family. This put intense pressure on the land causing soil exhaustion and therefore low productivity. Crops began to fail which in turn caused a decrease in the population. This can be supported through graphs of the population created from doomsday book and tax figures9. Another factor which caused this decrease in population was that during the 13 th century the little optimum came to an end. This sudden change in climate resulted in weather anomalies such as flooding and droughts. The archaeological evidence for this increase in rain fall and flooding can be seen by looking at the floors of buildings which around this time were raised above ground level, for example the floors of Bordesley Abbey in Worcestershire8. This can also be seen in the sudden installation of cobbled streets and drainage ditches in villages. Ice core evidence taken from Greenland shows that the end of the 13 th century was actually the minimum in the cold period following the optimum8. This decrease in population was followed by the devastating effects of the Plague, which killed off roughly half the population. This would have caused a severe shortage of labourers for the Lords to employ, which would have offered the peasants more control over wages and the ability to buy their own land. Houses from the 1500's have been excavated with multiple barns providing areas for cereal with hearths to dry it out so that it can keep and be sold. This shows the increased power of the peasants and the beginnings of agricultural capitalism. We can see the effects that this wealth had through stratigraphic layers: After the barns were built there were extensions made to the house, including extra floors, fireplaces and dove cotes9, which were an important status symbol; they now had luxury money. This shows the beginnings of an end to villages with peasants controlled by the Lord, and shows a more complex hierarchical system emerging.
Archaeology has taught us a lot about the medieval peasant. From various excavations we have learnt that their economic basis was essentially agriculture. This has been shown through the analysis of crop remains and soil at sites, also by the structure of their settlements, with fencing to control animals. Environmental archaeology has also shown that the huge drop in population was beginning even before the effects of the plague of 1349. Finally the emergence of increasingly wealthy peasants occurred after the plague, due to the forced decentralisation of power from the nobles and the shift to a more stratified social system.