To must of us the word scavenging implies an unskilled act carried out by people or animals not clever or organised enough to hunt. However, is this really the case? Examination of the skills required to both hunt and scavenge seems to suggest that both entail similar activities, such as tool making and co-operation. From looking at an array of Middle Palaeolithic sites and their implied subsistence strategies I will assess the extent to which hunting is superior to scavenging, if at all. These sites will include open air sites such as Il'Skaja and Mauren, and rock shelter/cave sites like that at Combe Grenal and Guattari Cave.
There are various problems which we will inevitably encounter when trying to evaluate the subsistence strategies of Middle Palaeolithic Neanderthals. For instance, the preservation prospects for plant material are very small so this element is largely missing in the evaluation. Although, bones analysed for isotopes showing the environments lived in show mainly open country animals so meat would have generally been the primary source of protein anyway. Animal bones from the sites may have disappeared post-excavation, and some are more susceptible to decay than others which may cause the data to be skewed. Another factor is that at open air sites the bones are more likely to have been open to erosion or movement than at rock shelters. There is the added difficulty of distinguishing between bones which have been introduced by humans and those which carnivores have brought in. Finally, few of the total sites have been excavated fully if at all, and for only a few of these do we have precise spatial distribution of the faunal assemblages. This creates the problem of where bones came from on the site; were they sorted or just discarded at random? These are important questions as they can help to show what the site was being used for and to infer the possible degree of social organisation and forward planning being used. Therefore, when looking at the evidence from any site, we must keep these factors in mind and be aware of any bias that they might present.
The idea that Neanderthals used specific hunting has been widely debated. Many, such as Binford, dispute this idea and feel that they mainly relied on scavenging or basic forms of hunting. On the other hand, people such as Chase, believe that there is ample evidence of this. What is widely agreed upon is that in order for specialisation to have any real cultural or behavioural meaning it has to have been a conscious decision by the hominids. This is where lots of problems lie, as many see the change in hunting patterns reflected in the climatic changes and therefore base the hunting on the fauna available. Alternately you could argue that even though climatic changes are occurring alongside faunal changes, there could still be an element of selection and no pattern of food acquisition is likely to be entirely random. The site of Combe Grenal has been excavated to give faunal remains across both glacial and inter-glacial cycles; it shows 55 distinct occupation levels which is un-paralleled anywhere else in the Middle Palaeolithic. The results are varied and show different animals dominating at different times. Broadly, the climatic conditions seem to correspond to the fauna; Wurm I which was comparatively temperate is dominated by Red Deer, whereas Wurm II which was much colder shows Reindeer dominating. This climatic argument is supported by the fact that the fauna change gradually as would be expected. However, Chase argues that these faunal changes are too gradual to be attributed to climate, and also there are a few brief but significant climatic changes which have no effect on fauna so he says there must have been specialisation. As yet we don't really know enough about the way in which animals react to climatic changes to asses this claim fully, but it is possible that they have a great deal of inertia to ecological shifts. The main claim for specialised hunting from Combe Grenal comes from the levels 25-20. It is at these levels that a high representation of post-cranial reindeer bones are found. This is in contrast to the rest of the levels which generally show a dominance of head and lower body bones. This indicates primary access to the reindeer carcasses which suggests hunting. Perhaps they were killed far away from the site and it was only these best parts that were brought back? Further, the bones are mostly of young and female reindeer which could indicate specific hunting as these would have good meat on them as opposed to older reindeer. This seemingly specific hunting site among layers which point to scavenging could suggest that they partook in both hunting and scavenging as a way of subsistence, depending on the resources available. Binford has argued that this shows not specific hunting but the early signs of hunting development since calves and females would probably be easy targets. However, there are a few other sites in Southern France which have small samples but nevertheless show a higher ratio of reindeer post cranial bones to teeth. There is strong evidence to suggest specific hunting from a number of European open air sites such as Il'skaja in Russia, La Borde and Mauran in France and Wallertheim in Germany. These sites are dominated by the presence of bovids, which also supports the idea of large game hunting as a subsistence strategy. At Il'Skaja the dominant fauna is that of Bison. These are prime age dominant with a low percentage of carnivore gnaw marks. There is also a high proportion of flint tools among the lithics found. Examination of the site, bones and their deposition reveals that there was recurrent seasonal exploitation. The evidence here strongly suggests that there was specialised large game hunting. Mauran is dominated by Bison. These show a catastrophic mortality which is again indicative of hunting as they are unlikely to run off the side of a cliff of their own accord. Wallertheim is a slightly different site with species of differing habitats being found but again with a high proportion of tools. There are open air mammals such as Bison and Equus, along with forest dwelling species such as Sus Scrofa. However, the distinction here is that only the Bison show any signs of human intervention. They are prime age dominant and have a low degree of carnivore gnawing, which contrasts with the results of the other species. This infers that only Bison were exploited by humans and therefore indicates specialised hunting. Le Borde is slightly different in that it shows exploitation of five species of mammals, which are prime age and female dominant. Therefore this indicates that Neanderthals did hunt large game, although this site is less species specific than the others. The evidence from these sites points strongly towards large game and specific hunting. However, as with most data from the Middle Palaeolithic there are other factors to be aware of. For instance you need to be able to show that the frequency of these skeletal parts is the result of an economic decision and not the result of other taphonomic processes, which is difficult since they are all affected by 'in situ' decomposition and possible post-excavation loss. However, the mortality pattern of young and prime age bovids rarely occurs in nature and is almost always the result of hunting; human hunting is further implicated as no carnivore assemblages seem to produce these results. The cut marks at Mauran and Wallertheim are also indicative of hunting as they show a pattern produced when the whole animal is de-fleshed. Impact marks probably from marrow processing are also frequent and occur at the weakest part of the bone, suggesting a good knowledge of food processing. This bone fracturing is also seen in ethnoarchaeology by the Nunamiut Eskimo. Further supportive evidence is that of the ages killed. The prime age animals must have provided better nutrition for the hominids in order for them to have selected them as their prey, and in cold climates they retain good fat stores. If this was why they were hunting them then you would expect to see occupation during summer and autumn; seen at Mauran. These examples of sites do not invalidate the accepted theories of opportunistic and diverse subsistence strategies during the Middle Palaeolithic but they do broaden our knowledge and show that hunting of specific species and large game most probably did occur.
Many sites have been found below headlands at the bottom of cliffs. It is argued that this shows the technique of killing the animals by forcing them to run off high points in the landscape. This is indicated by a 'catastrophic' mortality pattern, which is representative of all ages and sexes. This has been seen at many sites including the site of La Cotte de St. Brelade. This is an early Neanderthal site, dated to 180kya, with archaeological remains found in ravines below the headland. The interesting thing about this site is that the fauna, which includes Woolly Mammoth and Rhino, has been sorted into different parts and stacked; for instance with skulls in one area and long bones in another. This shows knowledge that different parts are useful for different thing and also co-operation as a group of people working on their own would not group all their things together; perhaps some people were processing heads and others processing marrow or meat rich parts. Social cohesion is also indicated by the fact that herding a group of animals off the edge of a cliff would have taken multiple people working together and would have required knowledge of the movement of different herds in order to successfully intercept them. However it would not necessarily have taken the same tools required for close quarter hunting as the animals would effectively kill themselves, although butchery tools would have been needed to process the meat.
The idea that Neanderthals were hunting should be supported by the types of tools found. For example at Umm el Tlel in Syria, two scrapers were found hafted to wooden handles, and at Lehringen in Germany (100kya) a wooden spear was found among the bones of an elephant. Also some blades seen to have 'shoulders' which looks as though they were hafted to something and either used as a projectile or as a close quarter stabbing instrument. Obviously it is difficult to fully infer that these tools were used for hunting and not just as snow probes for finding frozen bodies or for de-fleshing carcasses, however at La Cotte de St. Brelade characteristic impact damage is apparent on several of the tips of Mousterian points, which seems to support the hunting theory.
Evidence from other layers at Combe Grenal provides arguments for scavenging being used in the Middle Palaeolithic. In the early layers of Wurm I there is a predominance of Red Deer bones. However, the bones represented show an over-representation of non-meaty bones and under representation of meat rich bones; specifically they show an over-representation of heads. This pattern is consistent at all different levels and indicates that the hominids were scavenging, as why else would you choose only meat poor parts? This pattern is also shown again at the end of the Wurm II period (after periods 25-20 discussed earlier). These samples tend to show a dominance of heads, especially in respect to the Red Deer and also with the Bovids. The Bovid bones from the periods of 25-20 which show an over representation of heads cannot be due to preservation issues as the Reindeer bones from the same period show an exactly opposite pattern. Scavenging seems to be the most likely reason for the over-representation for the meat poor bones that we generally find at Combe Grenal. This is supported by the fact that carnivores eat the meaty axial parts first and then the upper limbs, so the parts found would represent the parts the animals liked least. This idea has been rejected by Chase who argues that the cut and breakage marks are not consistent with large scale utilisation of the remains, suggesting they weren't the only remains available to them. He also argues that a strong representation of pelvic bones is found among the Red Deer which is a meat rich part that the carnivores would most likely take if they had primary access, there is also a weak representation of foot bones which would be left by the carnivores. He argues that Combe Grenal was basically a primary hunting and butchery site where mostly complete carcasses were brought for processing. The Red Deer were processed on site and the prime meaty parts were taken back to the 'home base'. Basically, they would consume the meat poor parts on the spot and take away the good parts to their home. However, if this is the case then where are these other sites with all the meat rich bones? Of course, they may not have been found yet. The 'Schlepp effect' could be used to explain this; you wouldn't want to lug around heavy animal parts if they weren't that good so perhaps Combe Grenal was a hunting ground and they were leaving behind the parts that they didn't want to carry. But then again, if they were taking away the meat rich parts, why are the pelvises left behind, and where are the feet? Although this seems to represent a largely scavenging site, it does seem that they are scavenging specific animals, perhaps those that bring in the specific foods that they were lacking, such as fats and marrow. Or maybe it was just due to seasonal availability. The fact that they may have scavenged these parts is not necessarily indicative of un-sophisticated behaviour. In fact, in order to scavenge so selectively and consistently they would have had to have had some degree of social organisation to go out in groups and find these carcasses. They would have needed to have knowledge of where to find them and then the tools to butcher them. It is also possible that they may have needed to fight off competition from other scavengers to get the meat. In this case hunting tools and the ability to fight with them would have been necessary as well as the social co-operation needed to fight off packs of animals, which wouldn't be easy alone. This could be supported by the fact that pelvises were found which would have been sought after as they are meat rich and most probably wouldn't have been found on animals that had been almost fully utilised by other predators.
There are of course other ways in which scavenging could have been carried out; it could be pure luck that they come across a body, or they could go looking for animals which died a natural death through age or freezing. These frozen bodies would be especially useful as hyenas wouldn't be able to get at them despite their strong jaws and it is here that the human manipulation of fire becomes so important; they would have access to all the best parts without having to hunt.
Many Middle Palaeolithic sites show evidence for both hunting and scavenging. For example at Combe Grenal where levels 25-20 show specific hunting but the other 50 levels seem to indicate scavenging. It can also be demonstrated by Guattari Cave and Grotta di Sant'Agostino in Western Italy, studied by Mary Steiner and Steven Khun. At Guattari the top levels were found to be dominated by hooves and head bones with heavy carnivore gnawing marks, implying that this was a hyena den, not used by humans. However in the lower layers there are few gnawing marks and few hyena bones, indicating it was used by humans. However the assemblages were still largely the same as the hyenas, which leads to the conclusion that the Neanderthals here were partaking in a scavenging subsistence. The assemblages at Sant'Agostino are reversed. Here the Red Deer and Fallow were hunted, shown by mostly whole carcasses being brought back; with the cut marks outnumbering the carnivore gnaw marks. These sites show that within a specific region, Neanderthals were employing different techniques to obtain food which was dependant on moving around the landscape; they were deciding where to move to get food, demonstrating basic planning abilities. The idea that Neanderthals moved around their landscape can be seen from the seasonal occupation at many sites, such as Mauran, which indicates that they probably had multiple sites which they exploited at different times of year. However, this would only be necessary if one site wasn't enough. Many sites, such as Il'Skaja, show year long occupation which suggests that their requirements were being met without the need for movement too far a field. These sites do seem to be the ones demonstrating hunting of large game, which in theory should provide them with ample resources.
From looking at these case studies it becomes clear that there was no one subsistence strategy employed by the Neanderthals. Their survival strategy would have depended upon the surrounding landscape and the animals existing within it, which would vary depending on the time of year and climate; which fluctuated frequently. We must therefore look at the Neanderthals subsistence as being about movement around their specific landscape to achieve the highest amount of food, whether by hunting or scavenging. It can also be deduced that similar patterns of behaviour and thought would have been necessary for both strategies. Both would have required group co-operation and planning in order to decide where and when to go. This would have to be based on knowledge of the particular animals being sought out which probably would have varied season to season. Stone tools would have also been a factor in both. Both would have required butchery tools and it is also possible that scavengers would have had to use fighting tools to fight off competition from animals like hyenas. It is really only the act of hunting the animal which shows any more ability than scavenging as it would require greater co-operation, especially in the case of large animals. However, there is always the possibility of spontaneous hunting or scavenging and this is not ruled out simply because the Neanderthals are shown to actively organise both these activities; why make things more difficult? If you were on an unsuccessful hunting trip and you found the frozen body of a Bison, you wouldn't leave it just because it wasn't on your itinerary.
The evidence presented regarding various middle Palaeolithic sites strongly suggests that there were multiple subsistence strategies being used. Neanderthals were hunting and scavenging in various different ways, some perhaps more dangerous than others, with driving being seen at La Cotte De St. Brelade and specific hunting of large animals at Il'Skaja. This seems to be dependant not on their capabilities but on the landscape they are in and the availability of their resources. They made full use of their region in which ever way was most profitable.