It is often assumed that when the Romans conquered countries such as Britain, they were conquering areas which had no social or political structure. It was only after the Romans introduced this level of 'civilisation' that these countries truly developed. However, this is not true as any society will have structure and in this case, often well developed. Nevertheless, the imposition of the roman army on foreign ways of life would have had some influence in spheres such as urbanisation, the military, architecture and religion. By looking at some examples of towns and areas of Northern Europe I will analyse the contribution the army made.
The strategy of the Roman Empire was generally to conquer by using minimum force. This usually meant that they would go in and take over existing structures, using the elite to control the people. In order to create a feeling of inclusion rather than oppression for the conquered people they would try to remove the army as soon as possible, leaving only what was necessary in the cases of frontier provinces, such as Britain and the Rhineland. Obviously this strategy was a lot easier if they already had client kingdoms there or had alliances with kingdoms. However, if the people did resist, the army would need to be used. With this strategy, the degree of centralisation in the states being invaded is crucial. This can be seen by looking at the difficulty with which the roman army conquered areas of little centralisation with guerrilla warfare, such as areas of Germany beyond the Rhine. In contrast there were many alliances with Britain and so conquest was relatively easy.
The Romans would have utilised the structure of military units in conquered areas. In the Celto-Germanic world prior to the roman invasion under Caesar, martial values were held very high. They were warrior societies with warfare endemic to their ways of life. This can be seen through extensive ritual deposition of martial objects. War was often a way of getting economic and political power as many traded Gallic prisoners as slaves to Italians (Roymans 1984 p15). When the Romans invaded they would have used this military potential to expand the empire further. They would have recruited the soldiers into the roman army through the promises of Roman Citizenship after completion of their service, which would have given them many more rights. These foreign soldiers formed 'Auxiliary' units, whereas the Roman citizens formed Legionaries. Even when areas of Gaul and the Rhineland were not yet conquered, tribes made loyal to Rome under Caesar such as the Treveri and Batari supplied troops to keep these areas under control during the Civil wars between Octavian and Mark Antony, which would have kept the legionaries busy in and around Italy. This supply of troops came mostly from the southern areas of North Gaul, seen by the probable positioning of military camps from this period (ADx-AD31). Finally, under the reign of Tiberius in AD16, a permanent large concentration of troops was stationed along the Rhine frontier, in the form of 'limes'. Alfoldy has estimated that there would have been around 42,000 soldiers in the Lower Rhine area during Tiberius' time and 20,000 of these would have been mostly locally supplied Auxiliaries. This shows the importance of auxiliaries and demonstrates the military contribution that the army brought to these provinces. Although this could be argued to be more a contribution to the Roman Empire, as these people were fighting for them, it meant that eventually these people would gain roman citizenship and therefore more rights. It also meant increased trade to these areas as people would want to trade goods for the money that they would be paid by the roman army. Being made part of the Roman Empire would have also protected you from invasion by others and so in this way would seem very beneficial especially if previously you were under threat from neighbouring tribes.
The idea that the roman army brought urbanisation with it is popular. However, we must remember that when talking about the Northern provinces, or indeed any area of the Roman Empire, there are often huge differences in Romanisation region to region. For example, in north-western Britain there were vast areas of rural landscape with no urban centres other than those 'Vici' attached to the roman forts. In contrast in the south there were many urban centres independent of forts, such as London, as well as those with military origins like Colchester. Also throughout north-west Europe, areas such as Gallia Belgica and the Rhineland had varying levels of urbanisation depending largely on the varying agrarian regimes possible to create a surplus for the markets. A common theory is that the army's presence created the need for more food. They would also bring with them money, as they were paid in cash and so trading with them would have been a possibility. The people would have had to pay their taxes 'in kind' by producing food for the army, which meant that a surplus would have had to have been achieved. Of course, some areas are more capable of creating an agricultural surplus than others depending on the surrounding landscape. This idea was examined by Manning who deduced that this need would probably have been taken into account when setting up forts and so would be evidenced by the bunching of forts in arable areas. There is evidence of this along the Eden Valley where there were an abundance of forts (Jones 1984). Nevertheless, producing this surplus may have contributed nothing to the local people as this was not transferred as wealth to them but paid as a tax to the army. There is also a problem in seeing this increase in cultivation as it is hard to detect through archaeological remains. However, this doesn't mean it didn't happen and can be inferred through looking at field systems and what they may yield. In addition, if the method of conquest discussed earlier was in fact the way that the Romans conquered provinces, then this would mean that forts would be situated at strategic points, like tribal centres and boundaries which are already set up. This means that the forts would have been an effect not a cause of urbanisation. The idea of a market economy being set up can be investigated in a number of ways. Firstly markets are thought to be seen by the appearance of 'mansiones' where formalised trading took place in the Roman Empire(Jones 1984). These are difficult to identify as with many buildings when you are relying on sometimes scarce remains and little to go on. However many found in this country are very similar architecturally to those in the Roman world and occupy important positions in the layout of the town. Markets are also indicated by the widening of roads, possibly to encourage the practise of markets and increased by the trampling of cattle and continued use by large numbers of people. We can further look at the idea of markets developing through the influence of the army in other areas of Northern Europe. The introduction of the Pax Romana would have brought an end to the constant warring of the early Roman Empire under the Republic. This would have meant a decrease in the importance of the warrior societies of northern Gaul, Gallia Belgica and the Rhineland. In turn this would have created a stable social-political order, with the elite becoming more entrenched in a 'civilised' ideology and Roman lifestyle. The Pax Romana meant that a large number of troops would have been almost permanently stationed along the Rhine frontier. There would therefore be an increased need for food production in the surrounding areas; transporting cereals would have been expensive and difficult so cultivating it in the nearby areas would have been far preferable. It has been estimated that during the reign of Tiberius there would have been approximately 42,000 soldiers in the Rhine area which would have translated to a need for about 8400 - 21000 tons of cereals per year. This would have needed 840 - 2100 km land to be cultivated, which in an area the size of Gallia Belgica should have been fairly easy (Roymans 1996). The further surplus provided by this increased cultivation would have probably been sold at the markets to produce wealth for material goods. This exchange of agrarian goods for roman money would have meant that far more people would have been capable of acquiring prestige goods formerly only available to the elite. This roman money would have increased in circulation hugely since the arrival of the army as the soldiers were paid in money. This of course meant that the Northern provinces were a huge area of expenditure for the Roman Empire and this would have attracted many traders to the area, which in turn would have increased the wealth of the area; possibly funding the construction of public buildings and so increasing the urbanism of the area. However, despite this seemingly massive increase in the monetisation of local economies and commercialisation of exchange, much trading probably remained in the traditional ways of exchange. The market economy of the Romans would have been adopted but not fully. We can see this through the continued use of traditional ideas of gift exchange, now using the wealth obtained through the markets to buy and give roman prestige goods.
The prevalent idea that the Romans brought 'civilisation' and structure to the towns of North-West Europe through this introduction of taxation and a market economy assumes the idea that the army were an economic stimulus. This may have been the case and in many areas surrounding the forts no doubt was, but this also assumes that Pre Roman towns were primitive and had no system of taxation. This is not true. We only have to look at kingdoms such as Camulodunum to see that there was a great deal of social structure. These proto-urban centres were ruled by an elite and must have had some form of tribute network prior to the arrival of the Romans; unfortunately this is difficult to see the extent of in the archaeological record and there is no written evidence. The probable scenario is that there was a substantial tribute network in place in many areas of Britain before the Romans arrived but that this was then increased.
One major aspect of the Roman Empire was that it was polytheistic and wanted to win over foreign deities to its cause. A victory over a foreign place meant that its deities had complied with them and so they would then incorporate these foreign deities into the roman religion. A roman army camp can be seen as a kind of microcosm of Rome (Henig 1984 pg226). It would have fostered the same cults and same religious ideas. This is why when the Romans conquered other countries they simply adopted their deities. This was also a good way of bringing the people over to your side; don't take their gods away from them and completely replace them or they'll be unhappy, but slightly modify them and they are more likely to accept them. When the army came to Britain and other parts of North West Europe they would have done just this. We can see examples of this in Bath, where they encountered a goddess called Sulis. Sulis was likened to the roman goddess Minerva and so the two were moulded together to form 'Sulis Minerva'. This can be seen in roman literary sources as well as figurines and in excavation of the temple dedicated to her. This example is useful as the temple was built late in Nero's reign or else in the early Flavian period when there would have been no veterans present to force the locals into it. It was also built on top of the Pre-Roman temple of Sulis. This shows that the people had accepted this morphing of their religions, known as 'interpretatio romana'. This merging of religion would also be likely to happen for reasons other than Rome wanting to win deities to its cause. The soldiers in these new countries would be worried as initially it is likely there would be lots of civil unrest, and given their inclination to rituals and religion they would probably have wanted to appease any local supernatural forces. Additionally, the native people would probably have sent the soldiers as authority and culture figures and so mayhave been more likely to adopt their customs. This contribution to religion and roman culture is an indirect influence of the army as they were doing it for the good of their state and selves but the native people would have adopted it as part of religion from then on. Other arts such as the ability to write in Latin would have also been spread although this is probably only likely in areas with a long standing army base, such as that at Hadrians wall where inscriptions have been found (MORE). Other roman gods were adopted by the local people to help in their lives. For example around the Cotswolds, Mars was adopted as their local protector. This seems strange as Mars is usually seen primarily as the god of war, and since he is a god of the people who conquered them you would imagine that this is how they would see him. However, here the people have taken his role as an agricultural god as more important. This may indicate to some degree what the local people here thought of the roman influence. This incorporation of the roman gods into local religion would have further increased the people's respect for Rome.
It has often been thought that the roman towns found in Britain were built up around forts built by the army. One idea is that the people would settle around the forts for trading purposes discussed earlier and the population would become so substantial that when the army left, the town would remain. Another similar idea is that the Romans came in and invaded, taking over Iron Age towns and building a fort to keep the people under control. This urbanised the town and gradually they became more and more substantial. This is based on the idea that towns would be placed in strategic places in the landscape and would hold power over the surrounding area. The elite would therefore most likely be based here and so this links in with the Roman strategy discussed earlier. However there are a few problems with this. Firstly, many kingdoms in the south of England already had ties with Rome from when Julius Caesar came in 51BC. There is evidence of expensive gifts being given to these kings, such as Commius' torque. This indicates that these kingdoms would have been of some importance to Rome and if this is the case then invading and imposing a huge fort right in the middle of your allies' town is not likely to make them very happy. We can investigate this by looking at examples such as Silchester. This was a substantial Iron Age occupation and the Atrebates are known to have had ties with the Romans. This site has been heavily excavated and there is still no conclusive evidence of any fort to be found. Arguments for a fort include that one large structure which is thought to be an early forum was in fact originally a fort. However, this is unsubstantiated as there very little evidence for this other than the argument that it looks like an army barracks. This is very much up to your own interpretation and if you want it to look like a fort then it can, but it could also be any number of things. Further, it could simply be that the people influencing the building of the buildings were the army and since they had probably never been to Rome, their idea of a forum would be heavily influenced by the shape of the barracks they were used to constructing. They also found evidence for lots of metal working and ritual activity which seems unlikely for army barracks. Other interpretations include that of a proto-forum and even that it could be a palace as parallels have been drawn with Fishbourne. London is another example of a town that likely was founded without army influence. One hypothesis argues that it originated as a military base which a settlement grew up around. It then developed into a roman town once the military were moved on. The other, more seemingly likely theory is that it was always planned as a town, right from the start. In this case, it is thought that it was created by merchants who required a deep water port for trading in this new province (marsden). If it had been a military base then we would expect to find a fort, and as with Silchester, there is as yet no evidence for this. There are also no abundant finds of military equipment that would be expected that have been found on other military sites such as Colchester. However, we know that the army had a lot of influence on some towns. For example, Colchester was Cunobelin's capital, in charge of the eastern dynasty. In AD43 the legions constructed a military fort here and after the south was pacified it was made into a Colonie for veterans of the roman army. This was a town with natives living in it but dominated by veterans. Here there were many public buildings such as a forum and a theatre. There was also a temple built to Claudius who was venerated as its founder. However, due to its high percentage of veterans it is hard to judge the extent to which this was a native dedication or one controlled by the veterans. There are other areas where it is assumed that the army made a large contribution in architecture. This theory is based on the assumption that previously, the British had no real architectural tradition and the Romans changed all this. This is basically based upon a written source called Agricola, by Tacitus, where he says:
However, the governor in question here is Tacitus' father. It is therefore likely to be biased. It is also ambiguous as to what kind of encouragement was given. Did he pay for it or get the army to build them? He may have arranged for the help of the army but it is unlikely that this was in the form of labourers as they would have been busy elsewhere conquering. The idea presented by Frere and also Salway that they got technical help from the army seems likely as they must have got the knowledge from somewhere. However, we do not know how many civilian people had moved into Britain from the empire with these skills so this is another possibility. The army probably had its own buildings to build anyway, as well as the pacifying and conquering so this is still inconclusive. It is likely that the army had influence here but whether this was on a large scale or even intended is not known.