Burial practises have been at the forefront of archaeological discussion for many years. The idea of using burial practices to examine the social relations of the past was long thought to be straight forward; a wealthy grave indicates a chiefdom or stratified society. However, due to the changing ideas presented by recent theories we have now come to look at the evidence in a more open minded way. I will look at how burial is examined; along with ideas about social complexity and to what extent grave goods affect our understanding of status. Historical sources and ethnography will also be used in examining the archaeology.
Many early theories such as that of Spencer reduced societies to merely a few categories of complexity, such as band, tribe and state. This often meant huge generalisations were made and whole periods of time were put under one heading. This ignored the inevitable fluctuations and also meant complexity was being directly associated with inequality (Pearson, P 1999. p72). Binford argued that within a site each grave should be examined individually to determine its particular symbolism to prevent these sweeping generalisations (Pearson, P p73). The idea of 'Redundancy' was examined by Tainter as a way of further measuring social complexity. He was interested in looking at structural differentiation in status and measuring the overall degree of organisation by looking at the energy expenditure of the graves. He decided to look at vertical differentiation as he considered this less ambiguous. Vertical differentiation being aspects not available to everyone, which would indicate a hierarchical society. The number of these ranked levels that he encountered would indicate the degree of structural differentiation. However his results were in the form of numbers which by many was perceived as reductionist. It also required an abundance of complete information which is unavailable at most sites due to preservation (Pearson, P p75). The argument of energy expenditure signifying social stratification is useful as it allows you to recognise social rank from a wide amount of mortuary data so it can be used in a variety of cases when, for example, there is poor preservation or few grave goods. Like at Bougainville where the relative size of the stone monuments was used to distinguish statuses which were known ethnographically, despite the burials not being well preserved (Chapman 1981 p29). However, all cultures use different material expressions so it is not always clear what is higher status as this will change through regions and through time. Further, through time there are often many fluctuations, as demonstrated later by Cannon's examination of Victorian England and the Iroquois.
The way in which burials have often been perceived is that the dead would be buried according to their social standing in life. Goodenough developed a 'Role Theory' which looked at all the different identities that a social persona might have, for instance a woman might be a mother, wife, leader and so on. Any of these identities might be symbolised in the grave by either material or non-material means (Pearson, P p73). However, it has since been argued that social practise create a persons identity and they don't just act out their roles without question (Person, P p84). We must remember that the dead are buried by the living, and so what we are seeing may be their perception of the deceased. Saxe suggested that the decisions made by the living about the social identity presented in death would be determined by the rights and duties of the relationships between the deceased and the living, so what we see could be skewed. Binford further thought that the differences in the treatment of the dead will be dependant on the size of the social sphere affected and involved in the rite. So in small societies the loss will feel greater as it would affect more people (Chapman, p30) Also, in larger more unequal societies the funerals of 'important' people will be bigger as more people will feel emotionally involved, for example Princess Diana. We must also be careful to distinguish between ascribed status in societies and achieved status, as these both present different ways of life. Achieved status being associated with egalitarian societies and ascribed with that of a hierarchy determined by birth. Although sociologists claim this is more important in contemporary societies than past ones (Pearson, P p74). In my opinion this may be more consciously important to us these days but it would still have had an active effect on your way of life in the past as in one society you can increase your status through your own talents regardless of your birth, but in the other you are much more confined. Social aspirations are frequently pursued in death. For instance, someone who was not of high status during their lifetime could save a lot of their wealth in order to have a rich funeral. We can see this in the burial practices of Victorian England, Ancient Greece and also of Historic Northeast Iroquoia. (Cannon,A 1989). Cannon's paper outlines why we cannot rely on the degree of ostentation displayed in burial rites to indicate the status of the deceased due to cyclical change in display. Those of high status would have elaborate funerary rites, which would be used to display their status and set them apart from the 'commoners'. However, this ostentation would then begin to be emulated by those of a lower class, which would in turn force the wealthy to begin a period of restraint. This cycle would continue in order for those higher classes to keep the distinction of their status. He demonstrates this through his case studies: In Victorian England white marble was a popular choice for grave monuments, the church then deemed this inappropriate as is was "foreign" and clashed with the church material. However, this was only actually prohibited when the marble became available to the entire social spectrum. The fact that the highest status members of society were the first to begin elaboration does not imply that they were the first to feel grief. This display was a thing of fashion and of changing social attitudes. The useful thing about the Victorian case studies is that we have historical evidence for the time period and know that there was no change in social structure. This means the fluctuations in mortuary behaviour cannot be linked to this but must be seen as a change in attitude. Therefore this model could theoretically be applied to many cultures where mortuary display is a means of competition.
The study of the Historic Iroquois shows a similar pattern but within a completely different culture. They too showed a cyclical tradition of ostentation and restraint. This culture showed burial elaboration in terms of material expressions from the Terminal Archaic through to the protohistoric period. Here we see evidence to support the idea that the poor would save up their wealth in order to ensure a rich burial. This is in the form of early ethnohistoric descriptions. These reports outline the problems of the poor facing lifelong deprivation in order to secure this elaborate funerary display, as illustrated by the missionary Brebeuf:
The periods of restraint within this cyclical display of ostentation have been perceived by some as a lack of concern for the dead. However, current ethnographies of the Iroquois show that mortuary display is very much an important aspect of life; however, human nature generally dictates that no matter what your religious inclination or the current social fashions in mortuary display, your concern for the deceased is not going to be affected. These fluctuations mean that we must be cautious when using mortuary expressions to define status and a degree of knowledge about the fashion at the time is often necessary. It also demonstrates social control by the elite, so this model could not be applied in egalitarian societies, where we should not find any vertical differentiation anyway.
Grave goods have always been seen as an important aspect in the study of mortuary behaviour. Frankenstein and Rowland looked at prestige goods in terms of the Late Hallstatt Iron Age. They assumed gold as a high status metal which would therefore only be included in those graves of the highest status members of society. These were generally associated with carts, drinking equipment and other luxury goods. It was their theory that to have these goods shows control of the major trade routes and control of these items filtering down to other levels of society. However, there is no such evidence of this filtering down effect and it has also been suggested that items such as drinking equipment would not be that high status after all. They would instead be used for local drinking and be involved in local feasts which would characterise control held be those with political power linked to dispersing hospitality, not the control of trade routes (Pearson, P p79). Although surely this political control would first entail some kind of control over the trade routes in order to get the money to achieve the ability to disperse hospitality. Another study of metals representing status was carried out by Randsborg. Randsborg reduced the values of each artefact to the weight of each metal. These weights were proportional to the value of the metal. This showed that male graves had more gold and bronze than those of females, indicating inequalities between men and women; it also showed inequality within the two sexes. He further deduced that a higher density of graves presented a higher level of inequality and so a denser population created greater social complexity. Yet one unclear area of his theory is that there is no distinction as to whether gold represents a chief or a sacred person/deity (Pearson, P p79). This could present problems as a religious society that assigns more power to sacred people is different to that of a society with chiefs who have perhaps achieved that power through securing political control or that of the trade routes. This prestige goods idea was also applied by Chapman at the Iberian Chalcolithic site of Los Milliares. At this site was a central cluster of tombs thought to be 'prestige tombs' due to their inclusion of ivory and copper objects, jet and amber beads and other luxury goods. Chapman argues that since there were other tombs without these artefacts, this represents a heirarchical society, as opposed to the egalitarian society presented by Almagro and Arribas. It is further thought that this society became further stratified with hereditary leadership in the Bronze Age. This is due to the high status goods beginning to cross cut graves of differing age and sex (Pearson P p78). There are also rich burials of children, a sign generally assigned to societies with ascribed status since they have no way of acquiring wealth themselves.
Labour investment can be a useful way to distinguish the value of goods. For example, goods acquired through trade would probably be of a higher value than local goods which were easier to come by. Also goods which would have had a lot of time and effort put into them would be worth more, such as female headdresses. This theory was put forward by Shennan who found that generally female goods were worth more than male, which either indicates that women were of higher status or, more commonly thought, that they were dressed in the wealth of their male relatives (Pearson P, p78). However, the idea of dress showing status has more recently been thought misleading. For example, increased use of Wampum beads among the Native Americans was seen as increased elaboration, but Patricia Rubertone suggests that it was political resistance to stop the 'whites' getting them (Pearson P, p85). The idea of women wearing the wealth of men is also seen in O'Shea's study of the mortuary variability of Native American tribes (Mortuary Variability O'Shea). O'Shea studied three groups, the Pawnee, Arikawa and Omaha to look principally at the co-associations of the grave goods and their occurrence in individual graves. In the Omaha graves over half of the fifty goods found were in male and adult graves. There was also a distinguishable level of structure: More sociotechnic goods found in male than female, and adults had more native implements and trade goods than sub adults. The discovery of the usually male associated Wampum beads found in a few female graves indicated that both women and men could hold positions of power. However, the lack of rank symbols specifically for females indicates that there may have been no clear institution of power for them and that in general the men held the power. Trade was seen through distribution of goods in graves as male dominated, which may be the reason that they apparently held more power then females. At the Pawnee site O'Shea discovered 34 graves. He found that inhumation was the normative burial type. The only thing differentiating the adults from sub-adults was the grave width and depth, as with the Omaha burials, and may just result from adults being generally larger in size than sub-adults. Adults generally had a greater variety of goods including the more valuable trade goods. There were no specific restrictions on sub-adults; they just had significantly fewer goods. There was one main burial area which had segregated areas containing a spectrum of age, sex and wealth groups so it is likely that they represent some sort of horizontal social distribution such as lineage groups. Both these sites indicate a greater variety of goods and therefore power attributed to the males.
Both the Pawnee and the Omaha had instances of disarticulated burials. The Pawnee burials are probably due to the time or location of the death as if they died in the winter then they may have had to wait until the ground was sufficiently thawed to perform the burial, similarly if the person died far from the settlement then they may have had to be carried back which could have caused the body to be damaged. These reasons are more likely than rank distinctions since there were no other differentiations in terms of goods. There are also two graves of an unusual orientation which contain no grave goods. One theory is that they are the graves of social deviants but one is a child and they are both in the community burial area so it would seem more likely that they are simply buried that way due to unusual circumstances of death. The Omaha burials are of adolescent males with disarticulated bones which are in good condition. Both males had grave goods. It appears that these are the result of the well known Plains practice of dismembering war victims. All these examples seem to indicate that disarticulated graves or those of non-normative orientation are due to special circumstances of death, although with only six examples it is not conclusive.
A more recent perspective on grave goods is that they are not just elements of the deceased's identity but also the culmination of actions by the mourners to express their relationship with the deceased (Pearson, P p85). They symbolise their idea of the identity of the deceased. If this is the case then status is defined by a series of cultural practices which are subject to our manipulation, which is likely to be affected by our own ideology. Some grave goods were probably gifts. This is seen clearly in many Bronze Age barrows where there are swords and other tools which, under analysis, turn out to be unused and so probably made specifically for that occasion. The site of Borum Eshoj in Denmark not only demonstrates this practice but also that of the poor wanting to emulate the rich. At this tree trunk burial a sword scabbard was found but inside it was a dagger; someone wanted the burial to look more high status than it was. Grave goods may also be misleading since there is evidence from ethnography that in many cultures the possessions of the deceased are burnt with their body, such as the Tandroy in Madagascar (Pearson P p85). Also, heirlooms may either be passed along, or if there are no successors then buried. This would present anomalies within the analysis of goods in relation to wealth.
We must also take into account the fact that not all the aspects that go into the funerary rite will be visible in the archaeological record. Only some aspects of the rite will create a physical change in the disposal unit. Then, once buried it is subject to post-depositional effects. Further, it is likely that not all of the evidence will be excavated and so what we are finally presented with is a very small amount of the whole evidence. Taphonomic conditions vary from site to site, for example acidic soils will not preserve bone well and so any investigation of diet may be impossible or skewed. Erosion processes may also have caused sites to be altered with artefacts becoming lost which again presents a biased case.
Medieval practices of burial have a clearer social stratigraphy. This was a time of strict religious control and burials were predominantly in graveyards attached to churches. There was a clear distinction between where Lay people and priests were buried. There was then a further distinction between statuses. The high altar was the most prestigious point of the church and this was where the priests would aspire to be buried near. The closer you were to this, the higher status you were. Even out in the graveyards there was distinction. This is clearly demonstrated in excavations which have shown one side having neatly arranged burials and the other having layer upon layer of burials which are much less organised. This shows clear distinctions of wealth and status with the rich being accorded more 'respectful' burials in 'holier' sections, despite everyone being supposedly equal under God. Orientation of graves is a constant throughout, with the heads pointing to the west. We know from historical documents that this is so when Jesus comes from the east the dead will rise to see him coming. The fact that this is constant supports the idea that fluctuations in grave elaboration are due to changing attitudes as religious aspects remain constant. Bodies are also always on their backs with their arms wither crossed across their chests or by their sides. There are anomalies which present examples of social outcasts. For example many burials are assumed to be criminals or even accused vampires due to their prone burials and evidence of violent deaths. These bodies are not accorded any of the usual respect. From looking at medieval burials we can see clear distinctions of status; however it does help that we have the literature to back up our findings.
The occurrence of social relations is often evident in burial practices; however these are subject to the fashions of the day, which differ from place to place. It is therefore pointless to make generalisations about a particular time period since changes will occur regionally and fluctuations are likely. Grave goods can often give a good indication of wealth but again there are conditions which compromise this evidence and when looking at vast numbers of similar graves other factors will have to be taken into account. It is possible for archaeologists to determine social relations from burial practices, but the extent and certainty of this is often dependant on the time period in question, the conditions of burial and extent of the excavation.