The Annales d'histoire conomique et sociale was launched in 1929 by two colleagues at the University of Strasbourg, Lucien Febvre and Marc Bloch. It was born out of their reaction to outmoded historical thought and methodology in early twentieth century France and its growth led it to be one of the dominant historical schools in the proceeding century. Thus 'there is no one historical journal that is more influential in the world today'. In 1956, after the death of Lucien Febvre, Fernand Braudel became editor of the renamed Annales: economies, socits, civilisations and thus embodied and directed the school in the mid part of the century. This essay will to look at continuity and departure through these two periods thematically, and attempt to form a conclusion as to whether the 'Age of Braudel' conserved or contradicted original Annales historiography. Although Bloch and Febvre differed in emphasis, for example Bloch's commitment to geography was less than Febvre's whose dedication to sociology was greater, they held collective ideals for which the Annales is renowned, and can therefore be found in much of their work. The main source for an insight into Braudel's historical thought is La Mditerrane et le monde mditerranen s l'poque de Philippe II, his doctoral thesis, although some of his other work will also be considered. Yet it is not only his scholarship that is of interest, for his actions at the helm of the Annales ship go a long way into demonstrating what direction he was taking it, and whether this was consistent with the aims of Bloch and Febvre.
As stated, the Annales was founded partly as a reaction to the focus of French historiography, which was dominated by the Sorbonne, on political and diplomatic history. Bloch and Febvre thus wanted to widen such a narrow scope to encompass all aspects of history, especially social and economic. For the analysis of political events in isolation from its surrounding physical and social environment, the Annales believed, was sterile, as 'activities are conditioned by time and place'. Braudel's thesis, La Mditerrane, was originally conceived as a conventional study of the Mediterranean policy of Phillip II. Such a topic was approved of by the history establishment, the professors of the Sorbonne, because it was 'indifferent to the discoveries of geography, little concerned with the economic and social problems, slightly disdainful towards the achievements of civilisation, religion and also of literature and the arts, the great witnesses of all worthwhile history'. Febvre suggested in 1927 that 'even more than Phillip II, it would be exciting to know about the Mediterranean of the Barbary States'. On this advice Braudel trawled through the archives between 1927 and 1933. He was confronted with a mass of archival material on princes, finances, armies, land and peasants, used for the traditional history which he was abandoning. In 1934 Braudel discovered the registers of Ragusa at Dubrovnik containing information on ships, trade goods, insurance rates and business deals; 'for the first time' he 'saw the Mediterranean of the sixteenth century'. Thus Parts I and II of Braudel's thesis are not concerned with the traditional political and diplomatic history of the Sorbonne. Yet Part III, 'Events, Politics and People', is essentially such a traditional history, as his thesis was originally conceived, in which he provides brief incisive character sketches and long descriptions of the Battle of Lepanto, siege of Malta and peace negotiations of the 1570s. Nevertheless, Braudel goes out of his way to stress the insignificance of events and the limitations of individual agency. For example, Braudel attributes two factors for the slowness of Phillip II to act. First, in terms of Spain's financial exhaustion: 'It is therefore difficult to see by what aberration this exhausted country was to persist in the war in the Mediterranean', of which Braudel asks 'was the Prudent King really responsible?" Second, the physical problems of communication: 'Phillip II had to wait for reports to arrive from very distant places before taking decisions... So there can be no doubt: Spain waged an unremitting struggle against the obstacle of distance." Braudel thus saw events as merely 'surface disturbances, crests of foam that the tides of history carry on their strong backs' and to understand the past, it is thus necessary to dive beneath these waves. In this sense Braudel clearly followed the rejection that partly led Bloch and Febvre to found the Annales, and thus conserved the initial paradigm.
In rejecting the traditional history of the Sorbonnes, the Annales sought to promote other types of history, and the foundation of the journal was a bid to lead in the fields of social and economic history. This is reflected in analysing the nature of articles published in the journal between 1929 and 1945: 84 percent concerned social or economic history, compared with 21.9 percent in La Revue Historique, one of its main rivals. Thus there was a concurrent move away from written sources; for example, Bloch's agrarian history studied population, demography, soil composition, variations in production and monetary fluctuations. Febvre's doctoral thesis, Philippe II et la Franche-Comt
, was also important as a contribution to social history, not demonstrated in its title. It was not only concerned with the Revolt of the Netherlands and the rise of absolutism, but analysed the struggle between to rival classes; the declining nobility and the rising bourgeoisie. 'Echoing the polemics of Lucien Febvre and Marc Bloch' Braudel was 'irresistibly drawn to the study of a new kind of history, Annaliste history, economic and social history of a revolutionary kind'. In La Mditerrane one of the three sections is devoted to the conjunctures, the waves of intermediary length, price curves, demographic progressions, wage changes and interest rates; economic history, which was extended further to include social change. Later Braudel wrote a three volume economic history of France (published between 1967 and 1979), after the invitation of Febvre who had planned to write a concurrent volume on mentalits before his death. The science of history under Braudel was concerned with the entire social spectrum, as will be discussed, 'nonetheless it was economics above all that was attended to'. Yet, Samuel Kinser has argued that 'Braudel did not, in La Mditerrane, follow the newer approaches to economic and social history embodied in Braudel's and Febvre's work'. He did not utilize Bloch's innovative analysis of agricultural patterns of production or Febvre's idea that religious literary and cultural activity was guided by the mental tools of the epoch. Thus he ignored what seemed to many historians in the 1940s to be important historiographical achievements of the first two editors of the Annales.
Nevertheless, Braudel extended the most significant ideological tenet of the Annales by breaking down the barriers with the social sciences. 'For almost by definition, the scholars of the Annales have drawn their inspiration from non-historians as much as historians: theirs is a kind of history which crosses all frontiers and uses all techniques." Between 1920 and 1933 in the University of Strasbourg there were daily discussions between Bloch and Febvre, who were surrounded by an extremely lively interdisciplinary group. 'The milieu favoured intellectual innovation and facilitated the exchange of ideas across interdisciplinary areas.' Febvre was very much taken by the ideas of the psychologist Charles Blondel, while Bloch preferred the ideas of the sociologist Maurice Halbrachs. Febvre used historical psychology to investigate the individual, for example Luther, and to juxtapose this with the mental universe of sixteenth century Germany. Bloch preferred to show collective practices, and thus Febvre was critical of the lack of the individual in his study on La Socit Fodale. Nevertheless, both Bloch and Febvre wanted to 'decode the mental universe', using psychology and sociology. The founding fathers of the Annales sought to set this interdisciplinary approach in stone: the editorial committee of the journal contained not only historians, but a geographer, sociologist, economist and political scientist and one of Febvre's greatest achievements was the establishment of the Sixime Section of the Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes in 1947, of which he was president, that was predominantly concerned with the social sciences.
Braudel welcomed this interdisciplinary approached that he had inherited. In La Mditerrane his desire to encompass the tools of the social sciences is evident especially in his use of geography, economics and sociology. He stated that it was crucial to embrace all fields to truly comprehend humanity: 'each of them is a door open to the entirety of the social'. Braudel also fostered interdisciplinary research in his role at the helm of the Annales. Not only did he bring the Sixime Section to life, but he helped draft the Longchambon plan in 1958, which proposed a new university, separate from the Sorbonne, reserved for the social sciences and founded the Maison des Sciences de l'Homme in 1963, devoted to interdisciplinary research. Thus he was not only concerned with the state of current historiography, but wanted to preserve at least this aspect of the Annales in future generations. However, in his scholarship Braudel did not utilise the social sciences as his forefathers had. In his Perspective of the World, Braudel 'remained, in one of his favourite metaphors, a prisoner of his original division of labour with Febvre'. He has little to say on capitalist values, industry, thrift, discipline and enterprise. In this primarily economic work there is a great unwillingness to allow any autonomy to ideas or culture. Yet, Febvre had invited Braudel to write such a material history of France, with the intention of writing a complementary volume on thought and belief, before he died in 1956. Thus Braudel never intended to concern himself in this study with mentalits. What should be remembered are Braudel's views on the relationship between history and the social sciences: 'He is not worthy of the name historian if he does not juxtapose some of them; cultural and social vistas, cultural and political, social and economic, economic and political'. It is therefore evident that although Braudel did not necessarily embrace all of the social sciences in his scholarship, his beliefs as captain of the Annales ship were entirely harmonious with those of Bloch and Febvre, and it is this side that was most important for the development of the Annales paradigm in the age of Braudel.
The interdisciplinary approach was one of a variety of methods the Annales embodied in order to produce histoire totale. 'In this way Bloch and Febvre between them promulgated an idea of histoire totale, arguing that all aspects of a society were part of historical reality." For example, Bloch's La Socit Fodale was not confined to the relation of land tenure, social hierarchy, warfare and the state, 'it deals with feudal society as a whole; what we might now call the culture of feudalism'. And in his study of French rural history, an extension of the Ile-de-France, Bloch was concerned with developments from the thirteenth century to the eighteenth century; he was concerned with totality. It can be seen how this was conserved by Braudel; 'Braudellian history's greatest ambition was to capture the totality of the social realm in a single swoop'. After the publication of Chaunus' Seville et l'Atlantique Braudel noted that it had only concerned the Antilles, not the whole of the Atlantic, as he had done in La Mditerrane, and thus it could have gone further. In La Mditerrane Braudel extends the frontier of the Mediterranean to the Atlantic and the Sahara, the 'greater Mediterranean', a perfect example of his histoire globale. However, one of the criticisms levelled at Braudel's thesis was that in aiming to compile a histoire totale, he omitted key topics such as culture, agriculture, law and religion, and thus did not create a rounded picture. There is no discussion of honour, shame and masculinity, although the system of values was of great importance to the Mediterranean world. Thus 'in this respect he differs greatly from Febvre, despite his praise for The Problem of Unbelief'. Yet, once again it is not necessarily in his own scholarship that we should look, where clearly economic and geographical ideals were at the fore; but the notions of history that he put forward as leader of the Annales, that would be used by his contemporaries are of more significance. 'If more than 25 years of Braudel's life have had economics as their horizon, we should not, therefore, forget his continually proclaimed desire for total history'.
In attempting histoire totale the founding fathers of the Annales were rationalists: 'whatever can be rationally pursued, measured, calculated, quantified, is so pursued'. Bloch favoured rigorous statistical analysis, and argued that medieval history had been reduced to mystery and ritual, severed from the study of modern history. This approach to quantitative history was conserved under Braudel; 'an entire generation of Annales historians would swarm over church registers and legal documents containing prices, counting and fixing curves and cycles'. The Centre de Recherches Historiques of the Sixime Section demonstrated the importance of quantitative history to Braudel. For example, from the Florentine Catasto of 1427 the Centre was reconstructing 80,000 families and the registres de contrle of the troops of the French Revolution would provide information on a million soldiers. In his scholarship Braudel revised his thesis, and hence the second edition of La Mditerrane included tables, maps and graphs, previously absent. Thus in terms of his scholarship and the leadership of the institutions of the Annales, Braudel conserved the quantitative tradition.
So far one of the central themes in Braudel's work has not been discussed, geographic history and its structural implications, which had the most ambivalent relationship with the Annales paradigm. The conceptual guide for Febvre's and subsequently Braudel's interest in geographical history, or geohistory as it was later termed by Braudel, was the geographer Paul Vidal de la Blache, Febvre's mentor. It was the new paradigm 'that provided an obligatory framework for all the monographs published after World War II'. Bloch studied a series of field maps as if they were traditional documents and incorporated them into his Les Caractres Origineaux de l'Histoire Rurale Franaise in 1931: 'The symbiosis between history and geography found there its finest product'. Yet on the notion of geographic determinism Febvre 'chose the Vidalian notion of possibility... Nature was not a neutral force that conditioned human life; it was humanized right from the beginning and was already profoundly transformed by man'. The consequence of incorporating economics and geography in such a significant way into history meant that there was a slowing down of time. The Annales increasingly favoured what had lasted and was repeated, cycles and century long tendencies. This complemented the break with traditional French historiography that focused on the short term event. Between 1929 and 1939 45.9 percent of articles in the Annales journal were concerned with the longue dure, compared to only 30.7 percent for La Revue Historique.
It was this notion of the longue dure that Braudel was most concerned in his essentially geohistorical work, La Mditerrane. Those who had emphasized the historical role of geography, such as Vidal de la Blache, Bloch and Febvre, had not succeeded in finding a way of weaving it in with, for example, social activity. They had generally treated such geographical considerations as a separate chapter as background; for example, Febvre introduced his thesis on Franche-Comt
 in this manner. 'In the first edition of La Mditerrane, Braudel implemented the program that Febvre had envisaged." The thesis was divided into three sections; histoire immobile, the slow, almost imperceptible history of man in relation to geography and climate; conjunctures, the more mobile forces of social and economic cycles; 
vnmentielle, the traditional political history that, as discussed, was 'merely the top most layer of his multi-dimensional study'. Braudel stressed the role of the Mediterranean and its deterministic value; it was ultimately the most influential. Braudel analysed the mountains and plains, coastlines and islands, climate, land routes and sea routes. The aim was to show that the environment had its own history and that the events and general trends could not be understood without it.
Thus Braudel conserved the tradition of Bloch and Febvre in interlacing geographical with other social and economic elements, but historians have often cited that he went too far from the Annales paradigm in stressing geographical determinism and structuralism. Although there is not enough room here to give the debate the analysis it deserves, it needs to be discussed as it was the idea that could fundamentally separate Braudel from the Annales of Bloch and Febvre. 'In the eyes of its author, Braudel's history is, above all, structural history'. The forefathers of the Annales disliked such a historical framework. Febvre remarked: 'Structure? a fashionable word, I know; it even sprawls through the Annales occasionally, a little too much for my taste'. Bloch and Febvre remained faithful to anthropocentrism: 'man was the sole preoccupation of historians; he was the meaning of their work'. Thus the removal of human agency in the face of the colossal force of nature in La Mditerrane would seem to be a clear departure from the Annaliste paradigm. 'But, this interpretation is misleading'. Braudel did assign to individuals a certain role in the destiny in civilisations. For example, when analysing who deserved credit for the Christian victory at the Battle of Lepanto Braudel asked himself: 'Don John, the admiral?' and responded: 'Yes, undoubtedly'. Even in Part I 'Braudel deftly affirmed and yet simultaneously denied determinism'. Man was 'free' to do what he pleased in his environment, but was constrained by nature which was more fixed and permanent, thus it became the determining force. Braudel was not comfortable with structuralism that emphasized systematicity, mathematization and logical implication. The structural history that Braudel adopted valued 'flexibility and descriptive concreteness above systematically and abstract rigor'. The conceptual novelty of La Mditerrane lies not in Braudel's structural history, but in his geohistory. In any case it was not the longue dure that was the sole concern of the historian, for Braudel stressed the 'collisions, tensions and interchanges of each with the other'. Braudel certainly did go further in stressing the deterministic nature of geography than his predecessors, of this there can be little doubt. Maybe this was too much for Bloch and Febvre, but was it enough for the annalist of his relationship to early Annales to conclude on his contradictory nature? He did not remove all human agency; La Mditerrane was primarily a piece of geohistory and not structuralism, and thus his treatment of the role of the individual was often very subtle.
In the key areas of the Annales paradigm Braudel both conserved and at times contradicted the notions put forward by Bloch and Febvre. Yet was this enough to assert that the age of Braudel was a clear break? Braudel clearly continued the rejection of traditional political and diplomatic history that Bloch and Febvre so vehemently disliked, notably in his thesis, La Mditerrane. In doing so he fostered the continuing association between history and the social sciences. Some of his worked often neglected the fields of psychology and sociology. For example his three volume economic history of France did not discuss capitalist values, but it was planned that Febvre would write such a complementary volume, before his death. What were of greater significance were the institutions he created and helped expand, such as the Sixime Section and the Maison des Sciences de l'Homme, which promoted the interdisciplinary approach that Bloch and Febvre favoured. In terms of histoire totale Braudel constantly aimed to push the boundaries of current historiography and at the helm of the Annales challenged his contemporaries to do the same. Yet it is in the main theme of La Mditerrane, geohistory and structural history, that the greatest divergence from the Annales paradigm can be found. The notion of geographic determinism put forward seems to contradict the ideas of human agency that Bloch and Febvre favoured. However, as shown this is far too simplistic an approach; Braudel was far more sophisticated in his analysis, and although gave the ultimate determining role to the environment, he gave man a limited, but 'free' role within this history. Thus it may be possible to talk of two Braudels; the scholar, and the 'president' of the Annales. In his scholarship Braudel often did not use all of the Annaliste tools, yet no one to date has managed such a histoire totale. La Mditerrane has been described as 'the seminal work of the Annalistes' and helped develop the Annales into the science humaine that flourished today. More importantly, guiding the Annales school he fostered all of the major tenets set down by Bloch and Febvre, and therefore in broad terms Braudel did not contradict the original Annales paradigm. Known principally for his writings, Braudel was nonetheless principally a builder, more effective in the solidity of institutions that he ran than by the originality of his themes." As heir to Febvre to the Annales throne he was 'devoted and faithful to the man he succeeded', and managed to 'spread their influence beyond the bounds of France'. Braudel summed up his commitment: 'What I owe to the Annales, to their teaching and inspiration, constitutes the greatest of my debts'.