Recently dates for the human occupation of islands in the Mediterranean have been pushed back from around the 6 th millennium BP to the 9 th millennium BP by new evidence. This evidence claims to place human material culture in contexts containing bones of fauna previously thought to be extinct. Arguments as to whether these faunal extinctions can be attributed to human colonisation in some way have therefore arisen. Arguments relating to these extinctions have originally centered on the climatic changes that characterise the final stages of the Pleistocene and early Holocene. The following essay will attempt to lay out the evidence from several island studies relating to faunal extinctions and discuss their reliability and implications. The islands I will be looking at are Mallorca in the Western Mediterranean and Cyprus in the East. I will also look at possible patterns in the differences in extinction rates between islands in the East and the West and whether this can be related to the differences in their colonisation.
Climate change has been cited as a main cause of extinctions throughout the world. It seems easy to associate changes in the climate, especially throughout glaciations, with the extinction of certain species. Rapid de-glaciations at the end of the last glacial from 16,000 to 6,000BC would have created massive changes in both climate and flora, with temperatures and rainfall increasing. The changes in climate would have occurred far more rapidly than the flora would have been able to deal with, meaning that certain mammals, chiefly small ones, would have been forced to move with the climate into areas where the vegetation they relied on for sustenance would be absent. In this case it would seem that small mammals would be the ones greatest affected, as large mammals can generally occupy a greater range of environments (Lax and Strasser 1992, p218). Although conversely large animals do have slower reproduction rates and lower population densities, which could work against them (Martin 1984, p360). The examples I will examine shortly relate exclusively to the extinction of large fauna. Not only must you ask why this is, but it is also important to investigate why this change in climate affected only certain species in certain places. Proponents of human induced extinctions like Martin (1984) say that this is because only larger fauna would have been concentrated on by human hunters (Diamond 1989, p174). Furthermore, if the final de-glaciation of the Pleistocene was the cause of these extinctions, then why did extinctions not also occur during similar de-glaciations throughout the whole of the Pleistocene? (Diamond 1989 p173)
One theory regarding humans as the cause of human extinctions is the 'Blitzkrieg' model of Mosimann and Martin (1975) which assumes a rapid rate of extinction based on direct hunting by humans (Diamond 1989, p169). This would occur rapidly-within a generation or so, as the rate at which the animals would be hunted would be greater than that at which they could reproduce. An opposing model is 'Sitzkrieg' which assumes a much slower extinction rate which occurs due to indirect human causes such as habitat destruction or the introduction of new predatory species as competitors or vectors of disease (Diamond 1989, p 170). This could potentially take many hundreds of years and could therefore create the false pretence that humans were not the cause as they co-habituated for so long. For example, the Hawaiian Crow is only now close to extinction, around 1700 years after its discovery (Diamond 1989, p169). Another way of looking at faunal extinctions when related to humans is the anthropogenic 'overkill' model (Martin 1984, p357). This basically means human destruction of the native fauna by any of the previously discussed means, such as habitat destruction or hunting. It can occur gradually over thousands of years or even in a few hundred years or less (Martin 1984, p.357). Putting the time differences of extinctions aside, studies have shown that roughly 35% of terrestrial mammals on islands become extinct after the arrival of humans (excluding flying mammals) and this is a minimum estimate (Alcover 1998, p914). In addition, very few mega-faunal extinctions of the late Pleistocene seem to have occurred prior to human arrival (Martin 1984, p359). It is also interesting to look at the differences between the effects hunter gatherer groups have on island fauna compared to agriculturalists, as hunter gatherers would presumably present a case for a direct extinction, with the agriculturalists being an indirect cause. I will look at this by using examples of groups from two different islands with different subsistence strategies. When looking at island faunas we must remember that there is a very high possibility that their habitats would have been void of any other predators. They would have been extremely nave and thus easy targets for either human predators or the animals they introduced. They would also be without the genetic need for fast reproduction rates that animals of prey usually have, which would make the extinction process that much quicker (Martin 1984).
The island fauna that I will look at in this essay are island adapted species. On Cyprus I will look at the extinction of Phanourios minutus (pygmy hippopotamus) and Elephas minutus (pygmy elephants) and on Mallorca I will look at the Myotragus balearicus (From here on referred to as Phanourios, Elephas and Myotragus). It often occurs that animals which manage the difficult task of successfully colonizing an island setting become either dwarfed or much larger. This is due to selective processes which adapt the species to life in an island setting of impoverished resources (Lax and Strasser 1992, p206).
On the island of Cyprus in the eastern Mediterranean recent excavations at a site called Akrotiri Aetokremnos have uncovered levels which claim to show human material culture in the same levels as disarticulated Phanourios and Elephas bones. Radiocarbon dates have placed the site at around 10,000BP which, if accurate, make this the oldest site on Cyprus by 1500 years (Simmons 1991, p857). The claims for contemporary human culture and Phanourios bones are extremely interesting given that prior to this discovery it was thought that they were long extinct by 10,000BP (Simmons 1999, p153). The stratigraphy shows level 2 to be a cultural level with stone artifacts and 1% Phanourios bones - the 1% representing 3000 bones. Level 4 includes more bone than matrix with 20% of the bone showing signs of burning and completely disarticulated. There are also 12% stone artifacts in this layer (Simmons 1991, p 859). Obviously there is a question here of taphonomic processes; have the two layers have been contaminated due to later activity? However, layer 3 which lies between them for their entirety is a sterile layer and it is thought that layer 3 does not represent a significant chronological gap (Simmons 1991, p860). At this site there are over 250, 000 pieces of bone and 1019 chipped stone artifacts. 128 of the artifacts are formal re-touched tools and 95 % of the bones represented are Phanourios - a minimum number of individuals of 200. There are only 200 Elephas bones represented in the assemblage (Simmons 1991, p865).
Given the amount of disarticulated bones found at Aetokremnos it would seem unlikely that they accumulated through anything other than anthropogenic means (Simmons 1999 p.287). This is especially likely since there were no known predators, meaning that post-mortem disturbance of a die site is highly unlikely. It also seems unlikely that it is a die site due to the sheer numbers of bones found and that they represent a nonselective sample of a herd (Simmons 1999. p159). The fact that only approximately 12.6% of the stone artifacts are formal re-touched tools does not take away from the possibility that the animals may have been butchered. This has been shown in a study by Frison in 1989 which demonstrated that simple tools can be used in dismembering animals (Simmons 1991, p862). Critics of this site claim that there is no clearly butchered bone in the assemblage. However, even when looking at well documented butchery sites, cut marks are quite rare and are dependant on the methods used. Given the thick skinned-ness of both Phanourios and Elephas and their large amount of body fat, it seems especially unlikely that cut marks would be present (Simmons 1991, p863). Furthermore, if these animals were as nave to predators as you would expect, then they would be easy to kill. The humans may not have needed to completely butcher the animals as they would have been so abundant. Furthermore, the amount of bones found and fact that they were in a sealed context exceeds what is normally thought of as acceptable for reliable dating of an archaeological site (Simmons 1999, p215).
Dating of Aetokremnos was performed using shell, bone, charcoal and matrix (Simmons 1999, p201). The bone gave similar results to the subsurface materials but is never entirely reliable. The charcoal, which is supposedly the best material to obtain dates from, supported the dates of around 10,000BP (Simmons 1991, p 866). It is therefore quite reliably the oldest known site on the island at present. The strategy used here by the human colonists represents a non-domestic style, which is interesting as it was previously thought that the impoverished island settings would be incompatible with hunter gatherer subsistence strategies (Simmons 1991, p.867). However, there may have been some agricultural strategies used that we just have not seen, since these were being used on the Italian mainland by that time. This case represents a direct cause of extinction, and would appear to support the short-term 'Blitzkrieg' approach to faunal extinctions. Other factors may have also played a role in the extinctions. The animals may have been weakened by other natural means such as changing climate conditions altering their resources. The fact that their numbers dwindled is indicated by the increasing numbers of other food sources such as birds in the assemblage (Simmons 1991, p868). The situation at Aetokremnos indicates that humans were at least a part of the reason for the extinction of the Phanourios and Elephas there; when the humans arrived they didn't last for much longer.
The situation on the Balearic island of Mallorca also presents evidence of the co-existence of humans with fauna previously thought to be made extinct during the Pleistocene (Burleigh and Clutton-Brock 1980, p385). The Myotragus was a small goat/gazelle-like animal with shortened limbs; probably adapted for jumping from ledge to ledge on the steep cliffs (Guerrero Ayuso 2001, p136). However, this adaptation would have made it difficult for them to run fast, increasing their vulnerability to human hunting.
The site of Son Muleta on Mallorca was excavated in 1962 by WH Waldren who found and dated two Myotragus bones to 8600-7150BP (Burleigh and Clutton-Brock 1980, p385). Human bones in the same cave were dated to 6000BP. This was 2000 years earlier than it was initially thought they were around and raises the possibility that the two co-existed. This idea was further supported by evidence of Myotragus bones at Son Matge cave which were dated to 6680+/- 120BP (Burleigh and Clutton-Brock 1980, p386). However, the bones of Myotragus can be hard to distinguish from similar species of domestic goats and this could have contaminated the sample. Cave stratigraphies can also be uncertain due to taphonomic processes such as rock falls disturbing the contexts. To combat this uncertainty, morphologically definite Myotragus bone dates were compared with goat bones introduced by farmers. The latest date achieved for the Myotragus was c.4090 +/-390BP (Burleigh and Clutton-Brock 1980, p387). This post- dates the arrival of humans by at least a millennium and confirms their co-existence beyond any reasonable doubt. Claims for an even earlier date of the end of the 8 th millennium come from the site of Cova de Canet (Ramis and Alcover 2001, p262). However, Waldren among others rejects this due to questionable samples for dating, such as ash that could be the result of natural burning, or samples from levels without reliable cultural elements (Ramis and Alcover 2001, p265). If this early date for the arrival of humans is correct then it would mean an extremely long period of co-existence before the extinction of Myotragus. This would go against current biological knowledge regarding insular vertebrate extinctions which states that after the arrival of humans to oceanic islands, vertebrate extinctions would occur rapidly unless domestication occurred (Alcover 1998, p914).
Claims have been proposed for the domestication of Myotragus based upon 'humanly modified' V-shaped horn cores - to stop fighting, possibly butchered bones and a dense layer of coprolites - supposedly representing stalled animals, at Son Matge (Guerrero Ayuso 2001, p150). However, it has been discovered that the horn cores were not modified by humans to prevent fighting as there was no scarring; suggesting that the breakage occurred after death (Guerrero Ayuso 2001, p151). It can possibly be explained by looking at studies that show osteophagic behaviour in certain ungulates when they have dietary deficiencies such as a lack of phosphorous (Guerrero Ayuso 2001, p152). The dense coprolites have been explained by comparison to other sites where this occurs with no human co-existence (Guerrero Ayuso 2001, p 152). There is no reliable evidence to say that humans domesticated Myotragus, however this doesn't necessarily rule it out as a possibility.
By looking at the reliable information available it can be quite safely accepted that humans and Myotragus would have co-existed for around a millennium. Within this time Myotragus would have probably been used as an easy to catch food source. They may also have been seen as pests as they probably would have eaten the grains and crops brought by the humans (Burleigh and Clutton-Brock 1980, p386). If this was the case then they may have tried to manage them in some way but were evidently unsuccessful as they became extinct by around 4090+/-390BP (Burleigh and Clutton-Brock 1980, p387). This fairly rapid extinction is supported by the aforementioned biological knowledge regarding extinctions of this kind. It would fit into the anthropogenic overkill model of extinction and unlike the situation on Cyprus has some indirect causes as well as direct. These indirect causes are inferred through the introduction of farming brought by the Neolithic people on Mallorca, which would have introduced not only new domesticated species to compete with, but also would have meant land clearance and therefore habitat destruction (Cherry 1984, p16). Some people dispute the evidence presented on Mallorca as the Myotragus bones were not found in a clearly cultural context and the inference of co-existence comes mainly from the contemporary dates, however on an island of that size it is unlikely that if they co-existed they would not have encountered each other.
The two case studies presented above are examples of human colonisation of islands in the Mediterranean which had faunal extinctions occurring soon after the introduction of humans in the Neolithic. The evidence would suggest that the human colonisation of these islands was the reason for the extinctions. Other theories are explored such as climate. However, it is known that the Myotragus lived through many climatic oscillations. Temperature records show that during the last interglacial temperatures were 2 degrees higher than today and they survived through that, so why should they have died out so suddenly at the end of the last glacial (Ramis and Alcover 2001, p266)? Furthermore, there is no logical explanation as to why it only applied to these specific fauna and not others throughout the Mediterranean basin unless it was due to hunting or resource competition. It therefore seems unfounded to blame their extinction solely on climate. Besides, examples of this kind of human induced extinction are not in short supply. For example on the island of Hawaii the Greater Koa finch was discovered in 1891 and became extinct around 1896, the Dodo of Mauritius is another example - after discovery it took only 174 years to become extinct (Diamond 1989, p169). Late Pleistocene extinctions seem to follow the route of appearances of Homo sapiens to a much higher degree than any severe climatic changes (Martin 1984, p396). This may explain why extinctions in areas of the world where homo sapiens spread gradually show different extinction patterns to areas where homo sapiens appeared suddenly: When they gradually colonized regions - for example Eurasia, a kind of equilibrium developed, as opposed to a sudden introduction of an advanced predator which quickly wiped out certain species (Martin 1984 p.396). This would be especially true on oceanic islands where the endemic fauna, such as Phanourios or Myotragus would be nave to predators and ill-adapted to the fight or flight mechanism in-built genetically in most continental herbivores species (Simmons 1999, p.324).
The islands of the eastern and western Mediterranean were colonised at different rates, with the western ones being colonised at a faster rate - perhaps due to their larger mean size (Cherry 1981, p49). The islands of the west including those that were not previously joined to the mainland have similar material culture to the mainland such as impressed ware (Cherry 1984, p16)). This indicates that there was a degree of communication between the various groups of people. The practices used by the colonisers of Mallorca were those of farming and domestication. This can be seen in the archaeological record by the introduction of domesticates such as goats and sheep (Burleigh and Clutton-Brock 1980, p387). In contrast to this, the islands in the Eastern Mediterranean such as Cyprus seem to be isolated from the cultures of the mainland (Cherry 1984, p16). The evidence of the earliest colonisers on Cyprus seems to show that they were using mainly hunter-gatherer subsistence strategies with agricultural practices becoming more mainstream as time progressed. This may have some bearing on the length of time it appears to have taken for the affected fauna at each site to become extinct. The 'farmers' of Mallorca probably killed the Myotragus for food; why would you kill your own animals when there was such easy prey running around? However, this wouldn't have been their primary means of food as they were also using crop production and domesticates (Burleigh and Clutton-Brock 1980, p387). It would therefore be more likely that along with hunting of the Myotragus there was gradual encroachment onto their land. This would have destroyed their resources, along with the introduced species competing for the same resources. This destruction of resources would cause extinction far more gradually than if they were being hunted. This may explain why there seems to be a relatively gradual extinction on Mallorca in comparison with Cyprus where hunting was the primary subsistence strategy. However, a further point to make is that the dates for the sites are very different. The evidence from the site of Aetokremnos is very early in date at around early ninth to mid-tenth millennium BC, whereas the earliest date given for human occupation on Mallorca is around 6000BP. By the time Mallorca was colonised, agricultural practices on the mainland would have been far more established than during the 9/10 th millennium.
The evidence that I have looked at regarding both Mallorca and Cyprus indicates that humans played an important role in the extinction of island faunas through a variety of different means, including direct hunting and more indirect habitat destruction. The idea of climate being an important factor is largely played down as the patterns of extinction are too inconsistent to support this; they occur throughout the Pleistocene and early Holocene at different times and different places regardless. However, it may have weakened the species making the human impact all the more severe. Furthermore, the evidence for extinctions as a whole seem to follow a pattern of human colonisation globally as well as in the Mediterranean. I would suggest that the different causes of the human induced extinction vary between the two islands largely due to the varying strength of subsistence patterns occurring on the mainland at the two different times, and the degree of cultural isolation of the islands.