The following report is based on an assemblage of animal bones recovered from a British site no later than medieval in date. Each of the bones, or bone fragments, have been assessed and categorised into a table of results which highlights the main aspects of the bone fragments. This can in turn help to indicate the type of settlement and any practices going on there, for example husbandry. These results have then been compared with results from another assemblage to see any differences in types of animals and differences in aspects like ages and uses.
The assemblage investigated consisted of 48 fragments. Twenty-three of these were from sheep sized animals, eighteen from bovid, six from equus and one from a red deer. The bones are all in a relatively good condition, although nearly all have been subject to at least some weathering. 18 of the fragments are identified to be adult, 10 are at least a sub-adult with 2 definite sub-adults, 4 juveniles and 16 unknowns. The unknown ages are due to insufficient remaining bone parts or un-ageable bones such as the scapula.
Initially we would try to identify what part of the skeleton we were looking at. This was possible by comparing the bone to the images in our handbooks. There are also certain identifiable features on bones that made this easier. For example the head of bone which articulates with the socket on both the humerus and femur, or the distinctive shape of vertebrae. Often the shapes of the specific bones differ depending on the animal so the two identifications were then done simultaneously. Once the animal and bone type had been recognized we moved onto identifying other aspects such as age, side, proximal and distal fusion, pathology and weathering. The age of the animal was done on a broad basis. We know that the distal end of the bone is the first to fuse, followed by the proximal end. Using this information we could group the animals into juvenile, sub-adult or adult. For example, if all we had of a bone was the distal end and this was fused, we would know that it must be at least a sub-adult. Without the proximal end it is uncertain as to whether it is an adult. If only the proximal end was present and this was fused then we could assume that the distal end must also be fused and so it must be an adult. If either end were present and not fused we would know that it was a sub-adult (proximal un-fused) or juvenile (distal therefore both, un-fused). Distinctions such as the side of the bone were determined by comparing the bone with pictures in the handbook, as these were labeled left or right. To see any pathology that may be present we looked all over the bone to see any abnormalities, such as extra bone having been laid down. We had to be careful not to confuse this with weathering which could cause the bone to peel away or become scratched. Most of the bones had weathering on them, some were just discoloured but many had areas of bone broken away revealing the porous areas underneath. Butchery marks were seen on some of the bones. It was not always clear that the break was butchery by actually chopping the bone or if it had just been smashed. Furthermore, many of the bones had modern breaks which made it unclear whether the bone was broken or not. Modern breaks could be distinguished from old breaks by the colour of the bone on the cross section. If it was clean and a lot lighter than the rest of the bone then it is a modern break, as old breaks would discolour at the same rate as the rest of the bone.
By calculating the Minimum Number of Individuals (MNI) I found that there were a minimum of 4 sheep, 2 bovids, 2 equus and 1 deer in the assemblage. However, the Number of Individual Specimens (NISP) gave results of 23 sheep, 18 bovids, 6 equus and 1 deer. These results differ as the MNI is calculated by assuming that if there is a left, adult femur and another left, adult femur, this represents 2 individuals. But if there is one left, adult femur and another right, adult femur this represents only 1 individual as there is a possibility that they could be from the same animal. On the other hand, the NISP results are calculated on the assumption that each fragment is from a different individual. They both give the result that sheep dominate the assemblage.
Figure 1 shows that the majority of the bovids in the assemblage were adults when they died, with 16.7% at least sub/adult. The sheep again show a majority of adults or at least sub/adults. However, there are also 17.4% juveniles represented, which is more than in other species. The equus are all adult or sub/adult, and the deer is unknown as the only evidence was an antler.
On 56% of the bovid bones there is evidence of possible butchery. This includes definite chop marks and snapped bones. Of the sheep 35% have evidence of possible butchery, with old snap marks and 1 definite, longitudinal chop mark. Of the 6 equus, 50% have what looks like butchery marks, with 1 of the 3 being a definite chop mark. However, these results may be skewed as many of the fragments have modern breaks which could mean the loss of evidence of old butchery marks.
There is only evidence of pathology on 17% of the bovid bones, all with possible bone addition. There is also some pathology on one of the equus metatarsals with extra bone being laid down adjacent to another of the metatarsals.
Weathering is present on the majority of the fragments in the assemblage, with only 6% of bovids and 22% of sheep showing none. 28% of bovids, 30% of sheep and 83% of the equus show heavy weathering.
Assemblage E has a wider variety of animals, with categories of sheep/goat and sheep-sized, and also sus. There are 31 fragments in total. NISP shows 12 sheep/goat, 4 sheep-sized, 9 bovids, 4 equus and 2 sus. MNI shows that there are 2 sheep/goats, 1 sheep-sized, 2 bovids, 1 equus and 1 sus. The NISP is similar to assemblage A, showing a majority of sheep sized animals, followed by bovids.
44% of the bones (not including teeth) in assemblage E show signs of weathering, compared to 81% of assemblage A. 16% of the fragments in assemblage E show signs of butchery compared to 44% of assemblage A. 10% of assemblage E has evidence of pathology, with 8% of assemblage A showing pathology. Assemblage E is also dominated by 74% adults. Adults dominate in every species but sus, which is entirely sub-adult.
These results indicate that assemblage A was more open to weathering than assemblage E. This could be due to soil differences speeding up the erosion of the fragments; some of the better preserved could have been covered and therefore shielded from environmental effects. Many of assemblage E showed signs of root weathering which may suggest that they were buried in an area with more tree or plant growth. Assemblage A may be older then assemblage E, causing greater signs of weathering. However, both assemblages were investigated by different people and so it could simply be a matter of differences of opinion in what is weathering or butchery, as assemblage A again shows greater signs of butchery than assemblage E. Although this could also be due to the two sites being used for different purposes.
The fact that both assemblages are dominated by adults (ignoring the unknown category from assemblage A) could indicate that the sites practiced animal husbandry. As the sex of the animals has not been determined in either assemblage, it is difficult to tell which sex has been kept to adulthood. If animal husbandry were being practiced we could expect to find the majority of adults to be female, with fewer male. We would also expect to find many juvenile bones as they would be killed so that the milk from the mother could be used. We only find this in the case of sheep. This could be indicative of sheep being kept in breeding for meat and the older animals being kept for their wool. Traction is another use for bovids, which could explain the lack of juvenile bones being found. However it could be that these remains have been lost due to taphonomical processes, scattering or even having been lost since recovery at the site. This is because juvenile bones have yet to fuse and are therefore made up of several small bones and are less identifiable. Furthermore, the assemblages may have been analysed differently to one another, providing different results where they might not really exist. The equus in the assemblages are all at least sub/adult, with the majority being adults. This is what you would expect to see when the equus are being used for traction. The sus are both sub-adults, which is consistent with them being used as meat, since when they are juveniles they are too small and you wouldn't want the meat old.
The bones broken longitudinally may have been broken this way in order to extract marrow. However, this could also just be the way they snapped. It is sometimes easy to see where bones have been subjected to definite butchery. This can be seen when there is a clean cut, often with an area sticking out at the bottom where the sawing has stopped and the bone has snapped free under its own weight. In most cases the bone appears to have been broken, with no clean cut from sawing or shopping. This may be when the bone has been smashed to shatter the bone in many places and get the meat off. The modern breaks on bones may have broken off parts which indicate butchery, which may have given skewed results.
Both sites seem to show largely the same results, with a majority of young adult or adult animals. Animal husbandry may have been being practiced along with other usual uses such as traction, food and wool.