The preservation of this skeleton is good. All bones appear to be present, although the sternum is shattered and the long bones are missing their ends with the exception of the radius and the ulna of both arms. The metacarpals, metatarsals and phalanges of the hands and feet seem to be present. The fibula in the left leg is broken, post mortem, although all the parts are present. The Pelvis and sacrum have been well preserved, however the right pubis has separated from the Ilium. There are 25 loose vertebrae, with the top of the cervical vertebrae fused to the atlas. There are 12 pairs of ribs, most of which are intact but many seem to have been fractured and healed, or this may be a result of a congenital condition relating to the fused cervical vertebrae. Both the left and right clavicles are preserved as well as the Scapulas. The skull and mandible are intact and well preserved however there are only 17 out of a possible 32 teeth. The majority of these are loose and have a great degree of attrition and uneven wear.
In order to provide a sex estimate for this skeleton we had to look at the Skull, Pelvis and metrical data and form an opinion based upon these combined results.
An age estimate was achieved through looking at the skull, dentition, sternal rib ends and pelvis.
To get a stature estimation for our individual we had to measure the long bones and, using a formula based on his age, sex and race, calculate his stature. Our individual was missing most of the ends of his long bones and so we had to use the Ulna and the Radius to provide an estimate. We did have the end of one of his Femurs, however is was unattached so we used this, attached as accurately as possible, to see if it corresponded with our ulna and radius results.
This individual is well preserved and has nearly all the bones present. From looking at various parts of the skeleton and their growth and wear patterns it appears that this individual is male, with a middle-mature adult age range of 35-45 years and a stature of 166.64cm.