Rome was a polytheistic society in which religion was a major part of life, thus in order to maintain power Augustus needed to place himself at the centre. He achieved this by creating an ambiguous image of himself which was somewhere between man and god. In order to do this he used a variety of public mediums such as statues, altars, coinage and literature. This can further be seen in his actions, for example the changing of his name from Octavian to Augustus following the victory at Actium, and the further renaming of the month of August. However, a society accustomed to being run by a group of senators would not have welcomed an autocratic leader imposing himself on them and calling himself a god. For this reason Augustus had to be very careful with the way in which he used these mediums, so as not to appear tyrannical and end up dead like his predecessor Caesar.
When Augustus finally came to power after defeating Mark Antony at the Battle of Actium in 31BC, Rome had been in political unrest for a long time. The people were discontent with this situation and would have welcomed the idea of peace. Many Romans entertained the thought that the civil wars were the result of their neglect of the gods, and Augustus exploited this. He began a major restoration programme which restored many of the temples to their former glory:
He built many temples as well, for example he built a temple to Apollo which he promised he would do if he were to win the war. Along with this was the Mars Ultor which he dedicated to Mars after his help with the battle of Actium.
He also reinstated many religious cults, such as the Arval Brethren, whose job it was to say prayers and perform sacrifice for the safety of the imperial family. This showed people that he was a very pious man. 'Pietas' was an extremely important concept in ancient Rome and positions of priesthood were linked with positions of high political standing. This allowed for Augustus to cultivate even more support as he could appoint his followers into priesthoods and therefore reward their support with power.
Augustus himself adopted the titles of many priesthoods, including the title of Pontifex Maximus in 12 BC, arguably the most important one of all as it could link its origins with Troy and the flight of Aeneas. All these factors would have projected the image that he was not just an ordinary man. He was extremely pious and therefore must be very close to the gods. This new era of peace in Rome was attributed to the restoration of the piety of the state and could further be accredited to Augustus himself who was the one who instigated the entire process. He further inserted himself into the everyday religious life of the Roman people by changing the cult of the household god from simply the Lars to the Lares Augusti, therefore incorporating himself at all levels.
The idea of having a ruler as a god was a foreign concept from the Orient. It had been adopted to an extent in Greece and was in long term use in Egypt, but to the Romans it was a completely perverse way of thinking to their relatively contemporary republican ideology. Hence why Augustus had to be so careful about presenting himself not as a god, but as between god and man. He was accepted as a god straight off in conquered eastern countries such as Egypt, and since the Romans often adopted parts of the religions of the countries they conquered, many Roman generals may have been more susceptible to this ruler cult. This seemed to spread throughout Augustus' and the subsequent emperors' reigns until eventually emperors such as Domition were worshipped openly as deities during their lifetimes.
Further to this religious revival, Augustus had his name changed from Octavian. This wasn't unusual in Roman society; people who had done great things for Rome often changed their name to reflect this. However, the name Augustus has certain connotations to it that are slightly more unusual than most. Firstly it is one of the names used for Jupiter. August is also the name for things of sacred value and of temples, furthermore it is like the word 'auguries' through whom the will of the gods is foretold. He then went on to change the name of the eighth month of our year to August. The way in which this was done was very careful so as not to put forward the idea that he actually was divine, simply that he was more than the average mortal; somewhere in between...
Many statues were built by Augustus which demonstrates to us the way in which he wanted to be perceived. The Ara Pacis (Altar of Peace) is a major example. Built between 13 and 9BC, it celebrated the return of Augustus from campaigns in Gaul and Spain and was decorated with religious images. On the south Frieze of the Altar, Augustus is shown performing a religious ritual. This presents him as a mediator between gods and mortals and therefore as having a 'special relationship' with the gods. He is presented as pious here as he is wearing a toga over his head, and is bare footed, a sign of divinity. Links can be made to his image and that of Aeneas' image on another frieze of the Altar as Aeneas also has a toga ceremoniously covering his head; they are both pious men. Appropriately for this time (art work showing divinity among mortals is uncommon in this period but becomes common in Domitianic reliefs.) the gods are represented on different panels to that of Augustus and the Imperial family.
Another statue used by Augustus to put forward this semi-divine view is the Prima Porta. This shows Augustus wearing a breast plate with elaborate scenes of the gods on it, linking him to them and indicating that his military prowess is due to his being favoured by the gods. Furthermore, he is pictured with cupid riding a dolphin at his feet, indicating some kind of divine intervention in his life. This could also be linked to his association with Aeneas since he was the son of Venus and Cupid is closely linked to Venus. Lastly he is pictured holding a staff and being barefoot. These two things are often associated with the gods, although the idea of being barefoot does not seem to agree with the image of him in armour and so further indicates that this sculpture is for creating an image of him as opposed to simply presenting him in a realistic way. All these images would combine to give the people of Rome the idea that Augustus was something special. However he is still depicted as human as he is wearing armour and has no obvious facial resemblances to any gods; he has simply adopted some of their attributes.
Another portrait of Augustus to be analysed is the one of him as Pontifex Maximus. In this he is seen as heavily pious, in contradiction to the last one where he is seen more as a warrior. He is once again barefoot, this time in keeping with the theme of the painting. He is also dressed like a priest with a toga over his head suggesting that he was making a libation with the hand that has since dropped off. This is the number one image found of Augustus; the pious image. It is important as it ties in with his revival of the moral agenda and puts religion at the forefront of Roman thinking. This image of him creates a further appearance of being an important mediator between the people of Rome and the gods.
Coinage was probably the most effective tool of propaganda available to Augustus as certain types of it were used over the entire empire. To a certain degree, the coins used would have been commissioned by Augustus. If he had not approved of them they would have been decommissioned and few would have been found today. Due to the public nature of these coins we can assume that this was the official line that Augustus would have wanted to take as regards to his image so we can therefore rely on them to quite a large extent as accurate sources.
There are many examples of Augustus being linked to divinities on coins so I will talk about a few examples. After the battle of Actium, with Egypt defeated, Augustus was shown on a coin with many features generally attributed to Neptune: He is seen holding the aplustre of Neptune and he has his foot on a globe. This suggests Augustus' idea that Rome is dominating the world, especially after the defeat of Egypt. This image in turn can be closely linked to that of Demetrius' Poseidon, holding a trident with his foot on a rock, which was moulded on the Greco-Roman sculpture at Lysippis, made to celebrate Demetrius' sea victory over Ptolemy of Egypt. The fact that he is holding the aplustre can only be seen as him assimilating himself to the god Neptune, not actually being the god, as he doesn't have a beard and he is holding a sword not a trident. This would have been carefully arranged so as not to anger the people who would have been looking out for signs that he was assuming too much power over them. This would have been an especially sensitive issue since one of the great atrocities of Antony and Cleopatra was that they were reported to have dressed up as gods themselves. On many other coins Augustus is seen with a strong resemblance to Apollo, who was his patron divinity. This could have been done to stress the family line descending from Apollo through familial resemblance9.
Augustus keenly pushed the fact that his adoptive father, Caesar, was deified after death. This of course made him the son of a god, in addition to the fact that he could trace his family back to Apollo. This was publicised on many coins with the inscription 'CAESAR DIVI F' basically saying that he was the son of Caesar and therefore son of a god (divi filius).
The Aenead was written during Augustus' lifetime by Virgil. It is not known whether it was actually commissioned by Augustus or whether it was written by Virgil as a way of flattering the emperor. However, it would have been very well known and served to document the beginnings or Rome and how it was prophesised from the beginning that Augustus would be the saviour of Rome. It draws many parallels between the lives of Aeneas and Augustus and there are points in the book where the gods talk about the future and what will happen to Rome if Aeneas perseveres and fulfils the prophecy of Rome. The book presents Augustus as a man-god by stressing his divine ancestry and also by indicating that the gods have been expecting him all along, making him extremely important and divinely blessed. The idea of it being prophesised all along is further backed up by the Sibylline books which were held by the Priestesses of Vesta and told the prophesies of Rome, including the prophecy of Augustus as the saviour.
It was very important for Augustus to be presented as somewhere between man and god in order for him to maintain absolute control over the Empire. He managed to revive the religious order with himself right in the middle; the people of Rome could not miss him. It was prophesised that he would be their saviour and with his victories over the 'barbarians' from Egypt and general military successes bringing peace to Rome it would have seemed almost impossible that he didn't have some kind of divine blessing. All Augustus had to do was carefully exploit all this by extensive use of propaganda such as sculpture and coinage, to achieve ultimate control.