This practical looked at the location of ants in various habitats and how they interacted. Two scientific tests were performed; the paired T-test and the chi 2 test. The paired T-test showed that the location of species A (Leptothorax nylanderi) was affected by the different habitats, and that the location of species C (Formica fusca) was not affected by the type of habitat. The chi 2 test showed that there was an interaction between species A and C, and an interaction between species A and B (Tetramorium caespitum). It also indicated that there was no association or dissociation between species A & B. The reasons for these results are later explained in the discussion.
Ants are of the order Hymenoptera and the family Formicidae. There are roughly 9,000 species of ant worldwide and they occur in virtually all regions except in Antarctica and on a few oceanic islands. Ants go against the elementary principle of ecology that organisms become less abundant the higher their trophic level and they are in general carnivores but are very numerous and make up a large proportion of biomass. In many ecological communities ants are so dominant that all the available space appears to be the province of one colony or another, and they occupy many different roles in each community. Ants prefer terrestrial habitats and have a huge impact on terrestrial ecosystems by moving more earth than earthworms and are vital in nutrient recycling and seed dispersal. Ants are highly social and live in colonies ranging from a handful of individuals sharing a tiny shelter to tens or hundreds of millions inhabiting structures reaching six metres below ground. A colony will contain three castes of ant: workers, which are always wingless sterile females, queens, and males (which are usually winged and form mating swarms with queens at certain times of the year). Numerous species of insect and plant have evolved symbiotic and often highly complex relationships with ants. In some cases plants provide ants with food or homes; in return the ants may protect the plants by disturbing potentially damaging herbivores, or stripping leaves from encroaching vines. The ant family is divided into ten distinct subfamilies, of which the biggest by far are the Formicinae and the Myrmicinae. Some myrmicine ants have stings while formicines defend themselves by spraying formic acid. The infamous driver and army ants of tropical regions belong to the subfamily Dorylinae, and they move in massive columns, up to several millions strong, often raiding termites and ants nests. All ants have glands that secrete pheromones-chemical messages used for communication between colony members as well as for trail making and defence.
The aim of this practical is to see how different species of ants interact and how varied habitats affect there way of living and interacting with the environment and each other.
Firstly we measured out an area (fig.1) fifteen metres by eighteen metres.
This area was then divided into a grid using flags on poles, each grid being one metre squared. We then labelled the grid across using the letters A to O and down using 1 to 18, to make grid referencing easier. Then we drew a map of the site a noted down any obvious habitats (see 'a map to show the various habitats on the site'). Pictures were also taken (see sheet labelled photo of various habitats on site). Once the site had been mapped out we used four quadrates, which were twenty seven centimetres squared in size to break a random area in each grid square up into four equal parts. The quadrates were placed next to each other to make one larger square, although keeping the square still sectioned into four smaller squares (fig.2), which we could look at individually. This allowed us to see more accurately, concerning the coverage on the habitat. The area the quadrates were placed in was randomly selected. When the four quadrates were set up in a randomly selected grid square, thirty seconds was spent looking for any species of ant. Any ant species that could not be identified was collected and returned to the lab for identification. To identify the ants we used the book Identifying Ants by Gary. J. Skinner and Geoffrey. W.Allen.
A paired T-Test was performed on Minitab using our results; the results for this test are as follows:
Species A-Leptothorax nylanderi
Species B- Tetramorium caespitum
Species C- Formica fusca
This result shows that the null hypothesis, which is that habitat, does not affect the location of the ants, is rejected for species A as the P-value is small and the DF value is high. It is random for species B as you have fifty percent chance of being right, so more tests need to be carried out. For species C the null hypothesis would be accepted as the P-Value is considerably high.
Using Minitab once again dot plots were plotted:
The dot plot in figure three shows that there is a fairly even spread of all species of ants over different percentage coverage's, but ants were particularly located at fifty percent and ninety nine percent. When looking at individual species, Leptothorax nylanderi prefer around fifty one percent coverage and ninety nine percent. Tetramorium caespitum are located mainly in the higher regions of fifty one percent, eighty seven percent and most obviously in ninety nine percent covered habitats. Formica fusca on the other hand has a very evenly spread location of its species, with the highest number of ants being found around fifty percent.
The chi 2 test was also performed:
Therefore there is an interaction between species A & C which is either an association or dissociation.
(If X 2= 3.84 then the probability of the expected = 0 so therefore it is not random/there is association or dissociation between the two species.)
Therefore there is an association or dissociation between species A & B, it is not random.
Therefore there is no association or dissociation between species B & C, it is random.
The other tables included in this practical were used in mini tab to calculate our results. Maps were also sketched in order to display results.
Three nests were found on site; the Formica pratensis species, the Leptothorax nylanderi species, and the Tetramorium caespitum. The other species not included in the results could not be used as there were not enough ants to make them relevant.
Within many habitats the most important factor that determines the distribution and abundance of ants is the distribution and abundance of other ants. Also the ability of ants to dominate space is often severely limited by the necessity of foraging and patrolling from a fixed nest.
The results show that there is either an association or dissociation between species A and C. The way they interact is using pheromones, and there is a pheromonal parsimony where the same substance may elicit different responses in different individuals, or different concentrations or contexts. Pheromones are an important means of communication between ants because only one signal can be used to influence the behaviour of thousands of individuals simultaneously. Ants produce a variety of sounds that are inaudible to the human ear. Ants sense actual vibrations of moving air particles, which is a good system since their sounds don't have to travel far and noises from our world aren't heard by them at all. Ants make sounds by rubbing a set of ridges against their abdomen, which is a process called 'stridulation'. The interaction between these two species could be in many ways. The colonies may directly contest or scramble for limiting resources or have a directly detrimental effect through forms of mutual interference. The association or dissociation between these two species could depend on the species, size and proximity of neighbouring colonies. Each species could exert selection pressures on, and evolves in response to the species. Formica fusca makes medium sized colonies and they are usually an 'enslaved' species. This can cause them to have aggressive behaviour to their own colony as well as intruders. Either species could be 'mugger' ants, where they stop foragers and steal their prey items. There is also the chance of a species being a claim-jumper which are trail explorers, which means that one of the colonies food supplies is being intercepted by another colony. Leptothorax nylanderi are known possible guest ants where they exploit distantly related host species by living with another species. These two species along with the dissociation or association between species A and B, may interact to help hunt for food for their colonies, they do this by using the trail pheromone. An ant travelling between its nest and a plentiful food source some distance away deposits tiny quantities of pheromone along the trail, leaving the unmistakable signal of food. Although there is no directional information in the pheromone, passing ants presumably know where the nest is and deduce that going the other way will lead them to a food source. Trail pheromones pose a bit of a problem for ants though because they need to be long lasting but not to direct competition to a good source of food. The solution for this is to make the pheromone as chemically complicated as possible, so that other species decipher the coded message. This may be what has happened between species A/C, and A/B, where the other species has deciphered the pheromone and appears to be interacting as they are using the same source of food.
The two species of ant interacting could be acknowledging one another as intruder and attacking. This is caused by the alarm pheromone. The alarm pheromones are lightweight, highly volatile chemicals which spread rapidly, triggering an alarm response, and then disperse equally rapidly once danger has past. A foraging ant will stop looking for food in order to fight any intruder, even if the encounter is at apparently safe distance from the nest. As she fights, she exudes alarm pheromones. If the intruders constitute a serious threat, some of the ants will leave the fight and race home to summon reinforcements, leaving a chemical trail behind them. Back at the nest, the ants again perform their dance in front of their sisters, touching them with their antennae, but this time transferring alarm pheromone. Donald Griffin, in his book Animal Thinking, observes that the two dances, although similar, are not identical, so the combination of visual and chemical signals tells the nest-based ants what the crisis is. Griffin also remarks that when the alarm pheromone is transferred, not all the ants depart immediately; some repeat the gestures to others in the nest. John Bradshaw, a British entomologist, discovered another alarm system in African weaver ants, this time based on multiple pheromones with different meanings. When a worker meets an enemy in her colony's territory she releases a mixture of four chemicals from large glands in the head which open to the outside at the base of the mandibles. The individual chemicals diffuse at different rates through the air so that the other workers receive the different ingredients of the cocktail at different stages. The first is an aldehyde called hexanal and is the lightest. The second chemical is an alcohol, hexanol, which causes the ants to search for the source of the problem. The third is undecanone, which attracts workers to the site of the trespasser and stimulates them to bite any foreign object they encounter. Finally, butyloctenal sounds the 'trumpet' for the attack.
From my results, species B and C have no association or dissociation with one another, and finding them in a grid at the same time has no relevance, it is totally random. This may be because these two species are in no way in competition for resources. They may not be territorial. It was also noticed that the further an ant got from its nest the less interaction there was between species and this is probably because they are not defending their nest. The only ant to actually bite when on a nest site was the Formica pratensis and this may be because of territorial pheromones, causing the species to be aggressive. Although usually when there is an intruder in the nest, an alarm pheromone is released which spreads rapidly throughout the nest.
Looking at where the ants live the Leptothorax nylanderi nest was found in grid reference G11, where the habitat is fairly short grass, rocks and mud. This suggests that the colony is monogynous as monogynous leptothoracines tend to live in patchy habitats such as rocks and mud. Monogynous colonies can be unbeneficial to a colony thought, as it raises the dispersal costs, although cyclical changes in queen numbers could be worse as over time it may lead to a decoupling between the social structure of the colony, the genetic structure, and level of skew (Skew theory predicts an association between low ecological constraints, low relatedness, low skew and low aggression inside colonies on the one hand, and high ecological constraints, high relatedness, high skew and high aggression on the other), so therefore the colony has chosen a more stable community structure. Another reason the nest may be placed there is because it has high exposure to the sun, so that the humidity of the nest stays high. This nest was more underground tunnels than a built up nest unlike the other nests discovered, and this may be because there was a lack of cover from predators.
The Formica fusca nest was found in grid reference N3, where there was a fair amount of coverage as well as dandelions. The reason for this being the nest is shaded, which means low density and low heat capacity but the nest stimulates the properties of a rock because of its high thermal diffusivity. This can be beneficial against predators, and also humans who can easily destroy nests. The absorption of solar radiation in the nest will be high, and results in high surface temperatures for a smaller outlay on transport. The structure of the nests of each ant species is maintained by the constant activity of the ants at the surface.
The third nest, Formica pratensis, was found on grid reference A6, which was quite considerably shaded. The ants nest was more than likely built there because of the same reasons as the Formica fusca nest; it also appeared to be more built up as it was more shaded from the sun, so it could retain heat easier.
Other factors which may affect where the nest is built include the amount of food resources nearby. This would affect all three of the nests found as they are all central place foraging, where everything is brought back to be fed to the brood. Foragers have the problem where if they find a certain food source, whether to continue to find a more profitable one, and this can affect the nest greatly.
Predators and parasitic organisms can affect where a nest is located as well. This could be of great importance to the species, Tetramorium caespitum, as they have Anergates atratulus and Teleutomyrmex schneideri as parasites of their colonies. Polyergus raid Formica nests, and Harpagoxenus enslave Leptothorax species as well.
Nests can be affected by queen- worker conflict as well. This is where a colony with a single, once-mated queen, has workers that are more closely related to sons than to nephews or brothers. The queen, however, is more closely related to her sons, so therefore each party favours the production of its own offspring, leading to this conflict. Species A and possibly B promote stigmergic behaviour (which is when production of behaviour is a consequence of the effects produced in the local environment) looking at the T-test results, and this can be brought on by many stigmergic processes for example; the use of pheromones, the presence of the queen, carbon dioxide concentrations, and communication.
When we begin to look at the coverage result it is very evident apart from with the ant Formica fusca, that most ants do not like habitats with low coverage of about 0-15% coverage. This is because there is a lack of protection from predators, even though there is a high sun exposure, and there is probably a lack of resources for food and nest building as well, so fewer ants will be found in those coverages. Most of the ants we found preferred around fifty percent coverage, and the main reason for this is that there is an exposure to the sun, yet there is some protection from predators, and a mixture of resources. High coverage is also fairly popular which may be because of the fact it contains materials to build nests, and may even be a potential nesting place.
Species C accepted the null hypothesis of habitat having no effect on the location of ants, and this is may be because other factors affect the colony rather than just habitat, and habitat has a small if no effect on them. Other factors could include food, predators and so on.
It was noted also that the bad weather had a huge detrimental effect on ants as none were counted when it was raining, and also ants were scarce in the evenings and early mornings. This is because the weather is just too cold for them so they stay in the nest.
From the evidence gathered in our study, it can be concluded that it is not just habitat that affects the community structure of ants, for example other factors include weather, other species of ant, resources, pheromones, which all play a part in influencing the structure of the community. Many other experiments need to be completed, to show the true community structure of ants, as we only looked at worker ants, and there are many different castes in an ant community.