The idea that odontoceti communicate by sound has been around for many years, as Aristotle was aware that dolphins made sound at the surface of the ocean. This idea also goes back thousands of years as Aristotle wrote that the dolphin "when taken out of water gives a squeak and moans in the air" (Thompson, 1910, iv. 9. 535b, 31). The most obvious odontoceti to use sound production to communicate are Beluga whales and dolphins. The reasons for them relying on sound are believed to be for communication, navigation, or detection of predators and prey. Odontoceti may use sound to attract mates, repel rivals, communicate within a social group or between groups, navigate or find food. Dolphins emit sounds of 1,000 to 15,000 cycles per second and Beluga whales emit sound at 500 to 10,000 cycles per second.
Odontoceti are gregarious animals and usually travel in social groups called pods. Communication between mother bottlenose dolphins and their calves is performed by whistles, and whistles are also used by individual dolphins, killer whales, pilot whales and sperm whales for communication. Dolphins produce their noises by shutting their jaws vigorously, and when they are feeding they sound like they are barking. They also produce air in their nasal passages through their blowholes which sounds like a balloon letting air escape. In the mating season the produce a whining sound and echolocation in dolphins sounds like a rusty hinge opening and shutting. Clicks last from 10 to 25 seconds at 0.25 to 0.5 kHz, with screams up to 2 kHz. Beluga whales make a chirping noise and smack their lips together, whereas pilot whales have been heard whining. The humpback whale is known to "sing" which helps it to remember migration paths and communicate especially during the mating season. These songs can last from 8 to 20 minutes and they can sing for days on end, and over so many years these songs change gradually to completely different ones. Humpback whales also use bubbles as a form of defence and to coral fish, by creating a line of bubbles which the fish will not cross. These whales' coral fish also by using a high pitched scream, and they communicate between each other mainly by breathing. Fin whales use low pulse to communicate, and grey and right whales breach to communicate and play. Breaching is also used when whales are injured or trying to find food. Grey whales moan and make bubble like noises when they are migrating and a pulsing metallic sounding signal has come from a captive grey whale. Minke whales make pings, clicks, and grunt-like/thump-like sounds. There are four acoustic categories; tonal pulses and low frequency moans at 12 to 500 Hz, grunt-like sounds at 40 to 200 Hz, chirps and cries at 1 kHz, and click-like sounds at 3 to 30 kHz. These vocalisations have been found in the humpback, grey, minke, and bryde's whales. Other vocal communication methods include spinning, back or flipper slapping, and tail slapping, which may convey a threat or frustration from a whale.
For some years, it has been known that a method of echolocation is employed in bats flying in the dark. They emit a succession of high- pitched cries and control their direction of flight by analysing the echoes. Some nocturnal birds also use echolocation, and other animals, if crippled or injured by loss of sight, may develop some such a method as a substitute for vision. So it would seem reasonable that the method of orientation and navigation used by odontoceti must be echolocation. The fact that vision is impractical in the sea, and other animals employ this technique in the air, both tend to support such an assumption. It is most certainly possible that odontoceti are capable of producing many kinds of sounds. The question of just how the toothed whales produce sound signals has not yet been completely explained, as they possess no vocal chords, which has been evident since 1901; "Two points of general interest are presented by the larynx of the cetacea: firstly, the absence of the vocal cords, and even any rudiment of them; secondly, the peculiar modifications undergone in the arytenoids cartilage." (Benham 1901, P.295).
So since 'vocalisation' is not an option for communicating underwater between odontoceti, what is then turned to as a possible way of communicating is the powerful valve of the blowhole. This can be vibrated like a human lip when air is past through it. If the vibration rate is raised to a sufficiently high level, the resulting sound effect is like a human voice, but it the vibration rate is slowed down the sounds become identifiable as clicks or pings. The problem with this is we can not prove that the sound actually comes from the blowhole and that it may come from beneath the blowhole.
Scientists believe that the sounds produced may involve the melon in odontoceti's, as it is possible it acts as an acoustical lens to focus the sounds that they produce into a beam, which is projected into the water at the front of the odontoceti. This then reflects off objects and sends an echo back to the animal which can then be interpreted. Toothed whales use short sounds called clicks and locate objects by listening for the reflected echo.
They also believe the major areas of sound reception for the echolocation of toothed whales is in the fat filled cavities of the lower jaw bones.
Early studies suggested that 'whistles' were generated in the larynx while 'clicks' were produced in the nasal sac region (Au, 1993). Sounds are received from other odontoceti and conducted through the lower jaw to the middle ear, then the inner ear, and this eventually ends up in the hearing centres in the brain via the auditory nerve.
This means that odontoceti can communicate underwater through transmitting low frequency sounds and as the brain receives the sound waves in nerve impulses the toothed whales are able to interpret understand the meaning of the sounds. By this complex way of echo locating toothed whales can determine size, shape, speed, and distance. For example Beluga whales use this method for navigation at the poles under the ice, and locating breathing holes under ice caps. Through the sounds a toothed whale makes, the identity, sex, location, and status may be recognised by other whales in the sea.
Odontoceti are known to use 'clicks' as a form of communication. There are generally two kinds of 'click' toothed whales can make; discrimination clicks; where high frequencies and repetition rates are used to identify and locate objects (usually by shape and size), and orientation; where low frequencies and low repetition rates are performed to detect objects.
Toothed whales not only communicate by sound but also by vision (when possible), touch, and probably taste (chemoreception). Beluga whales communicate through facial expressions, and physical contact. Visual behaviours such as breaches, pectoral slaps, where the whales slap a pectoral flipper on the water's surface, and lob tails are other ways toothed whales communicate. Dolphins have several acute senses and can see as well as humans, although they have the ability to compensate for the refraction of light waves as they pass through the eye underwater, meaning they can see as well under water as they can above the surface. Dolphins also communicate by body posturing, vocalisations, and echolocation.
Adult belugas have been seen carrying objects such as planks, buoys etc during calving season as a way of interacting with their calves. They also have a flexible neck due to cervical vertebrae not being fused, which allows them to move their heads up, down, and side to side. Their melon is very bulbous compared with other toothed whales giving them more flexibility, so they can produce a wide range of different facial expressions. They move their lips to communicate as well and sometimes clap their jaws together making loud sounds.
Sometimes the size of a group of toothed whales can also affect the communication they use. For example; 'Blare' pulsed tones were significantly associated with compact, stationary groups near the surface of the water, and 'squawk' pulsed tones with socially interactive groups. It has also been suggested that beluga whale clicks and dolphin clicks are very similar, suggesting they may possibly communicate, although they adopt different echolocation techniques. The bottlenose dolphin maintains a greater level in the click interval than the time taken for the signal to travel to the target and back, so that echoes are processed before later signals are transmitted. But for the beluga, many clicks are sent before even the echo from the last click has been received back.
The communication that has been shown to occur in toothed whales is relatively simple, similar to the communication that many other animals engage in which involves identifying individuals and communicating breeding status. Whether or not toothed whales and dolphins are able to communicate more complex ideas and thoughts has never been proven, due to lack of evidence.