This practical used the sweep netting technique to collect species in four various habitats, and then the Shannon diversity index was used to calculate the diversity of each site. The results showed that all habitats were slightly different in diversity levels due to Abiotic and biotic factors, and other tests should be performed on various other habitats.
The aim of this practical was to measure the species diversity of four different habitats, and see if there is any difference in species diversity between the sites, due to different habitats. I believe there will be more diversity in site four because there appeared to be more edible vegetation and less inedible vegetation for example gorse. It was also seemed to be the site with a great mixture of plants. It also had long grass for cover and yet allowed some sun through for warmth.
The field containing the four sites was situated in the Rennes field centre in Brittany, on the edge of the foret de Paimpont. The reason for choosing a field here would be because it is undisturbed, and also there is more diversity in France than in Britain, due to continental drifts many years ago, so many species did not make it to Britain. The particular field that was chosen was because it had many different kinds of habitat yet they were not too far apart for other factors to affect the species diversity, for example the weather.
To begin with we chose four sites of our particular field selected by choosing four habitats remarkably different from one another, so we got as much variation as possible. Then in order to catch the insects we used sweep nets to sweep up the insects, and then used pewter's to suck the trapped insects out of the sweep nets and into test tubes, for examination and identification back in the labs. For each site notes and pictures of the vegetation were taken in order to help understand why particular species are in those particular vegetations. To make all collections of insects fair, each site was sweep netted four times for the same amount of time.
After this, back in the labs, we identified the insects into the matter of order and then into families, separately for each site. We then used this to calculate the diversity indices using Shannon weiner. Using Shannon weiner (= H = -PiLOGePi) we calculated the equitability, to discover which sites were most and least diverse. This is calculated using the equation Hmax = LOGeF (F = the number of families) and then this value is put into the equation H / Hmax to work out the equitability index which is always a maximum of one.
Refer to printed excel spreadsheets.
Our results show that sites one and two are fairly similar in equitability (both 0.87), meaning they are of similar diversity. Whereas site three is considerably lower (0.67) meaning that the species on this site are less equally numbered meaning it is less diverse than sites one, two and four. Site four on the other hand has a higher equitability than all the other sites (0.90) and therefore has a more even spread of numbers of species and is more diverse. Comparing this to the group results, the group suggests different with site one being the most diverse with the highest equitability (0.86), with site two being the least diverse (0.78), and the other two sites being fairly similar (0.81 and 0.80). Although the difference in equitability between sites is much smaller. In the group results there is a relationship between family and H because as the family value increases the H value increases. Although there appears to be no relationship between the number value and the H value, as there is no obvious pattern.
Looking at our individual results, site four is probably the most diverse because it plenty to offer a variety of invertebrates. There may be a good resource centre of food provided in this area, or perhaps the perfect habitat for those organisms.
Sites one and two of our results are of the same equitability and this is because they possibly offer the same resources, and similar habitats. Site three has the lowest equitability suggesting it is less diverse because its environment is less suitable for a variety of organisms. Natural selection may be choosing the stronger organisms, due to lack of resources on site three, but there are fewer selection pressures for the other sites, as there have more resources. Also it could depend on how a species disperses itself out from another organism. Behaviour and habitat selection could be reasons for the results shown. Some organisms do not occupy their potential range, even though they are physically able to disperse into unoccupied areas. In this case certain individuals avoid certain habitats even if they are suitable. Insects often have very stereotyped oviposition behaviour, and this may restrict their local distribution to certain host plants. Predators also affect the diversity of a site, if there is a particular dominant predator present that eats anything then the species diversity will decrease. Diseases and competitors affect how an organism is distributed as well. Abiotic factors affect the distribution of animals just like biotic factors, for example temperature, rainfall, salinity, and light. Environmental temperature is important at determining the distribution of organisms because of its effect on biological processes and the inability of most organisms to regulate body temperature precisely. Water is essential to life, but its availability varies dramatically among habitats. Sunlight provides energy that drives nearly all ecosystems, although only plants and other photosynthetic organisms use this energy source directly. Light is also important to the development and behaviour of many animals that are sensitive to photoperiod, the relative lengths of daytime and night time, due to the temperature changes. Wind amplifies the effects of the temperature by increasing heat loss due to evaporation and convection. It creates water loss in organisms by increasing the rate evaporation in animals and transpiration in plants. It can also affect the morphology of plants by inhibiting growth. The physical structure, pH, and mineral composition of rocks and soil limit the distribution of plants and of the animals that feed upon them, creating patchiness in terrestrial habitats. Time of the year may also affect the diversity of the sites as well.
The group results show that site one is more diverse, this could be because organisms were missed, and the method we used was not very effective as flying organisms could easily escape and vice versa for site three. The equitability of the four sites is quite similar which would suggest that the different habitats were not affected by the appearance of the habitat, the vegetation, and perhaps more different habitats should have been chosen. Most of the families found on the four sites were of the eighty percent Holometabola, which could mean that they find it easy to adapt to different habitats.
The results also show that there is a relationship between family and Shannon H, because as one increases the other increases. The reason for this is because family number is used as a multiple in the equation to calculate H, the multiple increases, so therefore the H value would increase. This means that the number of different families is relevant to discovering how diverse an area is, whereas the actual number of the same family has no obvious relationship, and therefore has no effect on the diversity of an area. When calculating the diversity of an area it is the variety that counts not the quantity.
From this experiment I have realised that it is an ideal test, when testing for water quality in fresh water streams, although otherwise it is not very useful, and wider more universal tests should be used.