Humans have hunted whales for a very long time. The oldest records of whale hunts are rock carvings found in South Korea that date back to 6000 BC. Historical whaling can be divided into six main stages, some of them overlapping: The first being the Basque fishery (1400-1700): Hunting in the North Atlantic by Europeans; the Atlantic Northern Right Whale was a major target. Secondly the Atlantic Arctic fishery (1600-1900): Hunting moved north to around Spitzbergen, Greenland and in between. The Pacific fishery (1800-)is the third stage: American whalers moved into Pacific, targeting the Pacific Northern Right Whale. The fourth: The Sperm Whale fishery: As "fast fishing" techniques improved in the eighteenth century American whalers learned that the Sperm Whale contains valuable oil and exploited it around the world. The fifth: rorqual fishery (~1880-): the explosive harpoon was used for the first time and was devastingly effective in enabling the whaling of the very large rorquals in significant numbers. Species were hunted in all oceans by British, American, Japanese, Icelandic and Norwegian whalers amongst others. Huge "factory ships" which carried out the processing of the meat whilst still at sea enabled whalers to stay at sea for months on end. Population numbers fell by 80-90% across the major rorqual species. The final stage occurred by 1946 and the international community decided that the destruction should not go on and the newly-founded United Nations passed the International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling. More and more species became protected from commercial hunting in the 1960s and 70s. In 1982 the International Whaling Commission members agreed a general moratorium of commercial whaling that was implemented in 1986.
Although whale oil has little commercial value today, whale meat has come to be considered a delicacy, particularly in Japan and Norway. The primary species hunted today is the Minke Whale, the smallest of the baleen whales. Recent scientific surveys estimate a population of 180,000 in the central and North East Atlantic and 700,000 around Antarctica.
Modern whaling is regulated by the International Whaling Commission, set up in 1946 by the United Nations International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling. On July 23, 1982 the IWC members voted to impose an open-ended moratorium on commercial whaling. An Article called V(3) states that it gives a 90-day period to object to decisions taken by the commission. Norway did object to the decision and further regards it as ultra vires (i.e. null and void), since the decision was not based on advice from the Scientific Committee and is, they say, in contradiction with the purposes set forth in the preamble of ICRW. Norway was thus able to continue a commercial hunt if it wished, and has done so since 1993.
In 2003, the IWC began a multi-year survey in Antarctic waters to update current population estimates. Norway has been conducting multi-year surveys each year since 1995 as required by their membership in the IWC. However several governments influential in the IWC, in particular those of Australia, New Zealand and the United Kingdom have hardened their opposition to whaling in recent years and may continue to attempt to block proposals from pro-whaling nations for a commercial catch regardless of the results of these surveys.
In addition to Norway's commercial whaling, IWC regulations allow for two further types of whaling: whaling for the purposes of scientific research, and subsistence whaling in aboriginal communities.
Currently there are only four whaling nations and they are as follows: the Faroe Islands where around one thousand Long-finned Pilot Whales are killed in the annual whale "grind" by Faroese fisherman each year. The current practice continues a tradition going back to the tenth century. However anti-whaling campaigners campaign particularly vociferously against Faroese whaling - saying that the method of killing is cruel. The second country is Iceland and has a long tradition of subsistence whaling. Indeed whaling of one form or another has been conducted from the island since it became populated more than eleven hundred years ago. By 1915, 17,000 whales had been taken from Icelandic waters, eradicating Northern Right Whales and Gray Whales in the area. The Icelandic Government banned whaling in its waters to allow time for population recovery. The law was repealed in 1928. By 1935 Icelanders had set up their own commercial whaling operation for the first time. They hunted mostly Sei, Fin and Minke Whales. In the early years of this operation Blue, Sperm and Humpback Whales were also hunted, but this was soon prohibited due to decimated numbers. Between 1935 and 1985 Icelandic whalers killed around 20,000 animals in total. Unlike Norway, Iceland did not protest against the IWC moratorium and was therefore limited to whaling conducted under the name of scientific research. Between 1986 and 1989 around 60 animals per year were taken. However under strong pressure from the international community, not convinced that the kills were truly for scientific purposes (particularly because the meat was sold to Japan) Iceland ceased whaling altogether in 1989. Following the 1991 refusal of the IWC to accept its Scientific Committees recommendation to allow limited whaling, Iceland left the IWC. With significant support from its people, Iceland rejoined the IWC in 2002. This allowed it to restart a program of whaling in the summer of 2003. Iceland presented a feasibility study to the 2003 IWC meeting to take 100 Minke Whales, 100 Fin Whales and 50 Sei Whales in each of 2003 and 2004. The primary aim of the study was to deepen the understanding of fish-whale interactions - the strongest advocates for a resumed hunt are fisherman concerned that whales are taking too many fish. The hunt was supported by three-quarters of the Icelandic population. However under the terms of the convention the Icelandic government issued permits for a scientific catch. In 2003 Iceland took 36 Minke Whales from a quota of 38. In 2004 it took 25 whales (the full quota). In 2005, the government issued a permit for a third successive year - allowing whalers to take up to 39 whales.
Japan is the third country that continues to whale. Harpooning of whales by hand began in Japan in the 12th century, but it was not until the 1670s, when a new method of catching whales using nets was developed, that whaling really began to spread throughout Japan. In the 1890s Japan followed international trends, first switching to modern harpoon whaling techniques, and eventually to factory ships for mass whaling. In the postwar 1940s and 1950s, whale meat became a primary source of food and protein in Japan following the famines that came with World War II. In many whaling nations, the discovery of petroleum products that could replace the industrially important parts of whales, such as the oil, resulted in a decline in the importance and levels of whaling. This was not the case in Japan, however, where whale meat was an important source of food, and where the whaling industry was a source of pride in a country that is dependent on food importation to feed its population. When the commercial whaling moratorium was introduced by the IWC in 1982, Japan lodged an official objection, but withdrew this objection in 1987 after the United States threatened it with sanctions. Thus Japan became bound by the moratorium, unlike Norway, Russia and (more disputed) Iceland. Therefore, in 1987, Japan stopped commercial whaling activities in Antarctic waters, but in the same year began a controversial scientific whaling program (JARPA - Japanese Research Program in the Antarctica). The Japanese government mainly justifies this type of whaling on the grounds that analysis of stomach contents provides insight into the dietary habits of whales, and that analysis of actual tissue is the only way to ascertain the age of a whale as well as the degree of interbreeding in the population which provides vital insight into whale population distribution.
Japan's scientific whaling program has remained controversial, with conservation groups and anti-whaling countries such as the US and Australia maintaining that the number of animals killed is much greater than demanded by scientific purposes, and that the real reason for the scientific kills is to provide whale meat for Japanese restaurants and supermarkets. Main Scientific justification of killing whales is firstly to obtain the statistical sample of ages which allows better population modeling secondly to examine the dietary habit of whales, both, Japan insist, is only possible through examination of whale body. The Japanese government point out that IWC regulation requires whale meat to be fully utilised once it's been caught. Moreover, it is hypocritical and inconsistent, on one hand, to insist that scientific evidence on whale population is inaccurate and insufficient in terms of commercial whaling while at the same time insist otherwise in the case of scientific whaling, which Japanese government says is needed in order to ascertain the sustainability of any commercial whaling operations, and to provide evidence on repealing the moratorium.
In 1994, Australia attempted to stop some of the Japanese whaling program by enforcing a 200 nautical mile exclusive economic zone (EEZ) around the Australian Antarctic Territory. However, antarctic territories are not generally recognized internationally. In 2002, Japanese whalers took 5 Sperm, 39 Sei, 50 Bryde's and 150 Minke Whales in the northern catch area and 440 Minke Whales in the southern catchment area. The catch was carried out under the IWC's special licence for whaling research.
In 2005, the JARPA scientific research program was replaced by the JARPA-II program, which increases the quota of Minke whales to 900, and more controversially, adds Fin whales to the program, with a quota of 10 animals in 2005. This move has sparked a great deal of controversy among anti-whaling nations, in particular because fin whales are listed as endangered under the Convention on International Trade on Endangered Species. From 2007, Japan plans to start taking up to 50 humpback whales and 50 fin whales annually.
The final country: Norway has registered an objection to the International Whaling Commission moratorium, and is thus not bound by it. In 1993 Norway, as the only country in the world, resumed a commercial catch, following a period of five years where a small catch was made under a scientific permit. The catch is made solely from the North-east Atlantic Minke Whale population, which is estimated to consist of about 110,000 animals. Norwegian minke whale catches have fluctuated between 503 animals in 1997 to 639 in 2005.
Prior to the moratorium, Norway caught around 2,000 Minkes per year. The North Atlantic hunt is divided into five areas and usually lasts from early May to late August. Norway exports a limited amount of whale meat to the Faroes and Iceland. It has been attempting to export to Japan for several years, though this has been hampered by legal protests and concerns in the Japanese domestic market about the effects of pollution on Atlantic whales. In May 2004 the Norwegian Parliament passed a resolution to considerably increase the number of Minkes hunted each year with up to 1,800 animals hunted per year by 2006. The fisheries ministry also proposed a satellite tracking programme to monitor numbers of other species as possible prelude to resuming hunting of them.
The sharpest point of debate over whaling today concerns the conservation status of hunted species. Today there is widespread agreement around the world that it is morally wrong to exterminate a species of animal for food. The past mismanagement of whale stocks has depeleted the overall whale population to a significant extent and four species of whale are still endangered.
Other species on the other hand, in particular the Minke Whale, have never been considered endangered and still other species have shown signs of recovery. It is these species of whales that whalers wish to hunt commercially, believing that with modern techniques a hunt of these species could be sustained without damage to the ecosystem.
There is much controversy over the status of particular species when it comes to whales, for example conservationists are happy that the Sei whale is listed as endangered but the Japanese believe the species has swelled from 9,000 in 1978 to 28,000 in 2002, so do not see why the animal should be listed with this status.
A reason for continuing to ban whaling is that we do not know the full effect of whaling has on the oceans system, in a BBC documentary "Blue Planet" it is shown that the corpse of whale feeds large numbers of fish(thousands), from groups of sharks to bottom feeders, for months even years.
It is proven far more profitable to whale watch rather than whale hunt, so anti-whalers do not understand why whalers continue to whale hunt, and also it brings in jobs. Non of the Southern Hemisphere have continued whaling and many countries including developing countries promote whale watching.
The method in which whales are killed is also under considerable debate, whales are killed using explosive harpoons, which puncture the skin and then explode inside the body. Anti-whaling campaigners say this method of killing is cruel, particularly if carried out by inexperienced gunners because the whale can take several minutes to die. In March 2004, Whalewatch, an umbrella group of 140 conservation and animal welfare groups from 55 countries published a report, Troubled Waters, whose main conclusion was that whales cannot be guaranteed to be killed humanely and that all whaling should be stopped. They quoted figures that said 20% of Norwegian and 60% of Japanese-killed whales failed to die as soon as they had been harpooned. John Opdahl of the Norwegian embassy in London responded by saying that Norwegian authorities worked with the IWC to develop the most humane killing methods. He said that the average time taken for a whale to die having been shot was the same as or less than those animals killed by big game hunters on safari. It is also possible to use non-lethal biopsy darts to do tests on whales so they do not need to kill whales for scientific purpose.
Intelligence of cetaceans is another arguments used by anti-whalers, as they believe that cetaceans are one of the most intelligent non-human animals, so it is morally wrong to kill them for food. However, those in favour of whaling point out that pigs are also amongst the most intelligent of mammals and say that it thus inconsistent to claim that pigs should be used for food, and whales not, other considerations notwithstanding. in the view of pro-whalers, if whaling is rejected on grounds of intelligence, then so should the eating of other animals leaving vegetarianism as the only option.
Whalers believe that whaling is an essential condition because whales eat far too much fish, for example the minke whale eats 10kg of fish meat to every 1kg hunted, therefore they should be allowed to keep hunting them to keep their populations down and keep fish stocks in good supply for humans. But this is inconsistent as if the catch of whales is small enough not to impact overall whale numbers, it is also too small to affect fish numbers. This would then mean to make more fish available, more whales would have to be culled putting populations at risk. This is argued by whalers saying that the populations would be "in check" not at risk. Professor Daniel Pauly produced a report saying that although cetaceans and pinnipeds are estimated to eat 600m tonnes of food per year, compared with just 150m tonnes eaten by humans, the type much of the food that cetaceans eat (in particular deep sea squid and krill) is not eaten by human. Moreover, the report says, the locations where whales and humans catch fish only overlap to a small degree.
Another reason to continue the ban is all the other factors affecting whale populations giving them a high mortality rate such as by catch, chemical pollution, noise pollution, climate change, and habitat degradation. Huge trawls drawn by powerful vessels are a concern that requires further investigation and drift nets are widely recognized as a problem for most marine life, there is evidence in the UK that 'bycatch' is a growing problem for cetaceans.
Cetaceans accumulate fat-soluble pollutants in their bodies at remarkable concentrations. Such compounds have been found in other species to cause a wide range of disorders and adversely affect reproductive and immune systems.
Noise travels well in water but this unfortunately includes man-made noise. The seas around Britain are now filled with the sounds of vessel traffic, seismic exploration for oil and gas deposits and powerful sounds from the military as well. The consequence of this on cetaceans is a cause for concern but is not fully understood.
Climate change due to us humans, causes changes in oceanic water circulations which may directly affect cetaceans. This is due to their thermal preferences and tolerances or their prey.
Fishing can cause huge physical changes, as can marinas and fish farms. Many believe that such growth of these industries relieves pressure on ocean fisheries, but this is sometimes the opposite. Farming carnivorous fish means you need to feed them lots of wild fish, and in fish farms disease can sometimes pollute wild stocks of fish.
Whaling communities argue that whaling has economic Benefits that are direct; there is a good market for it and it creates lots of jobs, and indirect; the fish stocks as a food source.
They also believe that whaling can have research benefits, and using information on whales' population structure, growth rates, and reproductive rates, we can whale sustainably.
Whaling is also a long lived tradition for some countries and it is believed that health and community spirit will be lost because of the ban. Anti-whalers disagree because many old traditions have been lost anyway.
It is also argued that small islands depend on fish and whaling as an essential food source, in particular the inuits.
Overall there is huge debate over whether the whaling ban should be lifted, there are many reasons for it to be lifted and many for the ban to continue. It does appear that there is more reason to continue to ban whaling, and this is probably why the ban as of yet has not been lifted. In my opinion I believe the ban should not be lifted, as there seems lots of evidence including scientific against whaling, and I think it would not be possible to control whaling so it is a sustainable market because it is so large and there is evidence of bogus scientific purposes.