Manydown is a 5000 acre (2000 ha) rural estate located west of Basingstoke around the village of Wootton St Lawrence in Hampshire. The estate is family owned and is a good example of diversification in agriculture, whereby 'not all eggs are in one basket' and income stems from a range of sources. Based on an integrated management and sustainable practices these sources include cropping, livestock production, farm property development and perhaps most crucially to Manydown's success, a farm shop which sells home produce - a vital link for the farm to the customer both locally and nationally. The farming system also includes conservation measures to address environmental issues.
This largescale operation, as table 1 suggests, requires a larger number of employees than a conventional farm - 22 full and four part time. Richard Sterling, Manydown's director suggested how there is a successful farm team at Manydown because there is a lot of flexibility amongst workers. This allows for multi-tasking to take place by staff and should help any problems with sickness within the workforce. The beef production unit is organised in such a way that the beef production manager lives next to the unit, meaning that he is involved 24/7 with the unit and that the unit is always manned in the event of any problems such as calving issues occurring.
Beef production at Manydown is favoured as part of the livestock production due to its popularity within the farm shop but also because livestock farming suits the soil type on the farm. The soil, typically that of Hampshire, is a flinty clay loam over chalk meaning limited fertility creating higher costs and problems for large scale arable farming on the estate. Therefore the viability of many combinable crops is limited if the whole estate were to go into cropping. Much of the land is grade three and not the easiest to work, so beef production seems to offer an attractive alternative. Various considerations have to be taken into account when choosing a beef production system, as Baker (1975) summed up.
The 180 head beef herd is a key source of income for Manydown and is geared up for farm shop production. The farm shop, when set up in 1994 was primarily set up for the sale of beef and this has now seen expansion to lamb, free range chickens and black pig bacon and sausages all produced on the farm. The homebred beef herd has seen major breed development over the past ten years with increased favour for Aberdeen Angus in order to meet customer preference. The original combination of Hereford Friesian cows crossed with Saler bulls has increasing seen Aberdeen Angus crosses to meet this demand. This is an innovative example of Manydown producing what is demanded, not just what it is necessarily easiest to produce and as the farm directly sells its own produce this is vital to successful business. It could be suggested that Aberdeen Angus are also used due to the breed's meat to fat ratio and growing rate.
As a closed herd, meaning that no new stock is bought in from markets etc, Manydown has managed an organised system to provide a constant flow of produce through the shop throughout the year. In relation to beef, three cattle are slaughtered a week and at the other end of the scale, calving is spread out throughout spring, summer and autumn, in order to keep a steady flow of beef stock maturing and finishing throughout the year. Steers and heifers are killed at 600kg and 550kg respectively. The cattle system is geared to 18 months including both indoor housing and outdoor grazing. Winter housing occurs, as on most farms, due to unsuitable field conditions outdoors in the wet and so that the cattle do not loose condition and the ability to gain weight by using a greater degree of feed energy for temperature regulation. Summer grazing is based on 160 acres (64 ha) of permanent pasture. Feed is a mixture of forage and concentrate with silage and cracker feed as well as milled rapeseed making up the majority of the diet.
Following the increase in demand for Aberdeen Angus meat and the strive at Manydown for new ideas, a recent stem has been the creation of a pedigree beef herd was established in 2000. Originally comprising of 17 cattle from successful Canadian bloodlines, the Knightingdale Angus cattle, Manydown has bred these animals with the idea of creating a centre point to their own commercial herd in future generations. The aim of this specialist smaller herd is for Manydown to breed its own bulls with this successful bloodline and become sufficient as unit for future meat production. The Manydown website states this aim and relates to the importance of knowing the whole production process when selling through the farm's own farm shop and obviously by controlling all aspects of the rearing process this is more so the case:
In conclusion the beef unit is an important part of the estate. It was because of the beef that the farm shop was originally set up and since has seen great expansion. It appears in regard to livestock production as a whole that Manydown has an efficient organisation in that the company produces and markets home grown produce. This has proved very successful and built up a widescale cliental base, including through mail ordering. Much of the success from beef production and the farm shop as whole is related not only to quality, but also the confidence that a reputable farm shop gives the consumer - that is the produce has been home grown and hence that person does not mind paying a little bit extra for this. There is also the public perception that Manydown is a well managed estate and deliverers sustainable farming practices which promotes the companies success.