The landscape and environment as it is recognised today has undergone great change since the times when the UK was predominantly temperate woodland. A key player in this modification has been agriculture, and the need of man to produce food both from crops in arable farming and animal produce from livestock production. From once nomadic subsistence wanderers, agriculture in the UK has seen increasing production demands, which in turn has led to the intensive farming systems whereby production is maximised through greater inputs - mainly at the expense of the environmental modification.
The total grassland area of the UK, comprising of England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland equals 12.5m ha. (Source: The Agricultural Notebook. p132. Soffe, RJ 2003) Much of the utilisation of this land area for human activity is performed by livestock production and the two basic types of this production are summed up in table 1.
Upland areas (hill farming) and health lands. Livestock production occurs as land is unsuitable for arable production. Grazing hill sides exploits this otherwise wasted land to agriculture.
Lowland areas Livestock production occurs on specialist or mixed farms because the production system is profitable, or the farmer has a personal interest. On a mixed farm livestock production can compliment arable cereal production through grassland rotation and manure. Equally cereals can be home grown and fed to stock.
Table 1: Two main areas outlined for livestock production and the reasoning for this.
Aesthetically livestock production segregates the landscape. Within the UK, livestock is mainly held within an area by a fence line or more natural barrier such as a hedgerow and this has created the 'patchwork quilt' countryside that is known today.
From a bio-diversity viewpoint, grazing causes modification to ecosystems from a loss of diversity through intensive or selective grazing or by mixed farming practice whereby land is used for hay or silage crops and continuous cutting wipes out natural species.
Geologically, grazing causes soil erosion through compaction and trampling and the churning up of soil around gateways, feed racks, water troughs and cow tracks.
Environmentally pollution caused from inputs from chemicals in intensive systems, waste and methane gas given off from cows can leach into water courses and cause eutrophication or problems to field ponds.
Case study of a mixed family farm.
Mixed arable and beef production, dairy unit at another site rented out.
Livestock production, even on a mixed farm such as Edwins Hall, has altered the local landscape, especially in the last fifty years due to mechanisation within the system and this has impacted the landscape. The production of beef cattle, and up until 1990, a 100 head dairy herd all took place on hill sides of bushy hill and the surrounding flatter areas, this factor relating to the demand for grass for grazing or related produce, silage and hay, and the fact that some of this land was largely unsuitable for cropping. The push for greater intensification saw hedgerow removal and field boundary change, impacting the biodiversity through loss of habitats within the wild ecosystems. This also loosens soil structure on hillsides due to less root structure to hold soil together. Similarly negative to the environment, areas of woodland on Bushy hill have been removed since 1950 in order to create cow tracks and routeways for machinery feeding the stock. This removal of hedgerows on agricultural land around Purleigh links into national trends as shown by table 3 relates to a quote from one website source stating that:
Field enlargement has been just one threat to the environment. More recently the problems caused by decades of selective grazing have become ever apparent from the increase in patches of weeds across the fields and a great increase in weed species. This has a cost not only to H.Turner to deal with the thistle problem but also to from the problem of monoculture being created. Just like monocultures on the Russian Steppes of wheat, on a smaller scale, Bushy hill has seen native vegetation wiped out as cattle have grazed, trampled on and left that vegetation which is less favoured by these ruminant animals to become common place. A major weed problem from selected grazing has been the increase in ragwort in the area - a great threat to horses if eaten. Linked to cattle grazing, another major influence on the environment is silage and hay for cattle feed. The continuous cutting of a grass crop sometimes up to three times a year has contributed to a loss of diversity within the area, mainly because of a loss of habitat to wild animals such as butterflies and also as cover to rabbits and field mice etc. Also constant mowing of grassland means that only the dominant species survives, and as much of the land that is hayed is that which is grazed for part the year, the selective grazing impacts are shown through in the hay production and the impacts of modern livestock production are maximised.
As on H.Turner a farm will often pull up traditional lays to achieve greater yields of hay crop, and replant with rye grass species, hence losing biodiversity through encouraging dominant species. This also creates a greater threat of soil erosion through a loss of soil structure, a major problem on slopes such as bushy hill caused by excessive surface runoff compared to flatter areas. On the other hand, as the farm has seen a move towards arable production has seen land that was grassland fifty years ago being tilled and an arable crop planted. This has happened with 16ha this year on this farm alone, promoting the question what have been/are the country wide trends and the impacts of these?
The effects of pollution have impacted the landscape over time and continue to do.
This broad question relates to the recognition that impacts to the landscape from livestock production, or is this case mixed farming, have been noted and that methods are developing to lesser these impacts.
Set a side was introduced fifteen years ago to promote greater species diversity once again and provide habitats to wildlife. (great numbers of butterflies use set a side as habitat on H.Turner) It can be suggested that set a side was introduced due to arable production but it must also play a part in helping with the impacts of extensive livestock production.
Introduction of Hedgerow protection. Hedgerow regulations 1997.
Manure heap regulations.
These include:
NVZ (nitrate vulnerable zone) dictates the times of the year muck can be spread, the rate per hectare and the distance from field boundaries.
In conclusion livestock farming has greatly impacted the landscape, aesthetically creating the countryside that we view today from the dry stone walls of the national parks such as the Lake District to the hedgerow lattice of the west country. The landscape has been heavily modified from the time when the UK was predominantly temperate woodland and no doubt the landscape will look different again in times in the future. It is a dynamic system, which is influenced by human activity but also by natural processes. It can be suggested that great loss has occurred in relation diversity and habitats to livestock farming. This is evident from H.Turner's 650ha alone, and that this case study mirrors national trends but the problem is no being recognised and although cannot be reversed, efforts can be made to sustainably manage many of the impacts.