It was Colin Platt who stated that 'numbers matter. ' Considering historians (debatably) conclude that between twenty-five and fifty per cent of Eurasia was purged by the Great Plague and its cyclical recurrence thereafter, it is satisfactory to consider the Black Death as the worst epidemic in the known history of mankind. Of course, the debate between contemporary historians does not deny that the Black Death caused an enormous dislocation of the economic and social structure previously in place, but the statistical variations at hand and the relative infancy of our knowledge concerning the disease R. Rattus itself. Rather than simply struggle with such a monstrous task of the validity of data, what I also propose to question is what this 'impact' actually was, applying my mode of theory to English landscape, thereby hoping to account for regional differences between countries.
Even so, one of the greatest difficulties when delving into accounts on the Black Death is our limited knowledge of medieval demography, with records appearing too scattered and haphazard to make a definitive statement. As previously considered, the history of the Black Death is a 'child of the scientific understanding of the disease,' and so the perspective of the bacteriologist has varied considerably throughout past eras. R. S. Roberts contemplates that Creighton, author of the still-esteemed History of Epidemics published in the 1890s, did not accept the theory of bacterial causation and transmission of the disease. The other great bacteriologist on this issue, J. F. D. Shrewsbury, produced a definitive but what I conclude an aggressive argument in his History of the Bubonic Plague in the British Isles. Shrewsbury denies that the plague was a widespread epidemic when compared to the influenza outbreak of 1918-1919, stating, 'It seems extremely probable that several distinct diseases were epidemic in different parts of England during the years from 1360 to 1362 inclusive,' and although Colin Platt admits that famine, and not disease, was still the principal causation of death after 1349, Shrewsbury's theories must be disapproved.
J. M. W. Bean states that Shrewsbury's insistence of the bubonic plague being a mainly urban phenomenon is incorrect, the impact spreading to predominately pastoral areas such as the boarders of Wales. Although areas such as Bohemia and the Low Countries failed to be affected by the 'Plague', there is no proof that the Y. Pestis decimated one third of the entire population of the British Isles and the rest of Europe alike. Therefore this sudden depopulation of society had a massive cultural and economic impact upon society as a whole, through both immediate and longer-term, protracted factors. Of course, when I state 'long-term' I do so liberally, considering that the Black Death itself is an extensive incident spanning nearly four hundred years in total. The historian Robert Gottfried examines such consequences in great detail, concluding with the vast, sweeping statement that, 'Depopulation ended the manorial system, at least in the West." Gottfried's The Black Death considers that 'wstungen' created economic prosperity for the workers and consequent urbanisation of English society; due to the Black Death 1300 villages had been deserted between 1350 and 1500. The manorial system ceased to succeed, in his opinion, partly due to now "absentee" landlords collecting rentiers, and also due to the indiscriminate nature of the disease destroying both ecclesiastical bureaucrats and the remaining British serfs alike. This does support Colin Platt's statement that landowners withdrew from farming upon the land, becoming "a responsible country gentry," or absentee, creating what appears to be the beginning of that "parliamentary society" of wealth and verse that became so problematic in the eighteenth century.
However, Dr. Levett has presented the main counter argument of the Black Death as a watershed of English social history. In her studies, in the manors of the Bishop of Winchester, commutation was rare preceding the plague outbreak of 1348, and that little changed after this date. However, as studies of different regions tend to suggest, areas such as the manor of Whitney reveal an opposing conclusions. Historians can therefore assume that in some areas of England there was a sharp rise in commutations while some landlords could restore the original status quo of their manorial structure. Either way, historians must still account for the impact upon some particular regions being a vast deviation from the norm prior to the Black Death, although perhaps not as much as originally supposed.
However, what many historians (such as Gottfried) main economic proposal for the enormity of the Black Death rests upon is the relationship between English tenant and landowner. Phillip Ziegler writes, '"The immediate effect of the plague", wrote Rogers, "was to double the wages of labour; in some districts to raise the rate even beyond this."' Ziegler develops the argument of the medievalist Thorold Rogers, who maintains that the Black Death caused the long-term resentment of the serfs, which gives rise to the Peasant's Revolt of 1381. If this is strictly the case, then the consequences of the Black Death itself were created a 'ripple effect', eventually resulting in more suitable taxation and a more stable bureaucratic apparatus. Initially, there can be little doubt that the Black Death was responsible for a rise in wages due to the greater bargaining position of tenants given the sudden labour shortage. Gottfried states that 'at Cuxham Manor in England, a ploughman who was paid 2 shillings a week in 1347 received 7 shillings in 1349.'
 This friction between the more envious position of the villein and the landowner's belligerent effort to limit wage rises (resulting in The Statute of Labourers in 1351) presented a reason for conflict that erupted through the poll tax.
This argument is paramount in presenting the Black Death as a fundamental catalyst for economic alterations within the very fabric of society. However, Ziegler maintains that the economy was already in decline twenty-five years before the outbreak of the Black Death, when agricultural production and trade had been steadily waning. Secondly, unless the comparison is between the first 'Great Plague' of 1348-1350, more than one epidemic must be considered, resulting in a more complex historical conclusion when including the pestis secundus, and pestis tertis. Finally, Ziegler considers that the impact of the Black Death had been somewhat undermined by the severe overpopulation before its outbreak, and the population in England was greater than the land could provide for. Chronic under-employment was its result, rather than unemployment.
The conclusion of Roger's original statement is therefore less definitive than originally supposed. What lends credence however to the general dissatisfaction of later medieval society is the impact of the Black Death upon the Church. Colin Platt states that although changing fashions in religion were a cause of declining recruitment within the ecclesiastical society, 'very few religious houses in late-medieval Britain ever fully recovered from their pre-plague numbers, and this was true of such huge and well-endowed communities as Christ Church (Canterbury)." In 1893, F. A. Gasquet argued that the Black Death marked the end of the Middle Ages, and as a cardinal he held responsible the disease for the decline of monasticism within the Roman Catholic Church in England. G. G. Coulton also forced this particular issue, stating that due to the greater per capita for survivors of the plague, increased wealth in part brought about the renaissance and the Protestant Reformation in Europe. To many, including myself, this hardly appears as an exaggeration, and even though a culmination of factors invariably caused the reformation around Europe, the secularisation and depopulation associated with the Black Death must claim a large proportion of the responsibility.
Furthermore, a particular sect of Christianity arose, curiously defined by those such as St. Sebastian, who was associated with the plague by his method of martyrism, that being 'arrows that riddled his body were alleged to be analogous to 'darts of plague." Such 'self-religion' resulting from what historians such as Robert Gottfried consider to be the Church's principal failure; not providing adequate spiritual comfort for survivors and sufferers of the Plague alike. Physicians were chosen and trained by the ecclesiastical authorities, and when they could not bestow any treatment, faith began to waver. Gottfried writes, 'close to 20% of the parish priests in certain deaneries fled the Black Death,' and it is hardly surprising that roots of anticlericalism could have become lodged here.
However, it must be considered that during the era of the pontificate of Boniface VIII (1294-1303) the papacy became increasingly secular, contesting with the head's of state until the papacy was moved to Avignon in 1309, where the apostolic succession had never before taken place. The genuine nature of the papacy was therefore vulnerable prior to the outbreak of the 'Great Plague' I348. Yet we must consider that faith cannot dissipate overnight. Due to the fixed placement of death in the lives of the masses, there became a fear of salvation, and therefore an emphasis upon the placement of good works. Using Robert Gottfried's opinion once again, he stated, 'In England, about a quarter of all testators' estates, land and movables, went to good works." However, it is difficult to consider this as having an impact upon historical 'progress' in the future in relation to the reformation itself. What was emphasised during times of high mortality was the practice of indulgences, which without a doubt were one of the major criticisms of the clergy in the sixteenth century. One should not forget that the inspiration for Martin Luther's 'new religion' came from the observation of a priest flogging time away from purgatory to the gullible peasantry.
Secularism seemed to become impounded in urbanisation, caused by the commutation of workers through the Black Death's labour shortages. Self-made secular organisations such as the Brethen of Common Life provided municipal assistance and confidence during a particular outbreak of the pestilence. What became particularly prevalent was the establishment of colleges and universities in these cities, with Cambridge founding four new colleges during the 'Great Pestilence' of 1348-1350. Gonville was established between 1348-51; Trinity Hall, in 1350; Corpus Christi, in 1352; and Clare Hall, in 1362. Oxford acquired two new colleges: Canterbury, in 1362, and New College, 1372. I have found little particular reasoning behind such a vast and substantial increase in ecclesiastical and lay learning, but it appears to correspond not only to education outside England, but also with general socio-cultural trends associated specifically with the Black Death. Emperor Charles IV granted a charter to the establishment of a 'new' University of Prague, which now undermined the dominance of the ancient great centres, notably Paris and Bologna. The replacement of logic with the study of Greek at the University of Florence seemed to imply a transformation of 'international cohesion of medieval culture.'
However, the number of students at Oxford rapidly declined in the late-fourteenth century from 30,000 before the plague to only 6,000. The sheer volume of educational material growth corresponds to the Epicureanism among the intelligentsia and other educated members of the aristocracy and clergy in England. Gottfried suggests that religious and familial bonds appeared to become more lenient within English culture, resulting in a more secularised high society through learning and opinion that affected more severe consequences in the sixteenth century, however his only explanation for such occurrences is the Black Death itself. For many historians, the initial short term effects upon society that resulted in a 'crises of faith' was psychological shock, due to the halting of various activities in daily life. As priests had fled or perished, there were few who would brave burying the dead. As the invaluable Decameron, written by Boccaccio states, 'It had come to pass that men who died were shown no more concern than dead goats today,' and art work such as Franceso Triani's great fresco, 'The Triumph of Death' depicts death as an ancient, bedraggled women, rather than a more 'elegant' skeleton, as observed in pre-plague illustrations. The enormity and constant observance of death during a time of pestilence indicates some explanation of late the medieval hedonism that occurs. Furthermore, the sheer horror of disregard for sacrilege of the dead and the last rites indicates an escape from faith.It is not surprising that many members of society such as kulaks, who had gained recent affluence through wage negotiations, would choose to live a more extravagant life rather than stoically accept their own fate. For merchants the phrase 'time is money' now became commonplace, while in 1349 workers in Flemish towns such as Ghent stipulated their own wages. This perhaps amounts to a socio-economic trend when we consider that the historian Johannes Nohl suggests that in Cologne, already five years after the Black Death of, 4,000 marriages took place in 1451 alone. Urgency of life was paramount, and there are few examples to suggest that the Black Death did not fully impact upon some aspect of people's lives. Geoffrey Chaucer reflects this new psychology for a more temporal life in his Canterbury Tales, choosing to barely mention any pestilence and focus instead upon the pleasures of life and comic anecdotes.
One authority on the Black Death has stated that, 'most important consequence of the Black Death in fact was simply that the disease was firmly established in England." If accounting for Shrewsbury's denial of the fixation of bubonic plague in English society, this statement appears to demean the centrality of the plague in later history and only seeks to counter the pre-mentioned authority's argument. The impact of the Black Death, however, lay in its rapid population shortage and its cyclical occurrence in society for the next four hundred years. Pope Clement VI estimated the Christian death toll to reach 23, 840,000 in its original outbreak; and such a consideration should not be undermined. Siraisi states, 'for contemporary chroniclers, the plague pandemic of 1347-1350 was one of the worst disasters ever to afflict the human race', and therefore the severe shock suggested even in a society used to high mortality rates presents a short term cultural relapse. This in itself presents a society in moral crises and therefore prone to the extravagance and secularisation that seemed to precede the first great pestilence. The Church in England was observed as more ineffective, people resided their religion in saints and a preoccupation in purgatory that created a forefront of criticism at the time of the Protestant reformation. Although, in this area, I must admit that more research needs to be done. Yet, what is even more profound is the depopulation of society in affecting the manorial system, even when accounting for the marginal declines in population prior to the epidemic itself. What has materialized in much newer historical analysis, even with the statistical variations, is that a population decline was inevitably to blame for various characteristics of 'bastard feudalism'. Behind every severe population shortage one encounters the Black Death. Research on the impact of the bubonic plague have merely been extended, rather than exaggerated.