Rushall Farm is an example of a mid-sized (351 ha) organic farm located within the Pang Valley in Bradfield, Berkshire. Until 2000, the farm operated under a conventional system, but prompted by a continuing downward trend in prices and increasing uncertainty over the future of a mid sized unit operating in this way, the decision was made for organic conversion. Organic farming demonstrates principles of working with rather than dominating the natural ecosystems ( 2002) and hence removes the use of artificial inputs. In return for this change in production method, organic produces receive a premium prices for their goods.
A crop production system can be split into inputs and outputs. Under conventional intensive production, a high percentage of these inputs are predominately artificial fertilizer and sprays in order to gain the highest yields per hectare, the output. As Rushall Farm is organic, the method of production is different, whereby no synthetic inputs are used, so a self-sustaining production course is needed in order to maintain good soil condition and productivity.
The key to achieving this is a well-managed crop rotation plan, which provides enough diversity to allow continued production naturally. This statement is not denying that rotation is needed for conventional crop production, just emphasising that the rotation process is vital to the productive sustainability of an organic farm. The success of the current rotation methods are only now becoming evaluatable after five seasons at Rushall Farm, as the soil is now rinsed of past chemical traces, and predominant weeds can become more of a problem. The farm manager suggested that incorporating set-aside to fallow land for a season within a rotation as one way of managing this apparent problem. This would enable external influences to act, for example local wildlife and then deep cultivation to deal with the problem. Certain biological controls are allowed in extreme cases but such products and applications need certification.
A typical example of a crop rotation on Rushall Farm could be:
The table shows a typical rotation on an organic farm incorporating both cereals and a break crop. Beans, as a legume help to fix nitrogen, acting as a natural fertilizer source hence a good break crop. Winter wheat, triticale and oats although cereals still offer crop variety.
Due to the practices of organic farming, and the costs of conversion, Rushall Farm received a grant of 105 000 over the five-year period. Based on a sliding scale, this grant made up for the loss of profit when producing organically during this period but being unable to sell at organic prices due to the remnants of the conventional system being apparent. As from 1 st January 2005, the Single Farm Payment (SFP) will also give organic farmers 30 a hectare in order to help them compete, a move which may spark controversy with conventional producers, as organic produce receives much higher prices already. Organic wheat made 130/t last year, in comparison to 62/t for conventionally farmed wheat.
It can also be stated that rotation is the core of grassland management in organic system. (diagram 1) Red clover is key as a source of nitrogen fixation in a typical three year lay. Continuous grazing year after year causes a build up of parasites and nematodes in the soil and without chemical control this creates a major concern related with diseases in livestock. At Rushall Farm, a 'safer grazing' technique is used to limit the risk of worm eggs affecting stock. Round worms, which conventionally are cured or prevented by the drenching process, cannot be controlled in the same way in the organic system. Sheep are moved around land on rotation, a strategy that helps control and prevent this disease. The term 'safer grazing' does not mean that the risk is removed; just practices are in place to limit their impacts. One consequence of this has meant that the farm has needed more land available for grazing. (60/40 arable has no reversed to 60/40 grazing area). The beef Salers suckler herd also plays an integral part in the grassland rotation system, by giving land a break from sheep grazing. Cattle do not seem to be affected by the same nematodes so can be used to 'clean' land recently grazed by sheep. This is a major advantage when land area is a limiting factor, and the Salers suckler herd work almost work as the 'break' for grazing land as well as supplying a source of farmyard manure as a source of natural fertilizer.
In conclusion Rushall Farm demonstrates how rotation is a core part of a sustainable organic farm and goes on to prove how dependant conventional practices are on artificial inputs in order to sustain annual productivity. In this respect organic farming faces a brighter future, especially since the introduction of the SFP, with less emphasis on production but the environment. The farm also demonstrates the importance of a mixed organic farm, in that the livestock and arable compliment each other through not only rotation but also inputs and outputs. The farm is however still learning a lot about farming organically, with one suggestion that the conversion was like 'starting again'. And because of the lack of background on the subject since the 1940's due to the intensification of agriculture from this time onwards, it was stated that Rushall is facing an active learning curve - with sustainability over time being the ultimate test.