Nitrate leaching is a key concern to modern agricultural systems and relates largely to intensified farming practices over the past half-century. The grassland system has been pushed ever harder to maximise outputs with relatively little thought, until recently, for any social, economic or environmental knock on effects. Much of this issue relates to the increased use of nitrogen and the associated multiplier effect - more productive swards, allowing higher stocking rates thus producing surplus and nitrate rich by products. This has hence led to the problem of greater nitrate leaching and the associated pollution of watercourses, but methods are in place in an attempt to reduce this issue - mainly through legislation and the encouragement of better farming practices.
The misguided application of nitrogen to the conventional grassland system to raise productivity may be deemed the major cause of nitrate leaching. This "untimely nitrate" (Burt et al, 1993) is the use of a greater rate of nitrogen than required, or spreading at the wrong time of year, either way, supplying the grass with more than is needed and allowing the excess to be washed out of the system. Efficiency of nitrate uptake will depend on several physical factors, predominately soil type and climate but management is the key method of reducing leaching in this case. It is up to the farmer and their knowledge of the grassland area in order to limit the environmental impact and reduce unjust expense on fertilizer.
Grassland responds to higher rates of nitrogen than arable crops, largely due to the crop cover and root system of the many grass plants within a ley. Optimum application rates are between 350 - 400 Kg N ha/yr, although yield responses are achievable even up to 500 Kg N ha. (Van Der Meer et al, 1986) It is however not advisable in terms of leaching or cost to apply such a high level, mainly due to the likelihood that not all nitrogen will ever utilised before leaching occurs. Table 1 shows how by simply doubling the rate of fertilizer from 250 - 500kg N ha/yr, the percentage of extra nitrate leached equates to four times greater.
Careful application as a reduction method stems from only applying nitrogen during the growing season, and not at drier times and drought. Grass can only utilise larger amounts of nitrate when adequate moisture is available - during the early to mid growing season. By applying amounts at this time, nitrate accumulation within the soil profile is prevented to such an extent, as greater efficiency of uptake can occur, lowering the level of potential loss from the system. This factor is particularly important due to the soluble nature of nitrogen when in the form of nitrate, making it easy for any surplus to move within and out of the soil profile. This is not good news for the environment in regard to the environment or the farmer's pocket, when the current price of fertilizer is around 160/t. (Banks Cargill, Nov 2005) A farmer must therefore carefully calculate the amount needed in regard to what they require from the crop and relate this annual application history. The Nitrate Vulnerable Zone (NVZ) action plan states how "...extra fertilizer should not be applied just to be on the safe side" as this just increases nitrate lost by leaching. (Defra, 1998) Another way of managing this is issue is through lengthening the growing season and this can be achieved by the use of planned irrigation, enabling grass growth to continue for a longer period than the climate may necessarily allow for. By this nitrogen can be applied and actually utilised by the crop over a longer time period, without saturation occurring.
The type of fertilizer used can also impact nitrate loss. For example, the use of urea-based fertilizers requires conversion through nitrification in order for nitrate to become available for plant use. This may be deemed a slow release fertilizer, with this conversion occurring over a wider time period than largely nitrate based fertilizers, and in order to reduce nitrate leaching, should therefore not be applied later in the growing season.
The total loss from the grassland system also depends on the utilisation of the grass crop - whether the sward is to be grazed or mown. Figures suggest far greater losses of nitrate from grazed areas, with 25 - 40% of nitrogen applied lost relative to a 2 - 10% loss when the field is cut. (source: van der Meer et al, 1986) The increased loss from grazing is predominately due to excretion from livestock and then the associated contamination of watercourses. Also, grazed grass is not under as much pressure as cut grass to grow back, unless under extreme stocking densities, as a mown sward removes the whole crop from the area demanding the grass to grow back. Selective grazing from stock does not encourage such efficient use of nitrate by the grass. Graph 1 is an illustration of this.
Due to this factor it is often the case that only 'improved pasture', that is a productive ley, will receive nitrogen, and even more likely that both grazing and cutting on the same area be in place within a season to encourage maximum grass use of the applied fertiliser. This will play a part in better farming practice and it can be suggested that the most efficient sward use of nitrogen is to graze, perhaps early bite, and then take three cuts in order to gain the most from the system. The third and final cut of the year helps to 'mop' up nitrate excess before any winter rain saturation can occur.
Just like manufactured fertilizer, the use of nitrate rich livestock by-products on grassland will increase possible leaching levels. As manures are more of a mixture of anything and everything in comparison to artificial fertilizer they can be deemed more of an unknown quantity and management in this area is in the form of legislation. A limit of 250kg/ha has been established in regard to the NVZ action plan as a method of reduction. (Also relevant to manufactured fertilizer) (Defra, 1998) Similarly, good agricultural practice dictates that manure should not spread when land is waterlogged, frozen or snow covered for this reason. Increased legislation has also been introduced in regard to manure and slurry storage with great emphasis placed on distance from watercourses with the aim of reduced impacts on the environment. Much of these guidelines are also applicable to the application of manufactured fertilizer and is a vital tool for reducing losses from the system.
The ploughing of grassland will cause a flux of nitrate released through the process of mineralization. This source of nitrate leaching is particularly a concern within an organic farming rotation, whereby grass and associated legumes are the mainstay of fertility within the rotation. One statistic suggests how the amount of nitrogen released over twenty years after ploughing was as much as 4000kg/ha, (Whitehead, 1992) a concerning figure when you consider 200kg N ha/yr to be an average application by today's standards. In order to reduce the impact of ploughing within a grassland system, alternatives can be sought. For example a reduced tillage system or slot seeding to regenerate pasture would not cause the same level of mineralization. Similarly, planting the crop relatively soon after ploughing will help with the uptake much of the nitrate excess, although this causes other issues in itself in regard to weeds and chemical use.
The concern surrounding nitrate leaching is ever present; although it is true to say that greater understanding on the issue exists today than in previous times, evident from the amount of legislation in place aiming to limit the knock on effects. Legislation is a vital method of control, with NVZ implementation at the forefront, promoting good agricultural practice and providing guidelines on nitrogen spreading issues. Nitrogen, as an important nutrient for plant growth, will always be required for productive agriculture therefore will continue to be social concern, an environmental impact and an economic cost in terms of leaching from the grassland system. It is fair to say that there is greater awareness and methods of control today than any time in the past.