The agricultural sector is amongst the most dangerous working environments within industry. Last year alone, 47 fatalities occurred as a result of farming or a farming related accident (HSE, 2005), coinciding with the national average of 49 deaths/year over the past decade. These figures indicate the significance of the health and safety topic within the farm environment and the need for managed practices in order to decrease fatalities and injuries alike. Legislation and guidelines, together with how these rules are implemented in practice is of key importance in order to achieve a safer working environment and the success of this largely relates to the communication and relationship between the body setting the rules and those working with them.
The nature of farm work can be deemed the reason for the high fatality rate. Those working within the industry are exposed to a variety of dangers including machinery, livestock, chemicals and disease as common working practice; hence the slightest lapse in concentration can have devastating results. Linked to this, it may be suggested that the general downturn in returns from agricultural commodity prices in recent years has tempted farmers to cut corners when working under pressure and not give first thought to their safety, or those around them. The table below shows the main causes of accidents within the sector for last year, not surprisingly showing machinery as the major cause.
Following increased awareness over the past thirty-five years of the dangers posed by working within industry, much legislation now exists surrounding health and safety. These policies all relate to the need to protect the employer, employee and others from harm through legally binding regulations. The Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 is the basis for legislation within industry, stating duties of employers and employees alike.
For the employer this means:
Employees equally have an obligation, that is to have the responsibility of not harming themselves or others by what they do. In many situations this point may be deemed common sense, especially on farm when using heavy machinery or handling livestock.
As both a commercial and research establishment, CEDAR has many employees of varying tasks, going around daily business exposed to many forms of harm. With many areas of health and safety to cover management needs to be organised in order to meet all legislation for the protection of all staff. As discussed above, this may be deemed a complicated task on a farm generally, due to the nature of the work, but especially CEDAR in regard to the number of employees and visitors on site at any one time. As a business, the farm is required to comply with the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 as an initial form of legislation, not to mention the many other forms of legislation applicable - including Manual Handling Operations Regulations 1992 and Personal Protective Equipment Regulations 1992. Organised management will allow an understanding throughout the hierarchy of how responsibility is divided up and should allow reliable communication channels between levels. A possible health and safety structure is shown below, whereby each level answers to the level above and relays to the one below. Feedback should operate throughout the hierarchy to allow practical evaluation, and any problems or gaps to be reported.
The 5 C principle is a diagrammatic form of how an organised management system should function is order for health and safety principles to be implemented successfully.
The 5Cs can be related to CEDAR, in terms of how health and safety issues can be managed.
From the above principle it is clear that provided that necessary training is provided and effective communication exists that control of health and safety is manageable, and no corners are cut, hence CEDAR can boost a major accident proof record. A written risk assessment is also included in the above principle, as this is simply a careful look of how to prevent harm occurring from a risk. This is done by observing the possible risks from work - for instance at CEDAR and a job involving roof mending, falling from a height would be the risk, implementing the correct features such as netting or a harness are the safety features to prevent harm from occurring. A risk assessment is a legal requirement since the introduction of the Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1992, and covers the employer should an accident occur, provided necessary and reasonable planning has been put into action to minimise harmful possibilities and outlines any safety equipment required. When writing a risk assessment five steps should be considered:
The HSE inspects and informs farmers in regard to health and safety within agriculture. Many information sheets are available in regard to the various specific health and safety legislation throughout the industry, providing advice and information on topics such as 'handling and housing cattle', an issue relevant to CEDAR. The HSE website states how increasingly this advice is becoming an ever more important tool to implemented health and safety, as farmers tend to seek advice, rather than just shy away from continued red tape within the industry.
Similarly, another source states how just quoting facts and figures of fatalities does not show someone working within farming the safe way to go around a job.
Therefore the HSE information sheets offer a reliable alternative source of information.
There are four main areas in regard to health and safety management for the issue of cattle handling:
Unlike with chemical storage, whereby spillage caused by a split bottle could be a manufacturing problem and is unavoidable, cattle handling requires knowledge and understanding of the animals together with common sense. At CEDAR, the appointment of the competent stocks person to handle the cattle, which are essentially an unknown quantity to someone with limited experience or with little common sense, can be deemed as a preventative method of reducing the risk of harm. On the other hand, the bunded floor to deal with spillages in the spray store may be deemed as a cure method to an accident, or an unknown leak.
Understanding cattle in regard to the design of the handling facilities is an important issue in regards to health and safety management. At CEDAR, the availability of a crush and race allow working with the cattle with less risk, as they are contained in a fenced area rather than open housing. A stocks person would therefore have very little contact with the animals once they are in the race and only touch the animals with protective gloves under the practices employed. Management may however have to give greater planning towards stock cattle as they are not so regularly compared to the dairy herd and extra provisions for their handling may be needed, for example taller fences, or a heavier duty cattle crush. The above measures taken by the management in regard to handling infrastructure at CEDAR coincide with guidelines within the HSE cattle handling information sheet.
Health and safety management in this area appeared successful with the conversion of a room into a secure, bunded, temperature controlled chemical store. This meets Environment Agency legislation in regard to storing pesticides.
The following model can be used in regard to chemical storage at CEDAR.
The farm environment poses many risks. The risk assessment visit to CEDAR flagged up some of the main issues surrounding the management of health and safety and the need for careful planning and organising in order balance legislation against working practices. Current management practices have been discussed and appear successful, CEDAR is major accident free to date. The visit outlined the importance of the risk assessment as a health and safety tool, flagging up possible causes of harm before a job has been undertaken and this is vital to the overall management system. Management can however only do so much, and have as many mechanisms in place to prevent harm occurring, but it is up to the individual in many cases to think for him or herself in order to limit the risk.