Modality has been discussed by philosophers, in relation to logic, for over 2,000 years and yet, as De Haan (1997) points outs, it is only since the 1960s that it has become a subject of analysis for linguists.
My endeavour to find a succinct and useful definition of modality for the purposes of this essay, proved entirely fruitless. The many authoritative sources I consulted provided the following: "Modality: A term used in grammatical and semantic analysis to refer to contrasts in mood signalled by the verb and associated categories", Crystal (2003:295); "Modality is concerned with the status of the proposition that describes the event", Palmer (2001:1); "Modality is the category by which speakers express attitudes towards the event contained in the proposition", Downing and Locke (2001:381).
The fact that these definitions fall short of a clear yet descriptive explanation reflect the fact that the rich texture of semantic nuances modality represents cannot be distinguished on the basis of pure grammatical form. On the contrary, the same modal expressions are employed in English to convey a vast complexity of different and even contradictory meanings, e.g., necessity, possibility, certainty, obligation, permission, willingness, ability.
This essay firstly defines modality in terms of its grammatical manifestations. This is followed by an analysis of the various semantic categories that have been subsumed under the umbrella term modality. Finally, the arguments that I believe support the statement in this essay title, that modality is primarily a semantic notion, are articulated and the main conclusions are summarised.
Modality in English is syntactically represented in a variety of verbal and non-verbal forms. Quirk et al (1985), Berk (1999) and Downing and Locke (2001), identify the following verbal markers of modality:
Modality is also marked by the following non-verbal categories:
The above clearly illustrates that the notion of modality is not easily definable in terms of its grammatical or physical manifestation in language, in fact Berk (1999:130) states: "Modality has nothing to do with form".
The term modality was originally derived from traditional modal logic in which the relationship between necessity (nec) and possibility (poss) of a proposition (p) was formalised in terms of affirmative and negative modal operators as Lyons (1977:787) explains:
(1)
(2)
Greek philosophers were concerned with what is now called Alethic modality, i.e., the necessary truth of a proposition as in (1), and realised by the modal expression:
(3)
Linguists and logical semanticists have more recently been interested in exploring how language reflects the underlying notions of proposition necessity and possibility, and a number of complex frameworks have been proposed, all of which largely overlap, but none of which appears to account for all the grammatical forms, outlined above, in a comprehensive way.
According to De Haan (1997:4), in the 1920s Jespersen first identified two mood categories, one in which the proposition involves 'an element of will' such as an obligation, permission or order, and the other where no element of will is involved, such as a deduction, a conjecture or an expression of doubt. The former of these became to be known as Deontic modality as it relates, in broad terms, to notions of duty, and the latter Epistemic modality owing to its association with the nature of the speaker's knowledge regarding the truth of the proposition. Figure 1 shows how the notion of modality has been differentiated so far in this essay.
The next two subsections examine the meaning of the terms Epistemic and Deontic, and illustrate how they have been applied to the notion of modality.
The evolutionary development of modality in linguistics from its roots in modal logic has followed a progression that has encouraged the construction of increasingly complex models. In fact, in relation to the types of modality that have been identified, Lyons (1995) concludes: "So far, there is no consensus among either linguists or logicians on the establishment of a comprehensive framework which is both theoretically coherent and empirically satisfactory." Lyons (1995:335).
Modality refers to necessity, possibility, certainty, obligation, permission, willingness and ability, but given the wide application of this term, as indicated by the examples above, this list is far from exhaustive. Nevertheless, as Lyons (1977) argues, it is clear that there are strong semantic associations not only among the instances of what is generally called Epistemic modality, and those grouped under the general heading of Deontic modality, but also, between these two categories themselves, both of which can be realised through the use of the same modal expressions. Interestingly, as Palmer (2001) illustrates, this phenomenon occurs in many languages.
Therefore, grammatical expressions of modality serve no function in discriminating between categories of modality. This is neatly illustrated by De Haan's (1977) selection of the modal auxiliaries 'must', 'shall', 'will', 'should', 'can', 'could', 'may' and 'might' to describe points along both the Epistemic and Deontic continua.
The concept of modality is about 'how' man operates in the cognitive, physical and social world, where 'how' refers to 'mode of thought' or 'mode of behaviour'. Linguistic expressions of modality reflect how man expresses his interpretations of observations and events occurring around him, and how he tries to influence them.
The grammatical system that supports the multifarious aspects of modality in English is itself multifaceted, using not only a specific category of auxiliary, but also a variety of other modal lexical devices. This complex grammatical system of modality singularly fails to distinguish between the various semantic nuances that modality conveys. Modality is primarily a semantically-driven notion that has required the recruitment of many different grammatical forms in order to permit the adequate expression of its complexity.