One of the major tasks of Language Acquisition theorists is to explain the processes involved in the child's early stages of word learning. In response to this question, it appears, superficially, that the crux of the debate between the proponents of the so-called 'semantic bootstrapping' and 'syntactic bootstrapping' approaches to language acquisition lies in the two apparently contradictory claims "that children use meaning to learn syntax ... but also that they can use syntax to learn meaning..." Bloom (1994:67). This conundrum has been called Bloom's puzzle, and it is the process of comparing the two approaches that permits the identification of a potential solution to this chicken-and-egg problem.
This essay firstly outlines some important findings from language acquisition studies that have informed the development of these two approaches. The theories are then defined and their similarities and differences compared. The nature of the innate knowledge of language they presuppose is evaluated and finally, the conclusions are summarised.
Bloom (1994) reviews the empirical evidence that children acquire the syntactic-semantic mappings between 'noun' and 'object' very early, even though the distinction between count and mass nouns occurs later on, and that subcategory errors are not uncommon until this distinction is acquired for the child's specific language. The early acquisition of these mappings for nouns is also considerably enhanced by the tendency for the child to experience simultaneity between the visual presentation of the object, and its phonological counterpart.
Verbs, on the other hand, are rarely used in what Gleitman and Gillette (1995) call deictic-ostensive contexts: their occurrence is not reliably synchronised with an utterance that refers to them (interleaving). This phenomenon, coupled with the observation that once children have acquired initial verbs the rate of subsequent verb-acquisition is exponential, suggests that a different process is at work. Finally, the problem with verbs is: how does the child identify from the linguistic input what constitutes a 'object' or 'action', how are these then related to the lexical categories ('noun', 'verb') so that the former can adopt a thematic role ('agent', 'patient', 'theme' or 'goal') relationship with the latter, and also so that the appropriate grammatical constraints ('subject', 'direct / indirect object') for that verb are fulfilled? Verbs differ in the number of arguments they licence, and locative verbs may take either a figure-object (e.g., pour), a ground-object (e.g., fill), or both (e.g., load) depending on which element is affected (Gropen et al, 1991a and 1991b).
These are the main linguistic considerations that have been addressed by the hypotheses evaluated in this essay.
The motivation for the Semantic Bootstrapping Hypothesis (Pinker, 1984) was to identify the processes involved in the child's acquisition of the relationship between semantic and syntactic elements of linguistic input that allow him/her to generate grammatical rules, and to postulate which components are innate.
Pinker (1984:225) proposed "that the child initially uses semantic notions as evidence for the presence of grammatical entities in the input..." and "...that object, action and attribute are the 'inductive bases' for noun, verb and adjective." Pinker proposed a set of syntax-semantics correspondences that map the semantic characteristics of language (e.g., object, action; agent, patient; argument type, etc.) to their successfully inferred grammatical elements (e.g., noun, verb; subject, object; relationship within phrase structure, etc.)
Pinker (1987) demonstrates that a single model can account for the two stages of word learning: a) the initial 'bootstrapping' process for the generation of grammatical rules, and b) the subsequent process of acquiring language by utilising those rules. The model assumes that the following elements are innate:
The essence of the semantic bootstrapping hypothesis is that the procedures for the acquisition of grammar are innate: the analysis of the semantic characteristics of initial word input 'bootstraps' UG rule prototypes (syntax-semantics correspondences) which, aided by innate pattern matching and parameter setting capabilities, generate the grammar rules of the target language.
The term Syntactic Bootstrapping Hypothesis was coined by Gleitman (1990), and in its initial formulation, it was postulated in 'opposition' to the Semantic Bootstrapping Hypothesis. Indeed, Naigles (1990:360) states that contrary to the latter approach, "children can conjecture novel meanings for verbs based on the presentation of novel syntactic frames."
At first glance, it appears that this approach predicts that word meanings are derived from the application of innate linguistic knowledge relating to the syntactic structure of sentences. Certainly, the motivation for the Syntactic Bootstrapping Hypothesis was to emphasise the role of syntactic-semantic mapping in the acquisition of verbs as opposed to a sound-concept pairing mechanism that can be posited for noun acquisition. However, the empirical work conducted by Naigles (1990) and Fisher at al (1994), concludes that the verb frame (e.g., transitive / intransitive, manipulation of subject-object / agent-patient relationship), provides a mechanism, similar to a zoom lens, for narrowing the search-space confronting the child, and not that novel verb meaning per se is only acquired through the child's syntactic analysis of the input. Indeed, Fisher et al (1994:367) stress that "the initial narrowing of the search-space for that meaning, by attention to the argument structure as revealed by the syntax, is the precondition for using the scene information efficiently to derive the meaning."
In clarifying the distinction between the two approaches, Pinker (1994:386) points out that the Syntactic Bootstrapping Hypothesis "...is not a different theory of how the child begins to learn syntax...", in fact it has nothing to do with 'bootstrapping' because it postulates "...how the child learns the meanings of specific words.....at the point at which the child has already acquired the syntax of verb phrases...". Gleitman and Gillette (1995:416) agree that the term 'syntactic bootstrapping' is "something of a misnomer" and cease to employ it further.
It appears then that the label Syntactic Bootstrapping Hypothesis has created two kinds of misunderstanding: the term 'bootstrapping' has inappropriately given focus to the very initial stages of language acquisition, and the term 'syntactic' has put too great an emphasis on the child's analysis of syntactic structure, at the cost of other sources of information such as the context, prosodic cues and knowledge of other linguistic items in the sentence.
The above arguments have established that the first important distinction between the approaches is that they are not both 'bootstrapping' hypotheses. Again, Pinker (1994:386) provides the following helpful definition to clarify the scope of these overlapping positions:
1) 'Semantic cueing of syntax' refers to the Semantic Bootstrapping hypothesis.
2) 'Semantic cueing of word meaning' refers to the assumption that meanings are learned via
their semantic contexts (both approaches sign up to this proposal).
3) 'Syntactic cueing of word meaning' refers to the hypothesis supported by Gleitman et al.
In essence, the two approaches are in no sense 'in opposition', and when considering purely the restricted area where they coincide, it can be said that they very largely overlap since they are based on similar assumptions and make similar predictions about the nature of language acquisition.
In order to draw the boundaries between the scope of the two approaches and also to identify more subtle distinctions between them, the following will address the main tenets of the Semantic Bootstrapping Hypothesis and make comparisons with the syntactic approach as required.
The Semantic Bootstrapping Hypothesis, as outlined in section 2, addresses the processes involved in the initial acquisition of grammatical rules. The syntactic approach does not posit a procedure for this stage of language development, but Bloom (1994:67) suggests that Gleitman (1990) has proposed that "Children use some sort of nonsemantic procedure to determine the syntactic structure of sentences and then use this syntactic information to initially acquire the meanings of some words." The nature of this 'nonsemantic procedure' is not discussed, however, in accordance with the semantic bootstrapping hypothesis, it is posited that once initial nouns have been assigned on a semantic basis, the argument-predicate relationships of the sentence are identified by means of a parser (Naigles, 1990).
As mentioned earlier, Pinker (1994) criticises the empirical evidence claiming to support the syntactic approach to verb learning presented by Naigles (1990) for focussing too heavily on the importance of the 'verb frame' as the means for drawing semantic implications from the sentence, and claims that they in fact confound the notions of 'content meaning' and 'frame meaning' in their study. In fact Pinker (1994) states that the Semantic Bootstrapping Hypothesis remains 'agnostic' as to whether verb content meanings are actually attained, and what form that representation might take.
The Semantic Bootstrapping Hypothesis emphasises that individual verb subcategorisation properties are not necessary to extract the semantic relationships between the verb and its arguments, it is sufficient to understand the verb's role in the context of the other lexical items, such as collocated nouns or propositional phrases. Yet, Fisher et al (1994) also emphasise that the surface phrase structure only represents the meaning of a verb as an argument-taking predicate. As mentioned earlier, both approaches agree that verb frames provide a zoom lens, or perspective on the sentence, that maximises the efficiency of interpretation of the scene.
The main difference between these two approaches lies in the reversibility of linking rules. Gleitman (1990:30) claims that the child can make deductions about meaning on the basis of observed syntactic structures. Pinker (1994:397) rejects this view by interpreting this claim to mean a correlational, or bidirectional relationship between the elements of syntax-semantics linking rules. Pinker defines this relationship as implicational, unidirectional and asymmetrical: "A grammar is a mechanism that maps a huge set of semantic distinctions onto a small set of syntactic distinctions".
Comparison of the approaches with respect to the nature of innate knowledge, again presents the evaluator with a series of fine discriminations. Essentially, both hypotheses adhere to the principles of the wider framework of Generative Grammar which postulates the innate ability of the human to utilise unlearned, universal, semantic-formal constraints to generate grammatical rules. The only discernible difference is between the emphasis placed on this approach: the Semantic Bootstrapping Hypothesis has had a greater opportunity to develop a theory of those aspects of language acquisition that postulate the mechanisms and procedures by which innate rule prototypes are developed into fully-fledged grammatical rules. There is no evidence in the Syntactic Bootstrapping Hypothesis literature that the proponents of this approach challenge the theoretical validity these proposals.
This essay has demonstrated that the so-called 'semantic' and 'syntactic' bootstrapping hypotheses are not equivalent in their status as theories: the former, as a true 'bootstrapping' hypothesis, provides a mechanism for accounting for how the child initially acquires syntactic rules as part of the wider theoretical approach described by the Generative Grammar framework, and the latter provides additional evidence to support the importance of the child's syntactic analysis of sentences once those syntactic rules have been derived, also within that framework.
Despite this more obvious difference, and the fact that the Syntactic Bootstrapping Hypothesis was initially developed to challenge the Semantic Bootstrapping Hypothesis (but later voluntarily abandons the focus on bootstrapping), their approaches barely conflict. Finally, given that both approaches have essentially been developed within the wider Generative Grammar framework, it is likely that the minor differences of perspective and emphasis noted in this essay will, in time, be reconciled along the lines suggested by Grimshaw (1994).