The notion of quantification empowers language by providing the facility to generalise from specific individual instances of an attribute to a collection, or quantity, of instances which share that same attribute. In Linguistics, the term 'quantifier' is used to cover all expressions of contrasts in quantity which range from determiners and pronominal items such as all (of), every, each (of), some (of), few, many (of), both (of), neither(of), the first (of), and  ten (of), to adverbial forms such as sometimes, always, seldom, never, hardly and scarcely. In Semantics, specifically in Predicate Calculus, the term 'quantifier' is used to explore the truth value of propositions with respect to the relative scope of Universal Quantifiers () such as  every, each, none, no-one, i.e., 'all', and Existential Quantifiers () such as many, a few, both, two, i.e., 'some', Lyons (1977). This analysis in logic has led to a deeper understanding of the nature of quantifiers in natural language.
Quantifiers constitute a universal semantic category in all natural languages, however, there are systematic differences in the manner in which they are manifested grammatically in negative and interrogative clauses across languages. The primary purpose of this essay is to explore the extent to which the behaviour of quantifiers can be satisfactorily captured by syntactic rules, in these two grammatical environments, in contemporary English. This exercise has revealed that there is currently no theory that adequately accounts for the interaction between quantifiers and syntactic rules, semantic interpretations, scope relationships between elements of the clause and the influence of pragmatic factors. Despite the complexity of these interactions, the structure of this essay is designed to address these areas in turn in order to clarify the issues relating to each domain and signal the links between them.
Lyons (1977:455) defines quantifiers as "modifiers which combine with nouns to produce expressions whose reference is thereby determined in terms of the size of the set of individuals or in terms of the amount of substance that is being referred to." As noted in the Introduction, quantifying expressions belong to a variety of grammatical classes and no consistent nomenclature appears to be used for classifying them. Examples of the specific quantifiers selected for the current purposes, on the basis of their relevance to a syntactic analysis of negative and interrogative clauses, are classified by Downing and Locke (2003) as follows:
The terms Assertive and Non-Assertive are crucial to many of the arguments covered in this essay. Downing and Locke (2003:173) define them as follows:
Assertive and non-assertive forms are also known as Affirmative and Negative Polar Items (API, NPI). The effect on polar items of interrogative and negative constructions will be discussed in more detail in the next section since these environments are directly pertinent to the theme of this essay, however, NPIs may also be licensed by other syntactic contexts. Quirkal. (1985) provide the most comprehensive list of these non-assertive environments:
A couple of additional points need to be emphasised here regarding the quantifiers some and any before moving onto the effects of syntactic environment. Firstly, Downing and Lock (2003) identify that although some has a 'specific' meaning in factual assertive contexts, as in:
(12)
some can also have a 'non-specific' meaning in non-assertive contexts, as in:
(13)
Secondly, any(one) has two distinct meanings. Downing and Lock (2003:175) state that in sentences such as (3) above, anyone is "inherently unstressed", whereas in the following declarative sentence:
(14)
anyone is "inherently stressed". The implications of these different terms will be discussed in more detail later.
Finally, despite the range of quantifiers outlined here, the main arguments that relate to this essay topic will mainly make reference to the following subset: some, any, every and all.
Unlike the process of negating laws of propositional logic, the application of the negative form in natural language can produce effects that generate a variety of meanings depending on the context. Ladusaw (1996:322) states that "The fact that natural language sentences are routinely associated with presuppositions about the contexts in which they may be used means that negation is not generally contradictory with respect to the full domain of contexts but at best contradictory only with respect to the range of contexts in which the presuppositions of the sentence are satisfied."
Furthermore, Hoeksema (2000:117) points out that artificial languages employ negation but exhibit no concept of polar-sensitivity, therefore suggesting that "polar-sensitivity is not logically necessary, but a deeply engrained feature of natural language." These quotes set the scene for the arguments that follow in later sections regarding the behaviour of quantifiers in negative syntactic environments.
This essay title asks for a statement on the syntactic rules governing quantifiers in negative and interrogative contexts, both of which are non-assertive environments. Analysis of the literature reveals that syntactic rules pertaining to interrogative clauses are considerably more straightforward than those relating to negative contexts, an observation that is borne out by the massive discrepancy in the number of studies carried out in these areas, the latter being disproportionately more extensive and sophisticated. For this reason, and given that the majority of the arguments relating to interrogative clauses have already been outlined in section 2, the remainder of this essay will focus on the behaviour of quantifiers in negative clauses.
In section 2, an overview was given of the 'standard' grammatical rules associated with assertive and non-assertive quantifies. This section completes the picture with respect to the behaviour of these quantifiers in a negative syntactic environment and identifies a number of cases where grammatical rules appear to be violated.
Example (2) illustrated that the process of negating the verb in an assertive clause has the effect of converting it to a non-assertive clause. An alternative would be to retain the affirmative verb form in (1) and use the Nuclear Negative pronoun no-one in place of the NPI anyone:
(15)
Nuclear Negatives, in the same way as the negated verb, have the effect of converting all subsequent APIs to NPIs (Quirk et al, 1985):
(16)
However, the NPI cannot precede the negative element of the clause:
(17)
In more formal English, the negative element may be fronted resulting in subject-operator inversion:
(18)
Having outlined the syntactic parameters for the use of NPIs in negative contexts, the following observations appear to defy these basic rules.
The role of quantifiers and negation in controlling the locus, direction and extent of scope within clauses containing these operators has been the centre of debate amongst logicians and linguists for many decades. This section presents a number of examples that illustrate the complexity of the inter-connected factors relating to this debate.
There is no doubt that the study of quantifiers, particularly in the context of negative clauses has presented logicians and linguists alike with a number of perplexing and contradictory phenomena. In sections 2 and 3, this essay articulated the syntactic rules relating to quantifiers in negative and interrogative clauses in about 500 words, and then proceeded in subsequent sections to discuss the exceptions in a further 2,000 words. A number of illustrations have been presented where grammatically acceptable clauses contain configurations that appear to defy syntactic rules, and where the locus and range of scope items appear to interact with other elements in the clause. In particular, there is plenty of evidence that Conversational Implicature and Negative Implicature influence the interpretation of quantifying expressions in certain contexts. Moreover, it appears that the full impact of the role of lexical semantics in the context of scope ambiguity is far from fully explained.
Quantifiers are of particular interest to logicians and linguists for two reasons. Firstly, their inclusion in propositional statements has provided formal logic with the tools to progress from Propositional to Predicate Calculus. Secondly, the process of Quantifier Raising allows the syntactician to derive the Logical Form of the proposition from surface structure. However, despite their critical role in these domains of analysis, the quantifier, in particular in its interaction with negation, appears to raise more questions than it answers.
It is concluded, therefore, that syntactic rules alone are insufficient to predict the behaviour of quantifiers in negative and interrogative sentences. It is certain that this area will present the logician and linguist with a wealth of challenges for many years to come before a fully integrated, explanatory theory of quantifiers has been identified.