The 1980s witnessed a breakthrough in neural networking techniques that drew computer scientists, psychologists and linguists alike into a heated yet focussed debate on the nature of human cognition in general, and language acquisition in particular. The computing technique was called Parallel Distributed Processing (PDP) and in 1986 two of its proponents, Rumelhart and McClelland, claimed to have developed a model that could emulate human performance on several cognitive tasks using a single mechanism, or non rule-based approach. This theoretical stance ran counter to that of the traditional rule-based, or symbol-manipulating processing theorists who, over the 1970s and 1980s, had produced empirical evidence that supported a dual mechanism approach for the acquisition of morphology.
This essay is concerned with the extent to which Connectionism can both describe and predict the processes involved in the acquisition of the past tense form of English verbs and whether it is successful in upholding the claim that a single mechanism model is adequate to account for empirical data from development studies of morphological acquisition.
This essay firstly describes the characteristics of the dual and single mechanism approaches to morphological acquisition. Then the ability of Connectionist models to account for empirical data with respect to the acquisition of regular, irregular and novel past tense forms will be discussed together with other pertinent aspects of PDP modelling techniques. Finally, the Connectionist approach is evaluated and the conclusions summarised.
The theoretical framework of generative grammar introduced by Chomsky in the late 1950s and subsequently developed by cognitive scientists, linguists and language philosophers, has led to the 'traditional' view that language acquisition and processing require the assumption that the child's innate language facility is endowed with principles of Universal Grammar (UG), and mechanisms that permit the extraction of grammatical rules from the systematic analysis of inputs from perceptual and behavioural experience. Pinker and Prince (1988:74) refer to such rules as "symbol-manipulating processes", and states that the mechanisms are provided by the brain's information processing capabilities.
The following diagram, adapted from Plunkett (1995), illustrates a schematic representation of this dual aspect model for generating the past tense form in English.
The box on the left-hand side of the diagram represents the concept of the lexicon which, among other lexical characteristics, stores irregular past forms. As each verb is input to the system, regardless of its phonological characteristics, if a match is made to an item in this exceptions list, the appropriate irregular past form is selected for output and the regular past tense rule (add 'ed') is blocked. Otherwise, the regular input verb stem passes directly through the regular rule system.
Therefore, in the adult, the dual mechanism theory proposes a memory store for irregular past verb forms and a standard past-rule mechanism for regular verbs. The consequences for this configuration on predicting the characteristics of past tense acquisition will be discussed during the course of this essay.
The Rumelhart and McClelland (RM) 1986 PDP model differs from the dual mechanism approach in two major respects. Firstly, it claims that a single system, utilising phonological feature analysis of input items, can account for the acquisition, and adult formulation, of the past tense of both regular and irregular verbs, in the form of a neural network that directly connects input and output units. Secondly, this connectionist model contains no explicit rules, rather, the trained "network merely reflects the statistics of the featural representations of the verb forms." RM (1986:267).
The challenge for RM was to demonstrate that an initially undifferentiated network could 'learn' the phonological relationships between present and past forms in order to demonstrate, within a single mechanism, the stages of a child's acquisition of past tense morphology, the characteristics of error patterns empirically observed, and the ability to produce correct transformations of regular, irregular and novel verb stems.
One aspect of the evaluation of the Connectionist approach relates to its ability to account for the three stages in the child's acquisition of past tense morphology as reported by Cazden (1968) and Kuczaj (1977):
1) Initial past forms of regular and irregular verbs are produced accurately.
2) The regular transformation (add 'ed') is applied to all verbs including previously correctly produced irregular forms (e.g., *goed). This phenomenon is called over-regularisation.
3) Over-regularisation decreases and eventually both regular and irregular forms are produced correctly.
The effect of Stage 2 is to produce a so-called "U-shape" in the child's performance profile, which soon recovers during Stage 3 so that accuracy scores eventually asymptote at near adult performance levels.
The following subsections document how successfully the RM and subsequent Connectionist models simulate these trends and the characteristics of children's past verb form error patterns.
This essay has evaluated the ability of Connectionist models to sustain their initial claim that a single mechanism approach can emulate the child's acquisition of the past tense in English. The success of the first PDP model (RM 1986) was to reveal the necessity for both improved phonological feature analysis techniques, and a multilayer architecture, to achieve results that converge convincingly on observed child data. The irony of this latter discovery is that such advances in network design (hidden units) have essentially converted the single mechanism architecture into one that could be described as exhibiting the properties of a dual mechanism.
Proponents in both camps concede that the PDP exercise has significantly sharpened the quality of debate on the validity of computer-based modelling despite Pinker and Prince's (1988: 82) prophetic words that initial shortcomings were "..irremediable; or if remediable, only by copying tenets of the maligned symbolic theory."