The various Neolithic monuments that appear around the area of Avebury have been a matter of debate between archaeologists for hundreds of years as to what could have been their past function. The monuments are important because, as Pollard and Reynolds have written, "monuments are often taken as defining the period, marking the first major human modification to the landscape." (Pollard and Reynolds 2002: 46) However, whilst dating the monuments to discover when the landscape was affected is feasible, it is more complex to decipher for what use the monument was there for to begin with. What makes the situation so difficult is that as well as there being many different possibilities to the monuments uses that archaeologists can think of now, the truth is there is really no single answer. There are sure to be numerous explanations and uses to the area of Avebury, even in the Neolithic and Bronze Age. (Gillings 2003: 61) Therefore there are many different possibilities as to the suggested functions for the Avebury monument complex.
Many historians have suggested the monuments may have had Roman linkage. In 1840 the historian John Rickman suggested that the area may have been an amphitheatre. (Burl 1979: 200)
This was not the first connection made between Avebury and the Romans, in 1723 Twinning declared that Avebury was created by the Romans as a temple dedicated to their god 'Terminus', his theory being that the Outer Circle was added by Cnaeus Julius Agricola, the Roman general who is credited with overseeing the final conquest of Britain, (Ross 2001, ) to celebrate his voyage around the country he governed. (Burl 1979: 200)
However it was the historian John Aubrey who first came to the conclusion that sites such as the ones at Avebury were most likely pre-Roman times. (Richards 2002, February, ) It was Aubrey that brought this theory to the attention of the king at that time Charles II and began the process of developing a deep study into Avebury in the form of his work 'Monumenta Brittanica'. This was the first key time that it was suggested that the Druids may have been the creators of the sites at Avebury.
One of the more widely believed uses that historians now suspect the monuments at Avebury are thought to have served is that they were related to astrology. In the 19 th Century Reverend Thomas Maurice first suggested that the various circular monuments served an astronomical function (Burl 1979: 200), this was expanded on by the historian Reverend William Bowles who said that the inner circles symbolised, each in a separate or individual way, the months, the year, the days and the hours.
However it was Duke, in 1846, who made the connection between Avebury and other various monuments surrounding it to form a geographical planetarium. He placed Avebury as the Sun and other monuments around it such as Stonehenge as Saturn and Marden as Mars. He said that "the planetary temples, thus located, seven in number, will, if put in motion, be supposed to revolve around Silbury Hill," (Duke in Burl 1979: 200) just south of Avebury.
The idea that the Druids would have used the various monuments as a form of worship towards the planets and stars is one of the most stereotypical views held by the majority of people. The shape of the monuments, being circular, is easily applied to the shape of the planets orbits. This, alongside the knowledge that the Druids where worshipers of the sun, moon and of planetary activity, provides a reasonable explanation to the function of the Avebury monument complex.
Archaeological evidence suggests that the Romans did have connections to the monuments; however there is stronger evidence to suggest that the original creators of the sites at Avebury were the Druids. This is why later historians, such as John Wood, have suggested theories connecting the Druids to the monuments, but in ways other than through the practise of cosmology. Wood's hypothesis was to see Avebury as part of the four minor colleges of the Druids, the Druids having a university at Stanton Drew. (Piggott in Burl 1979: 200)
Wood's connection to the Druids is a more popular theory, however not as many scholars agree that it was in fact a college or part of a university. More connections are made to the worship of death, sacrifice and ritual. Aubrey Burl writes in his book, 'Prehistoric Avebury' that "death and regeneration are the themes of Avebury". (Burl 1979: 200) He supports this view with the evidence of human bones, pieces of stone, red ochre (a reddish earth rich in iron oxide used in paints), pockets of fertile earth, antlers, shapes of the sarsens (large sedimentary rocks) and the architecture of the avenues and circles.
These archaeological discoveries suggest very strongly that Avebury was used by the Druids as a temple where a large number of the local people could congregate to partake in the traditional ceremonies of the time relating to magic and spirits to help them in their lives. In 'Avebury - The biography of a Landscape' Joshua Pollard and Andrew Reynolds discuss the Neolithic peoples attention to the worship of the afterlife saying, "for Neolithic people, life was perhaps seen as some transitory journey towards some future eternal state, necessitating a greater investment in monuments through which people meditated with the realms of spirits and the dead". (Pollard and Reynolds 2002: 45) However Pollard and Reynolds go on to make the interesting point that much of Neolithic life was interwoven in amongst other parts. To relegate the monuments to just religious use and as places that stood separate to everyday life would be mistaken. (Pollard and Reynolds 2002: 46) Pollard and Reynolds use the example of how both matters of survival (i.e. the social importance of cattle) are entwined with other events taking place at the Avebury monuments such as funeral rites, for instance the pre-enclosed burial site at Windmill Hill.
Pollard and Reynolds place the use of the monuments as being related to 'many concerns central to early Neolithic life' (Pollard and Reynolds 2002: 46) this includes relating to the dead, the local peoples ancestors and other supernatural connections. They also served the purpose of enforcing a sense of community in an area that was saw its inhabitants distributed over a large space. It brought many of the people in the region together and gave them a sense of meaning and purpose.
Many other researchers have made the connection with the history of Avebury monuments and the worship of the dead. In 1801 William Cunnington excavated a site twenty miles south-west of Avebury. Inside a round barrow he uncovered the skeleton of a man lying full-length on his back. With the body were found sixty animal bones, which were shaped to points and perforated at one end to form a necklace. There were also boar's tusks and a broken macehead or battleaxe, some stones and foreign pebbles. The position of the body and the artefacts found near him suggest he was a man of status, and in particular indicate that he was a medicine-man. (Burl 1979: 207) The presence of the buried man at Avebury suggests that the burials taking place there in the monuments may have been ritualistic for and of greater importance for certain members of the community. This shows that not only were burials happening as part of the function of the monuments, but more importantly there is a sign it was in fact ceremonial burials.
One of the most perplexing monuments in Avebury is that of the 39.6m Earth Mound, Silbury Hill, the largest man-made prehistoric mound in Europe. R.J. Fergusson, decided that he thought it was a burial ground. (Burl 1979: 200) However, since then multiple excavations in 1776, 1849 and 1968-70 have uncovered that in actual fact there is nothing beneath the giant earth mound except clay, flints, turf, moss, topsoil, gravel, freshwater shells, mistletoe, oak, hazel, sarsen stones, ox bones, and antler tines. This perplexed archaeologists greatly as to what the use of Silbury Hill could have been, if it was not what Fergusson had originally suspected it to be, which did seem like the most sensibly theory because that was usually the function of an earth mound. At the beginning of this century, Moses B. Cotworth said that Silbury Hill was "a giant sundial to determine seasons and the true length of the year" another example of a historian making a connection between Avebury and the practice of astrology. Since then the historical writer Michael Dames identified the Hill as 'the winter goddess', or the mother goddess, with the mound symbolising the pregnant womb (Ryewolf 2002 - 5, ? SID=Mythology) however is now admitting that the monument remains 'a stupendous enigma'. (Arosio and Meozzi 2005, 1 November, )
Legends relating to Avebury have suggested that the mount is the last resting place of King Sil, who is sat upon a fabled golden horse. Other legends imply there is a life-size gold statue of King Sil inside the mound. However archaeological evidence has proven that these fables are untrue. Therefore the purpose of Silbury Hill must continue to be a mystery.
As I have shown there are many different suggestions to the function of the various monuments in Avebury. From the early belief that the area dated back only as far as the Roman era, to the modern approach which sees it having connections as far back as the Neolithic period and the Druids. Historians and Archaeologists have made connections in Avebury to the possibility of the monuments being used for religious purposes, whether in sacrifice or as some type of alter for day-to-day worship. There is also the prospect that the monuments may have had some connection with astrology and the worship and or study of stars and planets. Or even just have been simply part of the Druids normal daily life, bringing people together from around the area to enforce a sense of community within the region around Avebury.
I think that William Stukeley, one of the first archaeologists to look deeper into the past of Avebury, put it best when he said, "Publick sacrifices, games, hymns, a sabbatical observance being there celebrated; we have just reason to think all the like were observ'd by our Druids at Abury." (Stukeley in Burl 1979: 200) Stukeley's view is that the reason why we find it so hard to decipher the true meaning to the function of the different monuments at Avebury is because in reality there is most likely to have been multiple functions. From looking at the archaeological evidence we have reason to believe that the majority of the suggested functions of the monuments are accurate and that the Avebury monuments have played host to a number of different activities throughout its history.