With the expansion of the Roman Empire through Europe from first century BC onwards there came a development in the design and urban styles of the towns all through the growing empire. The different cultures conquered by the Romans lead to a mixture and adaptation of local styles along with the creation, in these foreign lands, of Roman styles and town plans. In this essay I plan to compare two towns from different parts of the Roman Empire to discuss the difference in their layouts and plans, and also the modern approach used by archaeologists when excavating these sites. The two towns I have chosen for my study are Cosa, on the west coast of Italy, and Emporion, on the north-east coast of Spain. The difference in documentation on the history of these two towns varies, however they both provide a separate insight into the different styles that were to be found within the Roman Empire.
The town of Cosa was founded in 273 B.C. to guard the coast road and sea on the west coast, and to keep a military presence in the territory of Vulci, the defeated Etruscan city. It was located roughly 140 kilometres north of Rome and it had one of the best harbours of the surrounding area (Stambaugh 1988: 255). Cosa consisted of an 'auguraculum' cut into the limestone surface on the top of the hill, seven metres on each side. Upon this the town would be built, giving the people of the town a clear view of land and sea. They could also use the auguraculum to lay out the outlines of roads and fields within the town. The finished town was about 13.25 hectares and surrounded by walls about 1,500 metres long with square towers along it.
Emporion, along the Spanish coast, was also a key harbour point, taken by the Romans from the Greeks in about 100BC. Like Cosa it was built atop a plateau, but for Emporion the religious and commercial heart of the town was characterized by its market place, a large 63 by 38 meters forum overlooked by the 'Temple Capitolium' dedicated to the Capitoline gods Jupiter, Juno and Minerva (Kaey 1988: 117). The temple was an overwhelming structure that greeted anyone entering from the south entrance to the town. All the elements of the temple, such as its platform, shrine or tiled roof, were strictly symmetrical, reflective of Roman design. Religious ceremonies would have been performed here bringing the townspeople together, this in tern worked with the enclosed area to the south which acted as a market place.
Cosa's centralized section of the town surrounded what was called the Forum. The streets of the town were laid out in an orderly symmetrical way similar to the design of Emporion. Two main streets bordered the Forum on northwest and southwest, leading up to gates in the north-eastern and south-eastern walls, and a third main street linked the Forum with the northwest gate (Stambaugh 1988: 256). The Forum acted, like Emporion's market place and temple, as a place where the town's people could gather and meet within the town.
The first settlers at Cosa were in numbers between 2,500 and 4,000 colonists with their families from the surrounding Latin towns and then in 197B.C. another 1,000 followed in the aftermath of the Hannibalic War (Stambaugh 1988: 257). This affected the urbanism of Cosa because only roughly a quarter of these people could be accommodated within the walls of the town, therefore over 2,000 families were then living on small farms and in hamlets throughout the surrounding land, or ager Cosanus. This lead to smaller farms residing on the outskirts of the ager Cosanus with larger Villa farms further inwards, these larger Villa farms becoming more regular. These numbers are much smaller, however, when compared to the population of Emporion. When the colony first appeared under Julius Caesar, it was to accommodate 10,000 people (Sear 1982: 210). Like the Villa farms in Cosa it eventually saw the development of two late Republican houses which have since been discovered on the east side of the city. The style of these houses are more Hellenistic than Roman, this connection with a Greek style of building shows how, in Emporion, the Roman architects chose to develop the Roman sense of urban design alongside the already established Greek surroundings. This mixture created a look different to any town in other parts of the Empire such as Cosa in Italy.
The development of Roman complexes with the growth of its population is a common concept. In Emporion the first century saw the expansion into grander and more ambitious areas. However in the Spanish town the changes were not expansion outside of the walls, but instead added buildings within, such as the addition of a long covered hall called a 'basilica' (Kaey 1988: 118). With the development of the structure there also came the addition of forum and amphitheatre. This dramatically altered the structure of the town as there was now a large covered meeting place at which people could gather, and where the law courts and other official businesses were located.
I will now compare and contrast the difference in the modern approach taken to excavation and research of these two towns. The archaeological site of Cosa has been under various different investigations, the main ones happening in 1990 and 1997 concentrating on the 'atrium building V'. Stephen Dyson called the 1948 excavation of Cosa, by the American Academy in Rome, one of 'the most ambitious' excavations of recent times (Dyson 1981). Dyson claims that the selection of Cosa [as an excavation site] over other better known and more popular sites represented a careful expression of archaeological aims. This is shown into the extensive work that was done into Cosa from that point on. The town's site has been, since 1948, a popular site for excavation and research into Roman urbanism in towns. It has proven especially popular because of its abandonment and lack of use throughout the middle ages and right up into modern times. The belief is therefore that the town of Cosa would provide undisturbed evidence of the Roman era (Dyson 1981). Archaeologists consequently thought that the town would provide undamaged evidence of the vital stages in the development of Roman urban life which had long since been destroyed at other sites such as the city of Rome and other more persistently prosperous Roman sites. If done properly and successfully it was thought that Cosa would provide the reconstruction of the architectural history of the city and its monuments, whilst also providing significant insights into the material culture of Rome during that time.
Like Cosa, Emporion is also considered an unusual choice for an archaeological excavation. Recent excavations of the sight have resulted in positive results, Emerson Avery speaking about the sight prior to a trip there as part of his degree commented that, 'the sheer volume of material ... to emerge from Emporion during its nearly 100 years of excavation is staggering' (Avery 2005, June,  newsletter/june05/fullbright.htm). This statement, however, portrays a slightly distorted view of the sight. Despite being rich in archaeological evidence, the Roman period in Spain is much less well known even to the scholarly world when compared to sites in Rome and the rest of Italy (Richardson 1989). Therefore there is very little documented on the excavation and study of sites such as Emporion, this makes the study of the modern treatment of this sight a difficult task.
Cosa, on the other hand, provides us will well documented insights into study of various different monuments within the town. There was extensive work done in 'The House of Diana' where 40 samples of the frescoes were found and selected using the following criteria: the context of the building, the colour of the pigments, the macroscopic characteristics of the plaster layers and the state of conservation of the fragments (Damiani, Gliozzo, Memmi Turbanti, Spangenburg 2003). Using the evidence found in the house of Diana the archaeologists were able to decipher where the different particles had originated from, for instance by analysing the sulphuric isotopes they were able to identify the place of origin of the cinnabar (a reddish-brown mineral, the principle source of mercury found near volcanic activity). Archaeologists are therefore able to reduce the number of possible sources for the material to being either Almedn in Spain, Monte Amiata in Italy or Idrija in Slovenia.
'Considerable emphasis is placed on the origins' of excavated material from Cosa (Comfort 1974), which is why so much study is taken into the different sources of each piece which is found at the various sites. Archaeologists see investigation into a prime site such as Cosa, as an excellent opportunity to discover more about the sources from which the Romans gathered their materials for building and decoration. From study of Cosa we can get a more in-depth look into the methods used in the ancient world thanks to the modern methods of chemical study.
In conclusion a study of these two very different sites coming from two separate parts of the Roman Empire has provided us with an insight into the different ways that the Roman people designed and built their cities. In Cosa you see the example of the usual Italian town built atop a plateau and containing the usually arranged monuments that you would expect to find in the ideal Roman town. Cosa is a good example of how the Romans built their towns when building them almost from scratch in their land of origin. However in Emporion, we see a difference since Emporion provides us with a prime example of how the Roman town looked when affected by the settlers who were there before. Much of the urbanism and the look of Emporion, although romanised, reflected the Greeks who had a colony at Emporion before the Romans. This comparison gives us as archaeologists an insight into the difference between Roman towns when there is a distinction in the way the two towns has been affected before the structures were built.
Cosa and Emporion also are good examples of the difference there can be between the levels of research and study of two sites. On the one hand you can have a site like Cosa which has multiple resources on its many excavations throughout the past few years. On the other hand you could be looking at a site like the one at Emporion, which although it has been excavated numerous times, the level of documentation and sources on the site are sparse. This shows us how different the level of research and type of study in two separate Roman sites can be and allows us to understand the variation further between two towns that, although were within the same Empire, were, ultimately, a world apart.