'One of Sir John's Harington's epigrams tells the story of a man brought into the Star Chamber, who "for the greater terrour" was sentenced to be banded on the face and to have his nose slit. His wife begged for him, but the judges "gravely" told her that he had had mercy enough: his offences really deserve the death penalty. Thereupon she broke out:
How could a man possibly consider that his sense of honour and humility is maintained through public execution is an extraordinarily difficult concept for the modern observer to understand. To us, public execution seems both barbaric and unfamiliar, a subject that to many historians has always been 'shrouded in euphemism'. Many are still reticent on the subject of executions, using the metropolitan executions of Tyburn as a 'set piece' ritual in exploring the brutality of the crowd, and more recently as a point of contact between the elite and the rest of the populous. Yet this was not always the case, and such a conclusion was certainly not a product of earlier rituals and ceremony surrounding the methods of execution in early modern England. Here we observe an enigma of the period, the insistence on the condemned being brought to a state of penitence before their death, and that they would be required to make a public speech from the gallows to express their state of mind, and to warn the expectant crowd the dangers of committing sin. Many have concluded that this set piece was a form of ideological control, an instrument of morality and the judicial system that would set an example to the 'lower sort' of people. In this essay I wish to argue that although this may have been a theoretical ideology that succeeded generally in its intentions, and was applied readily by some few 'heroes' of the gallows, the method of execution has been glorified, and subtler efforts to invert this system of justice more than often succeeded, particularly with reference to the condemning of the Romanists by puritan magistrates.
Such a complex ceremonial revolved around the maintaining of morality; this unwavering constant is what the law endeavoured to protect. Theoretically the 'stylized confrontations' that occurred in court and the gruesome public punishment that occurred afterwards were recognised as lessons that could be used to teach the 'many headed monster' its own designated place in society. Especially after the reformation, when Protestantism taught the Calvinist theology of predestination, there was a general view that humanity was 'unavoidably flawed' and so punishment served as an example to the populace. It was widely taught in literature and sermons that although the miscreants were so socially divergent from the magistrates or constable who judged them, everyone was bound by this same 'struggle' to control human behaviour. The public execution was upheld as the 'climatic moment' in the justice system, one that could arguably be based on 'terror'. Many contemporary critics argued that the scaffold could weaken the enforcement of the law; the concept of the death penalty frightened the persecutors more than the criminals, who feared to commit themselves to sentence a man to his death. But many thought that in Tudor England; the law was so effective because it was shaped into its own formal structure, which combined both terror and logical argument to produce a more legitimate power. It was not, like many historians have concluded in eighteenth century executions, the 'point of contact' between the elites and the masses, as mentioned earlier. When the Judge approached the court room in his black cap and pure white gloves he was beginning the process of the ceremonial, an 'elaborate ritual of the irrational' meant to provide the show piece of divine power and an authority greater than man or those who ruled, these create the sacramental properties of the legal system. The judge, although simply a clog in this great machine, could also play the role of a more heavenly arbitrator, in pronouncing death or prolonging life. Douglas Hay concludes that the law 'became something more than the creature of a ruling class - it became power with its own claims', with the public execution standing 'at the symbolic centre' of such proceedings.
We are immediately presented with the idea of an ideological control that is greater than those who wield it, as it is associated with the fate of the sinful, and so is associated with a divine morality. The set piece speech was an extension of this need to control, becoming apparent at first in the executions of traitors at well-documented trials. Hanging was an extremely public event, one of the few occasions in which many hundreds or thousands of people could meet together, in the procession from Newgate to Tyburn in 1669 that the way was made impassable for the carts carrying the condemned, who had to complete their journey on foot. In the absence of a national police force and this 'fear' of maintaining order in society, this is surprising. Therefore this execution was far more sophisticated and complex than it outwardly appears, and large crowds were permitted because they supposedly acted as a way of enforcing physical control when there was such a lack of it at the time.
Of course the speech itself was of central importance to the entire procedure. In studying the work of pamphlets alone, J. A. Sharpe maintains that there were 'expectations' of the crowd to make a farewell speech, and in a particularly stereotyped format. The speech became very conventional as the seventeenth century progressed, and also more ornate. The condemned would address its 'audience', telling of their fate having an origin in their youth, and their behaviour, left to its own devices escalated out of control with a series of offences that culminated with his execution. There was supposedly an acceptance of this fate and a stress for all those present to be obedient to the monarch and to God. The clergy were often involved in working upon such felons, even eminent churchmen such as William Perkins talked with the convicted about desiring them to have a 'good end'. Such confessions were 'accepted readily and were generally unforced.' There was a great emphasis on admission of general sin, and not just for the specific crime that resulted in their execution. An Edmund Kirk, who was executed for murdering his wife in 1684, spoke not of the murder itself but stated that his death should be prevent others against 'gross and heinous crimes'. This was considered very typical of the speech, and so an emphasis on sin and religious obedience is very central to its success. John Noyse, executed for murder in 1686, gave a speech in which the 'younger sort' should avoid the 'profanation of the Sabbath Day'.
These speeches suggest that the victim was required to make a 'pentinent end.' J. A. Sharpe's study of pamphlets and chapbook accounts revealed that the there was an expectation by the crowd that those about to be executed would accept his sinfulness and be entirely prepared for his end. A John Rowse, hanging in Surrey in 1621, died 'with great penitency and remorse of conscience.' Here we are presented with the conclusion of this argument, that the men and women were not only accepting their death, but were 'willing central participants in a theatre of punishment,' and were tools used to legitimize political and ideological power. Even Robert Devereux, 2 nd Earl of Essex (d. 1601) died with a similar reaction to his own fate. Uncovering his head, he lifted his eyes wayward and prayed for 'the queen and her ministers to forgive him, praying for her life long.'
Sharpe argues that this willingness had to do with 'absolute obedience to the king, to law and to society,' arguing that only a few black sheep ever strayed from this unwavering belief. Some of my concerns with this argument is that although I can appreciate obedience to religion and morality (as mentioned previously) being a justifiable reason for such willingness, I cannot accept that those who have already flouted the law so recklessly would pledge such obedience to it in their moment of death. Most executions were, as Sharpe himself admits, because of murder, but because of property offences, which neither inspires such a fixation with guilt or repentance that the pamphlets endorsed so readily. Considering that any theft over twelve shillings was a capital offence, some of the executions (although these executions were diminished due to the lessening of a good's value by the jury or court) would have occurred over a good worth very little, and correspondingly dramatic penitence would seem entirely unfair to the condemned.
However, Sharpe does go on to justify his original claim by stating that for so many inhabitants in early modern England, there was little distinction between crime and sin. Those who sinned were disorderly, and absolute obedience to the king was essentially a prerequisite for absolute obedience to God. Death was so intimately interwoven with religion because, for the contemporary layman, there was no doubt as to whether Heaven existed. Penitence came so willingly because only now could the accused meet God with a clear conscience. Jeremy Taylor advised the clergymen speaking to a condemned man to address him in a similar manner as comforting the fatally ill. The sick man's confession was a parody of the condemned man's farewell speech. For it was Henry Goocole who wrote that 'dying men's wordes are ever remarkable,' (sharpe 150) in part due to their religious significance. In death, this 'great social rite in which the dying person is the principal actor,' the farewell speech acted as godly words to the expectant masses.
The 'actor' was required play their part with as much sincerity and acceptance as they could muster, engaging in a sort of 'parodic dialogue' with the crowd's support. Yet this sincerity was not necessarily, as Shapre insists, a form of penitence, but one of courage or defiance. As Gatrill eloquently puts it, 'some felons on the way to their doom constructed the illusion that they were masters of the ceremonies' and not the judicial administrators. When Lewis Avershaw wa hanged in Kennington Common in 1795 he appeared 'entirely unconcerned, a flower in his mouth, his bosom was thrown open...laughing and nodding to acquaintances in the crowd.' For months afterwards, thousands of the London populace passed their Sunday's near the spot, as if consecrated by the remains of a hero.' An agricultural worker executed in Kent for arson in 1830 refused to profess his guilt and 'refused to pull 'refused to pull the cap down over his eyes, saying he wished to see the people as' as he died.' Although this example spans past the seventeenth century phenomena of the 'set piece' speech, it displays a victim's efforts to maintain his dignity and die well not only through penitence, but through this supportive lifebelt surrounding him, the crowd.
What Gatrill hints at here is that in this 'illusion' of control there lay a truth that Sharpe seems reluctant to consider: the simple nature of humanity. The supposed bravado and public displays of repentance at the moment of execution must be observed from a far more basic, physiological level. There is a great danger in becoming caught up in such rituals being so different from our own time that we contemplate human nature might have altered as well. We view with fascinated detachment the plight of the repenting condemned, standing in front of the gallows, addressing the expectant crowd as an informal preacher to the masses. Using the analogy of Satre's short story, 'The Wall', once the individual has been sentenced to their death, the dying has already begun. When the character Ibbieta is condemned, his body expresses itself in the troubling of duality of heightened sensitivity and then diminished feeling and awareness. The body is pained, unmindful of anything. The body works to obliterate the world and self of the old person, and 'it becomes increasingly the object of attention...the "ever shrinking perimeter of pleasure" as said by Stravinsky.' 
The loss of conviction means now that nothing matters; the world is now meaningless. Physical pain is able to 'obliterate psychological pain because it obliterates all psychological content, painful, pleasure, and neutral.'
So we must ask if those sentenced were truly able to conform to the expected ritual, the last speech of a marked man. These spectators alone save this brave man, by the support that he felt, so that he feels 'no suspicion that his situation is the object of contempt or derision to anybody' so he can perform his own death with a lasting grace. Yet this is his only saving grace, and not all can die with such humility. There is a much bleaker truth that surrounds Satre's notions of the human body in pain, and that is that the felons died in a state of powerful and unwavering terror. The ceremony was the humane execution, giving him the only support the world can provide. The bravado hid the knowledge that this was their last journey, used to 'meliorate the terrible thought of the meagre tyrant Death'. However so many of the convicted were engulfed by the physical overpowering the psychological. For every man who died bravely, a vast amount died 'expelling urine and faeces'; even Marie Antoinette had to share this fate with the other 'meagre' villain. Most people would mount the scaffold 'trembling in a very extraordinary manner', their 'whole frame...violently convulsed', their minds 'bordering on stupefaction', having to be supported by those who execute them. Those who hoped to die bravely were often exceedingly drunk:
To refer back to Satre's views on the body awaiting an execution, the crowd act as a form of anaesthetic against his overwhelming fear. This is the one deed that can save them from total anguish and loss of self, of their worldly considerations. Those being executed, for all their supposed sense of self-control and persuasion, were still going to be executed, and were above all, completely powerless to stop it. Furthermore, those executed were rarely the heroes of legend; they were common, obscure criminals whose executions meant so little that they were not even printed in a newspaper.
Moreover, throughout the early modern period and beyond there was no doubt that hanging was a slow, and exceedingly painful way of killing people. If the victim's windpipe were ossified, the pressure of the noose would mean a inefficient and slow death. Those such as John Hatfield in 1803 took minutes to position the rope around his neck, believing that death was speedier if the knot lay below the ear. However, this would do little good, and the result would often be the same. In 1804 Anne Hurle used a Scaffold erected in the widest part of the old bailey. When the cart began to draw away, she 'gave a faint scream, and, for two or three minutes after she was suspended, appeared in great agony, moving up and down frequently'. Hangmen were very unreliable executioners, perhaps the rope would snap or the cross beam would fall loose. This happened to David Evans in Carmarthen in 1829. He cried, 'I claim my liberty!' but was hanged again all the same. It seems strange that throughout the early modern period, when other technological innovations were surfacing in so many areas, the technique of hanging was untouched by any mechanisation.
Execution therefore, was not an untouchable vessel that acted as a representation of morality. The ideology of execution was, certainly, but not at the scene, not in the vast majority of cases where the unknown common man vanishes into historical oblivion. In practice, many would die petrified, silent, and physically affected. The cheap print, the pamphlets and ballads exemplified the cases that they had reason to mention. When a man being executed at Worcester in 1708 delivered a declaration that he stood there as a result of the ill will of some of the county justices, the clergymen who recorded the execution felt constrained to take action. - p. 154 These cases were rarely recorded and that condemned persons acting in this manner seem to have been regarded as abnormal and reprehensible.
However, and I feel this is crucial in understanding why this 'ideology' could not be guaranteed to function in practice, the execution procedure could be subverted by the criminal to glorify his own will. Sharpe and Foucault see this simply as a 'malfunction of prevailing authoritarian structures'. Foucault writes, 'in the wake of a ceremony that inadequately channelled the power relations it sought to ritualise" there emerged a "mass of discourses", some of which detracted from the majesty of monarchical justice.' Here we turn to the deaths of catholic priests, the greatest example of those who subverted an arguably 'protestant' judicial procedure. For the speech of the sinful and the corresponding repetitive penitence, was essentially a form of preaching that was advocated so tirelessly by puritan theology. The deaths visited upon such Romanist priests reveal not an upstanding morality, but a much more conniving form of violence for which the early modern state was culpable. John Bossy goes as far to state that the executions could be viewed as 'sacrificial rites in the temple of monarchy, a deity fancying the boiled where older gods preferred the roast.'
In attempting to control and wield the gallows as their own weapon through this 'protestant' farewell speech, the early modern state were opening 'up spaces' in which such challenges could be subverted, as Michael Questier and Peter Lake concluded. If Sharpe argues that religion and crime were intimately interwoven, then to defy the very ideology of religion itself in a system that relies upon it so heavily could be considered a serious weakness. Furthermore this provoked a defiance that could be just as effective as 'set piece' morality speech to the crowds at the time of the execution, even if the 'pamphlets' and cheap print might not write about these challenges to authority.
This was not simply a form of defiance on part of the Catholics, but a battleground in a much wider war between Protestants and Catholics that used many other political and ideological ends. When executing a Romanist priest, the protestant state not only wanted to present the victims as immoral or defying the established order ordained by monarchy, but to equate popery with treason. In not only hanging victims, but also drawing and quartering them, the maximised agony and public disembowelment of the condemned showed to all that he had died a traitor's death. However, in doing so the authorities not only deviated against the 'set piece' execution ceremony that as Sharpe argues the crowd expected so readily, but it gave the Catholics status. For when the victim was required to make any last 'set piece' speech, he could not only subvert the authoritarian structure by denying his execution was valid, but was executed under such a pretence of magnitude that it paved the way for the concept of the Catholic martyr.
Of course the immediate argument here is that one religion's martyr is another one's traitor. However, as the Catholics often stated, martyrem non poena facit sed causa,
 and many crowds often felt the same. Anne Dillon concludes that many protestant accounts of Catholic executions often include a reluctant admission of their bravery, through their use of the via cruces, or imitation of Christ. For it was well known by contemporaries that any martyr would become one with Christ at the moment of death. Although Foxe's 'Actes and Monuments'
, published in 1563, paved the way for a legacy of hatred against Catholic burnings, these Catholic martyrs were ideally male, educated and so easy to differentiate from the 'unlearned riff raff thronging the pages of Foxe.'
Furthermore, there were many disagreements about how to conduct such executions. If the set piece speech was a 'required' form of penitence to control the crowd, should they allow a staunch Catholic to speak at all? At John Robert's execution a running religious dispute featured between a sheriff, who had no qualms with the former talking, and the under officer who was shocked that a catholic priest could be allowed to 'allure the king's people in this sort.' This was a far cry from the common farewell speech of repentance discussed previously, for the ideology itself was being debated on the execution block. There was, to conclude, a 'religious evangelical agenda' at work that the state could not control, a parallel 'set piece' that was anything but 'set' and orderly.
This, as I previously mentioned, was its own theatre and elaborate display of ritual. A Catholics ability to remain unflinching on the execution block, even when the moment of the blade's descent was signalled by a prearranged sign, was a sign to the crowd that this man was chosen by the Holy Spirit, and committed a true sacrifice. On the other hand, Protestant Pamphleteers often cast doubt on the truth of Catholicism through any corresponding gestures that convinced them otherwise, even involuntary ones. For instance, if the rope was grabbed when the cart pulled away it could be invested with a 'stoeriological significance.' Richard Kirman and John Boste sung the hymn of thanksgiving, 'Te Deum Laudamus' when their sentences were read to them, while Ralph Sherwin kissed the executioner, and Mark Barkworth embraced the hanging body of Anne Line. Edward Waterson went as far as to kiss the remains of a disembowelled and quartered priest sent by the government to 'scare him' into confessing.
No amount of pamphlets could hide the truth: these men did not conform, these men died defiant to the very end. As previously mentioned, public executions may have had thousands of witnesses, all present at such brazen displays of ritual and symbolic gesture. Michael Questier summarizes this point adequately when he writes, 'the gallows came to be seen as a prime moving ground for a spiritual truth.' To reiterate, this was not a matter of a crowd being religious, but being a form of support. As I also mentioned, the most base truth about the public execution ritual was that it provided a condemned man with his last saving grace, and this was clearly recognised. So Romanists could appeal to those who, under any other circumstances, would have wholeheartedly rebuked them. This was a fine line, but certainly a window of opportunity, even if the result was not always positive. John Roberts apparently managed to shout about the 'heresy of the kingdom' but gained a 'hearty applause from the very Protestants.' But those 'very Protestants' had their own chess pieces to play. They too could play these to the crowd. A sheriff, on discovering a cross on the priest William Filby, held it high up to the crowd, repeating 'Oh, what a villainous traitor is this that hath a cross', to the acknowledgement of the crowd before him.
This was much more than a form of ideological control. The ritual of execution was a play, a theatre, a chessboard of rivalries, and an opening for those who resisted to acquire some sympathy with a usually unwavering crowd. When Sharpe argues that its was a form of control to incite obedience to the state, he is right in that the pamphlets he studied used execution as a medium with which to set an example to the general public. The executions themselves were far more fragile, tangible and complex, for they dealt with the human body and mind confronted with our only inevitability in life: death. This is man's greatest and most timeless fear. The most persuasive argument for penitence being spoken in a farewell speech is not because of a willingness to accept an allotted role in a system of control, but a need and desire to face God with a clean conscience. This was even if the body and mind could rise above the choking fear that consumed it, and if the common criminal was even permitted a farewell speech for a small theft crime. The crowd expected a farewell speech, and they were often party to one, but not necessarily the speech they expected. For there were defiant men and women, particularly in the case of Catholic executions, that although not in their thousands were certainly maximised as a huge public spectacle; the protestant clergy only opened themselves up for an even greater fall by making Catholics traitors, and so potentially martyrs. As I originally stated at the beginning of this essay, the state could not control this practice, as Sharpe contends, because it was greater than that, greater than the judicial system itself, a power unto itself. The 'set piece' farewell speech was only set in theory, and not always in practice.