The term 'waterlogged' refers to the long-term exclusion of oxygen by the presence of groundwater around an artefact. By keeping the artefact away from the air waterlogging is able to preserve perishable artefacts for longer periods of time than if they were buried with contact to the air. Thus, in a site which has been waterlogged since the archaeological horizon was deposited, extraordinary insight may be obtained by study of artefacts of leather, wood, textile or similar materials.
In dendrochronology, the age of wood can be determined through the counting of the number of annual rings in its cross section. Tree ring growth reflects the rainfall conditions that prevailed during the years of the tree's life. Because rainfall patterns vary annually, any given set of tree ring patterns in a region will form a relatively distinct pattern, identifiable with a particular set of years. By comparing the pattern of tree rings in trees whose lifespans partially overlap; these patterns can be extended back in time. By matching the tree rings on an archaeological sample to the master sequence of tree ring patterns, the absolute age of a sample is established. In Central Europe dendrochronology sequences are made easier since the wood in the trees is preserved through waterlogging. Waterlogging also helps to preserve fossilised insect remains. The best sites for these results are peat bogs and organic lakes/river clays, where the high levels of water reduce the amount of oxygen and therefore there is lower biological action. Wet soils and clays which have not been subject to much hydrological variation are also good. Frozen sediments, such as the permafrost of Artic sites are excellent, as seen in the specimens from the Norse farm site of GUS in Greenland.
One of the best examples of waterlogging successfully preserving relics is the excavation of Star Carr, East Yorkshire, by Sir Grahame Clark in 1949. Spectacularly, Clarke discovered over 190 well-preserved barbed antler points (over ten times the previous total from the whole of Britain) together with a number of elk antler `mattock-heads' (perhaps used as digging sticks) and bone scraping tools. Alongside this he also found 21 red deer antler `head-dresses' (either hunting disguises for stalking the deer, or quite possibly ceremonial head-gear used in rituals), a large part of a birch-wood paddle, at least a dozen perforated stone beads, and a rich collection of flint tools ranging from the small `microlithic' tips and barbs of arrows to larger axe- or adze-like woodworking tools. The site had been a lake in prehistory and had since become an area of lowland peat bog until, in the 18 th century it was eventually drained for agriculture. Clarke dug an area of around 300 square meters by the edge of the ancient lake to make his discovery. Because the excavation area at Star Carr was located right by the direct shore of the lake the artefacts of antler, bone and wood were all extremely well preserved in the waterlogged peat deposits which evidently acted quite like a rubbish-disposal zone immediately in front of the site and helped to preserve the remains. The conditions by the lake shore had created a superbly well preserved site in which Clarke could make his discovery due to waterlogging and he was able to use radiocarbon dating to date the site to around 7500BC. The waterlogged conditions in Star Carr have meant that successful excavations of the sight have been able to continue right up into the 1980s when Tim Schadla-Hall (in association with Cambridge University) re-excavated the site.
Waterlogging has proved especially useful in the preservation of prehistoric human remains.