The term 'seclusion' refers to the condition of being cut off from others, or being excluded from a particular place. The position of the citizen women of fifth century Athens has often been described using the term, 'seclusion'. Due to limited sources it is hard for today's historians to know very much about the life of the Athenian woman, and furthermore all evidence for the subject comes from works made by male writers and artists, (Blundell in Sparkes ed. 1998: 232) resulting in a very limited insight into how Athenian women lived and the modern day reader needs to remember that since we are only ever subjected to the males view of women rather than the reality of women's lives, we cannot be sure of the accurateness of some sources. In this sense it can be said that the women of fifth century Athens lived lives of seclusion, since we have no evidence of the Athenian woman's opinion. However it is also debated that the women of Athens had a reasonable level of freedom by comparison to other women of the time in other tribes and states.
The negative attitude towards women derives from the traditional view of them in Athens taken from their own creation myth. The Greek creation myth tells of how the first created woman, Pandora, gave into her own curiosity and opened the box given her by Zeus that she was forbidden to ever open, thus releasing into the world all the horrors which inflict the world today. (Elliott 2004, 23 July, ) It is also important to notice how separately woman is created, 'women are descended from womankind alone', (Loraux, Levine trans. 1993: 74) Pandora is produced as a secluded individual, apart from the already created mankind. This sets the scene in the world of fifth century Athens for women to be placed apart from men, in secluded home lives. However, to what extent is this traditional view truth? Many women of ancient Athens were able to lead independent and working lives depending on their class and status. To what extent were the women of Athens secluded?
The most commonly found presentation of the Greek family in Athens is one where the wife is under a degree of submission from her husband. In W.K. Lacey's 'The Family in Classical Greece', we are told of two stories that present these types of situations. Lacey writes about a story from Andocides about Callias, who married an Athenian girl and took her mother as his wife also. Consequently the daughter was so ashamed that she tried to hang herself and eventually ran away. Meanwhile Callias grew tiered of the mother and turned her away from his house despite the fact that she was pregnant. (Lacey. 1968: 152 - 153).
This story presents a picture of the Athenian husband having very little respect for the woman or women he took as wife, similar to the story Lacey tells of Timarchus from Aeschines, who squandered his inheritance after helping Hegesandrus to squander the estate of his new wife (Lacey. 1968: 152). These two stories both portray the women of Athens as having very little say in the behaviour of their husbands and as a result being dismissed and effectively secluded in their marital lives.
However we also have evidence that shows women who were entitled by their husbands to maybe more freedom of speech than many other women of fifth century Athens. In 'Oeconomicus' (The Householder) by Xenophon, we are told about a conversation between Socrates and Ischomachus about how he instructed his wife on looking after the home. Although Ischomachus is discussing how his wife should 'live up to the rules given her' (tr. Bradley in Ferguson and Chisholm. 1978: 142) and that he already had 'women enough at [his] command' (tr. Bradley in Ferguson and Chisholm. 1978: 136), portraying a similar image to that of Callias or Timarchus, he also refers to the relationship between him and his wife in a far more positive way. He says that once his wife had entered his home he stated to her that household choices would be made as a joint decision and furthermore, "[their] house was now common to [them] both, as well as [their] estates; for all that [he] had [he] delivered into her care" (tr. Bradley in Ferguson and Chisholm. 1978: 136). From what Ischomachus says about his marriage we can conclude that he had more respect for his wife and felt that as a married couple they should be as equal as they could in that time and share all the property as a couple.
As you can see already there is no way of simplifying all these separate cases. Clearly each one shows that the treatment and position of a woman in fifth century Athens depended to a great extent on the attitude of her husband. A way to conclude would be to simply say that there were some households headed by considerate and open minded men and then there were the contradictory cases to this, (Lacey. 1968: 153) and this was a large factor in the place and freedom a woman held. Although another point to remember is that no matter how liberal a husband may be a woman still held no legal rights over marital property and so in that sense still remained secluded.
Another source of evidence that can tell historians about the way of life in fifth century Athens is archaeological evidence, mainly the discovery of decorated pottery that shows scenes of Athenian everyday life. A vase found around 440 BC, now in the Harvard University collection portrays what the Athenian male citizen may have considered the ideal of how his wife should spend her time whilst he is away from the home. According to Dyfri Williams this pot is a celebration of "the primary functions of a woman as they are set out by ancient writers: to produce and rear children and to contribute to the self-sufficiency of the household". (Williams ed. Cameron and Kuhrt. 1993: 94) Whether or not this is just cause to say that women lived lives of seclusion in fifth century Athens is debatable. On the one hand a historian may argue that the pot presents the Athenian woman in her most true form, isolated in her home and kept away from the rest of the city. However it can also be said that this is only a representation of a certain type of woman, and many other women in the city lived lives different to this picture.
The fifth century Athenian prostitute, or hetairai, was able to enjoy both economic and physical freedom unlike any other woman in the city at that time. Many of the hetairai were valued intellectually, as well as for the sexual companionship they could provide (Blundell ed. Sparkes. 1998: 244) thus showing us that a select group of women within Athens were not necessarily secluded to the realms of the home. Archaeological evidence portrays the female prostitutes as warmly dressed and appearing to be rich and successful women. However it is important to remember the audience for which these pots were created and who they were created by, for instance it is most probable that the biggest market for the pottery was the high-class men of the city. (Williams ed. Cameron and Kuhrt. 1993: 97) This would have affected the design on the pot as the artist may have felt the hetairai would have been a good selling point for the wine-loving men of Athens. In this sense we need to be cautious of the reliability of pottery evidence as it is always only a portrayal provided by the artist, also most likely male and Athenian vase-painting was ultimately a man's point of view. (Williams ed. Cameron and Kuhrt. 1993: 105)
There are documents from the fifth century that show signs of those who had a more liberal attitude towards women at that time. The Stoic philosopher Musonius Rufus was extremely liberal and forward by comparison to his contemporaries. On the issue of women he is documented to have said that 'women have received from the gods the same ability to reason that men have ... likewise women have the same senses as men, sight, hearing, smell and all the rest.' (Lefkowitz and Fant. ????: 50) This could be used as proof that women were not entirely secluded in ancient Athens as there were some forward thinking philosophers around at the time.
In conclusion the issue of women's seclusion and the extent to which it is accurate to use 'seclusion' as a way of describing the status of Athenian women is a strong matter of debate. On the one hand we have a great deal of evidence that would suggest that it is accurate to say that the Athenian woman was secluded to the realms of her home as a wife and mother. However we are also provided with evidence on pottery and what we know of some working women that would suggest that other women did have a certain degree of influence. For instance we could hear the story of Polyeuctus' daughters who were present at the making of his will and took part in the administration of the family property. (Lacey. 1968: 151 - 152) An important point to remember is that these sisters did not have any brothers and so were most likely going to be more independent than other women because of that. However it is still a fine example of how to generalise and describe all the citizen women of Athens in terms of seclusion is too much of a sweeping statement since within the women of fifth century Athens there existed many different levels of independence and status despite a lack of lawful rights.