The society of fifth century Athens could be described as one of the few slave societies that have existed in the world. It was a society in which the use of slaves was an everyday occurrence and it can be said that the economy and stability of the society relied on the use of slaves. Slaves in Athens, like women in Athens, were not classed as citizens and it can be asserted that they were not treated as human beings. There are many aspects of slavery that shed light on how slaves were treated. These are the amount of slaves in Athens, how the slavery was justified, whether the Athenians were cruel to their slaves, whether the slaves were considered to be less human than the free people of Athens and whether the comic characterisations of the treatment of slaves in the plays of Aristophanes are at all true.
As fifth century Athens was a slave society we can safely say that there was a large number of slaves in Athens. There were in fact such a large number of slaves that it can be said that the Greeks could not imagine life without any slaves. The speech Lysias 24 which is written on behalf of a cripple suggests that even poor Athenians would have looked to own slaves and would have seen them as an investment in terms of income. When Aristotle presents his argument in support of slavery he mentions the "master and slave" as natural elements within the household. This suggests that slavery was thought of as an essential and ordinary element in the Athenian household. There were different kinds of slaves in Athens, and therefore different slaves would have had different experiences with different masters and types of work. The public slaves and the skilled craftsmen may have experienced a more pleasant life compared to that of the miners who were often worked to death in appalling conditions, and the domestics slaves may have been able to forge relationships with their masters while agricultural slaves faced had work on the fields.
Overall slavery as was never really questioned in the classical period as many Greeks could see no alternatives to slaves, there was therefore often no need for it to be justified. At the height of the sophistic period however, slavery was said to be against nature as it was primarily based upon force and morally wrong, and this led to Aristotle writing his justifications of slavery. Aristotle came up with many arguments as to why slavery was justified. He commented on how people were born, stating that some people were born to "rule or be ruled", and therefore slavery was just and an advantage for the slave. There are many references to slaves as being an "animate piece of property" and therefore they are meant to be owned and follow the commands of their owners. Many Greeks saw slaves as being one of the "essential requirements of life" and thus made for slavery. The Pseudo-Aristotelian mentions three things that slaves are meant for as being "work, punishment and food", this presents the slave as being designed for slavery and therefore by being a slave is fulfilling some sort of life purpose. Many slave owners believed they were justified in owning slaves because they were born into slave families or they were won in wars which were fought fairly.
Athenians were in some ways cruel to their slaves. Slave owners could punish their slaves without fear of the law, this would have sometimes included harsh treatment. The flogging of slaves was a common occurrence, and even the most privileged of slaves could not be completely free from the threat of physical punishment. In Xenophon's The Householder, 12 it states "you must not be frightened to punish", showing that slave discipline was seen as an important aspect of owning slaves. The private life of a slave depended on the master, the master could prevent his slaves from forming relationships, or split up families without the slaves having any say. Most slave owners would not treat their slaves too badly. Slaves were considered valuable property as they worked for their master and contributed to the household or the income, and therefore many slaves were looked after, or at least kept in good physical condition. However, not all slave owners would have been interested in looking after their slaves. In the speech Lysias 4, a man "proposed that his own slaves should be interrogated under torture", this is showing a disregard for the condition of the slave as tortured slaves could be returned to their owners less able than before.
In terms of the law, the rights of slaves were protected in some ways. Slaves are protected from being murdered. In Antiphon 5, a slave is murdered because he is accused of killing his master and his murders are told "a jury's vote applies just as much to the man who kills a slave as to the man who kills a free man". The law also protects slaves against Hybris. In Demosthenes 21, it states "if anyone humiliates anyone, whether they are free or slave, or commits any illegal act against any of these, let any Athenian who has the right to do so and wishes submit their names to the Thesmothetai". Although slaves are protected in these ways according to the law, they themselves cannot file a lawsuit and so they rely on others who are free. It is therefore debatable whether these laws were actually effective in the protection of slaves. Other laws such as that stating "persons other than the slaves owner is not allowed to strike him" do not completely protect slaves, first the owner can still beat the slave and it will only protect the slave if the owner takes action when others beat the slave.
It could be argued that the slaves in Athens could not have been treated too badly because of the lack of revolts against the slave owners, even though slavery was so common. However there is a logical explanation for this. Most of the slaves in Athens were 'barbarians' after it became illegal for Athenians to be enslaved in Athens after solon's reforms. The 'barbarians' were from many different areas such as Thrace, South Russia, Egypt and Sicily, this meant they often shared no common language or culture and were thus unable to organise an uprising.
In some ways slaves in fifth century Athens were considered less human than the free people. As Aristotle states " the polarity between 'slave' and 'free' seemed as natural a way of dividing up the human race as those between men and women or young and old". Aristotle sums up the attitude of fifth century Athens well as the opposite to free was considered to be slavery, rather than imprisonment as in our modern society. There were many ways in which slaves were dehumanised. They are referred to as 'property' and compared to 'wild beasts', suggesting that they are a lower life form than the free men. Slaves were also prevented from doing what is natural such as forming relationships and having children, this put them lower than the rest of society. Slaves were also not allowed to give evidence at a lawsuit unless it was extracted while under torture, and many dehumanising devices were used such as referring to adult male slaves a 'boy'. However, some Athenians would have seen slaves as human as shown in Xenophon "Slaves have no less need of something good to hope for than do free men". This shows an acknowledge meant that slaves have the same hopes as all other people rather than not being able to think like suggested by others such as Aristotle when he brands slaves as incapable of all independent reasoning. I believe that Demosthenes sums up the reality for slaves when he states that "the greatest difference between the slave and the free man is that the former is answerable with his body for all offences".
Slaves are often presented in comedy, particularly by play writers such as Aristophanes who uses frequent comic characterisations of slaves. The slaves in the many plays set in fifth century Athens can hardly be said to give accurate descriptions of how slaves were treated at the time due to the fact that it is a comedy, designed to make an audience of the time laugh rather than a documentary. The slaves that Aristophanes presents are developed from the true slave of the time, but certain features have been exaggerated. The Aristophanic play 'frogs' gives us many situations with slaves such as when the slave offers his master, who he is changed clothes with, up for torture. This shows us that torture was probably not commonly used. There is another scene in 'frogs' in which two slaves talk about how they curse their master behind his back as well as pry and eavesdrop. Slaves probably did engage in these activities but it was probably more exaggerated in the play.
Overall I believe that slaves were not treated as humans. Although there were limited laws in place to protect the rights of slave, these were only useful if the slaves master or another citizen was willing to file a lawsuit, and slaves were often not deemed important enough to go to the trouble. The power the masters had over the slaves and the various methods of dehumanisation further took away the character and the personality of a slave so that they were barely human. Although some slaves may have been treated well by their masters, the masters had two much power over their slaves, and society too many restrictions to allow slaves to live as proper humans.