For years, linguists and sociologists have been researching the linguistic variables that are related to the sociological characteristics of speakers of language and what makes them varied. This is important because it implies that there are different factors that affect the way people speak, and that there is a variety of language used among people in society. In this essay, I intend to look at different social variables of gender and class, such as geographical factors and different language use, to try and find out if they have an effect on the way people speak. Also, if there is linguistic variation between gender and class.
Gender refers to the social, cultural and psychological differences that occur between men and women. It should not be confused with sex, which is associated with the biological and anatomical differences between men and women.
In 1975, Robin Lakoff carried out a study that looked at gender differences in the context of the courtroom and at how women spoke differently compared to men. There are certain features which women use. Women use speech such as hedges, which consist of not saying anything definite such as 'sort of', polite speech, tag questions, such as, he was there wasn't he?' and special lexicons. It therefore suggests that women do use different speech styles to men. Lakoff believed that women's language is related to power and that women use 'powerless language'. Powerlessness relates to a less social status. From analysing conversations in court, it was found that women did use more powerless language then men. The social status is in the context of occupations and it is therefore the social norm and culture that more women tend to use this type of language. However, powerful and powerless language does interact.
The main social variable for gender is speech styles. A study was carried out looking at the speech of African American men and women in different social classes (Trudgill, 2000:71). It was found that a higher percentage of women in all social classes used a non-prevocalic feature of speech than men. 90% of upper middle class women use this feature, whereas only 66.7% of men used this. In the lower working class, 31.5% of women used this feature of speech compared to 25% of men. Initially the explanation for these results was put down to the women of families being the main breadwinner and therefore had to use proper language when looking for work. However, the same results were found in white groups in England so therefore this explanation was inaccurate. Even in non-Western societies, where the American Indian language, Koasati is spoken, women still use conservative speech and better forms of language than men. Therefore, the main reason why women use better forms of speech is due to wanting to gain prestige. Women do not always have as much social power as men, therefore they want to gain power through developing a strong social identity. It has also been suggested by Elizabeth Gordon that the reason for this is due to women's role in society being seen as proper and therefore women use prestigious language so as not to be thought of as sexually promiscuous (Trudgill, 2000:73).
One question in the topic of different gender speech styles is who gives most compliments. In New Zealand, it was found that women gave 68% of compliments but received 74%, whereas men received only 26% of compliments. The same results were found in studies undertaken in other countries such as America (Holmes, 1986). The majority of people pay compliments to people who are similar to them. Conversely, it is also likely that men pay more compliments to women due to them being less powerful and making them easier to control. It is likely that people who are more powerful will not receive compliments, therefore complimenting maybe a form of subordinating women into a less powerful position in society. However, this is a strong feminist approach and could therefore be seen as biased.
As we have already seen, women tend to use Standard English more than men. The next points to look at are the social variables that affect language in class.
In the United Kingdom, it is believed that speakers in the highest social class use Standard English. This type of language is grammatically correct, logical and expressive. Whereas, non-standard English is linked with lower classes. This type of language is illogical and ungrammatical (Trask, 2004).
Standard English tends to have an - s at the end of verbs, and due to this being associated with higher social classes, it was assumed that there could be a link between the usage of - s at the end of verbs and the social classes that use this (Trudgill, 2000). For example, 'it goes ever so fast', rather than 'it go ever so fast'. Recordings of different social classes speaking were taken and the - s usage was counted. It was found that more speakers in lower social classes had a higher rate of not using - s at the end of verbs, whereas, higher social classes did use more - s.
In 2002, Ronald Macaulay carried out a study to examine different speech styles between two social classes and between adults and adolescents. Interviews were carried out and were later transcribed with a sample from a town in Scotland called Ayr. The sample consisted of six middle class and six lower class speakers. The speakers were put into the social classes depending on their education, occupation and geographical residence. With the two age groups, the adolescents were aged between 13-14 years and the adults were aged forty years and above. An equal number of men and women were in each group. Macaulay found that adult middle class speakers used more adverbs ending in - ly twice as often than the lower class speakers. For example, the frequency for the lower class using the word 'really' was 0.79, whereas the frequency for this in the middle class was 2.08. With regards to the adolescent group, the middle class group used adverbs in - ly with a frequency of 8.4, whereas lower class used adverbs with a frequency of 3.9. This therefore suggests that middle class use more adjectives, i.e., more refined speech than the lower class. It can also be seen from the results that the social class difference is found amongst both the adult and adolescent age groups. With regard to gender, middle class boys used a higher frequency of adjectives (8.8) than middle class girls (8.1) and lower class girls (3.7). Lower class boys also used a higher frequency of adjectives (3.9) than lower class girls. However, this difference could be due to the lower class adolescents wanting to use a more elaborate way of speaking to impress Macaulay.
From looking at the different variables in gender and social class, it can be seen that there is a link between females and higher social classes using Standard English. As I have found in previous studies, women use a higher frequency of Standard English than men. The most likely reason for this is aiming to gain status. Women in some respects are still seen as second rate to men. Men therefore do not necessarily need to use Standard English because their prestige will always be there. For women however, one of the main ways to receive prestige and to try and maintain this is to be seen as having a strong social status. With relation to social class, higher social classes have always been seen as the better class and who appear to be well educated. Therefore, they use language as a way of maintaining social status and due to having more power than lower classes, are able to control which speech styles are viewed as better than others.
In a study carried out by William Labov, one of his findings brought up another valid point. He found that women in the lower middle classes are more concerned with avoiding being stigmatised and prefer using Standard English to gain prestige. This is likely to be due to them being at the bottom of their social group and do not wish to be stereotyped into being seen as having no social upholding. Therefore, the link between gender and social class has been broadened to females in upper social classes and lower middle class. However, it is important to consider that class is not fixed, for example, a woman may have been born into a low social class, but marry a man from a high social class and would therefore have to take his class position.
Overall it could be argued that men have a higher social status than women due to using better forms of language. However, from examining research into this it was found that it is women who use better forms of language, in particular from higher social class groups and from lower middle classes. The main reason being to gain prestige and not to be stigmatised due to the social class they originate from. Also, social class is fluid and does not always stay the same.