According to Kennedy, (1998:1), '...a corpus is a body of written text or transcribed speech which can serve as a basis for linguistic analysis and description.' The corpus I have selected to examine consists of a number of speeches by British politicians. The linguistic feature I will pay particular attention to is their use of first person singular (FS) pronouns and first person plural (FP) pronouns within these speeches. The pronouns I intend to focus on can be grouped as shown below:
I aim to find out the frequency of these pronouns within the selected political speeches and compare the order of frequency to the order of frequency in a larger corpus, such as The Brown Corpus or British National Corpus (BNC). This way it may become clear as to whether the way in which politicians use the pronouns above is more representative of the population, and not unique to this particular group of people.
Therefore, by looking at the relationship between the frequency of the linguistic variables (FS and FP pronouns) there is consideration for any patterns the variables form and not just the frequency of the linguistic variable. (i.e. "our" is used more frequently than "my" in BNC, but not within the political speeches). This is a principle of corpus linguistics as researchers in this field are generally 'interested in what probable patterns are likely to emerge in language use, not only what is possible,' (Kennedy, 1998:8).
Based on the information obtained from my literature review I made the following hypotheses:
I hypothesized that FP pronouns will have a higher frequency than FS pronouns within the corpus which consists of the political speeches. I also hypothesise that the opposite will be true for these linguistic variables concerning the larger corpus.
I hypothesized that the FP pronoun 'we' will exceed the amount of instances in which FS pronoun 'I' appears in the politician's speeches.
Concordancing programs are effective in the sense that they can quickly and accurately calculate frequency lists for various amounts of corpus. In order to calculate the frequencies of the different pronouns in the political speeches it is necessary to download a concordancer program. I chose 'Concapp Concordance and Word Profiler for Windows Operating Systems.'
The next step was to obtain the right data or text. In order for the concordancer to be able to construct a word/frequency list, the data I collect must be in electronic form. This way, it is possible to save the web page to my N: drive as a text file, making the document format compatible to the program. Using electronic corpora also meant I could use as many texts as I wished in order to build up the number of words as stated in (Kennedy, 1998:3); 'electronic corpora can consist of whole texts or collections of whole texts.'
I obtained the data from The Guardian newspaper website, which listed a number of speeches by British politicians from as recent as the past week, dating moths back. Using these speeches would allow me to use up - to-date text. After clicking on the web link to access the speech, I would click to see the speech in print form. At this point it is best to save the webpage as a text file in your N: drive. I created a new folder for my speeches and called them "Politicians' speeches." I repeated the saving procedure for each speech and tested the word counts of the documents I had saved so far by constructing wordlists every now and then in Concapp. I did this by opening the program, selecting the "Statistics" menu and then "Unique Words," followed by "Directory." The "Politicians' speeches" folder will then pop up as another window, at which point I clicked on the "Select all matching files." This then led to a "Unique Words View" window appearing which lists the most frequent words, and informs you of how many words were in the file. The speeches totaled 18,573 words altogether. I then clicked on "Frequency Sort" which puts the list of words into order of what appears the most to what appears the least. I located my chosen pronouns within this list and wrote down their frequency.
In order to make a comparison I decided to use BNC spoken corpus, an option included in the Brown Corpus. The Brown Corpus, originally called 'Brown University Standard Corpus of Present-Day American English' (Francis & Kuera, 1964), has been labeled as one of the 'first generation corpora' (Kennedy, 1998:3). I input each pronoun and altered the amount of lines to 25,000. I then clicked on "Search for concordances" which gave me the number of instance the corpus had of that pronoun. I did this with each pronoun and again, wrote down the figure given for each number.
In order to show a comparison between the two sets of figures I had obtained, I thought it would be best to put each set within a bar chart and observe the similarities and differences. However, I was aware that the sets of figures I had gathered would be significantly different, due to the fact that they are from different sources - one corpus with a much larger word count than the other. Despite this, the nature of my question meant I was only interested in the patterning of the appearance of the pronouns, not the individual amounts.
I constructed these bar charts using Microsoft Office Excel.
Initial observation of the graphs proves my hypotheses to be accurate. My first hypothesis that the speeches will incorporate more usage of FP pronouns is evident in Fig.1. This is shown where "I" is the most popular FS pronoun, yet, within its category of subject pronouns, it has the lower frequency. It is a noticeable trend within Fig. 1 that all the FS pronouns have appeared less frequently than their FP counterparts.
The opposite is true for Fig. 1 which shows the results for the BNC Spoken corpus. Within the BNC corpus, frequencies of the FS pronouns exceed those of their FP pronoun counterparts. For example, "I" is occurred more than "we," and out of the object pronouns, FS "me" had a higher frequency. The FS pronoun "my" also had the greater frequency out of the possessive pronouns.
Thus from my results I can conclude that there is a contrast between which pronouns were used more frequently in the speeches, compared to the those used more frequently within the BNC Spoken corpus.
The research by Leech (2001) and Fairclough (2000) do support my findings. (i.e. In a broader spoken corpus, expect higher frequencies of FS pronouns than within politicians' language). However, a conclusion like this cannot be applied to all larger spoken corpora, as various corpus focus on different varieties of language. For example, investigating the appearance of FS/FP pronouns within 'Australian Corpus of English,' (Kennedy, 1998:29), would not prove to be useful for what I am researching. Thus, which corpus I used was important in defining the reliability of my results.
With further reference to reliability it would appear that even though I used a Spoken corpus which only used British English, there were examples of informal, casual and unplanned speech. More reliable results would have been achieved using corpora which just consisted of speeches. This would have provided a better and more realistic comparison.
Nevertheless, the methodology used in order to obtain my data was simple and easy to do. I think this is due to the fact that the required equipment consisted of a computer, internet access and various computer programs. Reasearch using corpus has been benefited by technology as Kennedy, (1998:5), says, 'Corpus linguistics is thus now inextricably linked to the computer, which has introduced incredible speed, total accountability, accurate replicability, statistical reliability and the ability to handle huge amounts of data.'