The English Noun Phrase (NP) is a constituent which can function as a number of elements in a larger construction called a clause. Berk (1999:55) highlights these functions as 'subjects, direct objects, indirect objects, subject complements, and object complements...object of prepositions...' Example (1) below illustrates an NP which functions as the subject within a clause.
(1)
The NP, highlighted in italics, is the subject of the monotransitive main verb hated. The noun man can be identified as the 'head' or 'central element,' (Berk, 1999:57), which symbolizes an entity or thing (Lock, 1996). For this reason, the terms 'noun' and 'head' will be used interchangeably when referring to NP's. Without a noun, an NP cannot exist, thus it can be argued that the noun selects the modifiers to be included within an NP, (Berk, 1999). For example, in (1) above, the central definite determiner the, pre-modifies the noun man. According to Berk (1999), determiners are the most common type of noun modifier in the English language and are usually required for grammatically correct NP's. This rule applies to example (1) which would be regarded grammatically incorrect with the absence of a determiner, as shown in example (2) below.
(2)
However, it is very possible for an NP to consist of just a noun, like single use of pronouns like I, we and she.
Nevertheless, when a determiner does pre-modify a noun, it cannot do so in any position or in any form as there are grammatical rules which prevent this. Thus, when using determiners there always has to be agreement within the NP. For example the indefinite article a is a central determiner which cannot pre-modify a plural noun within an NP, as shown below in (3), whereas the is a central definite determiner and can also pre-modify plural head nouns in (4).
(3)
(4)
Different types of determiners function in different environments, as shown above and do different things to the noun. For example, the indefinite article cannot usually precede non-count or mass nouns as shown in (5) below, but demonstrates that a 'referent cannot yet be identified as something known to the reader from anything that has been said previously in the text or from general knowledge,' (Downing and Locke, 2002:408). Thus, an NP like a cat is more suitable for this particular determiner.
(5)
However determiners are not the only part of speech which functions to pre-modify the head in a NP. Adjectives and other nouns can also fulfill this role (Quirke, 1985), but are different to determiners with regard to position or function within an NP. This notion will be examined in section (2). Section (3) will analyse the placement of central determiner combinations within NP's.
Pre-head Modifiers within an NP include a range of word classes and participles, (Quirke et al, 1985). In order to explore how determiners differ to other pre-head modifiers within an NP, there will be a comparative analysis between determiners and other parts of speech including adjectives, nouns and some participles in terms of the following:
Genitive, quantifying, demonstrative and interrogative determiners are all central determiners. Thus they precede any post-determiners, adjectives or nouns in an NP, and follow pre-determiners within an NP construction.
Each of these central determiners constitutes, 'a closed class of small function words,' (Berk, 1999:63), and modifies the noun differently:
A Quantifying determiner expresses quantity, and this is its 'sole function' (Berk, 1999:63). E.g. each, some, every.
An Interrogative determiner 'expresses specific/non-specific reference,' (Lecture 7). E.g. which, whose, what.
A Demonstrative determiner 'reflects a quality called diexis,' (Berk, 1999:61). E.g. that, those, these
A Genitive determiner expresses possession. E.g. my, hers, ours, Mary's.
These definitions will be later expanded through use of examples.
Within an NP there may be more than one central determiner pre-modifying the noun. This results in combinations of these determiners and, not unusually, there are particular rules which govern the sequence of these determiners. This is reflected in meaning of the sentence.
When Quantifying and Genitive determiners are combined to pre-modify the head in an NP, they form a 'partitive determiner construction,' (lecture 7). Partitive determiner constructions, also known as 'partitive selection,' (Downing and Locke, 2002:441) are marked by the use of preposition of, in NP constructions shown below:
(18)
In (18) the direct object NP is italicized. Within it, the determiners four of my, pre-modify the head children. The preposition of, indicates that the referent is from a 'selected set of class members,' (Downing and Locke, 2002:441). Or in other words, the noun children refers to an entire class of entities called 'children' and using the preposition of like it is in (18), means the speaker is referring to a selected group of this class. This is further supported by the use of Quantifying determiner four, which identifies the size of the selected group and Genitive determiner my, which identifies the referent as belonging to another entity (the subject NP, I).
Genitive and Quantifying determiners are not the only determiners which form partitive determiner structures when they combine to pre-modify a noun. Quantifying determiners can combine with Demonstrative determiners (19) and the trend continues as Demonstrative determiners can also combine with Interrogative determiners (20).
(19)
(20)
In (20) the Demonstrative determiner these refers to a particular set of within the class of 'books.' The Interrogative determiner which gives the NP a definite reference because it is a specific Interrogative determiner which can be used if the amount of possible noun referents is constrained, (i.e. when it is clear which options are available), (Berk, 1999). Thus the ways in which central determiners unite to modify a noun is very flexible once they incorporate of, otherwise the NP could become grammatically incorrect as shown in (21):
(21)
A demonstrated above, there are constraints to the ways in which combinations of the determiner types above may combine within the same NP. Thus, when Downing and Locke (2002:442) state that the preposition  of is 'obligatory when the noun referent is definite,' this can be seen as regulation within English grammar regarding the ways in which these determiners may be arranged.
It is possible to conclude that when determiners pre-modify the head of an NP, there are obligatory grammatical rules which mean they do so in a particular way depending on the type of determiner or the type of noun. English grammar handles combinations of determiners by application of grammatical rules like obligatory inclusion of preposition of for clusters of central determiners, and a general sequential rule taken from (Quirke, 1985). However, the requirement for agreement is applicable to other parts of speech which behave as pre-head modifiers. Yet, these parts of speech tend to have more flexibility in terms of what position they can be in when they modify the noun (adjectives), or can indeed be modified themselves (adjectives and nouns) by other pre-head modifiers (adjectives and adverbs). This can be explained by the fact that these various parts of speech each have different functions and roles within NP's.
Despite this, on observation of NP's, determiners are usually easy to identify and this is due to the restrictiveness of their position within the NP structure. This is often helpful as it would otherwise be difficult to distinguish a central quantifying determiner like each as belonging to a different subclass to many, which is a post-determiner. Thus observing the positioning of determiners in the NP makes these things clearer.