Language has been defined as ''the institution whereby humans interact'' (R.A.Hall, 1964), as a ''purely human'' form of communication (E.Sapir, 1921). In recent decades however, experiments have shown chimpanzees able to interact with humans through signs. But does this mean they possess language?
Popular opinion often thinks of language as a uniquely oral form of interaction, therefore impossible for a chimpanzee to acquire, due to it's lacking of a vocal tract. Most people tend to ignore the deaf, which make up a certain percentage of the population and for whom the development of language proves extremely difficult. It is for their sake that a non-oral form of language was developed: sign language. Moreover, conversely to common belief, it reflects all the complexity and richness of spoken language, even in its grammatical form. BSL (British Sign Language) and ASL (American Sign Language) are examples of this. In consequence, experiments were carried out teaching chimps sign language, to compare their ability of acquiring language with that of humans.
Washoe, for example, in the 1960s, was the first chimpanzee to undergo such an experiment. Allen and Beatrice Gardner, who introduced him into a group of adult ASL signers, carried this out. The results were encouraging: in 4 years he managed to acquire 132 signs. Strong similarities were observed with child language acquisition: in the general word meanings (mainly general nominals) and in the way he was able to put signs together to express small sets of meaning. This was done however at a much slower rate. Following this success, other experiments were took place declaring massive achievements in chimpanzees understanding (necessary to fulfil the interaction role of language) as well as production of sentences and even abstraction, which is considered as characteristic of human communication.
What Washoe and the other chimpanzees produced, although closer to language than anything else observed, still contains many differences. They may have succeeded in producing more than single word utterances, but these lack the complexity of the grammatical structure, characteristic of the human language. These are merely comparable to the utterances of a small child acquiring language. One must note that at this stage the child is said to be in the process of and not to have acquired language. Therefore how can we say that a chimpanzee, whose language is no more developed, has language?
Furthermore, these experiments present many weaknesses: their standards were very generous, the evidence is merely anecdotal and the reports were on a particular animal in a particular experiment, when language is something widespread. Consistent evidence, in more controlled conditions is needed for these experiments to be considered as scientifically substantial. Finally, the explanation of the observations is not clear; the lack of grammar suggests that it is simply a sophisticated imitation (which language is not) of what they observe humans doing.
It seems evident that chimpanzees can learn to imitate signs, put them into various sequences and use them in different contexts, but the explanation is unclear and more consistent results are necessary. What they have produced is also less complex and sophisticated than what healthy humans produce. It seems therefore fair to conclude that the communication gap, ability for language, between humans and animals is smaller than once believed, but still present.
Many have tried to divide child's language acquisition in to various stages in order to understand its development more clearly. Vocabulary learning is the first most noticeable sign of language acquisition. This may explain why the period of the first 50 words is often viewed as the first significant landmark in this development.
The period during which a child learns his/her first words appears to mark a change in the child's ability to communicate with language users. The child has moved on from simply babbling. The latter consists in the production of strings of sounds devoid of meaning. The first spoken words show that the child has learnt to control his/her vocal tract after the previous stage of experimentation.
After this same period, which may also be seen to coincide with the one-word stage (Trask, 1995), the rate at which a child acquires new vocabulary seems to increase more and more rapidly, as well as the length of his/her utterances; he/she moves on to the two-word stage, then three word stage, etc. (Trask, 1995). The progression through these stages also appears to accelerate.
The reason that 50 is the amount of words to characterise this period is simply because it appears to be approximately after this point the child generally experiences a 'word spurt'. An example of this change of pattern may be observed through the MacArthur Communicative Development Inventory (Fenson et al., 1993;1996). This experiment shows not only that child's production of new words increases more significantly after 50 words (at around 18 months), but that this is also the case for his/her understanding of vocabulary (earlier on: at approximately 12 months). By the age of 5 the child will have learned to say nearly 10000 words!
This 'word spurt' (Goldfield & Reznick, 1996) may be explained by multiple factors, which most probably occur during the first 50-word period, justifying its designation as a landmark further. Firstly, the acquisition of phonology takes place during this time. Moreover, this amount of vocabulary is the 'critical mass' necessary for the child to discover in word meanings and to connect words produced with ones he understands, his/her learning therefore becomes more efficient (Goldfield & Reznick, 1996) through increased precision of vocabulary.
One must note however, that due to the employers misunderstanding of the proper use and meanings of his/her first words (i.e. mismatches, overextensions, holophrasing...), some may not them as the being true language.
Finally, the first 50 words may also determine different backgrounds, reflecting the culture into which they were socialized. The more vocabulary is acquired the more differences level out (after an experiment by C. Stoel-Gammon & J.A Cooper, 1984).
Although the meanings of words and their roles in communication may differ from those of experienced language users and the amount of words constituting this landmark period are discussable, children's first words still mark an important change in communication ability, therefore an important step towards their acquisition of language.
Psycholinguists study the relationship between language and the brain, for example language processing. A lot of useful information regarding this subject is extracted from spontaneous speech. An example of this is 'slips of the tongue', which may reveal interesting patterns offering explanations on how ones mind constructs utterances.
Various types of speech errors exist and are considered natural since they are spontaneous and produced unconsciously. These errors can be produced at different levels, from single sounds to whole phrases. They can consist of moving around the different units through shifts or exchanges, or involve repetition such as anticipation or preservations. However, substitutions of whole words can also occur.
The 'tip of the tongue' phenomenon can lead to speech errors. In the effort to recall the required word, the individual goes through a series of mental processes, which may be reflected in 'slips of the tongue'. The speaker is likely to produce a word of a similar length, maybe even the correct number of syllables. Moreover similar sounding words are also likely to be confused, the middle of this word generally containing the error. This reflects how vocabulary is stored in one's mental lexicon and therefore the procedures used when searching for a word.
Furthermore, speech errors rarely seem to change the grammatical structure of a sentence, and words from closed classes, which mark this structure, such as prepositions and pronouns are rarely affected. What is more, when words are transposed, they are generally semantically related. The grammatical brain works in different stages; this seems to show that the structure must be laid out before the content. Once the structure is there the types of words are probably chosen (e.g.: nouns, adjectives...), before their meaning is considered.
However, when the grammatical sense of a sentence is not clear although it only contains real words one must consider a different explanation. This non-sense is often due to blending or exchanges, occurring between words or phrases. This is often due to anticipation or perseverance and shows that one does not construct ones sentences word by word, but phrase by phase or maybe even in larger groups. These errors are probably made because the individual is thinking about something else he/she said, or about to say in their utterance. On a smaller level, anticipations and perseverances on syllables or even sounds demonstrate the same kind of idea. Nevertheless, on all levels these are often the cause of repetitions.
Sometimes when errors are made words can be substituted with others. An example of this is a speaker who said "automatic transcription", when he intended to say " automatic transmission". These two sets of words appear to be linked through rhyme, have the same number of syllables and same sounds at the beginning and end of the words. This may be a reflection of how one organises vocabulary in their brain. However, since the meanings of these words are not linked, this phrase may simply show what the speaker was simultaneously thinking about while speaking.
A lot of this work on naturally occurring speech errors seems to depend on different individuals' personnel interpretations, since they the speaker produces these unconsciously and one rarely finds out, but may only guess what they really wanted to say. This is why it is only far to say that they provide a window to the understanding of language processes and not an explanation.