The diagram below shows the generalised amino acid:
It can be seen that apart from having an amino group (A terminus) and a carboxyl group (C terminus) the amino acid also has an 'R' group. It is this 'R' group which determines each amino acid and gives it specific characteristics such as charge. A term used to describe an amino acid with respect to it's charge is 'isoelectric point'. This is the pH at which the overall charge on the amino acid is neutral. As amino acids are the subunits of proteins, it is the charge of an amino acid which can determine the three dimensional structure of proteins by influencing the bonding which occurs. If adjacent amino acids are oppositely charged due to the differing properties of their 'R' groups, then electrostatic forces will occur and part of the three dimensional structure of the protein will be formed.
The differing charges of amino acids can also be used to identify amino acids in a protein using electrophoresis. This process allows amino acids to migrate towards either the anode or the cathode depending on their charge. Because the distance and direction each amino acid will migrate varies, the composition of the protein can be determined.
The methodologies I followed in order to carry out the two electrophoresis' and to calculate the pH values for each sample are described on pages eighteen and nineteen of part A of the laboratory manual. The only factor of our method that deviated from that set out in the handbook was that the volume of each buffer we prepared was 2.5ml rather than 5.0ml.
In order to determine the isoelectric point of casein we firstly had to create a series of buffers (acetic acid) ranging from 0.3M to 1mM. We did this by doubling dilutions. Firstly the initial concentration (0.3M) was created by mixing 1.5ml of 1M acetic acid with 3.5ml of distilled water. After ensuring that this solution was thoroughly mixed, we extracted 2.5ml into a second test tube and added 2.5ml of distilled water, therefore creating a buffer that had a concentration of 0.15M. The process was then repeated so that the following test tube had a concentration of 0.075M, then 0.375M etc. The full calculations used to create each buffer are shown in section one of the appendix.
Once the buffers had been prepared, 1ml aliquots of casein (dissolved in 0.1M sodium acetate) were added to each one. As a result the casein precipitated to varying degrees so that the precipitation was greatest in the buffer with the pH closest to the isoelectric point of casein.
In order to determine the isoelectric point of casein, the absorbance of each solution was determined using a spectrophotometer. Using a wavelength of 360nm and calibrating using distilled water between each reading, a sample from each of the test tubes was placed in separated cuvettes and the absorbance measured. The distilled water was used as a blank (i.e. it had an absorption of 0) to enable each of the readings to be relative to one another. The samples from test tubes two to five (in which the precipitation was the greatest) had to be diluted before the absorption was calculated as otherwise the values would have been too great. The dilutions were carried out by adding 1ml of the precipitated solution to 4ml of distilled water (i.e. a one in five dilution). The values for the absorption of these four samples were then multiplied by five to make them comparable with the rest of the data. The values for absorption are shown in the table in the results section on the next page.
(The calculations for pH are shown in section three of the appendix)
The graph above shows the relationship between the absorbance and the pH of the nine samples we tested (i.e. the nine different buffer concentrations each with 1ml of casein dissolved in 0.1M sodium acetate). The calculations for pH are shown in section three if the appendix. After adding the casein to each of the buffer solutions it was instantly visible that a precipitation had formed and that the degree of precipitation varied between the different concentrations of buffer solution used. It wasn't however until the absorbance of each sample had been determined that we were able to say which buffer had a pH closest to the isoelectric point of casein. The graph shows that the first buffer solution (0.3M) allowed some of the casein to dissolve leaving the precipitated molecules to produce an absorbency of 0.3. The absorbency then increased to 4.115 at a pH of 4.14 indicating that at this pH less of the casein was able to dissolve. There is then a decline in absorbency between pH 4.14 and 4.74 i.e. more of the casein was dissolving in the buffer solution. The peak in the graph at pH 5.04 indicates that out of the nine precipitate solutions we tested, sample five had a pH that was closest to the isoelectric point of casein. The reasoning behind this is that if we know that at it's isoelectric point casein has a net neutral charge, then it is unable to become dissolved in a solvent (i.e. the buffer solution). As a result the greatest degree of precipitation is formed and therefore this particular sample has the highest absorbance reading.
The graph shows that at pH values greater than 5.04 the absorbance decreases. This is due to the fact that as the pH increases there are less hydrogen ions in the buffer. At this point the pH is greater than the pK a (i.e. the pH at which fifty percent of the ionisable groups are charged) and the molecule looses protons to become negatively charged. It is this charge that enabled the casein molecules to partially dissolve in the buffer solution and hence produce a declining absorbency as less and less precipitate formed.
The electrophoretogram for haemoglobin and cytochrome c is shown in section four of the appendix. It shows that the mixture sample contained both haemoglobin and cytochrome c and that they were of opposite charges at pH 8.6 (the pH of the buffer-barbitone). By comparing to the charges indicated on the chromatography paper to the direction the haemoglobin and cytochrome c molecules moved, we can determine that at pH 8.6 the haemoglobin had a net negative charge and the cytochrome c had a net positive charge.
We can also compare the distances travelled by both samples in order to roughly determine the isoelectric point of each. As the haemoglobin sample moved only one and a half centimetres we can say that it was less affected by the electric field (i.e. it had a smaller potential difference) than cytochrome c, which moved by four centimetres. In other words, the isoelectric point of haemoglobin is closer to pH 8.6 than the isoelectric point of cytochrome c, so that in the experiment haemoglobin had a net charge nearer to neutral.
The aim of this experiment was to investigate isoelectric points of different molecules hence determining the isoelectric point of casein, haemoglobin and cytochrome c.
Firstly casein. The method we undertook in order to determine the isoelectric point of casein allowed us to use various techniques (the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation, doubling dilutions and spectrophotometry). Whilst the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation and the spectrophotometer were the best methods to determine the pH and the degree of precipitation of each sample, the process of doubling dilutions did not enable us to achieve as many different buffers within the given range (0.3M to 1mM) as were needed to accurately determine the isoelectric point of casein. This method could therefore be improved by determining the degree of precipitation at a greater number of pHs by preparing more buffer solutions. A second way in which the accuracy of this part of the investigation could be improved is by repeating the method at least four times for each different concentration of buffer. In this way the absorbance values could be averaged, ensuring that any anomalies were less prevalent and therefore making the overall results and conclusions more accurate.
Secondly haemoglobin and cytochrome c. Although the method of electrophoresis allowed us to determine the net charge of each molecule at pH 8.6 (i.e. the pH of the buffer), it did not allow us to accurately determine their isoelectric points and without any further investigation these values would not be completely accurate. The data we received from this method allows us to conclude that the isoelectric point of haemoglobin is approximately 8.6 minus half the difference between the pH of the buffer and the isoelectric point of cytochrome c (concluded by comparing the relative distances travelled by each molecule). In conclusion our results indicate that the isoelectric points of haemoglobin and cytochrome c are approximately 7.85 and 10.6 respectively. In order to increase the accuracy of these values, the method could be improved by the addition of marker molecules with known isoelectric points at pH 8.6. The comparison between the distance the marker molecules and haemoglobin and cytochrome c migrated could then be used to accurately determine the two unknown isoelectric points.
In summary, various methods can be used to identify the isoelectric points of different molecules.