The evolution of eukaryotic organelles such as mitochondria and chloroplast is a subject that has fascinated scientists for years. One of the most plausible theories that has been presented to explain this is the hydrogen hypothesis. This essay aims to give the evidence which supports this theory by arranging it into subheadings. The first is 'morphological features' that includes size, shape and membranes. Next the DNA is analysed, followed by RNA and it's homology to bacterial RNA. Organelle processes such as division and antibiotic resistance are then considered. Lastly organisms which resemble the original endosymbiont are mentioned along with other theories that contest the Endosymbiotic theory. The essay is concluded with the expectation that as more sequence data is obtained the evidence in support of the theory will be insurmountable.
Over the millions of years that life has evolved on Earth an enormous amount of diversity has been established. All these life forms, however, can be split into three distinct groups through the use of genetic sequencing techniques. The groups which we now recognise are the archae, the oldest organisms, followed by the prokaryotes and then the eukaryotes. The eukaryotes are the most distinctly different with the general view that they are more complex. Their main distinguishing feature is that they contain many intracellular organelles, or compartments. Two of these major compartments are the mitochondria, found in the majority of eukaryotes, and chloroplasts found in plants and algae. Over the years there has been much speculation over this split in evolution and many theories have been proposed to explain it (). One of these theories is the Endosymbiotic Theory that was developed and campaigned, mainly by Lynn Margulis in her book entitled 'Symbiosis in Cell Evolution' in 1981. The principle behind this theory is that mitochondria and chloroplasts originated as aerobic, or in the case of chloroplasts, photosynthetic prokaryotes that were incorporated into a larger prokaryote. Over time the two cells became interdependent until they were obligate symbionts. Incorporation of the symbiont into the host is likely to have been the outcome of phagocyctosis of prey or infectious agent which was consequently not digested and led to symbiosis between the cells (Margulis, 1993). This residency would have been beneficial to the bacteria providing it with protection and nutrition. In return the eukaryote would have received energy in the form of the proton motive force. It is worth mentioning here that the theory of Lynn Margulis also proposed in her book that undulipodia originated from spirochete bacteria (Margulis, 1993) however, during this essay the merits of this aspect of the theory will not be examined. This essay shall, instead, address the issue of evidence that is present in support of the origin of mitochondria and chloroplasts.
Mitochondria are the site of aerobic respiration in eukaryotic cells. They are normally oval-shaped organelles with a length of approximately 2m and a diameter of 0.5m (Berg, 2003). Notably, this is a similar size to the average prokaryote. Chloroplasts are significantly larger than mitochondria.
It was discovered by Palade and Sjostrand (as cited by Danks, 1978) that mitochondria and chloroplasts are surrounded by a double membrane which controls the passage of particles into and out of the cell. The outer membrane is relatively permeable to these particles and has a similar composition to eukaryotic cell membranes but the inner membrane is far less permeable and has similarities to the membranes found surrounding prokaryotes. This phenomenon can be explained by the endosymbiosis theory as is demonstrated in Figure 1.
The inner membrane of mitochondria is folded into protrusions into the middle of the cell called cristae. These cristae appear similar to the mesosome found inside a prokaryotic cell. There are not only similarities in the appearance of these, but both are the site of oxidative phosphorylation.
Chloroplasts are different in this respect as they contain thylakoids whose membrane is separate from the inner membrane surrounding the organelle. Comparisons to photosynthesising prokaryotes such as cyanobacteria show that these also contain thylakoids or similar structures as well as some of the same chlorophyll pigments as found in chloroplasts.
A striking piece of evidence which intrigued many scientists into researching the origin of eukaryotic organelles is the presence of DNA within the organelles. Both mitochondria and chloroplasts contain their own DNA which is found in circular form. In the nuclear DNA of eukaryotes the genome is arranged linearly in sections called chromosomes. Prokaryotes, however, have their DNA in a circular form, the same as mitochondria and chloroplasts.
There are also significant differences in the sizes of the genomes. Eukaryotic genomes are typically large with human DNA being 3 x 10 9 bp. Prokaryote genomes are much smaller and the mitochondria and chloroplast DNA follow this trend. Human mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) has a mere 16,569 bp (Madigan, 2003) although this may partly be due to transference to nuclear DNA and an increased dependency for the nuclear DNA to encode products required by the mitochondria, as discussed later in this essay.
It is also noticed that DNA found in mitochondria and chloroplasts is 'naked'. In the nucleus DNA is associated with proteins called histones. The DNA is wound tightly around these histones allowing supercoiling to occur. Although prokaryotic DNA is associated with a few proteins and some supercoiling does occur it is not to the same extend as in the nucleus and different proteins are involved. MtDNA and chloroplast DNA (ctDNA) is not associated with histones and is very similar to prokaryotic DNA.
Normal eukaryotic cells contain two copies of any one chromosome. In prokaryotes however, it is common to have multiple copies of a genome. These may be complete or there are likely to be parts of the genome located on pieces of DNA called plasmids. Mitochondria and Chloroplasts both contain multiple copies of their DNA. The number of copies present varies depending on the type of mitochondria and size of genome but may reach up to 40 copies (Lewin, 2000)
In recent years there have been great advances in genetic sequencing that has allowed us a far greater understanding of genomes. Through this we know that the human mitochondrial genome contains 13 genes that encode respiratory-chain proteins as well as 22 transfer RNAs, 2 ribosomal RNAs and cytochrome b (Lewin, 2000). Chloroplast DNA, however encodes far more genes. These include 45 RNA genes, 27 proteins required for gene expression, 18 thylakoid proteins, 10 proteins for the respiratory chain as well as 30 genes that are still yet to be characterised (Lewin, 2000). The amount of genes encoded by mtDNA varies greatly with mitochondrial genomes of some species being up to 5 times larger than that of Plasmodium faliciparum whose genome only encodes 4 main genes (Berg, 2002). The sequence of ctDNA from different species is highly conserved and the genes present are nearly always identical. Figure 2 shows a map of the human mitochondrial genome.
Analysis of the genetic composition of the DNA also leads to important evidence in support of the endosymbiotic theory. Eukaryotic DNA is not continuous, that is, coding regions are interrupted by non-coding regions called introns. These regions are then later removed before translation. Analysis of prokaryotic DNA reveals that it does not contain these introns or where it is present it is not to the same extent as in nuclear DNA. There is a theory which suggests that these introns used to exist in all cells but during evolution they have been removed from the prokaryotes. This would help to explain why some mitochondria and chloroplasts contain a few introns while others contain none. Some fungi, such as Aspergillus and Neurospora, contain introns at the same place as mitochondria suggesting that they have a common ancestor.
It has been shown by genetic sequencing that genes which encode mitochondrial proteins are present on the nuclear DNA. It is thought that these genes have been transferred to the nuclear DNA during evolution. The genes found on most mtDNA are no longer sufficient for the mitochondria to survive without the nuclear encoded genes. For example, in chloroplasts rubisco is made from two subunits, one of which is encoded by the ctDNA while the coding for the smaller subunit is found in nuclear DNA. In order for these genes, which are transcribed in the cytosol, to reach the appropriate place in mitochondria and chloroplasts they need to have specific sequences attached. This sequence is added to the N-terminus and is then later removed. The current nuclear and mitochondrial genomes are stable with no more transference taking place. It is believed that all genes would have been transferred but a change in the sequencing prevented this. Due to logistics such as adding an extra sequence at the end of the gene transference is a rare event (Alberts, 2002). It is thought that transfer was able to occur previously as the compartments were less rigidly defined. More recently non-coding regions or introns that have remarkable homology to bacterial DNA have been found in nuclear DNA as so called 'junk DNA'.
Genetic sequencing of the genomes has revealed a remarkable homology between mtDNA, ctDNA and bacterial genomes. For example, the genes that code for the four subunits (, , ', and ) of RNA polymerase in chloroplasts is highly homologous to the genes for the subunits in Escherichia coli (Lodish, 2004). Mitochondria also contain this enzyme which is, again, highly homologous to the bacterial equivalent, however, in mitochondria, it is encoded by nuclear DNA and then must be moved to the mitochondria as previously discussed. In S.cerevisia the mitochondrial RNA polymerase has two subunits, one large, one small. The large subunit has polymerising activity and is clearly related to the monomeric RNA polymerases of bacteriophage T7. The small subunit is the specificity factor that recognises the start codons on the DNA. It is highly homologous to the  factor in bacterial RNA polymerases. It is therefore believed that the mitochondrial RNA polymerase is a hybrid of these two subunits (Lodish, 2004). There are also many other genes and proteins that have sequences very similar to those on bacteria.
Analysis of the genetic code used by mitochondria also reveals that 4 of the 64 codons have a different meaning in mitochondria than they do in the nucleus. This is illustrated in Figure 3. From this figure it can be seen that in plant mtDNA the codons have the same meaning as they do in the nucleus.
It should also be noted that mitochondria and chloroplast use their own transcription and translation components. All the ribosomes used by them are specifically for their use and can not be used for the processing of RNA of nuclear origin. In eukaryotes ribosomes are normally 80S, that is, they contain one small 40S subunit and a larger 50S subunit. Prokaryotes, however, normally contain smaller ribosomes which are 70S in size. Ribosomal RNA sequencing techniques have shown that the ribosomes of mitochondria and chloroplasts are highly homologous to the ribosomes of bacteria and a comparison of the sequences allows molecular phylogeny to be established. Other examples of how two proteins with the same function are made in two conformations, one for the organelles and one for the cell, can be given such as superoxide dimutase in chickens. The amino acid sequence of the enzyme superoxide dimutase more closely resembles that of bacteria than the equivalent enzyme in the cytosol of the cell (Alberts, 2002).
Also observed is that mitochondria use N-formylmethionyl-tRNA as the initiator of protein synthesis as do bacterial cells. Nuclear DNA however, uses methionyl-tRNA as the initiating aminoacyl-tRNA (Danks, 1978)
Mitochondria, chloroplasts and bacteria all use chemiosmotic coupling to produce ATP, the universal energy form used in cells. During oxidative phosphorylation a proton gradient concentration and electric potential across a membrane produce the proton motive force. The main membrane protein involved in this process is ATPase, or the F 0F 1 complex. This protein is the same in both organelles and bacteria. Moreover it is present in the same direction, always pumping protons from the cytosolic face to exoplasmic face as is shown in Figure 4. There is also significance in that they all use the same electron carriers.
Despite having different ribosomes and having their own DNA there is also other evidence to suggest that mitochondria and chloroplasts evolved from prokaryotes.
Firstly mitochondria do not replicate along with the cell, it is not coupled to nuclear division. Instead, they replicate through binary fission as depicted in Figure 5. This was best illustrated by Manton (Danks, 1978) who showed that a single mitochondrion in the unicellular flagellate Chromulina was replicated during interphase. Other experiments such as that by Luck (Danks, 1978) demonstrated that rather than being a completely new organelle the mitochondria present were formed by the gradual incorporation of new proteins and lipids and then division of an existing organelle. An experiment with Euglena showed that when chemicals or a lack of light killed the mitochondria they didn't regenerate proving that they must exist before new ones can be made. As such there are often multiple copies of mitochondria in a cell, varying between 20 to over 100 in animals (Lewin, 2000) depending on the type of cell. They are also not split equally between cells when they divide at mitosis and so one cell may inherit all maternal mitochondria.
The effects of antibiotics on cells vary depending on whether is it prokaryotic or eukaryotic as they have specificity for the functioning of their ribosomes in protein synthesis. Since mitochondria have 70S ribosomes they are affected by the same antibiotics as bacterial cells but they are not affected by antibiotics that effect eukaryotic cells. Such antibiotics that effect mitochondria are: chloramphenicol, streptomycin, rifampicin and erythromycin, and others that have no effect are: cycloheximide, dipheria toxins, and emetine, these do however, affect the protein synthesising abilities of nuclear DNA.
Hydrogenosomes are another respiratory organelle, found instead of mitochondria in obligate or aerotolerant anaerobes. It is the same size but does not contain cristae or the enzymes necessary for the citric acid cycle. It thought to enable a fermentative metabolism in microbial eukaryotes such as Trichomonas. Some eukaryotes that are anaerobic and hence contain hydrogenosomes also contain symbiotic, hydrogen consuming, prokaryotic cells, such as methanogens, in their cytoplasm. This demonstrates the possibility for a prokaryote to become stably incorporated into a eukaryote (Madigan, 2003). It has also been found that hydrogenosomes contain their own DNA and ribosomes and hence are believed to be the results of endosymbiosis of Clostridium.
There are many modern-day organisms which also support the endosymbiotic hypothesis. For example, diplomonads are a type of amitochondriate eukaryote which contains bacterial genes in its nuclei. This suggests that is used to have an endosymbiont that was later discarded (Madigan, 2003). Also, there are many ciliated protozoans that are hosts for endosymbiotic bacteria. Research done by Jeon () with amoeba's shows that it is possible for a symbiotic relationship to be set up where both the symbiont and the amoeba die if they are later separated.
Margulis suggests that a  purple-photosynthetic bacterial such as Daptobacter or Bdellovibrio (as cited by ) were the original endosymbiont and that the original host cell was an archaebacterium similar to today's Thermoplasm.
Figure 6 shows a suggested evolutionary pathway for mitochondria. Present day anaerobic protozoans such as Microsporidia and Giardia are now thought to be the likely host cells that accepted the endosymbiont due to comparisons of their rRNA sequence.
It is believed the current bacterium that is the closest relative to mitochondria is Rickettsia prowazekii, the cause of louse-borne typhus. This species has the closest homology with the mitochondrial genome. Analysis of the Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Multi-enzyme Complex also shows a similarity between R. prowazekii and mitochondria as they both have a dodecahedral conformation (Voet, 2004)
It was thought that the ancestors of chloroplasts are the cyanobacteria but recents studies suggest that chloroplasts have a common ancestor with prochlorophtes as these contain the pigments chlorophyll a and b. An oxygenic photroph, prochloron, is also found as a symbiont in marine invertebrates (Madigan, 2003).
There are other opposing theories which disagree with the endosymbiotic theory. Two of these main theories are the Hydrogen theory and the Synthrophic
theory. The Hydrogen hypothesis was developed by Martin and Muller who believe endosymbiosis to be the result of a purposeful union between archaebacterium and methanogens (). The Synthrophic theory was developed by Lopez-Garcia and Moreira in 1995). It compliments the hydrogen hypothesis but believes the original symbionts were methanogenic archaebacterium and ancestral sulfate-respiring delta-proteobacterium. These hypotheses however, can not be validated due to a lack of research. Conflicts in evolutionary timing also make these possibilities less plausible.
Through the analysis of evidence for the endosymbiotic theory it is obvious that there is a wealth of reasons to believe that mitochondria and chloroplasts evolved from the incorporation of a small aerobic or photosynthesising prokaryote inside a larger host cell. The most profound of this evidence is that they contain their own specific translation and transcription machinery which can not be used by the cell but has remarkable homology to the machinery of prokaryotes. There are also many other aspects which support the endosymbiosis theory that have been detailed in this essay such as replication through fission, and the response of mitochondria to antibiotics. All this evidence apparently provides a very convincing argument for the endosymbiosis theory but yet there are still questions left unanswered and mysteries that this hypothesis does not answer completely. Despite this, the endosymbiosis theory is now widely accepted by scientists for the evolution of mitochondria and chloroplasts and with new evidence, such as sequence data and experiments with amoebas, being presented the case to support the theory grows.