The Peloponnesian War had a large variety of effects on Athenian society, which I have split into five very generalised groups. First of all I will look at the direct economic effects of the war, and show how these caused Athens problems. Then I will move onto the socio-political effects of the war, and examine how the conduct of politics and fear of revolution split Athenian society. Because religion and politics were not mutually exclusive I will move from the effect of the war on politics to its effect on Athenian religion, and discuss the decreased tolerance of impiety and introduction of new gods. I will then show how these effects of the war affected the works of poets such as Aristophanes and Euripides, before moving on to look at how Athenian society changed in the aftermath of the Peloponnesian War due to wartime events.
To begin with then, I will look at the economic effects of the war on Athens. Because of the cost of funding the war, Athens' resources began to dry up, and the city was forced to look for new sources of income. One method that was used was the introduction of a new tax of 5% on imports (Thuc. 7.28), yet this was not enough. Therefore Athens became increasingly dependent on the tribute it received from its allies, since it was this that enabled her to continue fighting, and thus any opportunity for economic gain was taken. An example of this is the Melian dialogue (Thuc. 5.84-118), where Athens attempted to coerce the Melians into becoming allies of Athens, giving the reason that "you, by giving in, would save yourself from disaster; we, by not destroying you, would be able to profit from you" (Thuc. 5.93). Therefore we can see that the Peloponnesian War placed a heavy burden on the Athenian economy, which led to Athens' increasingly brutal treatment of its allies in order to secure their tribute payments.
The economic effects of the war were also directly felt by the Athenian population. Aristophanes referred to rising prices in Athens in a line from The Frogs, where Dionysus, upon being told to pay the ferryman's fare, remarks that it is "amazing what you can get for two obels these days" (Ar. Frogs pp. 161). The ferryman's fare was traditionally one obel, so we can see this quote as a reflection of how prices were increasing in Athens during the war. This was because Athens had to increasingly rely on imports due to the occupation of her land by Sparta (Thuc. 7.28), which had decreased the supply of produce to the city. The effect of this was intensified since "the mass of the people had had little enough to start with and had now been deprived of even that; the richer classes had lost their fine estates" (Thuc. 2.65). Therefore the economic gap between the Athenian rich and poor became larger.
The large gap between the rich and poor in turn caused the war to have political effects on Athens. Osbourne has pointed out that "long invasions created internal pressures, partly because they did not affect all those alike... and partly because in a city under siege there was considerable scope for treacherous action and suspicion of treachery" (Osbourne 1987: 142). As time went on and the gap between rich and poor widened, political tensions developed between the two groups, with the poor backing a democracy while many of the rich favoured an oligarchy. Thucydides remarked that "society had become divided into two ideologically hostile camps, and each side viewed the other with suspicion" (Thuc. 3.83). Austin has provided evidence for this split by pointing out that the revolution of the Thirty was mainly backed by wealthy citizens (Austin 1980: 140). Therefore, although this division between democracy and oligarchy had existed before the war, we can see that the Peloponnesian War helped to intensify the split between the two groups and create a divided city.
The split between democrats and oligarchs was did not stay as a purely ideological conflict, since it was to lead to real consequences. Thucydides tells us that many Athenians feared a revolution which would overthrow the democracy, and thus "they were consequently always in a state of fear and apt to look at everything suspiciously" (Thuc. 6.53). This led to politicians accusing those who stood in their way to the top of plotting to overthrow the democracy in order to stir up public opinion against them. For example, Thucydides tells us that Alcibiades was accused of mutilating the Hermae in Athens because his political enemies were able to use this as evidence of a plot to overthrow the democracy (Thuc. 6.28), and were so successful that Alcibiades was forced to abandon the city (Thuc. 6.61). Another example that shows how the Peloponnesian War created an atmosphere of fear in Athens is the trial of Socrates. Guthrie has argued that Socrates was tried due to his connections with the oligarchic Thirty, and thus the restored democrats "could not feel safe until he was out of the way" (Guthrie 1969: 381). Therefore we can see that the Peloponnesian War caused Athens to become a suspicious, politically divided society in fear of revolution.
The trial of Socrates can also be used to show the effect the Peloponnesian War had on religion in Athens. Guthrie says that the charge brought against Socrates, that of impiety, was not just a simple cover for political motives but actually carried some weight of its own. For example, his links with Critias (an atheist) and Alcibiades (who was suspected of sacrilege in regard to the Hermae mentioned above) were good grounds for a case of impiety in the court (Guthrie 1969: 383). Dodds makes a valid claim that the reason for this new intolerant attitude to impiety can be put down to war hysteria, because "to offend the gods... was risky enough in peacetime; but in war it was practically treason - it amounted to helping the enemy" (Dodds 1951: 191). Dodds also mentions that other notable intellectuals, such as Diagoras, Anaxagoras and possibly Euripides, were also prosecuted for religious offences during the war for their progressive views (Dodds 1951: 189). In my opinion this was because Athenians feared that impious behaviour by individuals would cause the city to lose the gods' favour, which would in turn lead to defeat. Therefore an intolerant attitude was shown to people whose impiety had previously been allowed.
The Peloponnesian War also indirectly gave a boost to Athenian religion through the plague. The population density of Athens was greatly increased due to people moving from the countryside and taking protection inside the city, and this in turn was partly responsible for the spread of the plague that occurred in 430 BC. Parker has argue that "in a sense the plague strengthened the faith of the Athenians, if it is right to see, for instance, the purification of Delos and the introduction of Asclepius as responses to it" (Parker 1996: 200). Asclepius was a healing god who originated in Epidaurus. Before the plague he was a minor deity who was not a part of Athenian religion, yet after the plague he became a major figure of worship and was adopted into Athenian religion. Therefore we can see that, because of the intensity of the plague that was due to the Peloponnesian War, Athenian society turned to a new god, thus the Peloponnesian War helped to alter Athenian religious practice.
The Peloponnesian War also led to a number of theatrical works being produced that took the effects of the war on Athens as a major theme, since poets carried a dual role in Athens, "to amuse... citizens, and to advise" (Ar. Frogs p.181). The problems caused by the war gave the poets a number of issues to rise in their plays and encourage debate about. The plays of Aristophanes in particular discussed the war and its various effects. One theme that occurs in Aristophanes' comedies is an opposition to leading politicians and the conduct of Athenian politics in general. Many leading democrats who turn down peace in favour of war are personally named and taunted in Aristophanes' work. For example, in Peace Kleon, a democrat who had urged the Assembly to vote in favour of massacring and enslavement of the population of Mytilene, is likened to a pestle "who churned up all Greece" (Ar. Peace p.29). Another example of this is the attack on Archedemus, a democrat who argued in favour of the execution of the Arginusae generals, whom Aristophanes remarks that "among the dead men he's the prince of crooks - it's the way they do things now" (Ar. Frogs p.172). Therefore we can see how Aristophanes took a negative stance to the leading politicians of the day.
Aristophanes also expressed a wish for peace and unity amongst the Greeks, both of which were lacking due to the war. As well as attacking men who pursued the war, the play Peace is all about the struggle of a group of Greeks who try to save the goddess Peace from War. The disunity between Greeks that had resulted in the oligarchic coup of the Thirty and which I have written about above prompted Aristophanes to write the lines:
Aristophanes used his work to tell Athenians that they needed to work together for their common good, or else face defeat.
One other issue that the poets raised in their plays was that of religion. In Peace, Aristophanes has Hermes say that the gods were angry with the Greeks for going to war whenever they tried to create peace, and therefore "where they used to live they installed war as residence, handing you [the Greeks] over to him to do exactly as he liked with" (Ar. Peace p.23). Euripides also reminded the Greeks of the danger of neglecting the gods in The Bacchae, in which Dionysus brutally punishes the Theban king Pentheus for refusing to recognise him as a god. Therefore we can see that the effects the Peloponnesian War had on Athens caused a number of plays to be produced that discussed the issues relating to the war in an attempt to advise the Athenians on what they should do. The plays can also be seen to reflect Athenian views on the effects of the war. The Bacchae and The Frogs both won first place, while Peace came second, in each play's respective festivals. This success must mean that the plays were popular, and thus the issues they raised must have had some standing with the Athenian people.
The Peloponnesian War had a number of long term effects for Athens. The first of these was the separation of the office of General into two separate offices. Austin and Vidal Naquet have pointed out that "from the time of the Peloponnesian War one finds the beginnings of a greater specialization of the functions; the 'demagogues' in Athens formulated the policy of the state, while its execution was entrusted to others. The strategoi became more frequently military specialists". (Austinal. 1980: 136). Whereas Pericles had been both a political and military figure in the fifth century, by the fourth century there were clear differences between orators (such as Demosthenes) and strategoi (such as Iphicrates).
Another long term effect of the Peloponnesian War was the improved techniques involved in warfare. Austin et al. have pointed out that light armed infantry were often overlooked before the war, but their success during the conflict led to them being developed into professional soldiers called 'peltasts' (Austinal. 1980: 136). During the fourth century these troops were effectively used in land warfare, for example a group of Athenian peltasts defeated a Lacedaimonian hoplite battalion at Lechaeum. Therefore we can see that the Peloponnesian War led to new developments in Athenian warfare and methods of government.
The Peloponnesian War had many effects on Athens. The cost of the war placed an economic strain on the city, and this in turn led to division between the Athenian rich and poor. This division also helped to create a fear of revolution against the democracy and created an atmosphere of suspicion and treachery in the city. The war had effects on Athenian religion, and can be used to explain the intolerance of impiety in the latter fifth-century and the introduction of new gods. The above changes caused the Athenian poets to write works which dealt with issues raised by the war in the hope of helping Athenians to address the problems facing them. Yet developments in the government of the city and its methods of warfare show that even after the conflict had ended, the effects of the Peloponnesian War continued to be felt in Athens,