The reasons that enabled Vespasian's successful seizure of power in AD 69 can be quite complicated, but in my view they can be grouped into three different stages, which I will look at in this essay. The first section will look at the proclamation of Vespasian as princeps in the east, citing reasons as to why Vespasian was put forward as emperor and how he gained the support of the eastern provinces and client kings. Secondly, I will look at how this core support, and the actions of individual commanders, enabled the Flavians to win key military victories against the Vitellians and thus remove Vitellius from power. Finally I will examine why Vespasian was able to hold onto power, unlike his three predecessors.
During AD 69 Vespasian was stationed in Judea with the task of putting down the Jewish revolt, so his first step in becoming princeps was to gain the support of the eastern provinces, which would give him the necessary troops and resources needed to depose Vitellius. In the years after his succession it was traditionally claimed that Vespasian had been forced to fight for the Empire, due to the actions of Roman troops who were unhappy with the accession of Vitellius (Suet.Vesp.6). However, this seems to be a Flavian story invented to help legitimise Vespasian's seizure of power, and the more likely story is that Vespasian decided to use his military strength for his own advancement. Chilver has argued that "the Flavians were the only contestants who were able to control the records for any length of time, and the story which they allowed to emerge about their rising must therefore be treated with especial care", and points out that the time between Vitellius' arrival in Rome and the proclamation of Vespasian as emperor could not have been long enough for the troops to become sufficiently discontent with Vitellius' rule (Chilver 1957: 34).
Therefore we must look at how Vespasian was able to gain the backing of the east. In my opinion the main reason for his success was the support of the Syrian governor Mucianus, which gave the Flavians a combined military force stronger than any other eastern army. Mucianus' decision to support Vespasian rather than make his own bid for power at first seems surprising, since they were strong rivals who each commanded three legions. However scholars have pointed out that Vespasian's claim to power was slightly stronger, due to his ability to establish a dynasty (Greenhalgh 1975), and the fact that Mucianus' military experience was as a subordinate, unlike Vespasian (Levick 1999). Therefore, Mucianus "made the realistic choice between backing the marginally preferable Vespasian, with the chance of substantial gains, and of being swept away" (Levick 1999: 53).
Mucianus' support gave Vespasian a combined force of six legions at his disposal, and in my view it was the ability to flex this muscle which brought the rest of the east over to the Flavians. Tacitus simply remarks that Vespasian and Tiberius Alexander, the prefect of Egypt, came to an understanding (Tac.Hist. 2.74), but does not tell us how this came about or Alexander's motivation for agreeing to it. However, Levick has argued that Alexander "could not resist the Flavian conglomerate" (Levick 1999: 54). After Vespasian had chosen to fight for the Principate Alexander had two choices: join the Flavians and hope for success, or use his two legions to try and defend Egypt from an army three times the size of the defending force. Seen in these terms, the decision of Alexander and other client kings in the east such as Agrippa II to join Vespasian is easy to understand, and their support added Egypt's two legions, control of two-thirds of the corn supply to Rome, and the wealth of the client monarchies to the Flavian's growing pool of strength.
This left Vespasian with one final group to win over, the Balkan legions, who were to prove vital in Vespasian's eventual success. Although they were far stronger than the armed forces of Egypt, they were still easy to win over for two main reasons. The first of these was the fact that the Third Legion had been stationed in Syria before being transferred to Moesia, and this caused Vespasian to be sure of its loyalty to the Flavian cause (Tac.Hist. 2.74). Secondly, Tacitus tells us that "the whole garrison had been furious at the arrogant behaviour of the bullying and blustering troops who came from Vitellius" and for this reason they were more likely to follow the lead of the Third Legion and support Vespasian (Tac.Hist. 2.74). On a more individual note, it has been suggested that Antonius Primus, the commander of one of the legions stationed along the Danube who was critical in the Flavians' success, decided to support Vespasian due to his ambitious nature that had little chance of being satisfied while Vitellius ruled (Greenhalgh 1975). All of these factors combined with the result that Vespasian could add the strength of the Balkan garrison to his existing forces, and thus created an army strong enough to depose Vitellius.
So Vespasian had strong military support, but sheer numbers would not win the civil war on their own, so we must look at the actual events that led to the fall of Vitellius. In my view the actions of key generals, namely Antonius for the Flavians and Caecina for the Vitellians, led to a decisive Flavian victory at the battle of Cremona that was to lead to the eventual defeat of Vitellius. It would be impossible to give a detailed analysis of the entire military campaign in this essay, so in this section I will examine the decisive conflict, that at Cremona, looking at how the actions of Antonius and Caecina, along with a certain amount of luck, led to the key Flavian victory, and the consequences it was to have for the Vitellian forces.
Antonius was vital at the battle at Cremona, simply because it was his decision to disobey Vespasian's orders that led to the conflict. Vespasian had instructed Antonius to halt at Aquileia and wait for Mucianus to join him, but Antonius pressed on ahead (Tac.Hist. 3.8-9). The reasons for Antonius' decision to advance without Vespasian's consent are not clear, but it seems that he was motivated by a desire not to let all the glory of the campaign go to Mucianus, and was able to march ahead since his location allowed him to assess the situation better than Vespasian (Greenhalgh 1975). After winning a number of small victories his advance led him to Cremona, and into a head on conflict with six Vitellian legions (Tac.Hist. 3.21). His actions in the upcoming battle were to be decisive, but before examining the battle I will first look at events that had occurred on the Vitellian side.
After hearing of Antonius' initial success Vitellius sent Caecina with a force of troops to intercept him, a decision which was to prove fatal. By August of AD 69 Vitellius had lost "the agreement of his lieutenants Caecina and Valens in his support. This weakness was to contribute substantially to his defeat" (Wellesley 1975: 104). Vitellius had two preferred generals in Caecina and Valens, with Valens being his favourite of the two. Yet illness had prevented Valens from fighting Antonius and so Caecina was sent on ahead alone. This was a disaster for Vitellius since Caecina and Bassus, who had been given command of the Ravenna fleet, jointly decided to betray their emperor. Tacitus remarked that "a jealous fear that rivals would outpace them in Vitellius' affections induced them to ruin Vitellius himself" (Tac.Hist. 2.101), while Levick has also argued that the strength of the Flavians helped cause Caecina's desertion (Levick 1999). Bassus was easily able to convert his troops to Vespasian, since they had only recently fought for Otho against Vitellius (Tac.Hist. 2.101), yet Caecina could not do the same. Instead of loyally following their general over to the Flavians Caecina's troops mutinied against him and put him under arrest. Yet Caecina's defection was to have an important impact both on the battle of Cremona and in its aftermath.
Having looked at events running up to the battle of Cremona it is now possible to analyse why the Flavians won. First and foremost the skill of Antonius was vital to the Flavians. Tacitus describes how Antonius was able to keep command of his troops and prevent them from running blindly into battle before the proper reconnaissance had been carried out, even though this was an unpopular decision (Tac.Hist. 3.20). Also throughout Tacitus' description of the battle Antonius is seen as acting as like the ideal general, keeping order amongst his troops and setting an example when the tide turned against them. For example, Antonius led the troops where fighting was most intense (Tac.Hist. 3.29). His skill and courage was critical in the Flavian victory.
To go back to Caecina, although he had failed in his attempt to win his troops over to Vespasian he was still to have an indirect effect on the fighting. When the legions Rapax and Italica arrived, who had been under Caecina's command, they proved ineffective due to "the lack of an able general... [and] while they wavered in doubt, they gave Antonius time to reform" (Greenhalgh 1975: 150). Caecina's absence weakened an army already facing a formidable opposition.
The Flavians also had a considerable amount of luck in the battle. For example Tacitus described how the moonlight shone from behind the Flavians, allowing them to see their enemy, whilst also enlarging their shadows which made them harder to aim at (Tac.Hist. 3.23). Also, the Syrian troops who had been transferred to Moesia had a ritual of saluting the rising sun every morning, which they observed even as battle ensued. However this gave rise to the rumour that Mucianus had arrived to re-enforce the Flavians and caused the Vitellians to waver (Greenhalgh 1975: 154), allowing Antonius to press his advantage. These factors, combined with the skill of Antonius' leadership and the effects of Caecina's defection, led to a victory that was critical for Vespasian's success in the civil wars of AD 69.
Vespasian's forces had defeated the largest force of Vitellian troops in Italy, and this was to have major consequences which would lead to the fall of Vitellius. In my view the most important effect of the battle was the fact that it left Vitellius' most important commander, Fabius Valens, short of troops and unable to launch an effective defence of Rome. The troops under his control who had left with Caecina were meant to wait for Valens to catch up with them before engaging the Flavians. However, Caecina overrode this order, since he must have realised that it would be unwise to leave a strong force with the man who was soon to become his enemy, and split the troops between Cremona and Hostilia (Tac.Hist. 2.100). Therefore, after the Flavian success at Cremona Valens had access to neither group of soldiers, since those who fought at Cremona had either been killed, captured or joint the Flavians, whilst he was cut off from those at Hostilia. The force he was able to take command of was "too large to escape detection and too small to cut its way through" (Tac.Hist. 3.41), so in the end he decided to try to make his way to Gaul with a few trusted companions to try and stir up revolt against Vespasian. However, he was forced to land at the Stoechades Islands, who was in support of Vespasian, where he was arrested. Eventually he was to be killed by the Flavians.
Valens' death had a huge impact on events. He had been the Vitellian symbol of resistance, but after his death "both armies realized that the war was as good as over" (Greenhalgh 1975:174). Tacitus tells us that "the whole Roman world rallied to the winning side" (Tac.Hist. 3.44). Vespasian had now added the west of the empire to the east in support of him, leaving only the area in Italy south of the Apennines in opposition. Even Vitellius realised that the game was up, and soon began negotiating with Vespasian through Flavius Sabinus, Vespasian's brother who had remained loyal to Vitellius throughout the conflict. However, Vitellius was unable to obtain the approval of his soldiers in his abdication, who had the most to lose if Vespasian became princeps, and so Rome had to be taken by force. However after Cremona the Vitellians no longer posed a serious threat to Vespasian, and so it was victory at this battle that led to Vespasian's success in the civil wars of AD 69.
After Cremona the Flavians fought a number of smaller battles that eventually led to the capture of Rome and accession of Vespasian as emperor, although he was absent. In this section I will examine why Vespasian was able to hold onto the principate unlike his three predecessors.
When Vespasian took power he made sure to reward his supporters, in order to prevent them from turning against him and supporting a rival candidate for the principate. Antonius was awarded the insignia of consul whilst Mucianus was given triumphal honours for his campaign against the Sarmatians (Tac.Hist. 4.4). Furthermore Vespasian also used his actions to encourage a spirit of reconciliation. For example the German troops who had served under Vitellius feared they would be executed, but went unpunished (Tac.Hist. 4.46), and Vespasian also organised a marriage for Vitellius' daughter (Suet.Vesp. 14)
By rewarding his supporters and showing a will to forgive and forget Vespasian managed not to make the mistakes of the other contenders of AD 69. For example, Otho rebelled and eventually deposed Galba because he resented not being named as Galba's adopted son and heir (Suet.Otho. 5). Likewise, on becoming emperor Vitellius had obtained a list of 130 people who had performed some service to Otho, and ordered them all to be killed (Wellesley 1975). Actions such as these caused dissatisfaction to spread throughout the empire, and although Vespasian did have some figures killed, such as Vitellius' brother, he did not neglect those who had helped him gain his position or carry out harsh punishments on anybody involved with Vitellius, and this helped him to be accepted as princeps.
Another factor that helped Vespasian to remain as princeps was his possession of a wide range of military support, and the fact that he faced weaker threats than those who had gone before him enabled him to defend himself. After he took power a revolt was led by Julius Civilis, who attempted to establish an independent Empire of the Gauls. Yet Vespasian was able to send a force to crush this rebellion, whilst also keeping troops stationed throughout the empire on regular guard duty. This range of support was something other emperors had lacked. For example, Galba was easily deposed of since he had only been nominated as emperor by one legion, so he did not have the necessary military power in Rome to defend himself from Otho (Wellesley 1975). And whereas Vespasian had only to face the challenge of Civilis, Otho and Vitellius had to fight stronger rivals who could not be defeated as easily.
Vespasian was also able to stay in power due to his success in legitimising his rule. On becoming emperor he spoke to the Senate in a way which encouraged them to take a liking to him and support his rule (Tac.Hist. 4.3). In response, the Senate awarded Vespasian the consulship, and passed the Lex de Imperio Vespasiani. This gave Vespasian's decisions the same authority as those made by the people of Rome, and also made all his previous actions constitutional. Therefore all of Vespasian's actions had been legal, and the senate recognised him as princeps, thus legitimising his rule and helping to deter any would be rebels.
There were also many stories of omens foretelling Vespasian's rule being told in Rome. These omens had helped Vespasian gain the support of many people in the east (Greenhalgh 1975) and were also important in winning over the Romans, both elite and plebs. In my opinion this was because the Romans were a people who strongly believed in their religion, which can be seen by the fact that Vitellius kept an astrologer with him to guide his decisions, and by having numerous omens pointing to his accession as emperor Vespasian would have been able to give the image of having divine approval. One of the roles of the emperor was to maintain the relationship between men and gods, therefore these omens would have helped to legitimise Vespasian's rule.
Vespasian was successful in the civil wars of AD 69 for a number of reasons. Far from being forced into becoming princeps, as later tradition would have us believe, Vespasian was able to use the combined force of his own and Mucianus' troops to intimidate eastern rulers into supporting him, whilst the Balkan legions were easily won over due to their disaffection with Vitellius. This military support, combined with the defection of Caecina, gave Vespasian a key military victory at the battle of Cremona, after which Vitellius could not mount a serious defence of his position and was eventually deposed as emperor. After taking power Vespasian was able to maintain his support and military power, which enabled him to defeat the revolt of Civilis, and his success in legitimising his rule enabled him to be accepted as princeps and establish the Flavian dynasty.