Marriage altered the identities of both men and women in Rome, but in very different ways that I will discuss in this essay. It is important to note, however, that most of the surviving sources tell us about marriages between members of the Roman elite, and therefore it is they who are the focus of this essay. I will begin by showing how marriage affected men, especially their public identity. I will then look at how marriage affected one aspect that was common to both men and women, namely their status, before moving on to show how marriage transformed a female's private identity.
One aspect of Roman marriage that has been well documented is its use as a political tool. Harlow and Laurence have argued that marriage had little impact on a mans life (Harlow & Laurence 2002), yet while this is true in terms of altering a man's private identity, for members of the Roman elite marriage could have a fundamental impact on their public identity. Although the procreation of children was the main goal of a marriage, "for Roman politicians, marriage could [also] be a tool of advancement, a way of forging alliances among the influential and the wealthy" (Haley 1985:49). Dixon has supported this statement by arguing that prospective senators would marry earlier than other men "because they needed the support of two family networks to assist them in gaining office" (Dixon 1992:62). She provides evidence of this in a letter of Pliny's, in which he recommends a potential groom because he has previously held political office, and the wife's family will therefore be free from funding a campaign election for him (Pliny.Ep.1.14). Therefore we can see that marriage gave men access to the resources they needed to be successfully elected, and as a result it indirectly altered their public identity by giving them access to political office.
Yet gaining access to funds for election campaigns was not the only way in which marriage could alter a man's political identity. Politicians would often secure alliances through marriage between members of their families. For example Octavian married Marc Antony's step-daughter Claudia because each man's troops insisted that "they should become closely allied by marriage" (Suet.Aug.62). Each politician would have had individual reasons for entering into a marriage, but in my opinion political marriages can generally be seen in two groups: those that used marriage to create links to other politicians who could help young men advance their political career, and those which were used to lock men into long term alliances that might have otherwise fallen apart.
First of all marriage created a link between two men that they could use to enhance their careers and thus move up the senatorial ladder in power. These types of marriage would be more common among senators of lower rank, since "as a man moves up the cursus honorum, he moves into successive 'brackets' as a potential husband or father-in-law" (Treggiari 1991:92) and therefore some men might remarry as they advanced in their career. A good example of this is Pompey. His first two marriages were short term affairs that he used to create links with men who could help him in the senate, namely Antistius and Sulla (Haley 1985:49). Pompey's later marriage to the daughter of Julius Caesar, however, was only possible because he had become an important figure in the senate, and was only ended by the death of his partner. Therefore we can see that marriage altered the public identities of men at the beginning of their career in a way that could be advantageous to them, and thus more than one marriage could be entered into as politicians altered their public identities to suit their needs.
Second of all, marriages could create long standing alliances that were not easily backed away from. This can be seen in Pompey's marriage to Julia, the daughter of Julius Caesar. By marrying Julia, Pompey cemented his alliance with Caesar and thus created the first triumvirate. The role of marriage was critical in this alliance, as Haley has shown by pointing out that it was not political reasons but the death of Julia which led to the end of the triumvirate (Haley 1985:55). Pompey's reluctance to remarry one of Caesar's kin and keep the alliance alive therefore shows that his marriage to Julia kept Pompey in the alliance for far longer than he would have been without marriage. Thus we can see that marriage could alter men's public identities by creating long standing ties with other prominent figures.
Marriage could also alter the status of men and women. For men this could be advantageous in a political sense since marriage could lead to higher status and thus better career prospects. The state needed children, and the only way to produce legitimate Roman children was through marriage, therefore men who were married could present themselves as helping the state. Two speeches supposedly given by Augustus are recorded in Cassius Dio 56.1-10, in which Augustus praised married senators for replenishing the state with children, before going on to attack the unmarried senators by saying that they were committing murder and sacrilege for not marrying and having children. The enhanced status of married men could allow them to hold political office before reaching the regulation age set out in the Leges Annales, for example Agricola was able to become Quaestor at the age of 24, a year before he was legally entitled to, because he was married. Therefore we can see that marriage also altered men's public identity by putting them into a higher status group than that of unmarried men.
Away from the political arena, status could be affected in other ways. Both men and women tended to marry people who were quite close to them in social status, since the status of their partner would be reflected onto themselves. For example, Saller has pointed out that in Plautus' Persa there is a scam to defraud a slave pimp by selling him a citizen girl, and then accuse him of enslaving a citizen. Yet the girl involved does not wish to carry out the plan in case she becomes tainted with infamia which would prevent her from gaining an honourable marriage (Saller 1993:86). Harlow and Laurence give support to this view that marriage could affect a person's status by arguing that when women married "the identity of their husband changed their own status" (Harlow & Laurence 2002:81). Furthermore the Augustan marriage legislation prevented senators from marrying freedwomen, a group of much lower social status, in order to eugenically preserve the senatorial class as an elite distinguished group. Therefore we can see the importance that status had in the choice of partner, and can therefore deduce that marriage could alter the public status of an individual in regards to their husband or wife.
So far this essay has mainly focused on how marriage affected male identity, yet marriage, especially first marriages, also radically changed a women's private identity. In this section I will look at the ways in which a female's identity was changed, and analyse what implications this had for women.
The female transition from child to adult was marked by marriage. The Digest of Justinian states that "if a girl marries when she is under the age of 12, then she will become a legitimate wife when she has completed her twelfth year (and is living) with her husband". From this we can see that 12 years old was the recognised age when a girl became a woman, and this change in identity was symbolised by marriage.
As well as having her identity changed from child to adult, a woman's identity also changed from daughter to wife when she became married, and this had a number of effects. When a woman married and became a wife she took on a new set of responsibilities and had a new ideal to meet, which are shown in a number of surviving inscriptions:
These two passages show us how the change in identity from daughter to wife could affect a woman's life. She was expected to stay at home in order to do domestic duties, making sure the household was run properly and not wasting money. However this is only an ideal of what a wife should be written from a male point of view, and does not give us the reality of life for married women. Harlow and Laurence have pointed out that for women in the Roman elite this ideal of the stay-at-home mother could conflict with the social demands of their class, for example the ideal of staying indoors contrasted with the reality of the need to maintain social links (Harlow & Laurence 2002:79). However, what we can see is that marriage altered the view of how a woman should behave by transforming the private identity of a woman from daughter to wife.
Another effect that marriage had on women's private identity was that it gave them a small amount of independence after the marriage ended, which in my opinion can be explained by the fact that a woman's first marriage changed her identity so that she went from being looked on as a nave child to being seen as a woman with a knowledge of how the world around her worked. Due to the difference in ages that were common in Roman marriage, with the husband generally older than his wife, it was common for women to become widowers after their first marriage, if they had been divorced by then. However, when searching for a new husband a woman who had previously been married appears to have had more of a say in who she wed. A good example of this is Tullia, the daughter of Cicero. Her first marriage was organised by Cicero, yet he played no part in arranging her third marriage, where she married Dolabella. Whilst Tullia was looking for a third husband Cicero was away from Rome and thus could not see what was happening in his absence. He prompted his friend Atticus to help find a candidate, but Tullia's views were also important. Cicero commented about one candidate that "I doubt whether my girl could be brought to consent" (Cicero Letters to Atticus 5.4/97.1), and when Tullia's engagement to Dolabella was announced he wrote to Atticus saying "believe me, it was the last thing I expected" (Cicero Letter to Atticus 6.6/121.1). Yet Tullia's decisions were not overruled by Cicero, even though the marriage caused him some political problems. Therefore we can see that Tullia's views and wishes were far more important in choosing her third husband than her first. This pattern of woman gaining a measure of independence after marriage can also be seen in the imperial family. McGinn has pointed out a passage in Tacitus (Annals 4.4) where Tiberius comments that Livilla Julia, a woman whom he was paterfamilias to, was capable of making her own decisions with advice from her mother and grandmother. In my opinion the alteration of a woman's identity that occurred through a first marriage can be used in explaining this shift from complete submission and dependence to gaining an aspect of independence, therefore marriage was indirectly responsible.
.
In contrast to the huge impact that marriage had on a woman's private identity, the alterations in her public identity were quite minor. There were two areas in which a woman's public identity could be affected. The first of these was the possible change in guardian that resulted from a marriage. In Rome there were two types of marriage, those with manus, and those without. In a marriage with manus a wife would enter the manus (or power) of her new husband and become part of his familia, and "everything which belonged to the woman... [would become] the husband's as dowry" (Cicero Topica 23). Therefore a marriage with manus would see the bride's public guardian move from being her biological paterfamilias to her husband. However, Harlow & Laurence (2002) have pointed out that this type of marriage had become rare by the late Republic, and had almost been completely replaced by marriage without manus (in which the bride remained under the power of her natal paterfamilias and stayed as part of her familia). Therefore although marriage with manus could alter a woman's public identity, it was not a common occurrence, and thus marriage had less of an impact on a woman's public identity.
Marriage altered the identities of men and women, but in different ways. Generally it altered men's public identity, by creating links and alliances with other influential men who could help a man further his career. Marriage also increased men's public status by giving them prestige that could lead to political rewards, whilst the status of a partner could be reflected onto a person, male or female, and thus alter their public identity. In contrast, marriage greatly altered the private identities of women. It was symbolic of the transition from childhood to adulthood, whilst a woman's new identity as a wife altered people's perceptions of how she should spend her time. Marriage could affect women's public identities, but by the late Republic this was the exception rather than the rule.