The tribunate of Tiberius Gracchus in 133 BC was driven by his determination to implement agrarian reform with the lex Sempronia agraria. In this essay I will discuss how important agrarian reform actually was in this period of the Republic by examining the state of the rural peasantry, the effects of Roman imperialism, and the needs of the Roman army. I will also consider to what extant Tiberius was driven by personal motivations. Secondly, I will examine whether the policies of the Gracchi were the solution, taking into consideration the reasons for the opposition they encountered and the effects of their legislation.
Before discussing the need for agrarian reform, it is important to point out that land was important for two main reasons. Firstly, most Romans lived in rural areas outside the inner city and farmed crops to provide food for their families. Apart from agriculture there were little other options for the Roman plebs to make a living from, thus meaning that the land was essential to them. Secondly, land was important to the state because it provided troops for the army. Roman citizens were divided into six classes based on the amount of property they owned. Those whose property had a capital value of less than 11,000 asses fell into the lowest class, and formed a single century that were exempt from military service. Therefore it was in the interests of the state to make sure citizens had enough property to qualify for military service, and land was the best way to provide this property.
By 133 this system had developed strains, and I would argue that there was a need for reform. Roman law restricted the amount of land any individual could own to 500 jugera, yet this limit had been exceeded by a number of rich nobles at the expense of the poor (Plutarch Tiberius Gracchus 8, Appian Civil Wars 1.7). Appian appears to overstate his case, for example he claims that the rich possessed huge villas, yet there is only archaeological evidence for this from the 1 st century BC (Lintott 1992: 42). However, it is widely agreed that in this period "there was a general trend to greater accumulation of land by the wealthy" (Lintott 1992: 41). The cause for this can be seen in Roman imperialism. Conquests brought money into Rome which "sought investment as well as immediate expenditure, and the readiest and safest... investment was real property, and especially land" (Stockton 1979: 7). Land destroyed in war was designated as public land, which people could cultivate in return for providing the state with a share of their produce, yet rich nobles were able to buy this land and turn it into their private property, thus depriving access to other free citizens (Appian Civil Wars 1.7). The growth in the land holdings of the Roman elite can be seen in Cato's On Agriculture. In this guide to farming Cato placed nine different types of farming in order of their desirability, with grain coming a mere sixth (Cato On Agriculture 1.7). The fact that Cato's readers would have been limited to the rich elite, and his emphasis on the desirability of vineyards and watered gardens over grain, must mean that a significant number of the Roman senatorial class had gained enough land to be able to own these types of farms as well as growing grain. We can see, therefore, that the rich had gained large amounts of land due to the effects of imperialism.
At the same time military campaigns were continuing, and Brunt has pointed out that "prolonged absence on campaigns... must have ruined small farmers" (Brunt 1971: 77), while the Hannibalic War had left the land of others in ruin. Plutarch repeated a story told by Gaius Gracchus of how Tiberius was inspired to campaign for agrarian reform after journeying though Etruria, and observing that the native population had been replaced on the land by the slaves of wealthy nobles (Plutarch Tiberius Gracchus 8). Although this may be an exaggerated or even fictional account by Gaius, it must have had some basis in fact if it was to be believable. Therefore we can see that there was a shift in land ownership from poor to rich that resulted from imperialism and needed to be addressed.
The military demands placed on Rome by imperialism also created a need for land reform. As mentioned above the poorest men were exempt from military service, so the decline of the peasantry left the army with fewer reserves to call upon for future battles. Appian wrote that "the people became troubled lest they should no longer have allies of the Italian stock" (Appian Civil Wars 1.8), and Plutarch remarked that in reaction to their poverty the poor "became more and more unwilling to volunteer for military service or even to raise a family" (Plutarch Tiberius Gracchus 8), thus depriving Rome of the next generation of soldiers. To contemporaries this decline in potential soldiers could be seen in the census returns. In 141 327,000 citizens were registered, compared to 318,000 in 135 and 395,000 (Brunt 1971: 70). I agree with Brunt's view that, although the data is uncertain and does not give us a precise value for the actual population of Rome, the increase between the 135 and 124 figures can partly be explained by previously unregistered citizens being registered, either because they had gained land from the Gracchan distributions or because they hoped to do so (Brunt 1971: 79). Stockton has argued against this, claiming that the uncertainties of the figures makes them unsafe to use, and that the increase of the 124 figure cannot be because of the Gracchan distributions since the 135 figure appears to be unaffected, even though the lex agraria was passed in 133. However, I do not agree with either of these points. First of all, although the figures are uncertain the increase between 131 and 124 is so large that it cannot be effectively explained by a simple case of uncertainty or increased efficiency of the censors. Secondly Appian tells us that the work of dividing public and private land was complicated and time-consuming (Appian Civil Wars 1.18), so distributions may not have even started until 130-1 (Brunt 1971: 80), therefore their effect would not be seen in the 135 census. The increase in registered citizens in the 124 census, therefore, shows us just how many people were not being registered due to a lack of land, thus meaning that agrarian reform in 133 was important since it allowed the Roman state to exploit its military reserves to the full potential.
Yet the above reasons do not provide us with any understanding as to why Tiberius Gracchus was so determined to pass his agrarian law. Although there was a need for reform, Tiberius' apparent zeal towards this policy makes the need for agrarian reform appear far greater than I believe it actually was. In my view, it was Tiberius' personal circumstances that caused him to press forward where other politicians would have backed down. For example, Gaius Laelius had previously attempted agrarian reform, yet like Tiberius he was met with strong opposition and subsequently dropped his policy (Plutarch Tiberius Gracchus 8). Early in adult life Tiberius had served in the Numantine campaign in which he had suffered a great blow to his dignitas. This was a quality that Romans put great value on, and for Tiberius to suffer a further setback to his dignitas would have been devastating for him. Therefore he could not afford to later back down when he came up against such strong opposition. He became "a prisoner of his own dignitas" (Stockton 1979: 85), and got caught up in an escalating situation which would be hard to escape without more personal setback. Therefore, although agrarian reform was important in 133, in my view Tiberius was also fuelled by personal motives, and his apparent devotion to the cause can make the need for reform seem exaggerated and more important than it actually was.
Despite of this agrarian reform was important in 133, but whether the Gracchi had the solution is harder to assess. That both were strongly opposed by the ruling class, combined with the fact that land continued to be an issue until Augustus, would seem to suggest that the policies of the Gracchi were failures and thus not the solution to Rome's problems. Yet the answer is not as simple as this, and I believe that although the Gracchi were not able to formulate a complete solution to Rome's agrarian problems, their policies were useful. In my view, Tiberius faced strong opposition not because of the content of his reforms, but rather because of the political methods and actions he used to pass them into law. On the other hand, it is my opinion that Gaius' agrarian policies were designed to bring short term benefits and not a complete solution to Rome's land troubles.
The opposition that Tiberius Gracchus faced when he presented his proposals for agrarian reform could give the impression that his law was completely useless. After all, it would be hard for a law that was so strongly resisted by the governing class to be effectively implemented, and their opposition would appear to indicate that they themselves did not see Tiberius' reforms as a definitive solution. Yet while I take the view that the policies of the Gracchi were not the complete solution to Rome's agrarian problems, I do think that they were useful and other members of the Roman nobility realised this. Plutarch tells us that Tiberius was supported by such influential men as Appius Claudius Pulcher, the Princeps Senatus, and Crassus, who held the office of Pontifex Maximus (Plutarch Tiberius Gracchus 9). Astin has pointed out that at least five of Tiberius' associates were from consular families, and that he was likely to have had other senatorial supporters (Astin 1967: 192). Stockton also makes the interesting point that no move was made to invalidate the law after Tiberius' death (Stockton 1979: 88). Therefore we cannot simply pin down the opposition Tiberius faced to vested interests of members of the Senate, since we know he was actually supported by many of its prominent members, and thus we can see that numerous members of the nobility believed Tiberius' reforms had potential.
In my opinion the lengths Tiberius went to in order to pass his bill alienated a lot of the landowning class, and this is the actual cause for the nobility's opposition to his policy. Astin has commented that "there is the possibility that some of them might not have been opposed to the agrarian scheme itself and became hostile only when Tiberius threatened to depose a fellow tribune, or even later" (Astin 1967: 199). Stockton has supported this view, saying that Tiberius broke various precedents (such as the deposition of a fellow tribune, taking financial and foreign affairs out of the hands of the Senate in the affair over the wealth of King Attalus, and standing for re-election as a tribune) that would have alarmed the Senate (Stockton: 1979:82). Therefore the prospect of "a demagogue's holding office indefinitely and directing the affairs of Rome without fear of serious impediment from colleagues and without reference to senate and consuls", would have alarmed the Roman aristocracy and caused them to unite against Tiberius and his reforms (Stockton: 1979: 84). Thus we can see that some of the opposition against Tiberius was due to his personal actions, not his agrarian law, and therefore the opposition this bill faced cannot be seen as meaning that it was ineffective.
As discussed above, the effects of the 133 agrarian reforms can be seen in the increase of registered citizens in the 124 census. Yet a further agrarian law was passed in 111, and Lintott has argued that "it is hard to imagine a law like this being passed, if the public land... had irrevocably passed into the hands of a minority of private citizens and public control of it was a thing of the past" (Lintott 1992: 52). Therefore we can see that the law of 133 helped prevent the public land from being consumed by the nobility, yet it did not solve the problems of rural Rome and further reform was needed, thus meaning that Tiberius' reforms were useful but not the solution to the agrarian problem.
Unlike Tiberius, the legislation of Gaius Gracchus was not aimed at a radical solution to Rome's land problems. Some of the legislation he passed aimed to improve the agrarian situation, and he served on the land commission set up by Tiberius, yet he did not propose the same radical reforms as his brother had done. Instead he proposed the founding of colonies and construction of roads, which would provide land for the poor and help the development of Italian agriculture (Plutarch Gaius Gracchus 8). Although this would have helped the land situation, it was never going to provide a permanent solution, since it did not tackle the core problems that had caused the unfair distribution between rich and poor in the first place. In my view Gaius' proposals were an expedient that would help in the short term, but were not going to be an effective solution to Rome's land problems.
There was a need for land reform in 133. Land that was meant to provide for the poor was being taken over by the rich, thus depriving many citizens of a way to make a living whilst also depriving the Roman army of soldiers. The career of Tiberius Gracchus may exaggerate the importance of agrarian reform in 133 and give us the impression of a rural crisis in Rome that did not actually exist, but in my view it was an important problem that needed addressing. Although the Gracchi did not have the complete solution to Rome's agrarian troubles, the opposition they faced was not completely because their policies were seen as redundant in Rome. Instead their reforms were beneficial and helped improve agrarian conditions, but were not the definitive answer to the Republic's agrarian problems in the second century.