This essay will argue that the attitude of the Roman elites to foreign religions tended to range from disapproval to downright hostility, yet we cannot put this down to pure xenophobia. North has pointed out that "the Romans were willing at almost all stages of their history to accept foreign cults and practices: evidently, something more is needed to provoke action" (North 1975: 86). This acceptance of foreign practices can be seen in the importation of the cult of the Magna Mater, the welcoming of Mithraism, and the assimilation of some native religions into that of the Romans. Yet while some foreign religions were imported into Rome or assimilated into the Roman state religion, others were viewed with complete disdain and hostility. I believe that this was because these foreign religions were often seen as both a political threat, and as having practices that were anti-social and indecent. Together these factors caused many foreign religions to be viewed disapprovingly by the upper echelons of Roman society.
To understand why Roman elites accepted some foreign religions, but were extremely hostile to others, it is important to give a brief summary of their religious background, and how they were attached to the traditional Roman system. Senators were bound to remain loyal to traditional Roman civic religion since they competed with each other for traditional priesthoods (Beard et al 1998a: 229). Another interesting fact is that senators from outside Rome very rarely made dedications to their ancestral gods outside of their hometowns (Beard et al 1998a: 230). In my opinion this was because these non-Roman senators wished to integrate themselves into Roman society, and practiced traditional Roman state religion to do this.
The Romans themselves also followed this policy of integrating foreigners via religion when their systems were similar to that of Rome. This can be seen in the process of 'interpretatio Romana', by which native gods were assimilated to Roman ones. For example, in the Germania Tacitus gave Roman names to the native gods, with Wodan or Odin being named as Mercury (Tac. Germania 9). Gordon has pointed out that over time native gods were either obliterated or replaced by their Roman counterparts (Gordon 1990: 233). Thus we can see that if a foreign religion was similar to Roman state religion it could be used to integrate that part of the Empire into the Roman system. Yet there are many examples of the Roman elite taking a negative view of foreign religions, and it could be argued that "rejection of foreign superstition created a sense of unity for the Roman elite in relation to the empire" (Beard et al 1998a: 229). Thus we can see how Roman elites favoured the traditional Roman state religion, and thus took a negative stance towards foreign systems that were so different to their own that integration was not possible.
Yet why did the elite not simply ignore religions that couldn't be integrated into the traditional model? In my opinion one of the major reasons for their dislike of these foreign religions was that they saw them as a potential political threat. Gordon (1990) has argued that the Roman elite had an inbuilt ideology that made it natural for them to dismiss foreign religions, since they threatened the elite's position at the top of Roman society. He claims that the positive Roman characteristic of humanitas, which contained all Roman ideals, came to be the polemic opposite of superstitio, which referred to the ignorant beliefs of the poor (Gordon 1990: 238). Since the traditional religious system, which was led by the elite and thus helped justify their position at the top of the Roman hierarchy, was a part of humanitas, differing religious views became superstitio and were thus viewed negatively by the elite, since they could be seen as a threat to their social dominance. In short, "humanitas and superstitio are ideological instruments developed to contain possible threats to the basic assumption of the Graeco-Roman sacrificial system, that those who were at any moment in control deserved to be where they are" (Gordon 1990: 238). Thus we can see that religions that could not be integrated into the Roman model could be viewed negatively since they threatened the elite's position at the top of society.
Foreign religions could also be seen as a more direct political threat, and this threat to the Roman order was bound to incur the elite's wrath. We can see this in the case of Christianity. The Christians set themselves outside the normal political order by refusing to serve in the military or take civic offices (Beard et al 1998a: 226) and by worshipping an executed criminal who called himself 'King of the Jews' (Ste Croix 1963: 16). However, what really made the Christians a serious political threat was the hierarchical nature of their church. This gave its followers a strong organisation, and it could be argued that this was feared by the Romans. Beard et al have pointed out that the persecutions of Valerian and Diocletian were targeted at the church's hierarchy, whilst Decius was said to fear the election of a new Pope of Rome more than pretenders to the throne (Beard et al 1998a: 243-4). In my opinion, this was because Christianity not only had large numbers of followers whose loyalty to Rome was dubious, but was also organised into a clear hierarchical unit that could potentially be used against the Roman elite. Thus it was a religion that posed a clear political threat to the established Roman order and the elite.
Christianity was not the only foreign religion that could be seen to pose a political threat to Rome though, and this can be seen in the suppression of the cult of Bacchus. In my view, one of the reasons for the suppression of this cult by the elite was that, like Christianity, they feared it could be used to mobilise anti-Roman forces against the Roman state. North has argued that the cult evaded the normal basis of state control since its followers joined out of choice, whilst other colleges were based on localities or trades. Bacchants were also bound by oath and were required to show a higher degree of commitment than other collegia (North 1979: 93). Thus it was made of people who were interested in a cult that was different to the traditional forms of Roman religion, and who must have therefore found the idea of a cult not led and controlled by the elite appealing. This argument could be criticised by the fact that a few of the later non-traditional Roman cults were not suppressed in this way, however in my view this was because the were more familiar with them and saw that they did not pose a threat, and thus treated them with more toleration. However, although the Bacchic cult was no more of a menace than these later cults, it was completely unfamiliar and thus caused the senate to over-react (North: 1992: 183). Thus we can see that the contemporary Roman elite viewed Bacchism as a threat that needed to be removed.
There are different views as to what type of people became Bacchists. Toynbee has claimed that the cult was an escapist movement that mainly consisted of oppressed peasants and slaves; Fr. Bmer has suggested that it was dominated by the elite, and Gallini argued that its members had different backgrounds but were all from marginal groups. North has argued that while we cannot be sure of the backgrounds of the cult's followers, these contrasting views seem to suggest that the cult was made of primarily apolitical lower class men and women led by upper class men with political agendas. Furthermore, the cultists would be strongly bound to their leaders, since "once an individual had undergone initiation, he must have become vulnerable in relation to the political authorities of the city and hence increasingly dependent on the group and the group's authorities for support in all aspects of his life". (North 1979: 95). Even if this was not the case, it seems to be what the elite feared (North 1979: 95). Therefore we can see how the cult of Bacchus could be viewed as a political threat to the Roman elites, since in their view it collected people who wished for an alternative religious system, and thus maybe an alternative way of life, and tightly bound them to leaders who may use them for their own political agendas.
These two religions were viewed as a political threat by the Roman elites due to their organised nature, which in the elite's view made them capable of bringing enemies of the state together. However, the upper classes appear to have been more fearful of magic. In my view this was because magical practices were believed to work, whereas the beliefs of other cults could be dismissed as mere superstitio. Pliny argued that magic was fraudulent in his Natural History, yet he tells us that it has had huge influence, immense authority, and in his own day "it has sway over a great proportion of nations" (Pliny Natural History XXX.1-2). This, combined with the fact that Pliny feels compelled to explain why he believes magic to be ineffective, must point to the fact that many literate Romans must have believed it to be an effective practice.
On a basic level the elite's dislike of magic was for a simple reason, namely that it could provide individuals excluded from the politico-social order an access to power (Beard et al 1998a: 221). The elite could use the army or legal restrictions to preserve the Roman state (and their position in it) from conventional threats, but it was powerless against the threat of magic. Gordon has shown how these fears of the elite's vulnerability to magic were exposed in the death of Germanicus, which led to an investigation to discover if he had been killed by sorcery (Gordon 1990: 255). Thus we can see how the elite viewed magic as giving anyone who practiced it an access to power, and thus made them vulnerable to attack.
The Roman attitude to Judaism is interesting in this context of viewing foreign religions as political threats to the elite. The Jews revolted from Rome on occasions, one of which lead to the destruction of the Temple in AD 70, yet the Romans did not try to suppress them or persecute them. This seems out of line to the elite's attitude to the cults previously mentioned, but there is an explanation. First of all, Judaism was an old, ancestral religion, and this gave it a certain amount of legitimacy that the other cults did not have. Secondly, North has convincingly argued that the Romans appear to have viewed Jews primarily as an ethnic group, rather than a religious one (North 1992: 190). Because of this it was thought that Judaism did not pose a political threat, since people couldn't convert to an ethnicity whereas they could convert to the previously mentioned cults. North goes on to show that when Judaism began to preach to gentiles in the second and third centuries AD it began to look more like a religion, and thus met with official disapproval in an edict that banned non-Jews from being circumcised (North 1992: 191, Beard et al 1998b: 262). This would prevent conversion of non-Jews, and we can therefore see how Judaism was viewed with hostility by the Roman elite when it was seen as a religion, which ties in with their attitude towards other foreign religions.
So we can see how the Roman elites often took a negative view of foreign religions for political reasons, but social factors were also important. For example many foreign religions were accused of anti-social practices that completely went against Roman decency, with many of the most serious charges being made against followers of magic. In the Pharsalia Lucan gives an extreme view of witchcraft in the form of Erichto, whose listed practices included necromancy with revived corpses and the eating of rotting bodies. Although this is an extreme depiction of magic, it shows us how hostile the Roman elites' view of magic was, since Erichto can be seen as the "antithesis of rational and humane religious practices" (Beard et al 1998a: 220). Although magicians' actual practices were probably very different to what our sources tell us, we must look at why magicians had gained such a bad image. In my view there are two reasons. First of all it has been pointed out by North that the elite's view of magic, which was said to be of Persian origin, was tainted from the beginning since it derived from the anti-Persian stance of the Greeks (North 1980: 188). Secondly, in my view the elite felt so threatened by magic that they saw it as the complete inverse of Roman society. Gordon has pointed out that "just as the emperor fulfilled the central role of the paradigmatic sacrificer and euergate, offering himself as the ideal model... so the magician fulfilled the inverse function" (Gordon 1990: 253-4). Therefore they constructed an image of magic as everything that was indecent in Roman society, and soon the image stuck so that the practice of magic was entirely anti-social, and thus this image alone helped cause the elite to take a hostile view of magic.
As I have already mentioned, Judaism was tolerated due to its old age, but this did not stop the Romans looking at it with complete disdain. Tacitus said that in Judaism "everything we hold sacred is profane, and conversely they permit what for us is taboo" (Tacitus, Histories 4). This is another example of how the Roman elite viewed foreign religions as having social customs and standards that were the inverse of their own, and thus created a negative image of them.
Interestingly, Tacitus goes on to give a brief history of the Jews that is a mix of traditional Jewish teaching and complete nonsense, and from this we can see how the Romans could sometimes misunderstand the religions they were opposed to. This can be seen in the case of the charges laid against Christians by elite Romans of the late second and early third centuries AD in which they accused the Christians with indecent practices such as cannibalism and incest. Pliny had reported to Trajan in AD 110 that his investigation into Christianity had revealed "nothing worse than a depraved and excessive superstitio" (Pliny Letters X.96), yet Christians continued to be accused of indecent practices. Therefore I agree with Beard et al when they argue that these charges were derived from a misunderstanding of Christian rituals, for example the Eucharist could be mistaken for cannibalism by someone unfamiliar with Christianity (Beard et al 1998a:225-6). Therefore we can see how the Roman elite could misunderstand the practices of foreign religions, and in turn could lead to them viewing as anti-social.
Christians also made themselves unpopular because they were often viewed as being dishonourable to the gods in the Roman pantheon. Christians would openly declare that the pagan gods didn't exist and would not sacrifice to them, which caused the pagans to fear that the gods would punish the whole community for this dishonour (De Ste Croix 1963: 25). This can be seen in a passage by Tertullian in his Apologeticus, in which he says that whenever a natural disaster occurs a cry is soon raised of "the Christians to the lion". The stories of miracles performed by Christ also contributed to the negative image of Christianity, because they evoked comparison between him and the powers of magicians (Beard et al 1998a: 227). Thus we can see how Christians could be seen to be rejecting the values of Roman society and thus caused the elite to become hostile towards them.
The Roman elites did not have a general view that was taken on all foreign religions simply due to their place of origin, but rather varied their outlook to each religion. If it was similar to the Roman model and could be integrated into Roman life the elite appear to have been accepting of foreign religions. However, religions that were very different to the traditional Roman system in their nature were viewed with hostility. The level of hostility could vary from begrudging tolerance in the case of Judaism to persecution and suppression in the case of Christianity, the Bacchanalia and magic. This was because these religions could be seen to pose a threat to both the Roman political system and the elite's place in it, and the social decency of Roman life that they appeared to subvert.