One of Fellini's main aims in the filming of Satyricon was to portray the ancient Rome of Petronius as a society completely different to our own, and the finished film can show us many things about the role of cinema in producing history. We can see from the film how the need to adapt ancient classics for a modern audience in order to make them both understandable and appropriate for modern standards will virtually always prevent the original story from being told without some changes to its content. The way that Satyricon uses various sources and Fellini's interpretation of them shows us how cinematic history can have similar methodology to literary history, which could be used to argue for the legitimacy for a cinematic presentation of history. Satyricon also shows how valuable the visual element of presenting ancient Rome can be, since it can show us differences between antiquity and modern society that could not be put across in words. Finally, the film also shows us how cinema can use ancient Rome to comment on modern issues and ways of life, thus making film an important medium for the construction of Rome in the present.
In my view, cinema's relationship to ancient classics will always be affected by the need to adapt ancient texts for a modern audience, and Satyricon shows this quite well. Fellini wished to show antiquity as completely different to modern society and thus the film had less need to adapt the original text to make it easier for modern audiences to consume. However, even Fellini had to make adaptations in order to prevent the film from alienating audiences to such an extent that they would be bored. For example, Dick has pointed out that the original text opens with a scene between Encolpio and Agamemnon bemoaning the decline of classical rhetoric, but this has been cut from the film since "Fellini obviously knew that even an art film should not open with a debate on classical rhetoric" (Dick 1981 :153). This forced Fellini into further changes, for originally Agamemnon took Encolpio to Trimalchio's banquet, where he then met Eumolpo who took him to an art gallery. But in Fellini's version the gallery and banquet scenes are reversed so that Eumolpo can take the place of the omitted Agamemnon and take Encolpio to the banquet. The fact that changes have had to be made to the original plot, even in a film that set out to portray ancient society as being vastly different and indecipherable, shows us how Satyricon is representative of the fact that classical texts will always have to be adapted for modern audiences.
Satyricon also shows us how filmmakers may have to sometimes add their own input into a film in order to capture the essence of a classical text. Petronius's sense of parody would have gone over the heads of people who were unfamiliar with classical poetry and the societies which produced it. For example, the 'Widow of Ephesus' scene is an ironic response to the tragedy of Dido in the Aeneid, while the whole of the original Satyricon was a parody of the Odyssey (Dick 1981: 150). Dick has shown that to solve this problem, Fellini simply replaced Petronius's references to works of antiquity with references to more modern works that would be familiar to the audience. For example, the scene in which Encolpio stands over the dead body of Ascylto would evoke memories of the ending of De Sica's Shoeshine, when Pasquale weeps for the dead Giuseppe (Dick 1981: 151). Therefore we can see how Fellini had to use his own creativity to capture Petronius's sense of parody, and thus it is clear that in order for a film to capture the essence of a classical text, changes may have to be made to get the point across to a modern audience.
The portrayal of sex was more up front in Satyricon than previous Hollywood films about ancient Rome. For example, in Spartacus the simple insinuation of bisexuality was seen as shocking, whilst Satyricon portrayed nudity, sex and homosexuality. When talking about this aspect of the film, Fellini raised an issue which can be seen to affect the relationship between cinema and ancient Greek and Roman classics, namely the attitude of modern society towards the portrayal of subjects such as sex in film. During the time that Satyricon was released there was a debate as to whether cinema had gone to far with its portrayal of sex, yet Fellini pointed out that ancient playwrights such as Aristophanes could be just as explicit, if not more so, and the costumes that actors wore would have been seen as obscene by modern commentators (Chandler 1997: 173). Satyricon was more of an 'art' movie and Fellini therefore did not have too many worries about making the film suitable for mass consumption. Yet an epic Hollywood film would have to be careful not to offend potential viewers and would therefore have to be less explicit in its portrayal of sex, such as in the example from Spartacus above. This issue raised by Satyricon's portrayal of sex, therefore, shows how the standards of modern society will always have an effect on how the classics are portrayed on film, since what was seen to be suitable for an ancient audience may be deemed inappropriate for modern consumption.
Fellini's Satyricon raises many issues about the value of using cinema to reconstruct and consume ancient Rome in the present. One of these is how the portrayal of antiquity in cinema can depend on the filmmaker's choice and interpretation of sources, just as traditional literary histories can use similar sources to argue different viewpoints, and in my opinion this could be used to argue that film is a legitimate form of history. The Satyricon was not filmed using only the original text by Petronius for inspiration. Fellini himself has said that he used other texts such as the Metamorphosis of both Apuleius and Ovid, the Satires of Horace, and the biographies of the Caesars by Suetonius to create the world we see in Satyricon (Fellini 1978: 18). An example of this is the scene of the 'marriage' between Encolpio and Lica. Dick has shown how Fellini used the accounts of Tacitus and Suetonius about Nero's mock weddings to young boys to turn Lica into another Nero (Dick 1981: 151). From this we can see that the treatment of history in cinema is in some ways similar to literary history. The depiction of Rome we see in the final film can depend on the sources used to create the picture, and how these sources are interpreted. For example, in the aforementioned wedding scene Fellini used the stories of Nero to show how different ancient Rome was to our own time. Yet another director could use the sources to show Nero himself as being effeminate or portray him as quite camp, yet this is not the impression we get of Lica in the Satyricon. Another director may dismiss the stories as false rumours and completely ignore them. Thus we can see how the Satyricon is an example of how cinema can reconstruct antiquity in different ways depending on the filmmaker's use of sources, just as literary history can argue different viewpoints by interpreting sources in different manners. This similarity in methodology can therefore be used to argue that films are just as legitimate a form for the portrayal of history as literature, and thus shows the value of cinema for the reconstruction and consumption of antiquity in the present day.
An important aspect of Fellini's Satyricon is that it shows how cinema can help present how different antiquity was to modern society by its visual portrayal of ancient Rome. Fellini himself said that "in Satyricon, I show a time so remote from our own that we can't even imagine it. Though it's our heritage, it's impossible to know what life was really like in ancient Rome" (Chandler 1997: 171). Fellini used various methods to present the society in the film as completely alien to our own. Wyke has shown how a dubbing technique that left characters' voices out of sync with their lips, and the insertion of random sound effects which had no meaning, distanced viewers from the characters which thus helped prevent the audience identifying with the Romans in the film (Wyke 1997: 190). A lot of characters in the film also use visual gestures such as facial expressions, or the arm movements used by Gitone, that are unrecognisable and incomprehensible to the audience. The point that Fellini was trying to put across by doing this was that, although ancient Rome has been studied by numerous historians, so much of the society is lost to us that there will always be large parts of it that we will never know of. Dick has pointed out how Fellini represents this symbolically on the screen by often showing characters on the side of the frame against a background of expansive sky or and empty space. For example, in the Garden of Delights Ascylto crouches at the left of the frame against a blank wall. The point of doing this is that "symbolically, compositions in which the object appears on a block of space call attention to the absence of a specific background and therefore to the gaps in our knowledge of the past" (Dick 1981: 147). Thus we can see how the visual nature of cinema can help to represent just how different ancient Rome was to modern society, and can raise important historical questions by drawing attention to the fact that much of what made Roman society is lost to us, something that can be hard to do in literature.
However, in my view cinema does have its drawbacks in this regard, because as a medium it is seen primarily as a means of entertainment. Rosenthal has drawn attention to the fact that the people and events that are portrayed in Satyricon are so far removed from us that most of the film passes by without producing much reaction from the audience (Rosenthal 1976: 36). This may not pose to much of a problem for a small budget 'art' film, but for epic blockbusters like the type produced by Hollywood it is a huge stumbling block in the accurate portrayal of Rome on film, since they need to captivate and entertain their audience if they are to make money. Therefore, although Satyricon can show the use of cinema in reconstructing a society completely different to our own, we can see that many other films would not be able to do this because they would run the risk of boring their audience.
Fellini's Satyricon shows how cinema is a valuable tool for the consumption of ancient Rome in the modern era, since it shows how antiquity can be used to draw attention to parts of our own society. This seems strange when we consider that Fellini portrayed ancient Rome as a completely alien society, but Dick points out an example that shows how the director merged the alien with the familiar. In the 'Villa of the Suicides' sequence a classical image of husband and wife drinking in the garden with peacocks in the background puts us into ancient Rome. Yet when Encolpio and Ascylto enter the house we are transported into a world of groupies, anonymous sex and sixties 'hippy' culture (Dick 1981: 148), and so we can see how the film can draw parallels between ancient Rome and modern society.
This is important, since it means that cinema can deal with contemporary issues through film. Fellini argued that the negative image of Rome that was so often portrayed to modern audiences, that of a faithless society which gave little power to the common man in politics and was the driven by greed, was no so different to the society of the sixties (Fellini 1978: 16-7). He therefore used the film as a critique of modern life. We can see this in a scene near the end of the film, in which the characters are given the chance to inherit some of Eumolpo's wealth on the condition that they eat his dead body. Everyone except Encolpio agrees to do this, yet Encolpio remains self-content whilst the cannibals are not, even though they stand to make money. Fellini has pointed out that Encolpio is alienated from the society around him, and the fact he does not share the values of his peers means he is able to remain content with his lot. This is Fellini's way of saying that people should look twice at the values of western society, since it is only those who did not share the materialistic, commercial mindset that were happy with their lives. Thus we can see that cinema can be incredibly useful for the consumption of ancient Rome in the present, since it can show us the faults of antiquity and help us to avoid repeating them.
Fellini's film adaptation of Petronius' novel tells us a lot about both cinema's relationship to Greek and Roman classics and its use for reconstructing and consuming ancient Rome in the present. It enables us to see how, however hard filmmakers may try, the unfamiliarity of modern audiences with antiquity and the different values of the two societies will always prevent a film remaining completely loyal to the original text. The visual nature of cinema means it can portray the differences between us and the ancients which we may not think about, such as mannerisms, in a far more effective manner than could be put across in a book. Finally, Satyricon is an example of how antiquity can be used to comment on the present, and how the parallels between the two societies can help prevent us repeating the negative aspects of antiquity that we criticise today.