The biographies of eminent Greeks and Romans written by Plutarch were not texts designed simply to record the subject's life, but rather used their protagonist as a model for imparting moral lessons to the reader. Plutarch hoped that by showing virtuous characters, his readers would be able to emulate the subject's good qualities and thus better themselves. This is especially prominent in the Pericles, and it is for this reason that Plutarch wrote such a positive biography of the Greek statesman. In this commentary I will look at the end of the Life and how it summarises different themes recurrent in the text, such as demonstrating Pericles' virtues, Plutarch's defence of Pericles against the charge of being a demagogue, and the author's techniques in doing this.
Before looking at the virtues shown in this section of the Life, it is worth pointing out that the Pericles was paired with another Life, that of Fabius Maximus. Because Plutarch paired these two figures together his biographies of them often share similar features, which I will acknowledge in parts of this commentary.
One of the virtues that Plutarch admired in Pericles was his calmness. Instances of this calmness can be seen throughout the Life, for example when the Spartans invaded Attica and the Athenians were desperate to go to war, Pericles remained composed and followed his own plan of action. Plutarch uses a rhetorical trick to show this calmness in chapter 39, where he twists the meaning of Pericles' nickname of 'Olympian'. Contemporary comic poets had given this title to Pericles as a way of making fun of his aloof manner. However, Plutarch argued that the name was appropriate, since Pericles shared the calmness associated with the gods. This technique of using a nickname to show virtue also appears in the Fabius Maximus, in which Plutarch claims that Fabius was known as 'Little Sheep' due to his self-control and dignity. Thus we can see how Plutarch could use something as small as a nickname to show virtues which his readers could recognise and emulate.
Another trait of both Pericles and Fabius that is seen as a virtue by Plutarch is their lack of superstition. In Pericles' case this was due to his good education at the hands of figures such as Anaxagoras. Throughout the Life Pericles is untroubled by bad omens, for example in chapter 35 he ignores an eclipse that terrifies everyone else who sees it. In the extract I am discussing Plutarch indirectly mentions this lack of superstition by mentioning how, when Pericles was ill, his character deteriorated to such an extent that he had taken to wearing an amulet, which showed "what a terrible state he must be in to submit to such nonsense". In antiquity there was a constant debate over whether a person's character could be affected by external factors such as illness, and this issue can be seen as a constant theme in Plutarch's writing. Stadter has pointed out that several other biographies by Plutarch show a change in the protagonist's character near the end of the Life, for example Alexander also became increasingly superstitious. Therefore we can see that Plutarch appears to have supported the idea that external circumstances could affect a person's character, with Pericles' change from rational thinker to follower of superstition in chapter 38 being just one of a number of examples he uses to support this theory.
In chapter 39 Plutarch gives something similar to an encomium when he summarises Pericles' career in an entirely positive tone. Yet the one aspect of Pericles' life that caused most dispute amongst the ancients was his monopoly of power and his methods in achieving it. Figures such as Plato took a negative stance and viewed Pericles as a demagogue whose methods of achieving power were harmful to the state. Others in the hostile tradition also accused Pericles of aiming at establishing a tyranny, and referred to his companions as "new Pesistratidae". The charge of aiming at tyranny was also levied at Fabius Maximus, who ruled Rome as a dictator, and this provides another similarity between the two statesmen that led Plutarch to pair them together.
Yet there was a positive tradition towards Pericles, which viewed him as a good aristocratic ruler. Writers such as Thucydides put forward this point of view, which greatly influenced Plutarch. Therefore a major theme of the Life is the defence of Pericles against the charges of acting as a tyrant and demagogue. Plutarch does this not by denying Pericles used what could be seen as demagogic methods, but by arguing that his use of power was beneficial to Athens and thus justified his actions. This can be seen in chapter 39, where Plutarch says that "the offensive power he had wielded, which had previously been dubbed autocracy and tyranny, was seen to have been a source of safety and protection".
So how was Plutarch able to portray Pericles as a good aristocratic ruler in chapter 39 of the Life, when many of his early actions appear to be those of a demagogue? Gomme has argued that Pericles' character simply changes halfway through the biography, and he goes from being a demagogue to the noble leader we see at the end of the Life, but I do not agree with this view. Breebaart has convincingly argued that Plutarch never portrays Pericles as a demagogue, but as an aristocrat who is forced into the popular cause. For example, he points out that Plutarch says Pericles chased popular support against his own nature, and only used demagogic methods in reaction to the methods of his political rivals. It was only when his political rivals were removed that he could act as his true self. Thus it was not a change in Pericles' character, but in his political circumstances, that allowed him to act as the almost monarchical leader we see described in chapter 39. I agree with this view, and so Plutarch's evaluation of Pericles as an aristocratic leader at the end of the Life is representative of how he presents Pericles throughout his career.
To further elevate Pericles, Plutarch contrasts him to his successors in an incredibly positive light. The politicians who came after Pericles are described as "a rich crop and hoard of evil", who Pericles had kept from harming the state. Pelling has pointed out that Plutarch often uses historical events after his subject's death in order to further elevate him. He takes the case of Cimon, and argues that "the failures of his successors do not diminish his achievement, they heighten it: they project the gloom against which Cimon's brilliance stands out". The poor leadership of Athens after Pericles' death, as described by Plutarch in this extract, is therefore designed to elevate Pericles and his leadership of the city. This method of comparison to elevate a protagonist is a common form of writing in biography. For example, in Xenophon's encomium of Agesilaus he compares Agesilaus and the Persian King. Stadter has pointed out that "Plutarch's goal of awarding praise to a man so as to elicit admiration and emulation is very similar to that of the encomium", and the fact that this summary of Pericles' life is placed so soon after his death shows us the influence of this form of praise speech on Plutarch. Thus we can see that not only does Plutarch defend Pericles from the charge of being a demagogue, but in this extract he also compares him to later demagogues in order to increase his status.
Because Plutarch wrote biographies with a moral theme, rather than histories, he sometimes puts his own spin on events in order to show virtues or make a point, and this is evident in the extract I am discussing. For example, Pericles did not have a particularly impressive military record. Therefore, rather than attempt to show him as a traditional conquering hero, Plutarch took the opposite view and praised Pericles for his self-restraint and caution. For example, in chapter 39 he talks of Pericles' "self-possession, which he maintained throughout all the troubles and hostility that beset him". This is a clear reference to Pericles' refusal to fight the Lacedaemonians when they invaded Attica. Thus a decision that could be seen as cowardly is in fact turned into a virtue by Plutarch.
In chapters 38-9 Plutarch appears to be so concerned with showing Pericles in a positive light that he ignores events that contradict the image he presents. For example, he says that Pericles led Athens in "a blameless and unblemished fashion", yet Pericles was fined by the demos and deprived of his position as a general. He also claims that Pericles never treated an enemy as irreconcilable, yet he stubbornly refused to repeal the Megarian decree, had Thucydides ostracised, and only recalled Cimon on the condition that he was to take a fleet and stay away from Athens (though Plutarch does not seem certain of this). Furthermore, on his deathbed Pericles claims that no Athenian citizen put on mourning clothes because of him. Stadter points out that the context of this quote, which is mentioned just after a reference to military trophies, was used by Plutarch to show that Pericles had not needlessly wasted Athenian lives in unnecessary wars. This would thus reinforce the image of Pericles as a cautious, self-controlled general, yet by doing this Plutarch ignored deaths that could have been avoided by following a different policy. Therefore we can see how Plutarch can use spin, or sometimes gloss over events, in an attempt to show virtue, since he places this at a higher priority than showing historical truth.
This extract of Plutarch's Life of Pericles contains a number of features that appear in the life as a whole. It shows Pericles' virtues of calmness, self-control and lack of superstition, whilst also defending him from the charge of being a demagogue. It shows common methods that appear both in ancient biographical writing, such as comparison between the protagonist and other figures in order to elevate the former, and in Plutarch's own writing, such as using criticisms and taunts, or ignoring some aspects of his subject's career in order to show virtue.