In accordance with the title I am allowing Medea to be a figure of male nightmares and intend to argue the reasons why she both is, and is not, something more than that. I believe that, viewed as just a character in a tragedy, Medea is nothing more than figure of male nightmares. She has few of the qualities that we are led to believe Athenian women of her time had. She is not submissive or obedient to men, and she does not remain in the house to take care of its management and her children. Infact she is almost male. She is the aggressor, she takes the initiative and she exacts her revenge in a male way, through death. From the weeping, desolate woman at the beginning of the play grows an enraged monster who, by the end, rides away in a chariot of the gods with the blood of her own children on her hands. She becomes so outrageous, so huge and terrifying a monster, that she cannot be more than a nightmare because such a creature could only ever exist in dreams. However, when viewed as a piece of work, a literary creation, Medea is much more than just a nightmare. She is a statement on the roles and treatment of women in Athens in the 5 th Century and a literary advancement in characterisation on the part of Euripides.
Medea cannot be anything more than a figure of male nightmares as a character because she is too unrealistic and extreme to exist outside the dreamscape. First and foremost she is a monster. She sacrifices her own children just to get back at Jason, and even does so after she knows she has successfully killed his wife and father-in-law. She cannot be content until she sees him done as much damage as possible and no obstacle, not even her own flesh and blood, will stand in her way. That is what makes her 'No woman, but a tiger; a Tuscan Scylla- but more savage'. This extent of preoccupation with bloodshed and revenge belongs to no one else but the Furies. Nowhere else in Greek tragedy do we see such supposedly reasoned savagery. As the play goes on we watch as Medea's humanity falls away. At the beginning she weeps in the house and laments the loss of Jason. However, it is not long before she is cursing him and planning her revenge. When she asks the messenger from the palace to recount the deaths of the princess and her father she states: "You'll give me double pleasure if their death was horrible.". She then ignores the part of her that urges her not to kill her children, effectively shutting off the last of her humanity as, when she appears at the end of the play, triumphant and elite, she shows little remorse and reminds Jason angrily "I can stab too:". She may be a barbarian, and thus not expected to behave in a civilised way, but, as Knox points out, in Iphigenia in Tauris the captured barbarian king says about Orestes murder of his own mother: "Not even among the barbarians would anyone have the heart to do what he has done.". Here is Euripides himself pointing out that even the barbarians, these savage outsiders, would not commit such a crime against their own blood.
Another aspect of Medea that makes her so extreme and unbelievable is her maleness. No woman of Athens would ever be so male, so she becomes even more improbable and dream-like. She states how she would rather '..stand three times in the front line than bear one child.', preferring fighting like a man to giving birth to children like a woman. Medea's great anger also suggests a maleness as public anger belonged very much to the male in Athens at the time. As Harris says: "A properly organised city, from a Greek male point of view, was one in which women knew their place; and knowing their place involved among other thing avoiding anger.". Medea does know her 'place', that of a grateful foreigner, and obedient inhabitant, but not a citizen, of Athens, but she refuses to be put in it. She lets loose her anger as if she were male and has the right to and she takes her revenge as if she were male, by killing. "I understand the horror of what I am going to do; but anger, the spring of all life's horror, masters my resolve."
Another thing that makes Medea so unbelievable is the way she appears to have the Gods behind her. The Gods did not look kindly on those who killed their own family and punished them, yet Medea calls on Zeus many times throughout the play and there is never any evidence of him taking action against her. In Oedipus Rex the gods make their displeasure at Oedipus' pollution known by causing a famine and barrenness on his city. In Aeschylus' Agamemnon the constant references to the Furies let us know that Clytemnestra's deeds will not go unpunished. However in Medea, at the end of the play we see only a sign of support from the Gods: the chariot of Helios.
As a literary creation, Medea is much more than a nightmare. In her Euripides creates a more advanced heroine than has been seen before. She seems part Sophoclean hero, she is set on what she is going to do, she is passionate, she will not listen to reason, she is alone, she feels disrespected, she is unafraid of consequences and so on. In these ways, she resembles Sophocles' Electra from the play of the same title thought to have been written around or just before Medea. But she is not all Electra, as Electra cannot act without Orestes and Medea, though she needs Aegeus' aid for the future, does not need a male hand to do her killing. In this respect she is like Aeschylus' Clytemnestra from the century before, another committer of murder within the family. Like Clytemnestra she is cunning and willing to spend time deceiving her enemies so as to set up the perfect revenge. Like Clytemnestra she will do the deed herself, and like Clytemnestra she does not object to killing the innocent party of whom they both seem jealous (in Medea's case Glacue, and in Clytemnestra's Cassandra). But to both these characters Euripides must add something more to create the product that is Medea: an element of monstrosity. Clytemnestra may be cruel like Medea, but she goes straight to the heart of matters and kills Agamemnon. Medea does not kill Jason, she does what is possibly worse, she decides to revenge herself by hurting him as much as she possibly can, "This is the way to deal Jason the deepest wound." . She is unlike any heroines that have gone before her, designed to shock, and she still does now, thousands of years on. She is much more than a nightmare in this respect, she is a masterpiece.
Medea is also more than a nightmare in another sense. She is a statement on Athenian women of the time. Out of her mouth comes some of the most pro-women statements of her time. It is because of her speeches that many label Euripides a feminist. As Goldhill, rephrasing Slater, puts it: "Women, repressed in life by men, find a voice through men in the institution of tragedy." and in Medea Euripides seems to do just that. "Surely, of all creatures that have life and will. We women are the most wretched." Medea moans, but as she carries on we see the role of women unfolding. She talks of being possessed by one's husband, of having to 'purchase' this husband at a price and she makes valid points about what little a woman has should her husband leave her. It is very hard not to sympathise with Medea throughout the first few scenes of the play, and even though that sympathy may diminish as she takes her revenge, her points are still no less valid. She has been betrayed, Jason is indeed an 'oath-breaker' and a 'guest-deceiver'. The chorus, a group of Greek women, agree with her "To punish Jason will be just.". And although the tragedies are plays and are thus not necessarily a completely accurate representation of Greek society at the time, they cannot be discounted completely. As Goldhill suggests after comparing Sophocles' Procne to Medea: "The attribution if such sentiments to two such similar characters by two different playwrights suggests that the lot of women was, in late fifth-century Athens, very much a question of the day, and also a subject that fascinated the tragic poets.".
In conclusion, Medea can be seen as both nothing more than a male nightmare and as something much greater than just that. She can be dismissed as being nothing more than a fantastical, evil witch, or she can be viewed as thrilling advancement and a thought-provoking message on the functions and expectations of Athenian women of the fifth-century.