For the past decades, researchers have been interested in whether could chimpanzees, who share close genetic features with human, acquire language known unique to man. Some chimpanzees were taught modified American Sign Language (ASL) while others were trained to use signs or symbols known as lexigrams to communicate. They were capable of learning and using these signs but this does not directly support that they possess language.
Washoe, a chimpanzee raised by psychologist Allen and Beatrice Gardner, was able to acquire 132 ASL signs over a period of 4 years and managed to spontaneously used combination of signs in 2 or 3 words sequence to express meaning relations, which resembled some of the early sentences of young children, such as WANT BERRY, TIME DRINK, THERE SHOE (B.T. & R.A. Gardner, 1975, cited in Crystal, 1997:402). She might have grasp some designs features of language, properties used to define language introduced by Charles Hockett, such as arbitrariness, semanticity and creativity but Aitchison (1989) did noted that
Washoe did not consistently sign in order which inferred that she does not understand structure
dependent operation, an essential feature of language, which is believed to be innate in human.
Another chimpanzee, by the name of Nim Chompsky, under the care of psychologist
Herbert Terrace learned to sign ASL but there were limitation to his utterances. Even though he managed to record a 16 signs sequence of GIVE ORANGE ME GIVE EAT ORANGE ME EAT ORANGE GIVE ME EAT ORANGE: GIVE ME YOU, it merely consists of redundant repetition and showed no structural order. Nim rarely sign spontaneously and most of the time it is in response to the trainers' prompting and conditioning. This is a big contrast in comparison to children, who usually initiate conversations and become increasingly more creative in their language use as they grow up (Fromkin, Rodman & Hyams, 2003).
Dr Sue Savage-Rumbaugh reported that Kanzi, a pygmy chimpanzee taught to use lexigrams, acquired a vocabulary of' 200 signs and has the comprehension of spoken language equivalent to a two and a half year old child. However, he did not exhibit any further progress in linguistic skills such as producing complex sentences in reference to the universal Grammar. Johnson (1995) claimed that 'there is no evidence that chimpanzees utterances emerge from anything like the "language organ" Dr Chomsky believes resides only in human brains'. They are just not predisposed to cope with language.
There is more to language than just being capable of matching pictures, signs or spoken words to objects or actions. It involves creating sentences to narrate one's feelings in novel ways without internal or external stimuli. This was not exhibited by signing chimpanzees.
Based on experimental findings, it revealed that chimpanzees' acquisition of language is limited. Although chimpanzees may be able to present certain linguistics characteristics, it is premature to conclude that chimpanzees actually have language. There is no strong evidence to date that could support that chimpanzees are able to acquire language distinctive to man.
Acquisition of speech comes naturally during childhood, while reading and writing has to be learned through formal and informal teaching. Fromkin, Rodman & Hyams (2003:546) stated that `to become literate, to learn to read and write, one must make a conscious effort and receive instruction'.
Children are anatomically prepared, through evolution, for speech. They do not need to be taught to talk. At a very young age, they perceive sounds of language from their surroundings and start off producing cooing and babbling sounds. Then they progress to utter single recognizable word, to two-word combinations and to meaningful sentences using their vocal tract consisting of the lips, tongue, mouth, pharynx, larynx and lungs. Children unconsciously develop grammar of language from all aspects including phonology, semanticity, syntax, and morphology as well as pragmatics. It was discovered that the innate drive to acquire language is so strong that children will create their own spoken language if they are deprived of the stimuli of proper language, which is evident in the creation of twin languages and creole (Wren, 2002).
In contrast, reading and writing is not a natural process. Crystal (1997:181) mentioned that the structures of the eye and hand do not seem to be biologically adapted for written language in the way that the vocal organs are for speech. A speaking child may be able to see written words in a book but not able to read, likewise he may be able to hold a pencil with his fingers and scribbles or draw but unable to write words. Children indeed need to be taught to read and write.
In order to acquire reading skills, in reference to the English Language, a child has to learn to distinguish and remember the visual appearance of different letters and words, work out how the alphabetic letters symbolizes different sounds and how the sounds can be put together to make words. It was found that children only begin to be aware of the existence of phoneme when they learn how to read, which is extremely crucial for efficient reading (Bryant & Bradley, 1985). In writing, children need to control their fine motor skills to write letter shapes as well as spell words in correct letter formation. They also have to know about word spaces, margins and punctuations. It was found that here no necessary link between reading and writing (Crystal, 1997:215). Hence, both require different learning strategies.
Furthermore, there would be no literacy gap in a community if children could acquire reading and writing on their own. It is recognized that reading and writing has to be learned by children, and many education modules has been carefully planned out to help children to acquire and develop these new linguistics skills especially in schools.
It is obvious that children's reading and writing has to be learned and it takes years of hard work. On the contrary, they are able to acquire speech and language at a remarkable speed without needing any teaching.
Language processes, which take place in the mind, cannot be observed directly. Psycholinguists have been studying and analyzing speech errors or `slips of tongue' and uses them as indirect evidence to explain about the neuropsychological processes that underlie speech.
Occurrence of speech errors are due to either a breakdown in the word selection process where a wrong word is being chosen or a fault in the assembling process of correctly selected words. It was found that slips, in tongue are not random and they are bound by basic constraints.
Different kinds of units such as features, segments, morphemes, words, and even phrases are involved in speech errors where they might be exchanged, anticipated and produced earlier than intended, or persevered and repeated. This shows that we construct syntactic phrases and sentences in a buffer memory, where error may occur, before articulating them instead of retrieving one word from the mental lexicon and say it one at a time without involving any planning (Fromkin, Rodman & Hyams, 2003; Garman, 1990).
Shattuck-I Hufnagel (1979) is quoted by Aitchison (1989:260) as claiming that sound misplacement occurs because a "scan-copying" mechanism has gone wrong. A scanning device copies each segment of the pre-selected words for utterance and then deletes them. In the case of an exchange error found in LOWING THE MORN (mowing the lawn), the L and M was mistakenly copied, while a repetition error in BEEF NEEDLE (b eef n oodle), the EE was not deleted after being copied.
The example A BURLY BIRD (An early bird) presented an anticipatory error where the phoneme /b/ of  bird was added to the beginning of early. Note that the indefinite article was also changed to conform to the grammatical rule. This suggested the existence of a `monitoring device' that prevents a compounding of errors. Besides that, it also reveals some information about stages of speech production that is phonemic disorder has to occur before the indefinite article is given its phonological form or the morphological rule have to reapply after the initial error has occurred (Fromkin et al, 2003).
Blends, another type of speech errors, for instance FROWL (frown / scowl) illustrate the lexical selection process. We may retrieve two or more words to express our ideas, and instead of deciding on which one to use, both words are blended together.
Slips in which the uttered word has some meaning and sound similarity to the target word as in HE WAS IN THE NEXT COMPONENT (compartment) shows that there's overlapping of processes in selecting the meaning and fitting on the sounds (Aitchison, 1989). It also inferred that words with similar ideas or meanings as well as similar sounding words are linked together in the mind.
In conclusion, naturally occurring speech errors managed to shed some light into the understanding of language processes in an adult speaker. However, speech production is a big complex piece of puzzle with a huge portion remaining unknown and yet to be solved.