Sociolinguists today are more concerned with social variation in language. Quantitative studies were set off from the pioneering work of William Labov. Scientific investigations is carried out by stating the hypotheses, sampling, collecting data, drawing conclusions and relating conclusions to the social functions of variation. The use of linguistics variable, a linguistic item which has identifiable variants, has added a new dimension to linguistic investigations and is a basic tool used in the study of variation (Wardhaugh, 1998). By relating the occurrence of the variants of linguistic variables to quantifiable social factors such as gender and class, we could find out the effect of social variables on language. I will initially discuss the effect of social class on the way we speak and followed by gender as the other social variable. Subsequently. I will consider the link between the two variables in human speech.
Social class is an abstract construct and a complicated factor. Downes (1984) mentioned that people are stratified within a society by classifying and ranking them in a hierarchy from the highest to the lowest on some scale. These scales can be based on occupation ranging from professionals to unskilled workers, education ranging from graduate to high school attendance, and income level as well as source of income. Few studies have been carried out to investigate the how people speak in different social class. The linguistic variables can be phonological, such as dropping of [h], pronouncing to[] rather than [n], rhoticity and nasalizing vowels or grammatical, such as occurrence of `s' of the third-person singular and multiple negations. The study of New York City Speech by William Labov is regarded as a classic in sociolinguistcs where he interviewed 120 people and examined their pronunciations of different consonants and vowels. His Findings of regular pattern relating to social class of the speakers later reemerged in similar studies done in English-speaking communities all over the world (Holmes, 2001).
A study done in Norwich by Trudgill, found out that the highest social group drops the least number of [h] and the lowest social group omits the most number of [h] in words like `hand', `heart', etc (cited in Romaine, 1994). The Detroit study by Wolfram and Fasold (cited in Holmes, 2001) on grammatical pattern shows that higher social groups use more standard grammatical form and fewer instances of the non-standard form or the vernacular; here being the lower class speakers saying vernacular present third person singular present tense verb for example `she walk' instead of the standard `she walks'.
In terms of vocabulary, people from different social classes choose different words to represent a certain thing. For example, it was claimed that the upper-class English people used "lavatory" rather than "toilet" which is referred to by the non upper-class English people. There is no empirical research to back up these claims but its existence does distinguish social groups on a categorical basis (Holmes, 2001).
We will now elaborate on gender and its effect on speech. The term gender refers to the "social, cultural, psychological construct that are imposed upon biological differences between male and female" (Shapiro, 1981, cited in Mcelhinny, 2003:22). The relation between linguistic variables such as phonological and morphological variants and social variable of gender will be explained later in correspondence to the link with social class mentioned above. Women are claimed to have their preference of lexical choices. They use more color words such as lavender or aquamarine, adjectives such as charming, lovely or divine which are rarely used by men (Wardhaugh, 1998).
We will also focus on the different conversational style employed by men and women. This can be divided into verbosity, minimal response, hedges, tag questions, commands and directives, swearing and taboo language and compliments. The following findings are cited in Coates (1993). The Folklinguistic claim of "women talk more than men" are proven wrong as research revealed that men talk more than women where male subjects too on average 13.00 minutes to describe a picture compared to female subject who only took 3.17 minutes (Swacker, 1975). It was found that men dominate more in mixed interaction. The topics that men and women also differ vastly; men like to talk about sports and politics which is associated with competition while women like to talk about child-rearing and personal relationships. Research also shows that women use more minimal responses at appropriate moments indicating support as a listener to the speaker.
Hedges such as "I think", "you know" or "perhaps" usage in men and women are investigated and studies had supported Lakoff's claims that women uses more hedges. Further research by I Holmes (1987) revealed that women use "you know" more frequently than men when expresses confidence but less frequently when it expresses uncertainty and this demonstrates that hedges are mufti-functional. Moving on to tag questions, women do use more tag questions in comparison to men. Holmes (1984) pointed out that tags used by women arc facilitative, which express the speaker's supportive attitude to the addressee while tags used by men arc modal, which expresses degree of certainty about the specific proposition. In terms of directive, a speech act which tries to get someone to do something, Goodwin (1990) managed to observe that boys preferred to use aggravated directives to explicitly command and establish status differences, and in contrary, girls use more mitigated directives which exploits suggestions for future action. Cultural stereotypes claim that men swear more than women. There is no clear data that actually support this claim but however, there is evidence that female speakers are familiar with a wide range of taboo words and are increasingly ready to use them (De Klerk, 1992). Research suggested that worsen give more compliments than men. It was also claimed that intonation patterns of men and women vary; women uses certain patterns associated with surprise and politeness more often than men (Wardhaugh, 1998).
People are socially conditioned and, to a certain extent, men are taught to speak like men and women are taught to speak like woman since young according to the established norm. The existence of a predetermined set of rules in various languages distinguishes the male and female gender. For example, Japanese men show they are men when they speak by referring themselves as "boku" or "ore" while Japanese female uses "watashi" or "atashi". (Wardhaugh, 1998).
In the study of variation, there might be interaction between social variables. Gender could be secondary to social class in relation to the same linguistics variable. To illustrate the connection between social stratification and gender, we will look back at the Detroit study which showed that upper middle class uses the least multiple negation, like "I don't have no money'", in contrast to the lower working class who uses the most multiple negation. In the same study, it also revealed that women of each social class use the more standard variants, that is less multiple negation, more often than men of equal status. It was interpreted that women tends to hypercorrect more than men, especially lower middle class , showing their sensitivity to linguistic norms which is attributed to their insecure social position (Romaine, 1994). In reference to phonological linguistic variable of pronouncing [] in "singing" and [n] in singin' in Trudgill's study in Norwich, the general pattern observed was women speakers for all social classes tend to use the standard variant [] more and the non standard variant [n] less in comparison to men speakers (Coates, 1993). Labov (1990) mentioned that "men are less influenced by the social stigma directed against them while women respond to the overt prestige associated with them".
Social construct such as social class and gender does have an effect on spoken language in including conversational styles. Most variations are not free. Higher social class prefers to use the more standard form of language while the lower social class would be comfortable with their usage of non standard language or vernacular. Women, who are stereotype to have nurturing role in the society and with less dominance and power in the men-biased society, would work towards higher status by using more standard language in comparison to men. It is obvious that men and women differ in the way they speak because they often fill distinctly different roles in society. Moreover, men and women know this and behave appropriately (Wardhaugh, 1998). The ideology of gender should be incorporated with the ideology of social class in the study of variation of language for a more complete description and understanding.