A protein is a polypeptide, or complex of polypeptides that has attained a stable three-dimensional structure and is biologically active. A polypeptide is a sequence of amino acids linked by peptide bonds between the amino and carbonyl groups. Therefore, amino acids are sub-units that are joined into condensation polymers which make up proteins.
Glycine (aminoethanoic acid)
This normally exists as a zwitterion
A condensation reaction occurs between the carboxyl group of one molecule of gylcine and the amino group of the other molecule of glycine to form a peptide bond (-CONH-) and a molecule of water is given off.
Globular proteins are three dimensional structures that contain both secondary and tertiary structures. There are two main types of secondary structure, the -helix and the  sheets.
In a globular protein such as carbonic anhydrase, a human enzyme, many hydrogen bonds exist. Globular proteins are very important in biological systems and act as enzymes, hormones and transport and receptor proteins. Typically, as in carbonic anhydrase, they contain both -helices and  sheets in their secondary structures. These secondary structures are very stable as the bonds are at their optimum length and these structures are sterically favourable. Much of their tertiary structure is maintained by hydrogen bonds. However, as hydrogen bonds are relatively weak, this leads to the structure being less stable than of other molecules containing more covalent bonds such as diamond. In fact they are only 5-10% the strength of covalent bonds. This means that globular proteins are susceptible to high temperatures which disrupt their structure by breaking the hydrogen bonds and causing a loss of function. The ability of these hydrogen bonds to break can, however, be advantageous. For example, proteins can be easily broken down by the digestive system when they are damaged, in excess or no longer required and the amino acids can be reused in another protein. This recycling of sub-units is very important in the human body. The fact that the bonds are weaker also allows the bonds to flew and stretch when required. This is illustrated in haemoglobin or other transport proteins. The weak hydrogen bonds enable the shape of the molecules to change. When an oxygen molecule binds to a heme group on haemoglobin the structure is changed so that the other heme groups become more easily available for bonding. A third advantage is that the hydrogen bonds only require a small input of energy to form and so protein synthesis uses less energy.
Theoretically the blood pH should rise from 5.5 to 7.4 during recovery from exercise, an overall change of pH of 1.94.
In order to counteract these changes in pH that could be detrimental to cellular processes a mechanism exists using a buffer solution. A buffer is a solution of weak acid or weak base that is a able to resist changes in pH. Thy do this by reacting with excess H+ or OH- ions. Protons released by the acid react with the ionized form of the buffer, A-, neutralising them whilst OH- ions react with the undissociated buffer, HA.
The system used in the blood is called the carbonate buffer system.
During aerobic exercise CO2 is produced which reacts with H2O to form H2CO3 or carbonic acid. If anaerobic exercise takes place this is further increased by the by product lactic acid. Both of these substances are acidic and would lower the pH to 5.5 as is shown in 2(a) if the buffer mechanism was not in place to maintain a steady pH.
Actually the pH only falls as low as 7.24 with the buffer system in place when the blood lactate level is raised from 1.6mM to 8.3mM