Linguistics, the scientific study of language, is essential in the field of speech and language pathology. It provides the foundation in understanding the nature and causes of communication disorders. In carrying out clinical work, linguistic knowledge is applied in identifying and assessing speech and language disorders in children and adults, as well as in planning and performing appropriate therapeutic interventions.
Linguistic theories provided a distinction between speech and language. Saussure, the founder of modern linguistics, contributed the basis of explaining spoken communication. Speech is a physiological act made by an individual, which results in the production of physical sound waves that is considered of having concrete existence. Language is a psychological abstract that does not have substance but exist as a 'form' in the shared knowledge of a linguistic community. Within language, it can be divided into two aspects, language execution (expression) and language reception (comprehension) (Grundy, 1995). Thus, speech impairment can be differentiated from language impairment.
Assessment and diagnosis of speech and language disorders is built on the linguistic-descriptive approach. The method is based on describing language, using metalanguage, at different levels of the linguistic hierarchy. The frame work of linguistic components is illustrated in Figure 1 (adapted from Crystal, 1984).
The different levels of language, which are briefly defined in the following (Fromkin, Rodman & Hyams, 2003), are important in providing a systematic linguistic analysis.
It is important to recognize that although language can be separated into multiple levels, each linguistic level interacts and has influence on one another. A breakdown in any of the linguistic levels will result atypical communication condition.
I would further discuss the links between linguistics with speech and language pathology, including its role in assessment and management, with reference to two communication disorders:
Cleft palate is a congenital malformation that involves the hard or soft palate or both, unilaterally or bilaterally. There is sub-mucous cleft where the surface of the palate appears intact in contrast with overt cleft. It is a type of articulatory disorder, which may be accompanied with or without phonological consequences.
Knowledge in phonetics, especially articulatory phonetics in this case, is crucial in understanding the pathology of cleft palate. Majority of English consonants are oral sounds produced with a velic closure, where a sufficient air pressure is achieved in the mouth; except for the nasal consonants [m], [n] and [], which is produced by lowering the velum to allow air flow through the nose. Problem in the velopharyngeal mechanism in children with cleft palate causes hypernasality. Hypernasality can also be influenced by degree of mouth opening, tongue position and relationship of maxilla and mandible (Stengelhofen, 1989). A nasal snort, a disturbance caused by nasal emission may be heard.
Due to velopharyngeal insufficiency, with air escaping into the nose, oral plosives may be substituted by glottal stops where manner of articulation is maintained but there is a shift of place as a compensation to achieve plosion. Misuse of larynx in glottal articulation results a harsh quality phonation with uncontrolled loudness (Berry & Einsenson, 1972).
Lawrence & Phillips (1975, cited in Stengelhofen, 1989) stated that there is also a tendency for contacts to the back of the mouth. Backing, is a deviation from normal speech development, for example in [ggi] for 'daddy', which is different from the stopping of fricatives in [tu] for 'sue' and cluster reduction in [pun] for 'spoon' that are observed as part of the normal development process in children.
Dental abnormalities and malocclusion between the upper and lower jaw may be present in children with cleft palate and interfere in speech production of fricatives / s /, / z /, /  /, /  /, / f / and / v / and alveolar plosives / t / and / d /. A compensatory substitution for labiodental [f] and [v] with bilabial [] and [] may be seen (Starr, 1979).
Phonetic impairment may lead to phonological impairment of reduced phonological contrast, for example when the child produces both alveolar fricative / s / and postalveolar fricative /  / as palatal [] by saying [

] for both 'sew' and 'show'.
The child with cleft palate may be subjected to language delay. Hearing impairment resulting from chronic otitis media as well as malfunction in the opening and closing of the Eustachian tube can reduce auditory input and feedback, which consequently slows the development of language comprehension and expressive language.
Besides taking a thorough medical history of the size and extent of the cleft including any surgical repair done or any usage of palatal training appliance or obturator, a descriptive profile of the child's speech and language abilities is made, for example by collecting a phonetic inventory as well as conducting the Phonological Assessment of Child Speech (PACS). Instrumental articulatory phonetics such as the electropalatograph may also be used. Phonetic and phonological analysis helps to estimate the developmental level areas associated with language acquisition.
Intervention is performed through play. Articulatory therapy, with preparatory work focusing on auditory discrimination using minimal pairs, should be progressive; plosive sounds should be tackled first before the fricatives and affricatives in coherence with the normal development sequence. Initial focus is placed in facilitating the production of sounds in isolation and then into simple nonsense CV syllables and followed by meaningful words. Further consonants of a similar group might be elicited through the first consonant acquired, for example, firstly acquired [] can be modified to produce [s]. Complexity of the phonetic context of target sound should be gradually increased, for example, practice / t / at the final position of the word as in 'hat' before going into initial position as in 'top' which requires additional aspiration component. Appropriate progression will strengthen the sensorimotor patterns and achieve desired modification of the child's Sound Pattern Template (Lancaster & Pope, 1989, cited in Grundy & Harding, 1995).
Speech production requires rapid and precise movements. Therefore, the child with cleft palate is encouraged to experiment with his articulatory ability to try a wider range of speech and to boost sensory feedback of oral kinesthetic and proprioceptive information.
Next, let us look into aphasia in adults. Aphasia is the loss or impairment of language function caused by brain damage. Brain damage can be due to various problems such as cerebrovascular accident, brain trauma or encephalitis infections. Aphasia can affect different modalities of language, not only speaking, but also reading (such as alexia) and writing (such as agraphia). In this discussion, I will focus only on spoken language in aphasics.
There are many classification systems for aphasia. Some uses localization of brain damage such as Broca aphasia (frontal, where Broca's area is associated with serial organization and motor programming), Wernicke aphasia (temporal, where the Wernicke's area is associated with spoken language comprehension) or conduction aphasia (parietal), while others refer to the speech pattern, using the dichotomy of fluent and non-fluent aphasia, as well as grammatic and agrammatic aphasia. It should be noted that there is a lot of variation in aphasia as no two individual's brain anatomy and physiology as well as language usage are identical. Alongside, the location and the extent of damage generate different manifestations with different severity (Benson & Ardila, 1996).
Descriptive linguistics and structured analysis is used to detect impaired linguistic skills caused by the brain damage, as well as to determine linguistic performance that is unaffected. Assessment is made by communicating with the patient through conversation, making relevant observation and accurate transcription, and implementing appropriate linguistic test. Below is some language impairment at different linguistic levels that may be found in aphasic patients: