As children attempt their first words, their pronunciation seems to fall short of the corresponding adult word forms. It is assumed that children already perceived and stored adult representations that they can map onto before they start producing words; and they gradually adjust their pronunciation to approximate towards the adult target word forms through time and practice. In the progress of acquiring and mastering the full range of articulatory programs, children simplify adult word forms in their production to fit their abilities.
Regularities in children's speech can be noted. In earlier studies, Jespersen (1922) managed to observe children's tendency to replace velar stops with alveolar stops and he specified this general pattern as one of the sound-laws in operation in phonological development. In the late 1960's, Stampe (1969) referred these sound-laws as phonological processes in his theory of Natural Phonology.
He further defined that 'phonological processes are mental operations performed on behalf of the physical systems involved in speech perception and production (Stampe, 1979:9). 'These processes manifest themselves as a cerebral system of prosodic mappings and phonetic features substitutions which govern the perception, representation, and production of speech' (Bright, 1992). Stampe's theory is related to the Complete Perception Theory and involves two levels of representation that is the child's perceptual organization of the adult language and the child's phonetic representation or output (Ingram, 1989). These phonological processes simplify the accurate phonological representations of the adult surface form, resulting the production of reduced child form. He described these phonological processes as a set of hierarchically ordered procedures, with some processes being more basic than others, and is phonetically motivated but he did not provide a list of the universal processes.
In order to bring his pronunciation closer to the adult form, the child operates three possible mechanisms of change upon the innate phonological system (Ingram 1989).
The first mechanism of change is ordering, which is by imposing a restriction on the natural order of application of the processes so that the application of one process eliminates one of the contexts in which another process normally applies.
The second mechanism of change is limitation, where the child limits the range of segments or context in which a process applies.
The third mechanism is suppression, where a phonological process or the sequence of processes is suppressed.
It was claimed by Stampe that the different degrees of limitation and suppression of phonological processes in individual children accounts for individual variation in phonological acquisition. The loss of phonological processes occurs gradually in phonological development.
Ingram (1976) further attempts to describe the phonological patterns in children's speech through the establishment of phonological patterns. He proposed three general categories of phonological processes, which are (a) substitution processes, (b) assimilatory processes, and (c) syllable structure processes. Elaborations of these processes along with common processes found in children within and across languages are found below.