The late Pleistocene was witness to the mass extinction of mega fauna. The climatic changes at the end of the Pleistocene cause the steppe tundra receded and replaced by boreal woodland and boggy tundra. The melting of the glaciers was so rapid, according to ice cores from Greenland, that it may have only taken 50 years for the temperature to rise 7 degrees causing the climate change from an artic to a temperate climate at the beginning of the Holocene. The extinctions were disproportionate between continents. Between 16-11,500 BP 33 genera of Mega Fauna in North America became extinct, whereas in Africa only 7 Mega fauna became extinct (Roberts 1998). The scale of the extinction and of the varying effects it had upon the Mega fauna population is suggestive of an additional factor other than just climate change. This essay will explore to what extent people were responsible for the extinction of these animals and what other factors may have contributed.
The Overkill theory relies upon the hypothesis that humans hunted the Mega fauna in North America and then in South America to extinction due to what is known as the foraging theory. This theory proposes that large vertebrates are hunted more often and therefore decline faster than smaller vertebrate because the return of carioles is greater. As the larger vertebrate decrease, smaller vertebrate become more common in the diet of the human population. Resulting in the relocation of the population (Grayson 2001). The Over Kill theory proposes that the Clovis human colonisation of North America between 11,300- 10,800 BP was a direct cause of the of mass extinction through the over hunting of big game, such as Mammoth and Mastodon which were un-adapted to human hunting. The speed of the overkill apparently created a human front that travelled across America causing a wave of extinction. This model of human hunting behaviour assumes that the local human population would have had little concern for the conservation of their food resources. It does not take into account the possible condition of the humans and how they were coping with the environmental changes, nor does the proposed mass hunting of the Mammoth and other Mega fauna bear any resemblance to the development of a symbiotic relationship between humans and the Bison bison.
Martin claims that species such as Bison were better suited to the hunting techniques of human hunters (Davies 1987). However, according to Davies the increase in temperature during the last glacial and the post-glacial resulted in hasher conditions than had occurred in the rest of the Pleistocene (Davis 1987). In North America the area of grasslands increased. This presented animals with a more primitive digestive system such as ground sloth and elephants that could not ruminate with a lack of plant biodiversity. The reduction of plant diversity in diet could have led to extinction for some animals, whereas Bison, with advanced digestive systems, were already adapted for these conditions (Davis 1987). The speed of the environmental changes may have left many animals unable to adapt.
According to Martin, the huge number of animals that became extinct in North America in comparison to Eurasia is further evidence that the Mega fauna in North America was ill adapted to human hunting (Bell and Walker 2005). Mega fauna and humans in Africa had evolved together while humans had been hunting in Eurasia for long before the end of the Pleistocene. However, there was not a mass extinction of mega fauna in Eurasia at around the time of human colonisation. If overkill were a main characteristic of human colonisation its logical that evidence for the extinction of many mega fauna species like Mammoth would occur earlier than the late Pleistocene.
The theory that climate change caused the extinction of mega fauna is supported by the discovery of the remains of 'Dwarf Mammoths' in Wrangle Island, which was once part of the Beringian landmass until rising sea levels caused the Mammoths to be trapped on the island (Bell and Walker 2005). Radiocarbon dates of the dwarf mammoths suggest that they survived into the Holocene until 4 Ka BP. The survival of the Dwarf Mammoths into the Holocene has been interpreted as evidence that they could have survived the climate of the time and that only human contract cause their demise on the mainland of the continent (Burroughs 2005). This ignores the fact that the vegetation of the island still resembled the Pleistocene steppe communities that had covered most of Eurasia during the Pleistocene until rising temperatures cause a shift in the types of vegetation to forest and boggy tundra. The Mammoths survived until humans may well have hunted them to extinction. This is speculated from the conjunction of the first human artefacts with the disappearance of dwarf mammoths from the archaeological record (Bell and Walker 2005).
The extinction of species on islands after human occupation is a model that Martin used to argue that the same effect could occur on continents (Grayson 2001). More recently the radio carbon dating of Giant Sloth in Cuba, Hispania, Puerto Rico, has revealed that they survived up until 4,200 years ago. Humans colonised 1,300 years earlier slowly hunted the giant sloth to extinction (Hecht 2005). This discovery along with the extinction of animals such as the Moa in New Zealand adds weight to the concept that humans are capable to causing massive extinction of animals on islands. New Zealand had been isolated until its colonisation by humans in AD 1280. The absence of predators had lead to the evolution of a diverse bird fauna. By the time of the first European arrival 34 bird species had died out. The late quaternary environmental sequences are well documented and there is no evidence for a depletion of the bird population during the Late Glacial and Holocene (Bell and Walker 2005). The Archaeological evidence reveals 300 Moa kill sites between 900-400 BP. The huge amount of kill sites is suggestive of overkill, especially as the fossils of the Mao in some cases show that only the most palatable parts of the Mao were used (Bell and Walker 2005). The predation from humans may not have been the only threat to the Moa from humans. In 500 BP fires caused by humans had destroyed most of the lowland forest. The preserved gizzard contents of a Moa indicate that their habitat may have been the forest and the forest margined, this suggests that the deforestation caused by the burning of woodland resulted in a loss of habitat for the Moa (Bell and Walker 2005)
The application of the island model of extinction after human colonisation is not necessarily applicable to the effect that humans would have on a whole continent. Islands are isolated with fewer predators, competition, a limited supply of food and a limited population (Bell and Walker 2005). This means that island species may lose their adaptability to new predators, such as humans, and there are few alternative populations to help replace the individuals (Grayson 2001). This could indicate that island fauna are less adaptable to changes in climate. Therefore, fauna on islands are more vulnerable to aggressive human hunting, disease and extinction than continental fauna. The extinctions on islands caused by human hunting do provide an interesting study of human behaviour. In this example it is possible for humans to overkill birds such as the Moa without regard to conservation. This does not take into account the cultural significance of the Mao and whether humans were in competition with the bird for other sources of food.
The combination of the overkill by humans and the destruction of habitat may be indicative of the ecological effect of humans. Humans have changed the environment in order to use it to the best advantage for survival. This, as in the case of the Moa, can cause the extinction of fauna unable to adapt to the new environmental conditions caused by a human agent. This is not the case for global environmental changes. Humans themselves are also victim to the changes at the end of the last ice age and this may have influenced their hunting strategy. The change from tundra to open birch forests in Europe would have been ideal conditions for hunting. Perhaps the changing environment afforded humans more opportunities for hunting that had been previously unavailable. This disruption of the balance between prey and predator in favour of the hunter may have been enough to cause overkill. Alternatively the rapid environmental changes forced the Mega fauna into small areas of refuge where they were more vulnerable to human hunting and to other predators (Bell and Walker 2005). This theory of the demise of the Mega Fauna is supported by the earlier reference to the dwarf Mammoths on Wrangel Island (Bell and Walker 2005).
The overkill theory in North America lacks the archaeological evidence of kill sites for the array of Mega Fauna that went extinct. Only in 50 sites is there found human artefacts in association with Mega fauna. Only in 14 of these sites is their direct evidence of human hunting of Mammoth and Mastodon (Bell and Walker 2005). There is only archaeological evidence for the hunting of the Mammoth and the Mastodon. If the Mammoth and the Mastodon was the main focus of human predation it is logical to expect that they should become extinct first. RW Graham's unpublished personal communication the radio carbon dates of the fossils indicate that they may have been among the last Mega Fauna to become extinct (Grayson2001). Martin claims that the over killing would have been too rapid for it to have been preserved (Grayson 2001). Alroy has devised a computer simulation to represent how human hunting could have caused the extinction of over 70% of the Mega fauna of North America. His model, aimed to in part answer the questions of how human population growth could have been rapid enough for over kill, assumes that prey naivety would be unchanging (Alroy 2001). Modern comparisons between Moose and Wolves, where areas which wolves and moose have coexisted are compared with areas where they have not, showed increases losses and little response but the moose lost their naivety rapidly. A computer model can not take into account the possibility of human hunting motivated by social status, as in the case of the Moa, overkill is much more likely to occur (Brook and Bowmen 2002).
To what extent were humans involved in the extinction of mega fauna remains controversial. One of the main reasons for this is the difficulty in separating climatic factors and human factors in the Archaeological record. The extinction the Giant Deer in Ireland occurred during the Younger Dryas where a colder environment changed the vegetation the deer relied upon (Bell and Walker 2005). This caused its extinction before human arrival in Ireland supporting climate change as the primary factor in extinction. The rapid climate change and change of vegetation pushed many species of mega fauna into areas of refuge. It is possible that these animals could have continued to survive in the refuge areas however the human population continued to hunt an unsustainable population (Bell and Walker 2005). In North America the huge amount of species that became extinct is suggestive of human intervention, however lack of archaeological evidence of the hunting for any other species but Mammoth and Mastodon places the theory of overkill in question (Grayson 2001). If the overkill process was so fast why is there no evidence for the hunting of other animals other than Mammoth? The human population could have created unfavourable conditions for mega fauna in other ways. In Australia Aboriginal fires might account for charcoal peaks in the last interglacial. These fires may have altered the vegetation causing the Tasmanian devil to find refuge in woodland areas and the extinction of other animals reliant on the previous vegetation. The rises charcoal levels may have been caused by climatic change (Martin Bell). Climate change brought mega fauna close to extinction and humankind added the final blow.