Studies about L2 foreign accent have been done a lot in the linguistic area, as linguists are curious about the causes and solutions to foreign accent, and about the effects of foreign accent on individuals and relevant impact on the whole society. Strong foreign accent may result in the difficulty in listeners' comprehension and sometimes it is considered as weakness of pronunciation as the same as speech defect, hyper-nasal and dialect (Rodman, 2000). Therefore, while speakers are trying to reduce their foreign accent in various ways, linguists have researched into the factors affecting degree of L2 foreign accent attempting to find the deep reasons of this phenomenon.
This essay is going to review two articles, namely, Factors Affecting Strength of Perceived Foreign Accent in A Second Language (Flege, J, Munro, M., & Mackay, I. 1995) and Factors Affecting Degree of Foreign Accent in An L2: A Review (Piske, T. Mackay, I, & Flege, J. 2001). They provided several factors - age of L2 learning (AOL), length of residence (LOR), gender, motivation, language use and so on. The essay will summarize the main factors presented in both two articles with analyzing the reliability of these factors with the support from other research and individual experience; moreover, it will also briefly mention other existed factors in the end.
There are various factors which affect L2 foreign accent apparently and potentially. They include certain common factors and individual factors as well. In these two articles, linguists are attempting to find the common and representative reasons for explaining the L2 foreign accent. In the first one, Flegeal. (1995) provided a specific example by doing certain research with a group of Italian speakers of English, comparing to English native speakers in Canada; Piskeal. (2001), in the second article, summarized a few main factors on a basis of the results done by Flege et al. and other linguists. Therefore, five common factors can be found from both articles as prominent reasons for L2 foreign accent, although they may still cause disagreement.
As a review of those two articles by Flegeal. (1995) and Piskeal. (2001), the first finding is the five common factors, namely, age of learning, length of residence, gender, motivation and language use of L1 and L2 which have been introduced and analyzed with evidence from both articles, other research, certain private experience and observation. While age of learning is most popularly acceptable factor affecting the degree of L2 foreign accent, the rest four factors are still more or less controversial in this area. Some other factors have been also simply added in the end of this essay, which are not as significant as the five main factors.
Another finding is that certain factors are unclear in their independent effects on L2 foreign accent. Firstly, they may impact L2 foreign accent by confounding with other factors; for example, effects of LOR, gender and motivation differ in different groups of subjects. Secondly, it is difficult to measure some of them such as motivation; attitude toward the second language might be also a quite private and unstable factor. In a word, the factors do not affect the pronunciation separately but with influence from other factors or some subtle variance in individuals. Therefore, it may be difficult to confirm their own influence.
Finally, it is not a finding but a doubt, which has been pointed out in the analysis in Part 2.1, about the degree of the validity of these factors when applied to people who live in their motherland. As can be seen, most subjects in the research in this article lived in a L2 environment, so some factors like age of arrival, length of residence and language use aimed at that group of people. However, a large number of people learn their second language in a L1 speaking environment and may encounter more difficulty from L1; therefore, internal drive and some individual factors might play a more important factor comparing to immigrants. Whether those factors mentioned above are equally suitable from them is suspecting and maybe the future research can take this group of L2 learners into account.