Since Chomsky (1964) proposed several standards of the depth of the generative syntax, the depth has been divided into three different levels from low to high, namely, observational adequacy, descriptive adequacy and explanatory adequacy, which become the purposes to certain extent for the generative syntax to pursue. As the observational adequacy is mainly concerned with generating sentences of a language accurately in a basic level (Matthew 1997), the other two levels are more presented by X-bar theory, which is a system of providing the universal structure for illustrating structures of various languages. Therefore, after the more precise explanation of these two levels, the focus of this essay is to show to what extent the X-bar theory has achieved the levels of descriptive and explanatory adequacy with certain examples.
Descriptive adequacy is a more advanced level than observational adequacy, which not only correctly generates the linear sentences but also presents the spatial structures of various languages; furthermore, in this level, a satisfactory theory should be able to describe the 'linguistic intuition', i.e. the implied competence of the native speakers (Hanna 2004). At this point, X-bar theory has quite successfully achieved this level and is able to explicate how the tacit linguistic knowledge is used by speakers; it can be briefly proved by two of its advantages.
Firstly, it can clarify the structural ambiguity with different Surface-structure representations. For example, it is quite useful for clarification when the position of modification in a sentence is not clear; there is more than one possibility of the surface-structure although the sentences look quite similar in a linear structure as shown below.
In the example (1), it is difficult to illustrate two possibilities from a planar sentence; however, there are still two different S-structures (1a) and (1b) which can account for the sentence reasonably. To be more precise, depending on the component which is modified by the complement with a bone, one situation is that Bob hit the dog and the dog was carrying a bone while the other one is that Bob used a bone to hit the dog. Thus, the X-bar theory in this level has achieved one of its responsibilities.
However, it is not perfect to clarify all the ambiguity. For example, it is still difficult to draw different trees for scope ambiguity like (2)
(2)
There is only one tree which can be drawn from this example although it is still ambiguous. One interpretation is all the boys like the same girl; the other one is every boy likes different girl. Thus, to this extent, X-bar theory may not be very adequate.
Secondly, X-bar theory can indicate the deep structure of sentences in a language; in another word, it can explain why sentences with different S-structures may have the same meaning. For example, the patients in the active and passive sentences have different position either in the subject or the object; nevertheless, they all indicate the same meaning. Therefore, X-bar theory is able to present the deep structure showing the relation between active and passive sentence patterns such as the following example (3).
As can be seen from the deep structure marked by the index t i, although the two structures are quite different, one essential position is unchangeable - the patient John. In (3a), the patient becomes a subject which appears at the beginning of the sentence, however, it still leaves the trace t i in the position of the object of the action bite as well as the position of John in (3b). It means that John is always the patient if it was true that a bee bit John.
Therefore, the X-bar has shown rather convincing analysis corresponding to the level of descriptive adequacy by establishing a spatial structure and using indexes for a reversion of the primary meaning. So the theory has much freedom in the analysis and deconstruction of various sentences including English and other languages. However, descriptive adequacy only requires an explanation based on the direct description and the 'external ground' (Hanna 2004); however, the final aim of a successful generative syntax should sufficiently achieve the highest level - explanatory adequacy.
As the final level, explanatory adequacy firstly requires the achievement of the former two levels - observational adequacy and descriptive adequacy and then provides the intrinsic explanation which is concerned with the Universal Grammar in all the languages, i.e. the syntax theory should fit in the universal structure which exists in various languages. Furthermore, the theory should touch the depth of explaining how the speaker can obtain the knowledge about the language (Matthew 1997). In other words, compared to descriptive adequacy, explanatory adequacy returns to the 'primary linguistic data' (PLD) (Chomsky 2002) and tries to explain how children can relate PLD with their linguistic competence and establish their language system in one language other than other languages, since there are so many languages in the world with different grammatical and lexical principles.
Likewise, X-bar theory relatively indicates explanatory adequacy to certain extent. Primarily, it is able to provide a universal structure which well applies to various language structures. For example, the notations 'XP', 'X'' and 'X' (e.g. NP, N' and N; VP, V' and V, etc.) establish a relationship between different syntactic categories and become the general principles in all the categories; moreover, the feasible framework of X-bar theory can also establish a relationship between different languages like the example below:
Clearly, the structures in English and Chinese (Mandarin) are different from each other; there are I-to-C movement and A' movement in English which are not necessary in Mandarin; however, X-bar theory with the characteristics of cross-linguistics is still able to present both structures and it also indicate the existence of the Universal Grammar.
As for the explanation of the language acquisition of children, the concepts of 'cue' and parameter are proposed (Boysson-Bardies 1999) to interpret the choices from a large number of parameters in different languages. To apply to X-bar theory with the example (4), the Chinese children may received the overt 'cue' of no I-to-C or A' movement in their speaking circumstance within an innate background of the Universal Grammar; whereas, the English children choose the different parameters from the Universal Grammar with the distinct cue provided. It may account for the language acquisition by children in an initial stage (Huybregts 2004), although it is not completely clear in this level.
To sum up, this essay basically talked about the correspondence of X-bar theory to the two criteria of the generative syntax - descriptive adequacy and explanatory adequacy. With the above examples and explanations, it probably can be seen that X-bar theory quite successfully achieved the former level as it can explain both deep and surface structures sufficiently and clarifies the ambiguity in sentences clearly. Furthermore, in the final level, it is still able to establish a universal structure which may interpret different situation in languages and to explain the deep reason of language acquisition of children to certain extent. Therefore, X-bar theory is a relatively successful theory especially in descriptive adequacy although it may fail to illustrate the scope ambiguity; furthermore, X-bar theory has explained a little in the final level but there is still a distance from the ideal purpose. In a word, X-bar theory basically achieved those two criteria proposed by Chomsky with some flaws; however, it is still a quite advanced theory and developing.