Intonation has been a wide and common topic in the study of English phonology. Different from segmental phonology such as the study of phonemes and syllables, intonation belongs to, as well as stress, suprasegmental phonology (Roach 2000). It is a complicated system in English which plays an essential role in the use of language and it sometimes may imply more information beyond the real speech rather than be a byproduct of the utterance. For accurately describing the intonation system, various analysis systems and notations have been used which often have their own advantages and disadvantages. This essay will basically introduce two of the analysis systems - the traditional British analysis of English intonation presented by Peter Roach (2000) and the relatively new notation system ToBI used widely in the U.S.; furthermore, it attempts to evaluate the benefits and drawbacks of those two systems by a comparison between them.
As a kind of autosegmental approach to the intonation system, ToBI is originated by Pierrehumbert (1980: 87 in Cruttenden 1997) and used mostly in the American academic research. It applies only two tones, High (H) and Low (L) to the analysis and presents a quite new view of the intonation system. It is necessary to introduce five types of symbols used in ToBI (Cruttenden 1997: 60):
Other symbols such as '' (shown as 'H' and 'L') and '%' (shown as 'H%' and 'L%') represents namely 'pause-type' boundary (||) and 'non-pause' boundary (|) as they are mentioned in Roach (2000); however, '' can occur before both boundaries and '%' only appears before the 'pause-type' boundary (Cruttenden 1997).
Therefore, if the tone unit (2) is analyzed in ToBI, it may be like this.
(2)
(10)
After the rough introduction of both systems, the advantages and disadvantages of each can be noticed with a comparison between them.
1. The application of different notations usually conveys a direct impression to readers. Undeniably, the symbols such as ' ', ' ' and ' ' do provide a simple and visual guidance for the readers of course with appropriate explanation but are quite difficult to type in computers. Contrarily, ' * ' ' ! ', ' % ', etc. are quite meaningless and abstract codes which are difficult, especially, for learners to remember, which is also agreed by Roach (2000) and (Cruttenden 1997); however, the system is easy to be used in computers.
2. For the attempt to describe the natural speech, the Roach's system seems to have more limitation than ToBI. One is the analysis on more than one tone movement in a tone unit. Roach generally summarizes five situations as mentioned above; nevertheless, the natural intonation system is not as simple as Roach's generalization. Considering the following example (11) indicated in ToBI system by Cruttenden (1997: 63), it is difficult to use Roach's system to analyze the tone unit.
(11)
According to Roach (2000), there is only one tone movement carried by the tonic syllable, so the part from didn't to to should be considered as a low head if go is the tonic syllable. Thus there should be no tone movement before the tonic syllable carrying a rising tone such as (9a), but it does not make sense in (11). The possible solution is either to admit the existence of more than one tonic syllable in a tone unit, as the problem raised by Roach himself (2000: 178) or to divide (11) into three tone units but it will looks quite farfetched.
Another limitation is to analyze the detail in a rising or a falling pitch movement, for instance, the high fall and low fall. As shown in the example (4) where  might carries a falling tone, one may still fail to deduce the correct pitch height of might because the symbol ' ' does not indicate whether a high fall or a low fall although Roach used '' once to indicate the full rise (Roach 2000: 155). In contrast, ToBI has a connatural merit from its simple structure that it is more flexible to describe different levels of the pitch height. So a high fall and a low fall can be illustrated presented as H*L-L% and !H*L-L% in tone units (Cruttenden 1997: 63).
Hence, ToBI seems able to be applied more successfully and extensively in the description of intonation in R.P., G.A. and Australian English (Cruttenden 1997) although it has not been applied very well into all the intonation systems in a statistic result (Ohio State University Department of Linguistics 2004).
3. With the drawback in Roach's system discssed above, it still had the benefit of its simple generalization about the intonation because it provided a comparatively clear profile of the real system with straightforward notations and established an easy access to the complicated intonation system, at least for the learners. Nonetheless, ToBI focuses on a full-scale description and makes it a little difficult to summarize the analysis results and point out the outline of the whole system.
To sum up, this essay outlined the whole structure of English intonation by comparison between the traditional analysis system used in Roach (2000) and the ToBI system widely used in America. The traditional system, based on the concepts of tones and units, is easy to read and understand with the use of visual symbols and can provide rather primary and clear contour about the whole system although it may fail to analyze some phenomena in the changeful reality and the inconvenience in the computer input process. In contrast, the flexible system ToBI may succeed to track detailed information occurring in speech and give a comparatively accurate description; however, there are many abstract symbols requiring adequate comprehension although it is simple for computer operation. Therefore, if the first system is supposed to be easy for a general introduction and fundamental learning, then the second one is more suitable for advanced research to certain extent; nevertheless, they both have limitation in different aspects.
There are still other ways of describing the natural speech and will be more; inevitably those methods will probably have their own merits and shortcomings in different aspects as well. However, with the continuous development in intonation research, the true face of this complicated and attractive system will be unfolded one day.