Deixis is an essential element in a language as all the languages have a tendency to economically express meanings and it will be redundant and inconvenient to repeat the names of places, time and people within the same context; therefore, deixis is a universal phenomenon as Huang (2005) has also mentioned. Among its three basic categories, respectively, space, time and person, the last one - person deixis is the background of this essay which is going to study on plural first-person deixis in Modern Chinese.
The first-person plural pronounce in northern standard Chinese has two different expressions women and zanmen. They have different pragmatic uses in the northern Chinese and are unable to exchange in the spoken language; however, in the southern regions of Chinese, only women is used in the colloquial speech. It is worth questioning whether the lack of zanmen may result in ambiguity in the south if only one first person plural is employed in everyday speaking and why zanmen is unnecessary in the south if it plays a different role from women in northern Chinese. This essay will firstly research on the use and functions of zanmen in northern dialects of Chinese by comparing with women with certain analysis and examples; secondly, it will attempt to focus on the absence of zanmen in the south, trying to find out some possible reasons that zanmen is redundant from three aspect - the historical development, linguistic theories and the consciousness level.
For an initial introduction, it is necessary to present a brief description about the whole Chinese system of pronouns (see Table 1). All the person pronouns in Chinese have no distinctions in grammatical functions such as between nominative and accusative use, neither do the two plural first-person pronouns which are different only in a semantic status or a pragmatic status. Thus, the following section 3 will present the details in distinguishing the two words within the northern Chinese setting.
In the conclusion, this essay initially talked about the usage of the first-person plural pronoun zanmen only appearing in the northern colloquial speech by comparing to another common one women used in both the north and the south but with different functions. Basically, there are three difference between zanmen and women in the north, the range of inclusion and exclusion of the addressees, the extent of intimacy in the speech and the extended use of the two words performing a singular function in special situation.
However, the importance of zanmen does not impact on its complete absence in the south. From a simple data collection, the independence of zanmen was gradually reduced as the location moves to the south until an utter replacement by women. This essay explored the reasons of a lack of zanmen in southern Chinese in the second part and found that three possibilities may result in the current southern Chinese characteristics, namely, the historical reason, the linguistic reason and the consciousness reason. Additionally, the final reason about consciousness might not be explained very adequately or require more convincing evidence and reasoning; furthermore, this may be related to the influence of society, geography, history, etc. which is too far from the topic of this essay. Thus, it was just pointed out as one hypothesis of the absence of zanmen in south Chinese.