Languages are essential tools for human to communicate with each other and record and transfer information everyday; it is difficult to imagine the situation without language delivery. However, a natural language is not so perfectly designed to transfer all the information in an expected way. More or less, some flaws in a language are inevitable, such as the ambiguity of a language which causes confusion in people's common utterances. Generally speaking, there are often certain ambiguous words and sentences appearing in human's utterances and acquiring more precise clarification from speakers. Different interpretations of the same utterance may result in various interpretations and the difficulty of comprehension of listeners. It is, actually, a quite common phenomenon among different languages.
The purpose of this essay is to identify the types of ambiguity because sometimes it could be confusing in itself and with other phenomena. Therefore, this essay attempts to focus on explaining the basic types of ambiguity after a brief definition and some distinctions from other similar linguistic phenomena which are vagueness and deixis. Among the main content about ambiguity types, it will provide definitions of each type of ambiguity, namely, lexical ambiguity, structural ambiguity, a combination of lexical and structural ambiguity and scope ambiguity.
A simple definition from Chierchia and McConnell (1990: 32) is that 'ambiguity arises when a single word or string of words is associated in the language system with more than one meaning'. That means a sentence can be interpreted in different ways and it may be caused by multiple meanings of one word - lexical ambiguity, by different structures of a sentence - structural ambiguity, by a combination of lexical and structural ambiguity or by different semantic scope - scope ambiguity. Examples can be seen as below:
(1)
(2)
(3)  (Chierchia and McConnell 1990: 32)
(4)  (Heim and Kratzer 1998: 194)
It is necessary to distinguish vagueness and deixis while typology of ambiguity is concerned because they have distinct ways of presenting unclear meanings. So they are two different phenomena from ambiguity and should not be included into ambiguity.
Vagueness is a matter of the relative looseness or of the nonspecificity of interpretation (Huang 2004). For example, in (12) there is no lexical, structural or scope ambiguity which could cause doubt in comprehension, but a small animal is not specified to a definite animal such as a cat or a dog. It only provides a general description about the animal.
(12)
Deixis is another matter about semantic reference. In the definition by Peter Mathews (1997: 89), 'it is the way in which the reference of certain elements in a sentence is determined in relation to a specific speaker and addressee, a specific time and place in utterance'. In other words, the deictic word has uncertain implications because of its changeable reference. Taking I for example, the word I may refer to speaker at that moment; thus, John can use I when he speaks and so does Mary. The sentence (13) does not provide the definite date with the reference to tomorrow unless listeners or readers assume the day after whenever he or she receives this information.
(13)
However, sometimes it is difficult to clearly differentiate ambiguity from vagueness and deixis and probably certain sentences might include combined elements. But detailed analysis will not be omitted due to the different focus on this essay. The point made here is that vagueness and deixis are two distinct situation and inappropriate to be mixed with ambiguity.
To sum up, this essay, with relatively simple analysis, basically talked about the types of ambiguity which is an important component in studies of semantics. These four types, namely, lexical ambiguity, structural ambiguity and scope ambiguity and a controversial type - the combination of lexical and structural ambiguity all have their own properties although it is not easy to distinguish them very clearly sometimes. Another interesting point is that the spoken lexical ambiguity is also a kind of lexical ambiguity although it is not very often mentioned in books. Furthermore, generally speaking, ambiguity is different from vagueness and deixis because those two are able to present distinct semantic situation; however, they are not always absolutely unrelated to ambiguity. An additionally essential emphasis is that the variety of ambiguous examples presented here can cause problems probably because the context or background knowledge is deliberately omitted for the research purpose. Actually, ambiguous sentences and words can be very often interpreted in an accurate way when they are used in reality; moreover, writers and speakers also use this characteristic of ambiguity to make an artistic impact on their language, as this has been mentioned in previous paragraphs.
Finally, as Cann (1993:1) said in his book, 'a semantic theory must be able to predict the ambiguities in the expressions of a language'. However, some of its aspects are not quite clear-cut even though certain complex means of description have been applied, so ambiguity is still an interesting and complicated topic worthy of further discussion.