It has been recognised that a person's health is not just attributed to their physical well-being but is more holistic and incorporates the biological, psychological and social determinants of health. Research into health and illness in the current population has identified that ill health is not randomly distributed. It can be determined from data taken from the Office for National Statistics and HMSO that there is a marked patterning in ill health by age, ethnic group, gender, social and economic status and place. These systematic differences in health and illness across social groups are referred to as "Inequalities in Health". Although the health of the population in Britain has increased dramatically in the last half of the century, inequalities in health still exist. In an attempt to review and tackle health inequalities, the Black report was published in 1988, followed by the Independent Inquiry into Inequalities in Health by Sir Acheson in 1998 and both these reports have been fundamental in addressing health inequalities.
The Black Report  1 suggested four types of explanations for differences in health - artefact, social selection, behavioural/cultural and materialist. However, several studies have revealed that the artefact and social selection models cannot account for these inequalities 2. The behavioural/cultural explanation states that "social position determines health through social differences in health damaging or health promoting behaviours" such as smoking, diet, lack of exercise and excessive consumption of alcohol, which varies according to social position 3. At the time of the publication of the Black Report, the Conservative government highlighted the fact that life style choice was the root cause of health inequalities 4. However, it is now known that only 10 - 30% of class differentials are accounted for by health behaviour 5. This indicates that there are other factors which contribute toward ill health.
A strong correlation exists between a person's material circumstance and health - where socioeconomic gradients in health are simultaneously an association with social position and with different material circumstances. Both of these have implications for health 6, 7. Studies have found apparent relationships between income and health, where low-income groups experience higher morbidity rates 8, 9. Good housing, healthy diets, social and leisure facilities depend to a large extent on household income. Poor housing conditions are experienced disproportionately by low-income households where the housing conditions are incompatible with good health 10, 11. They are also likely to live in overcrowded homes which are poorly constructed and are damp, cold and mouldy and therefore, are at increased risk of infection 9.
Studies have also demonstrated that low-income houses have poorer diets (consisting of high sugar and high fat foods) than their wealthier counterparts 12. This could be perceived as an individual's choice. However, research has proven that major determinants of this are low income, accessibility and availability of healthy foods 13. Low-income families are often dependant on local stores which are less likely to sell a range of fresh produce and are usually more expensive than supermarkets, which are often inaccessible to these families 14. In a similar manner, those on low incomes, although they may wish to, may not be able to participate in leisure activities because they do not live where sports centres are sited, lack transport and sufficient spare cash to use them.
Living in poverty can be stressful and could lead to unhealthy coping behaviours such as smoking and excessive alcohol consumption. A strong association exists between smoking and socioeconomic status 15, 16, 17. Cigarette smoking rates are three times as high in social class V as social class I and appear to increase as levels of social and material disadvantage increase 18, 19. These coping mechanisms have been found to be as a result of psychological stress. A case in point is where mothers have shown to smoke in order to cope with the stresses of raising children under poor material circumstances 9. It has therefore been concluded that smoking, in this instance, is not experienced as a lifestyle choice but as a compromise to protect family health 9. Psychological stress can also affect health by increasing vulnerability to mental and physical illness that operates through mind-body pathways 20.
Wilkinson has provided evidence that more factors contribute towards health inequalities. He claimed that where relative poverty exists, rates of social stress and anxiety tend to be higher 7. This is due to "psychosocial stress" theories, which is the perception of ones position in relation to others in society. These perceptions produce negative emotions such as anger and resentment, which can result in poor health and health-damaging behaviours such as smoking and drinking. However, Wilkinson's psychosocial theory has been criticised by researchers who believe in a "neo-materialist" theory 21, 22. This theory states that "health inequalities result from the differential accumulation of exposures and experiences that have their sources in the material world" 22. The neo-material interpretation is an explicit recognition that the political and economic processes that generate income inequality influence individual resources and also have an impact on public resources such as schooling, health care, social welfare, and working conditions 22.
Finally, it has been revealed that "life-course perspectives" influence health. This explanation argues that exposure to one form of deprivation increases the risk of exposure to others and thus leads to health inequalities. Poor childhood circumstances, for example, set children on educational pathways that direct them onto low paid, less secure jobs which increases exposure to disadvantage in later life 23.
Studies have also shown that ethnicity and gender have a role to play in health inequalities 35
The evidence for tackling health inequalities recognises that intervention should be made on a broad front - both on a local and national level 24. This includes improving education, housing, material circumstances, targeting young children, reducing poverty and income inequality and reducing inequalities in access to health and other public services.
Doctors alone cannot tackle health inequalities. However, they do play a role in it by challenging policies that promote health exclusion and providing services that seek to assist families to avoid, mitigate and cope with the worst effects of poverty on health 25. Practical aspects of tackling health inequalities involve recognising that the nature of health service provision affects how patients experience poor health. Primarily, profiling and monitoring helps to build up a population profile of health inequalities, allowing doctors to see the extent of health and social problems. Through this, unmet health needs could be targeted and services that are effective and responsive to healthcare needs could be developed. For example, the provision of health information in languages used by the local population has shown to be successful 26. This enables an equitable service to be provided and is useful in assessing needs at a community level. According to the Inverse Care Law, the provision of healthcare in the UK is inversely proportional to needs 27. Equitable health provision is vital in order to reduce health inequalities as equality in health care is likely to widen the health inequalities gap 28. Practitioners should also understand the core reasons for certain behaviours in individuals 29 and should always respect patients and work according to the GMC guidelines and treat patients in a non-judgemental manner irrespective of their lifestyles and/or socioeconomic status 30.
Doctors have a role in tackling health inequalities through prevention and alleviation of ill health, which is as a result of social disadvantage. Doctors can help patients to adjust and cope with the health effects of social disadvantage 31 by recognising that poor health is due to exposure of health risks throughout the lifespan, for instance incomplete childhood vaccinations. Practitioners can tackle this by maximising access to healthcare where, cultural, material, social and geographical barriers are reduced.
Medical practitioners can tackle health inequalities by targeting specific groups who are at a higher risk of certain diseases. This targeting could be carried out by providing information and counselling at convenient locations and times about blood cholesterol and blood pressure screening, targeted health promotion with regards to exercise and nutrition to those at risk. The ability to maximise social resources and minimise costs of health promotion is paramount in alleviation and prevention. Doctors can also be influential in increasing awareness of mothers to programmes such as Sure Start, which aims to tackle child poverty and social exclusion by improving the health and well-being of families and children - both before and after birth 32.
Doctors can assist patients to maximise their income by advising on benefits, by the provision of welfare rights in health centres and by providing written support in housing applications. Research has identified that primary care based welfare groups provide advice that reaches groups that are not accessing all that they are entitled to. This advice in turn results in increases in income and improvements in self-reported mental and physical health 33.
Practitioners are also able to tackle inequalities through social change, by working towards health enhancing policies. They have an influential role in lobbying groups, through collective professional organisations such as the BMA, which adopts strong lobbying roles on social inequalities in health 34. It is vital to lobby for such health enhancing policies and these should be implemented at a local level by working with other agencies and services. Doctors should ensure that issues relating to health inequalities are present on the agenda at meetings and addressed in practice in an attempt to realistically combat health inequalities.
In conclusion it can be inferred that health inequalities still exist and requires addressing. Evidence supports the fact that income plays a vital part in health inequalities, where poorer individuals are more likely to suffer from ill health. As a result of poor material circumstances, negative behaviours such as smoking could be adopted and therefore, the behavioural and material explanations can be see to be related to each other. Contemporary theories such as psychosocial, neo-material and life-course concepts have also shown to play a part in health inequalities.
It is important to realise that doctors alone cannot tackle health inequalities, but they do have a challenging role to play in it my monitoring and profiling and via prevention and alleviation. Health inequalities cannot be tackled by just working at an individualist or community level and therefore has to be combated through radical changes in policies that promote health exclusion and by assisting families affected by illness due to poverty. It is vital to recognise the underlying causes of poverty and address them at both a local and national level in an attempt to narrow, if not eradicate health inequalities.