Tense is often viewed as a matter of time. It is used to describe time and therefore has the same qualities as time i.e. a past, a present and a future. In English, this expression of time is a property of a verb form. In this essay I will discuss the possibility that it is not as simple as this. Tense could in fact be a matter of syntax. It could be a grammatical feature that is independent of time. Syntax is "the way in which words are arranged to show relationships of meaning within (and sometimes between) sentences" (Crystal 1997:94) I shall discuss whether it is possible to have a future time without a future tense. This will lead to discussion of how many tenses there are in English. There are three main approaches to tense in the English language: The traditional view, the functionalist view and the structuralist view. I will define and discuss each of these in turn. I shall first look at the relationship between tense and time.
The scope of time cannot be covered by tense markings. For example, you cannot pinpoint where a pair of sentences such as the following would be on a timeline:
We therefore cannot see tense as a relationship with time in this way. These examples may leave us asking 'when?' To give information about time we could say:
In this case, the verb did gives the tense marking and the adjunct on Monday gives the information about time. This shows tense as a separate concept from time. It shows it as a grammatical marking, which could therefore be a matter of syntax. The first verb in the Verb Phrase (VP) always carries the tense. This is, as Berk points out, "a matter of form, not meaning" (Berk 1999:100) I will now look at the three main approaches to tense.
The traditional view comes from a Latin model. There is a past tense, a present tense and a future tense. Traditionalists see tense as having a very close relationship with time and as more of a temporal concept than a grammatical concept. However, English grammar does not support this view. Future time is not generally indicated in the verb form itself. The argument that the future is not a tense is based on grammar. Without auxiliaries, the future tense is the same as the present tense. Since future cannot be indicated by the first verb in a sentence (without using an auxiliary), some argue that it is not a grammatical tense. Tense is form driven and therefore there are only two tenses in English, the present and the past. This is called the Structuralist view. I will now show examples of formation of 'future tense' in English to explain the points made by structuralists.
The simple future uses will or shall or going to plus the base form of the verb that describes the action. For example:
The future can also be formed from the present simple or the present progressive, for example:
(present simple)
(present progressive)
It can also be formed by will be/have or shall be/have plus the - ing form of the verb. It is also possible to form it from will/shall have plus a past participle.
(will + -ing form)
(will have + past participle)
Structuralists think that whereas the time expressed by these sentences may be future, the grammatical tense of the verb is either present or past.
The tense of the sentence will affect how the sentence is formed, with relation to the Verb Phrase (VP). For example, in a sentence without an auxiliary, e.g. Peter liked the film, the tense of the sentence is the head. The VP must agree with the tense of the sentence. This can be shown in a simple diagram:
In this diagram, the verb has to agree with the tense (past) and therefore the verb is formed with a past tense inflectional morpheme. As Carnie says "Tense inflection on a verb is in complimentary distribution with auxiliaries" (Carnie 2002:155). Either one of these can express the tense of the sentence. Tense is a matter of syntax when we see how the meaning of time relations can be changed with the changing of syntax. These examples illustrate that:
This example shows how the rearranging of VPs in a sentence can affect the meaning. The meaning that is altered in this example is how the events are sequenced. In example 17. The pot is dropped before the apology is made. In example 18, the apolgy is made before the pot is dropped. By swapping the two VPs, the syntax is changed and therefore the timeline is altered.
Some linguists argue that the structure of time-relations is deeper than this surface-level analysis. They are often called functionalists. The functionalist view is that tense is meaning-driven. Functionalists believe that tense is not just the grammatical state of the verb. It is related to peripheral concepts also. For example, Reichenbach, a logical semanticist, proposed that there are many tenses in English and to assess these three things must be taken into account, Speech time (S), Event time (E) and Reference time (R). This can be shown in a simple sentence:
Speech time, Event time and Reference time can be in any order and two may occur together. Timelines can be made from the SER sequences. The timeline of SER for example 9 would look like this:
There are a maximum of 24 combinations of SER orders. Reichenbach drew from these to propose a basic set of 9 tense forms. These basic tenses are, according to Hornstein, "syntactic constructs" (Hornstein 1990:41).
Hornstein looks at Reichenbach's views and suggests that tense has deeper connections to syntax. He says that the syntactic constructs of tense are ordered by "linearity and associativity... A point linearly to the left of another point is considered temporally earlier" (Hornstein 1990:41). Taking these assumptions, Hornstein then proposes that the syntactic representation of a tense is more than that required for understanding the time it suggests. Tenses from the Reichenbachen theory are individuated syntactically, not just temporally.
I will now discuss syntax in more detail, focussing on an example from use of the past tense. Berk raises the point that past tense verbs relating to an action represent activities occurring in the order in which they are mentioned in a text. For example, when two predicates are joined with and we can often say that they are in sequence. The following example shows this:
We presume that I put the key in the lock before the door opened. This can work even with examples that are less obvious in sequence, and examples that have an obvious gap in time between the predicates. Berk uses the example:
(Berk 1999:114)
This temporal ordering is also true of some passages containing many sentences. I have taken an example from a fictional book.
(From 'The Lovely Bones' by Alice Sebold.)
Some past tense verbs do not have this obvious time line. When actions continue over a long period of time, the predicates are not ordered temporally, for example
It is not only the order of the sentences that shows the temporal ordering of events. If a progressive or stative verb follows a past-tense verb, we assume that the progressive was occurring before the past-tense verb. For example:
We assume that the window was open before I went over to it. The order of sentences is not necessarily the temporal order. This shows that word order is not the only thing affecting temporal-relations.
Tense is definitely affected by context, and the context will affect the syntax used. For example "Actor, 72, dies of heart attack" is written in present tense but when seen as a newspaper headline we assume that it means the event has already happened and is therefore in past time. The present tense can be used to express many different things. Berk (1999) summarises these. Habitual action can be expressed with the present tense, along with states, Universal truths, Planned future events, Commentaries, Performatives and Historical events. Comrie attempts to explain these uses of a one tense to express a different time than usual. For example present tense grammatically representing past time in narrative discourse.
Comrie says: "apparent exceptions to the use of a given tense as defined by its meaning can be accounted for in terms of the interaction of the meaning of that tense with independently justifiable syntactic rules of the language in question." (2002) This implies that these differences are a matter of syntax, therefore making tense systems a matter of syntax.
This all shows how the traditional view may not be as clear-cut as it first appears. As stated above, we have no future tense as such, but this does not mean we have no concept of future time. Tense and time can also be separated by looking to other languages for evidence. Chinese has no grammatical tense system but this does not mean that the speakers have no concept of time in their language. They have words to express past, present and future, and they understand time as well as any other speaker of a different language. Other languages such as Japanese mark tense on a different word class such as the adjective. In an Indian tribal language, Potowatomi, endings expressing time can be used on nouns. These are just examples of a different tense marking. The fact that they do not mark the verb for tense does not mean that they have no tense system. Their system of marking a different word in a sentence works just as well. Romance languages comply more with the traditional view of tense. On most verbs there are three markings for past, present and future time. Word order may change according to tense in some languages. The word order we use to convey a past event is different from that of other languages. British Sign language adds a time marker to the end of a sentence. For example, to say "I ate" you would sign "I eat" and then add the sign for "finished." In many pidgin languages, particles replace tenses as time markers. In some languages, the word order and grammar for each tense may be the same but the phonology may change. For example, in the West African tone-language, Bini, present tense is indicated by a low tone and past tense by a high or high-low tone. Other languages also show a difference of tense system from speech to writing. In French, the simple past tense does not occur in speech, only in writing. However, this does not mean that they can only convey this concept if they write it down. These are just some of the differences in tense marking across languages. It shows the variation in how time relations are conveyed. Syntax is just one of the factors affecting tense.
In this essay, I have discussed the three main approaches to tense. Firstly, the slightly archaic traditionalist view that there are three tenses (past, present and future). Linguists generally reject this view. Secondly the structuralist view that there are two tenses (past and present) and the future tense is made up of combinations of these with auxiliaries. Finally, the functionalist view which is dominated by Reichenbach's theory of speech time, event time and reference time. These three make up several combinations to give the tense of a sentence. The functionalist view is concentrated on tense as a matter of syntax and sees tense as having a deeper structure than the surface grammar shows. It is all to do with where these three points are located in the sentence, which shows how they are related to each other in time. I have also discussed the weak relationship between tense and time. This has led to the discussion of other factors affecting tense and how tense in turn affects these factors. For example, how other languages cope with or without different tense systems but all maintain the same concept of time and how context affects how tense is used to convey a different time than expected (for example when the present tense is used to express a past event in narratives).
The functionalist view seems to be the most widely accepted throughout the literature. It is generally agreed amongst linguists that tense and time have a weaker relationship than many people think. The structuralist view goes deeper into the structure of tense and suggests that it is not necessarily just grammar that creates tense, but syntax and meaning as well.