Hunston and Francis define a pattern as "all the words and structures which are regularly associated with the word and which contribute to its meaning." Sinclair and many other corpus linguists propose that all language is patterned. This brings forward the concept of 'fixed phrases' and this essay will discuss the relation of these with meaning. I will discuss the importance of the following theory: words that share a particular pattern tend also to share an aspect of meaning. The work of Hunston and Francis and other linguists in this field such as Sinclair and Stubbs will be included in this discussion. I will look at how the connection between pattern and meaning has been studied and what effects it has on the field of corpus linguistics. I will then refer to my own research from the British National Corpus and conclude with reference to the literature I have studied and corpus evidence I have gathered.
In his 1954 book 'A Guide to Patterns and Usage in English', Hornby highlights the need for language learners to understand patterns in grammar usage. He suggests that it is not only the meaning of a word that is important when learning the language, it is also important to learn the collocation patterns. It is only recently that patterns have become accessible to researchers through the development of Corpus Linguistics. Sinclair and Francis pointed out how superior Corpus Linguistics is over intuition, as it can work with a large body of authentic data. "A corpus does not contain new information about language, but the software offers us a new perspective on the familiar." (Hunston 2002:3) So Corpus Linguistics is incredibly useful when looking at the connections between patterns and meanings. It is a source of computational semantics which not only looks at the meanings of morphemes and words but also at meanings derived from combinations of these morphemes and words. Corpora offer us an abundance of information on attestedness- one of the principles of communicative competence pointed out by Hymes. It describes what is really done in our language rather than what should be done or what we think is done.
Pattern observation is done using a corpora of data which is preferably not annotated. Annotation can lead to inherent theories of grammar being stored in the data, which, if tagged automatically may lead to inaccuracies in results. The grammars used by computers for parsing and automatic tagging do not tend to be the same as the linguists construction of human linguistic competence or performance. There is an infinite set of possible sentences in the grammar of a human and there is only so much of human linguistic performance that a computer can be programmed to recognise. Patterns are investigated through a set of guidelines. For example, concordance lines are sorted into alphabetical order. If the lemma is a verb it is generally best to sort the data to the right because, as Hunston and Francis point out, most verbs have a complementation pattern following them. It will however, depend on the investigation. Nouns tend to show complementation patterns on the right but will show modifiers if sorted to the left. These generalisations are examples of the importance of studying patterns. Early studies in the field of Corpus Linguistics have highlighted tendencies, which make it easier for current and future researchers to carry out their own studies.
It is now generally accepted that meaning and form are related. As Sinclair stated, "each meaning can be associated with a different formal patterning.... There is ultimately no distinction between form and meaning.... [The] meaning affects the structure and this is.... the principal observation of corpus linguistics in the last decade" (Sinclair 1991 in Stubbs 1996:35). The question is, can corpus analysis give any insight into meaning? As Stubbs points out, corpus linguistics in Britain has focussed directly on semantics and the best way to find out about meaning is through the analysis of texts. Corpus Linguistics makes it easier to carry out this text analysis and is therefore an incredibly useful vehicle for theorists studying meaning.
One pattern cannot be defined. It is just a 'recurring sequencing structure'. This is the viewpoint taken by many linguists who, in some instances, find Corpus Linguistics objectionable, and therefore disagree with the concepts that develop from it. "In this case, checking the frequency of a pattern... does not add essential further insight beyond the vague hope expressed by Hunston and Francis that large amounts of data 'can inspire new theories'" (Weigand- ) Like others, Weigand sees corpora as simply a tool for analyzing language. From it, we have gained many useful resources such as the Cobuild dictionaries. However, from this tool, these linguists feel that we can only get phenomena, not full theories.
Patterns tend to have groups of words regularly associated with them. It has been found that these words can be sorted into meaning groups. That is, they are similar in meaning. Each pattern can have a number of different meaning groups but it is rare to find an anomalous word that will not fit into a group. I have looked into this using the BNC. I looked at the regularly occurring pattern, to V yourself. The following query was typed into Sketch Engine:
1149 hits were found in the BNC. Of these, I selected a random sample of 100 using the sample tool. I then sorted the concordance lines alphabetically and assigned each to a meaning group. The groups and the words assigned to each are as follows:
These groups are my own thoughts and intuitions as to where each word should be placed, so obviously the meaning of the words in this case is subjective.
It is often possible for an accomplished user of the English language to predict which words from a meaning group occur most frequently in a given pattern. For example, I have researched the two words 'understand' and 'comprehend' which could both appear in the pattern: 'I XXX that'. Both words in this pattern would mean the same thing but as a native speaker of English I predicted (purely through intuition and experience) that 'understand' would be the most likely to occur in this pattern. I put this to the BNC as a phrase query. 'I understand that' showed 465 hits and 'I comprehend that' showed none. This shows that intuition can be quite a reliable source when researching language patterns, otherwise predictions such as this one could not have been made.
There are, of course, words that are used very infrequently in a pattern but nonetheless, have occurred and therefore are included in a corpus. Hunston and Francis call this "an area of flux...of which no complete list can be given" (Hunston and Francis 2000:99). The main words associated with a pattern can be listed and are called the core words. Analogy is the creativity that is available through pattern-usage. Once a pattern-meaning relation has been established, words with the same meaning can be used in this pattern through analogy. However, this is not always the case. Patterns have restrictions that mean certain words are unlikely to occur within the pattern. I note the use of the word unlikely though and raise the point that this doesn't mean they cannot be used. Words that are not found in a corpus are not necessarily non-existent in a pattern. No corpus can be large enough to account for every use of a word and the uses of words is always open to change. So Hunston and Francis raise the point, "can we state categorically that something 'cannot' be said?" (Hunston and Francis 2000:103) The main point that has to be raised is that use of words in patterns is based on intuition. I can intuitively predict that a certain word is unlikely to be used in a certain pattern but my intuition does not make it impossible. Hunston and Francis raise the example 'to persuade someone into doing something' which, using intuition, most people would deem incorrect. However, the Bank of English shows use of this form 22 times. This is a prime example of how important it is to study patterns with a corpus of genuine data. It shows us tendencies that our intuition will not consider. It shows that meaning groups affect our use of patterns and that we consult these meaning groups unconsciously when constructing utterances and sentences.
The debate still goes on as to whether patterns can have meanings or whether it is just the words within the patterns that contain the meaning. When used in a particular pattern, the meanings of some words can change. Hunston and Francis look at the example of the word 'talk'. 'To talk' means something different than 'to talk one's way out of something'. The implications of the latter are that "someone uses clever, devious, or forceful language to achieve a goal" (Hunston and Francis 2000:100) In this example it can be argued that it is the pattern that contains the meaning, not the word. This strengthens the case of creativity in that if this theory is correct, any word from the same group could be inserted into this pattern and the meaning would not be lost.
The relationship between pattern and meaning is also important when tagging and analysing a corpus. A distinction between 'high-level' and 'low level' syntactic rules is made. Low level rules are mostly word-class rules but high-level rules are those which assign function. The following diagram shows the set-up of the Computer Corpus Pilot Project (CCPP) which was set up in the early 1980s and tagged using syntactic rules which were decided upon by linguists. The linguists formalised the high level rules according to their meaning.
The inputs and outputs (rectangles) in this diagram all show how important the processes (circles), especially the formulation of a grammar based on meaning, are. Meaning is important in the study of patterns in that one word can mean many different things depending on the pattern it occurs in. "One must take into account the assumptions with which readers approach texts. Classes of verbs such as ergatives and reporting verbs require much corpus based work before the range of meanings which they convey will become clear" (Stubbs 1996:146). This point can mean that reader's intuition can often be a good source. A linguist will look at meaning in a text in a different way than a reader but it is often the reader that can give the real meaning of a pattern, especially in specialist texts.
Pattern grammar is a very important theory sprung from corpus linguistics. The relationship between meaning and pattern goes far beyond what can be said through intuition. As Stubbs points out, lexis and syntax are "inter dependent". One word can occur in several different grammatical distributions to mean several different things. Patterns change with time and meanings of these patterns change through analogy. "even major parts of speech are not as solidly founded as they might be" (Sinclair 1991 in Stubbs 1996:39). It is necessary to study these patterns regularly to maintain knowledge of the connection between pattern and meaning. Meaning is not obvious through one pattern alone. It takes a contextual knowledge to understand the semantics behind a pattern, and this is why it is so important to understand the connection between syntax and semantics.