It is generally understood by archaeologists that there was no predetermined political system in the Neolithic period, just as there was no one set of religious beliefs. Any form of hierarchy or established social structure that may have existed, was developed through local day to day activities and ritual, resulting in Neolithic British societies being as culturally different from each other in the same way that modern countries usually are. John Barrett says that "there never was a single body of beliefs that characterised 'neolithic religion.'" (Barrett, 1994) In fact, it could be said that the word 'religion' is entirely inappropriate. Neolithic ritual would be better termed, to coin a phrase, as a way of life. Life was dictated by ritual and vice versa. Different lifestyles led by the Neolithic peoples across Britain resulted in similar yet varied practices. For example, some societies built tombs whilst others chose not to. Some chose to place their dead inside their tombs whilst some tombs were used simply for ritual and veneration of the ancestors.
However the development of differing beliefs does not imply there was no movement or migration throughout Britain at this time. The evidence we have suggests that very few societies remained in any one area for exceptionally long periods. Bearing this in mind, perhaps we should view Neolithic burial monuments not just as private mortuaries but as local landmarks advertising the society who built it, or more importantly their ancestors, to anybody that happened to be travelling through the region. It is for this purpose that monuments were so carefully placed within the landscape. What is the point of putting so much effort into building such a magnificent piece of architecture only to hide it in a dense forest where no one is likely to see it? The passage graves at Bru Na Boinne in Ireland are a good example of the Neolithic people manipulating the landscape to draw attention to their work. Newgrange, Knowth and Dowth are situated at the bend of the River Boyne on their respective plateaus. Each tomb is raised above the river, with no obstructions, ensuring that whoever travelled along the river got a clear view of the tombs. They are also on the same bank of the river, spaced a fair distance apart but close to the points where the river meanders, providing onlookers with plenty of time to admire the 'locals' work.
Barrett (1988) discusses Saxes 'hypothesis 8' in which "formal disposal areas may be maintained by corporate groups whose claim to the use or control of restricted resources depended on lineal descent from the dead". In other words, only those with family ties to the deceased were allowed to use the burial monument. This theory suggests that the Neolithic people did not move around much as they were only allowed to be associated with and buried in their family monuments. The idea of being buried near to your family or home town is a very modern one and one that is not likely to apply to the Neolithic. In reality people often moved to locations deemed sacred in order to receive the honour of being buried there. The Amesbury Archer discovered three miles from Stonehenge was certainly not local as oxygen analysis of the enamel on his teeth indicates he grew up in a region around the Alps. It is possible that the 'Archer' travelled from his home land to be buried at what was (and still is) deemed to be a sacred place. To use another modern analogy; a hundred years ago people were often buried in family plots but this does not indicate that only they were entitled to use the land, or that members of their family could not be buried elsewhere. People of noted importance were buried in high status cemeteries, such as that of Westminster Abbey. The Archers achievements in life must have impressed the Neolithic people thus ensuring his burial at a sacred site.
Another important factor to consider when analysing Neolithic burial practices and politics, is the rise of the status of the individual. "It has been a commonly agreed convention that the late Neolithic witnessed a change in mortuary rituals, with a shift away from 'communal burial' towards a 'single grave tradition'" (Barrett, 1998. pg32) The shift from communal tombs to single person graves towards the end of the third millennium has led some archaeologists to speculate about the development of a hierarchy and a more embedded notion that certain aspects about a person gave them priority over others.
The social structure and status of individuals within a community forms the basic part of any political system. If burial practice can be used to surmise about the practitioners' society then Neolithic burial practice can possibly tell us a great about their political organization. (This, of course, is all assuming any presumptions made about the nature of their burial rituals are correct) Funerary ritual can not only tell us about the status of the person but of the people participating in the funeral. One would imagine that being invited to be involved in the funeral of an esteemed individual would have meant a great deal to the living person, especially if they had not been related to the deceased. (We have no concrete evidence that Neolithic funerals were a family matter. In fact, even with the increase in single person burials the emphasis would still have been on the community rather than the 'nuclear family'.)
The fairly recent, modern funeral of Princess Diana is a good example of not only the importance of the individual but of the community as a whole. With the exception of the actual internment of the body, the nation (through the medium of television or by being present at the church) was able to witness her funeral. This then established Diana's importance as an individual within our society. Furthermore, anybody directly involved in the 'ritual' of her funeral (for example Earl Spencer or Sir Elton John) consequently had their status raised merely through association. This pattern could be applied to Neolithic burials. Those who had a higher status within their community were likely to receive a more extravagant burial and those involved would have their statuses raised for taking part in the ritual.
However we should not always assume that the development of single grave burials demonstrates the status of the individual and that multiple burials do not. It may be the case that, to the Neolithic people at least, that multiple burials were also a status symbol for whatever reason. Or it may be that neither show social standing and the amount of bodies in any given burial is merely due to practical reasons, depending on the death toll. (Despite this, it is my personal opinion that 'religious' beliefs determined how many people were to be buried in a certain tomb or grave and I shall discuss this in more detail in part two.)
Neolithic funerals were not always focused on the dead as most modern funeral practices are. In fact the tombs have sometimes been referred to as 'houses of the living' rather than 'houses of the dead'. The whole process of conducting a ritual and interring the body was not just for disposing of a corpse or to establish status but also to reshuffle identity within the community. With one or more individuals gone from a group roles are left open which living members must fill. In modern terms, when a man dies his son naturally takes his place as the head of the family. The dead mans wife probably takes a more matriarchal role whereas her daughters and/or daughters-in-law assume her role of 'child bearer'. In short, when one person dies the entire community around him has a slight change of identity as everyone is affected.
Another possible reason for tombs being referred to as 'houses of the dead' is the notion of Neolithic death being a transformation rather than a journey. Rather than dying and travelling off to some distant afterlife, the Neolithic people appear to have believed that the dead 'transformed' into spiritual ancestors and were reborn. It is possible that they believed that the spirits remained on earth but in a different plane of existence. Therefore the ancestors would need an earthly location to act as their home should they visit earth to observe the living, and the tombs may have served such a purpose.
If we use ethnography we are able to use the deposition of material goods in tombs as evidence that the ancestors were born again in a new life, but would have links to our world. The Inuits have a practice of burying their dead with their tools from life, usually hunting equipment. It is practically forbidden to remove any of the deceaseds' belongings as they would be deprived of them in the afterlife. Perhaps Neolithic people buried their dead along with material culture to support them in the next life.
An important concept to consider when using burial practice to make assumptions about the political system of a society is whether the rite is merely a way of disposing of a corpse, or something more. Cooney (1992) states that " mortuary rituals compose not only those of a funeral nature, to do with the disposal of a corpse, but also those involving ancestors, which may include the use of funerary architecture and the bones of the dead". Many archaeologists agree that funerals were also seen as a way of venerating the ancestors. I'd like to take this theory further by suggesting that the funeral was not just an excuse to venerate the ancestors but was deliberately planned to show their respect. There is evidence in the archaeological record that shows that some bodies were stored in a temporary mortuary until being brought out for proper burial within the monument. It is possible that they were put there until the monument was finished but I believe it is more likely that it was decided that their bodies should be used in the ritual. I am not suggesting that certain people were deliberately sacrificed to be used in ritual (although such ideas should never be dismissed completely) but they became part of their own funeral and their bodies became the ritual tools.
Ethnography can again be used to debate this matter. Modern pagans take part in rituals to gods and ancestors, and most involve the use of ritual items. Certain branches of paganism, including Wicca, often bury the items after completing certain rituals to 'seal' the spell. Perhaps Neolithic burial was not just a way to get rid of a body or to venerate ancestors, but a way of 'sealing' their own spells by burying their 'tools'.
Archaeological evidence from sites such as Fourknocks in County Meath, Ireland, support the theory that bones of the dead had symbolic meaning in Neolithic ritual. Human remains in the archaeological record consisted of clean, un-burnt bones mixed in with the ashes of cremated bone. Skulls and long bones were often removed from the body before cremation which suggest that they were used for some other purpose, most likely a form of ritual. Charcoal was discovered mixed in with the bone, leading me to deduce that the remaining parts of the body were cremated on wooden funeral pyre outside the burial monument. It conjures up images of the deceased person lying on a large pile of logs and sticks (if there had been platforms built for such a purpose we would assume that post holes would be found nearby) with members of the community around them conducting an elaborate ritual using the dead persons skull to invoke the spirits of the ancestors.
It is interesting that Cooney (1992) uses the phrase 'cremated bones' rather than 'cremated body'. If this is done deliberately we are left wondering what happened to the flesh. Analysis of both cremated and un-cremated bones shows that the bones were de-fleshed before internment in the tomb. A study of South American tribes would lead us to believe that a form of cannibalism existed in the Neolithic period. The Cashibos of the Ucayali are known to mix the ashes of their dead relatives in a sort of soup. Only directly related members of the deceased's family may drink the soup as it is seen as absorbing their life force and is viewed as the highest honour amongst the tribe. This may help explain what happened to the rest of the dead persons body in the Neolithic or the removal of the soft tissue may simply be for practical reasons. It is generally understood that the tombs were sacred places. Perhaps the Neolithic people didn't want their dead decomposing in the tombs and therefore defiling the sanctity of the place.
When it comes to studying the Neolithic Bradley (1998) sums it up nicely as "an era fraught with paradoxes and ambiguities" as any evidence discovered can be explained in so many different ways. We assume we can use burial practice to make inferences about the nature of the Neolithic political and social systems but "we cannot proceed by analysing the organisational form of mortuary data to reveal the form of the social system" (Barrett 1988) Ethnography is certainly important in helping us understand a society that is so different from our modern westernised culture but such comparisons may not always be accurate or true. The little evidence we have offers no pattern as to lifestyles or trends in the Neolithic. In fact it could be said that finding 'abnormal' evidence for the Neolithic is normal.
We also have to take into consideration the concept that Britain should not be viewed as a whole nation in the modern sense. Neolithic societies were not isolated but were culturally independent from each other. (Modern Europe may form one land mass geographically but the people that live there have many different lifestyles and religions. One would not assume to generalise about modern Europeans in the way that academics tend to do with Neolithic peoples.) A final point to bear in mind is that any evidence we have for burial practice only accounts for a small proportion of the Neolithic population. Not everybody was buried in elaborate tombs and had the honour of being used in rituals. The questions facing archaeologists now are what happened to general members of the population when they died and would their graves be a better representation of Neolithic society than the burials we have already discovered.