The early Egyptian state owed its creation in 3100BC to both warfare and ideology. Ideology, as well as other factors including competition for land, caused warfare between the cities of Egypt. This warfare resulted in Narmer of Upper Egypt defeating the king of Lower Egypt and physically uniting the two lands under one king. He united the people of Egypt psychologically by creating one religion based on the gods they all shared. Narmer was once thought to be a myth but work by the historian, Manetho, describes a king that came from the south and united Egypt. His Greek name was Menes and modern Egyptologists have identified him as Narmer, the victorious king depicted on what is now known as the 'Narmer Palette', which was discovered in 1898. The war won by Narmer was an important catalyst in the creation of the Egyptian state, and his methods concerning the organisation of the Egyptian people and their ideology, helped to maintain this unification and prevent further inter tribal strife. As Leonard Cottrell said "Narmer became master of a land that required only the organised effort of its inhabitants to realise its ample resources". The Nile also played an important role as it not only allowed the Egyptian agricultural industry to develop, but it was an important means of communication that helped trade and assisted Narmer in keeping control of Egypt.
Although religion was ultimately an important factor in the unification of Egypt, it also caused divisions between the cities. The Egyptians believed in the same gods but each city also had different ideas as to which gods were the most powerful and important. Each city had a 'patron' god and their own hierarchy of the gods. The stories about how the gods were created were also different. For example, some towns claimed that Ra created the other gods through masturbation whereas others believed he spat them out. This caused tension between the cities, as each one was certain they were right. Eventually some towns worked together but there was still a division between the north and south of Egypt. The north became known as Lower Egypt and the south became Upper Egypt. These 'Two lands' worshipped the same gods but still had different religious hierarchies. The goddess Wadjet of Buto became the protector of Lower Egypt and the goddess Nekhbet became the protector of Upper Egypt.
Despite the fact that these goddesses caused tension between the north and the south, who both thought their respective goddess was greater and should therefore be worshipped accordingly by the other cities of Egypt, they also helped unite Egypt. When Narmer defeated his enemies he joined the crowns of upper and Lower Egypt to symbolise the unification of the two lands and to establish himself as supreme ruler. He also combined the symbols of Nekhbet and Wadjet (a falcon and a cobra) and used them to symbolise royalty as well as the joining of the religions.
Narmer combined all the Enneads and Ogeads of the various towns into one hierarchy, ensuring that at least one deity from each cult had a prominent position. Where there were many gods commanding one aspect of life e.g. Ra, Amun, Amen and the Aten were all gods of the sun, they were merged as one or attributed with slightly different tasks and powers. (Ra and Amun were joined as Amun-Ra the sun god and 'king' of gods and the Aten was the sun and sunlight, not a human manifestation) The stories of gods and creation were also combined in a somewhat confusing manner. Basic explanations of how the world came to be got more complicated as more gods and forms of gods became involved so no one would feel resentful. If a particular group felt their deity was being suppressed they may have rebelled and caused more conflict.
Modern archaeologists know that conflict was occurring between Egyptian tribes hundreds of years before Narmer came to power. These villages or tribes were also known as 'Nomes'. Some Egyptologists argue that these early confrontations were due to racial differences. It is said the "inhabitants of Upper Egypt were generally longheaded and small of stature, and occasionally their skulls showed signs of Negroid admixture (Cottrell L). However in Lower Egypt the people were taller with a different skull structure suggesting they had Asian origins. These people split into different hunting tribes and each adopted a different cult symbol that caused the divisions to widen. The chieftains of these tribes often waged war on his neighbours to gain more land and power. Occasionally some tribes formed alliances to defeat a common powerful enemy, but they soon turned on each other as soon as the threat was gone. It is also likely that many of the battles were over land. Early tribes wanted more territory in which to hunt and later towns wanted more fertile land to farm.
Like Narmer, the chieftains made palettes to celebrate their success in battle. Other artefacts, such as knives, have been found depicting battle scenes that give some indication of the conflict before the creation of the early Egyptian state. A flint knife found at Gebel el Araq shows people attacking each other with clubs and sticks, and bodies floating in the water beside a boat. It appears that although the Nile was later used to consolidate the unification of Egypt, it had once allowed many tribes easy access to neighbouring tons and villages, therefore encouraging conflict.
Recently new evidence has been discovered that suggests that there was a king before Narmer who had fought battles in the hope of uniting the tribes. He is only known as the Scorpion King, as his cult symbol was the Scorpion. However he was obviously unsuccessful as conflict between towns and the "Two Lands" continued until Narmer united them in around 3100BC. Unification was then developed and consolidated by Narmers successor and the first official Pharaoh of Egypt, Hor-Aha. Hor-Aha's Greek name was Min, which is a classical form of Menes, leading to arguments as to whether Menes was Hor-Aha or Narmer. Archaeologists agree, however, that it was Narmer who first united Egypt whether he was known as Menes or not.
The early Egyptian state was created due to the influence of both warfare and ideology. Warfare was slightly more important in the unifying of the Two Lands but ideology was important in ensuring this unification and creating unity in the minds of people who had once been at war with each other If ideology had not been a factor in the unification, all Narmer would have achieved was conquering another land. The people may have rebelled and Egypt would have divided again. On the other hand, if Egypt had not been plagued by conflict for centuries and if Narmer had not gone into battle, Egypt may never have unified the way it did. Tribes may have overpowered another eventually, causing some form of unification but the victors may have dominated over the other tribes. This would have caused tension and conflict that would result in the division of Egypt. It appears that warfare and ideology were not only equally important in the founding of the Egyptian state, but they were also responsible for maintaining it.