Augustus spent most of his time in power representing himself as 'between god and man'. He never directly portrayed himself as a god as it was likely that the people of the Roman Empire would think he was getting too ambitious and he would lose his power. However he never portrayed himself as merely a man either. Augustus knew it was not wise to publicly show that you believe that you are better than people like the senators as his own adopted father, Julius Caesar, was murdered partly for this reason. In order to overcome this problem without denying his supposed his divine status, Augustus built up his propaganda then 'modestly' refused other peoples' attempts to honour him in a manner befitting a god. In his autobiography Augustus claimed that 'some eighty silver statues of me, on foot, on horse and in chariots, had been set up in Rome; I myself removed them, and with the money I set golden offerings in the temple of Apollo2 (Res Gestae 24.2). Augustus manipulated the publics' belief that Julius Caesar had become a god and used propaganda to subtly suggest his divine status. When Caesar died, a comet was seen and the people decided it was a sign that he had become a god. Augustus was then able to call himself the son of a god rather than an actual god. Although Augustus was adopted by his uncle, Caesar, he was still able to make this claim as biological links were not important to the Romans. What was important was pietas, your duty to your father. Augustus could also use myths about his lineage and the founding of Rome to support his claim to divinity. Statues and buildings showed him as a divine, religious figure without actually declaring that Augustus was a god. Even private pieces, such as the Gemma Augustea, depict him as established gods rather than claiming he was a god in his own right.
Augustus's adopted father, Julius Caesar, had been declared a god soon after his death. Later, Augustus' adopted son Tiberius would make the same claim about Augustus but whilst he was still alive Augustus had to say he was just the son of a god. In order to spread this propaganda to all areas of the empire, coins were issued showing Caesar on one side and Augustus on the other. The inscription DIVI.F, meaning divi filius or divine son, was also put on the coins alongside Augustus portrait. Augustus could also trace his ancestry back to the gods Apollo and Mars, and the goddess Venus. If anyone disputed that he was the son of a god he could always argue his divinity by claiming to be a descendant of one of the three major gods. Augustus' link to Venus and mars stems from the myths surrounding the foundation of the city of Rome. The most commonly known myth about Romes' beginnings is that of Romulus and Remus. The story of the twins is described on the bases of statues in forums on Pompeii and Rome. There are different versions of the myth but they basically tell the same story. The daughter of the deposed king of Alba Longa was imprisoned by her uncle and became the first Vestal Virgin. However the god mars entered her prison cell and impregnated her. She gave birth to the twins Romulus and Remus. However her uncle discovered her children and tried to dispose of them by putting them in the river Tiber during a flood. They were washed downstream where they were found and cared for by a wolf. Some stories say a shepherd also raised them. Eventually the twins were recognised by their grandfather and they decided to found a city. After much disagreement Remus was killed and Romulus built the city of Rome. His descendents were said to have become the kings and emperors of Rome which is how Augustus could claim he was related to mars and the god that Romulus became, Quirinus.
There is another, less known myth about the foundation of Rome. It is documented in Virgil's poem The Aeneid and is also on statue bases in forums in Rome and Pompeii. Aeneas was the son of a mortal called Anchises and the goddess Venus. After the Trojan war Aeneas leads the surviving Trojans to Italy. The gods make plans for him and he ends up in Carthage where he begins an affair with queen dido. However Jupiter prophesised that he would one day found a great city. The Aeneid describes Aeneas being shown the future history of Rome, including the battle of Actium, which was won by Augustus. (This was Virgils' way of honouring Augustus, as he was asked to, without the poem becoming just another piece of Augustan propaganda.) Aeneas leaves dido and founds the town Lavinium. His son goes on to found the town of Alba Longer, which was said to be the birthplace of Romulus and Remus.
Augustus was believed to be the son of a god through adoption but it was also rumoured that his biological father was a god as well. Augustus has always shown favouritism to the god Apollo and he was sort of a patron god to Augustus. The temple of action Apollo was dedicated to Apollo in 28 BC and was built on the palatine hill, the place that Romulus is said to have taken for his augural quarter when deciding who should name the twins new city. Augustus relationship with the god is explained by Suetonius, who argues that Apollo was in fact Augustus' father. Augustus mother Atia was asleep in the temple of Apollo when a serpent entered her and a strange mark appeared on her body. He goes on to say "the birth of Augustus nine months later suggested a divine paternity" (Suetonius Augustus 94)
Augustus was able to spread his propaganda about his divinity through the building of monuments, such as the Ara Pacis and his statue, the Primaporta. The Ara Pacis was an altar of peace but was also a memorial to Augustus. It was situated in the campus Martius along with Augustus mausoleum and an obelisk that acted as a sundial. The friezes on the outside wall of the Ara pacis depict a procession headed by Augustus. He is dressed in robes and s leading the people in the direction of the west frieze. It represents him restoring the glory of Rome and the robes show him as a holy figure. Augustus is the people's connection to the gods through his prayers and sacrifices. This special relationship makes him more divine and special in the eyes of the people. The primaporta statue shows Augustus dressed in a military style rather than the religious robes but he still manages to subtly portray his divinity. His feet are bare which is usually portrayed on statues of the gods to highlight their divinity. Augustus is also accompanied by cupid on a dolphin. Cupid, like Augustus' supposed ancestor Aeneas, was the son of Venus so he is once again hinting at his divine family links.
Augustus never publicly announced he was a god but private pieces of art suggest he believed he was a god, or at least had some sort of divine status. The gemma augustea produced in 15BC, is an imperial cameo commissioned by Augustus' adopted son Tiberius. Although Augustus didn't commission it himself it shows the effect his propaganda had on people. They also started believing he was a god. The cameo shows various gods and goddesses seated around Augustus who is dressed as Jupiter. Some people may argue that portraying himself as Jupiter isn't declaring himself a god and that the cameo is just a fun piece that was treasured by the imperial family. However the modern equivalent to this would be someone dressing up as Jesus for a photograph. People would disapprove of it and the Romans would probably have disapproved of Augustus being depicted as Jupiter, which is why the piece remained in a private collection.
Augustus may or may not have believed he was a god but he was successful in convincing the majority of his subjects that he was 'between god and man'. His clever use of propaganda and his good fortune at having various gods and goddesses associated with his family meant he was able to portray himself as divine without crossing the boundary that could have caused his downfall. If the senate and the people of Rome had not believed in his divine status, they would not have supported him let alone build monuments to him without him commissioning them to. The people of Rome believed in him so much that a cult formed around him. Priests and priestesses included him in their prayers and his name and image was place next to those of the gods in numerous monuments. Augustus manipulated myths surrounding the death of Julius Caesar and the founding of Rome to explain his divine status without actually declaring he was a god. Augustus hard work paid off and his legacy lives on today, as the month of august was named in his honour.