Downing and Locke define participants as "entities of all kinds, animate and inanimate, concrete and abstract, that are involved in the processes" (2002:5). Michael Halliday developed a Systemic Functional Grammar as a fruitful means with which to analyse language effectively. In his Functional Grammar he employs a comprehensive list of Grammatical Functions which consists of a Subject, a Direct Object, an Indirect Object, a Prepositional Object, a Subject Compliment, an Object Compliment, a Predicator Compliment and an Adjunct. Only three of these, however, can be identified as participants of verbs, or action processes. These are the Subject, Direct Object and Indirect Object. Conversely an Adjunct cannot be regarded as a participant because it is non-nuclear, that is to say it is not intrinsic to the meaning of the clause as it lacks a solid relationship with the verb.
Berk states that it is the verb phrase that is at the heart of the sentence (1999:97). Furthermore in Transformational Grammar, it is the verb that dominates the tree diagram structure and thus commands the rest of the constituents in the clause (Radford 1998:119). It can be said that a verb possesses its own individual grammar. It therefore follows that the type of verb determines the number of participants, known as valency, which must be present in the clause, and which functions they may have. It is important to note here that syntactically the Subject must be present, but the presence of Objects depends on the transitivity of the verb, for example if it is intransitive, monotransitive or ditransitive. This essay will look at how each of the participants of action processes are identified following the theory of Downing and Locke and how they relate to various Semantic Roles.
The group of Semantic Roles features the Agent, the Experiencer, the Effected, and the Recipient, amongst others. Not only does the verb class determine which of the participants are present, but the meaning of the verb also prescribes which of the Semantic Roles they exist as. Downing and Locke allocate processes into three major groups, according to their meaning: Material, Mental and Relational. Where it is useful to be aware of these groups, for the purpose of discussing the three participants mentioned above, the material and mental processes will be most pertinent. Relational processes refer to stative verbs of being and becoming, which require a Complement, rather than an Object, therefore only the Subject is a likely contender to be a participant. Material processes, however, refer to 'doing' verbs. Although they are potentially transitive and therefore involve two or more participants, not all of these participants are necessarily actualised as they are understood by the context. For example in I'll mow and you can clear up, the two Subjects involved would be aware that the Direct Object they are referring to is the grass. Many mental processes tend to have two pairs of converse relational verbs, indicating a different direction of the process. For example in can I borrow a pen? the process is represented by a transitive verb, whereas in can you lend me pen? the direction is reversed but because of the semantic structure of the verb a direct object is needed.
Is it stated above that syntactically the Subject must exist in a clause. It is necessary however to elaborate on this generalisation and point out that this only refers to declarative and interrogative, and not to imperative clauses. This is because without the Subject the verb has no concord of person or number. The Subject appears first in declarative sentences and questions beginning with who, what, where et cetera (known as wh-questions) as in who fell down the stairs? The Subject is placed after the operator (usually an auxiliary verb) in polar wh-questions such as why did she break it? A subject is referred to anaphorically in a tag question e.g., the dog smells doesn't he?
Although a subject is commonly thought of as a noun phrase, it actually has many additional representations. As well as a noun phrase (including pronouns) a Subject may also manifest itself as a non-finite clause:
Perhaps the most obvious and common instantiation of the Subject is when it takes on the role of the Agent. The Agent is usually human as it refers to something that deliberately performs an action (a material process) on either itself or something else. There are occasions when the Agent is not human, however, but an animal, and therefore the action is not deliberate. For example in the dog left a trail of mud on the carpet we know this was not a deliberate action of the dog. In this instance the Agent becomes the Causer. Nouns denoting a psychological state are also Causers e.g., desire led them on, as are nouns denoting natural events such as rain put a stop to the game. Another role of the Subject as an inanimate being is that of the Instrument. An Agent inherently uses the Instrument but grammatically in English it is not compulsory to include the Agent in the clause. It is therefore unactualised. For example in the key opened the locker it is understood that the key did not do this of its own accord.
When the Subject undergoes a mental process as in Sophie loves the beach, the participant has conscious thought and is known as the Experiencer. The Experiencer itself divides into two subcategories: the Recipient Experiencer and the Agentive Experiencer. These enable a distinction to be made between those verbs in English which imply volition and those which do not. For example when dealing with processes of perception, there is an aspectual difference in meaning between the following:
(8)
(9)
In the former sentence Geoffrey is an involuntary Recipient Experiencer and in the latter he is a voluntary Agentive Experiencer.
When the verb denoting a material process requires two participants, one of which is an Agent, semantically there is often a necessity for an entity which is affected by the process, hence the Affected. Halliday (1985:103) uses the alternative terms of the Goal or the Patient, meaning "one that 'suffers' or 'undergoes' the process". It is possible for the Subject to function as the Affected only when a construction is in the passive form, and not the active. For example in the patient was saved by the doctor, the Affected is realised as the Subject. Alternatively in the doctor saved the patient, the Subject is the Agent and the Affected is the Direct Object. Another role similar to the Affected, where the participant is altered in some way as the result of a process, is the Effected. Again this can only perform as the Subject when in a passive construction but unlike the Affected, the Effected represents something that did not exist before the process but which was created as a result of it. An example of the Effected is music in
(10)
The final role that the Subject is capable of is that of the Recipient in a passive clause, as in you will be given a warning. The Recipient, as the name suggests is the receiver of some concrete or abstract item(s), although is typically realised as the Indirect Object as will be later discussed. In the sentences (2), (3) and (4) above, the Subject lacks a Semantic Role entirely.
In order for a participant to function as a Direct Object it must be placed after the Indirect Object following ditransitive verbs:
(11)
The Direct Object must also appear immediately after the verb in a simple construction and therefore cannot be separated from it:
(12)
If a clause is passivised, the meaning does not change. A prepositional paraphrase involving the Direct Object is not possible. Like the Subject, the Direct Object is typically a noun phrase although it has many other possible realisations: WH- and that- finite clauses; a non-finite clause; cataphoric it and a prepositional phrase denoting a time or place.
The possible Semantic Roles of the Direct Object are the Affected, the Theme, the Experiencer, the Created Object, the Locative Object and Empty  it. English is an SVO language (Subject-Verb-Object) so it follows that in simple sentences the Direct Object most commonly takes the role of the Affected, as it is affected by a material process e.g., Fred is decorating the kitchen. Whether the Affected is the Subject or the Object often depends on if the clause is active or passive. When the participant undergoes no change as a result of the process, it plays the Semantic Role of the Theme. The Theme usually appears after verbs denoting a mental process of perception e.g., she heard the thunder and corresponds with Halliday's definition of a Patient.
When the Direct Object is a conscious entity to undergo a psychological state it functions as the Experiencer:
(13)
although here there is only the non-volitional, unlike in sentences like (8) and (9) above where the Subject can be a Recipient Experiencer or an Agentive Experiencer.
The equivalent Direct Object role to the Subject acting as the Effected is that of the Resulting Object. As this refers to something which has been created from a process, syntactically this must be the Direct Object in an active construction as in Rachel made a cake. Similarly when an action is performed that involves a location, the Direct Object participant functions as the role of Locative Object in sentences such as  Arthur sailed the Atlantic Ocean.
The final Semantic Role of the Direct Object is used only in idiomatic expressions. Not dissimilar to the realisations of the Subject as cataphoric it and expletive it in (2) and (3) respectively, the Empty it has no syntactic function.
When a verb is ditransitive and two participants are involved in the process, the Indirect Object appears first in a clause, before the Direct Object, e.g., Ellen gave Tom the pen. Unlike the Direct Object a prepositional paraphrase involving to is possible with the Indirect Object such as Ellen gave the pen to Tom.
The Indirect Object has just two potential Semantic Roles, namely the Recipient and the Beneficiary. These may seem similar but depend on the individual semantic composition of the verb. Downing and Locke describe the criteria for identifying a participant as a Recipient: "When the action expressed by the verb extends to two inherent participants the additional participant is the Recipient. Processes of this type include give, send, lend, grant, pay" (2002:117).The Beneficiary on the other hand is not essential to a clause. As opposed to being a participant to whom a process is directed, the Beneficiary is a participant for whom a process is performed. This is the equivalent to the Affected and Theme roles of the Direct Object.
The Indirect Object, both as the Recipient and Beneficiary, is predictably realised by noun groups, but also by WH- clauses:
The Recipient 'receives' the Direct Object and can also exist as a non-finite - ing clause (15) and a prepositional phrase (16). The Indirect Object as a Beneficiary 'benefits' from a Direct Object and so cannot be actualised as these realisations because by definition it refers to an actuality.
(Downing and Locke 2002:47)
Berk (1999:43) regards the Recipient and the Beneficiary as two kinds of Benefactives and demonstrates that they can also represent the Indirect Object with the preposition for:
(Recipient)
(Beneficiary)
Sentence (17) is a paraphrase of James painted his Mum a picture. Sentence (18) however does not readily paraphrase in the same way; *Tony mended her the tap. It is important to be aware that with all Grammatical Functions there is no one-to-one correlation of participants and Semantic Roles as they are very much under the authority of the verb.