The aim of this assignment is to conduct a study in order to find out how Muslims are represented in the press. To do this a random sample of current newspapers will be analysed to find out which words are collocated with Islamic/Muslim(s). Articles from both tabloid and broadsheet newspapers will make up two small Corpora which will then be analysed independently in order to draw a comparison between the two genres. As well as relating to Corpus Linguistics, this also relates to the Written Discourse aspect of linguistics, giving gives rise to stylistic issues involving language, such as whether or not one genre differs dramatically in formality from the other. Unfortunately such a small scale study restricts an in depth investigation in this area. The following questions will be investigated using methods set out by a Corpus based approach to language analysis:
(1) Which adjectives are attributed to Muslim groups and Muslim individuals?
(2) Muslim groups and individuals are grammatically found to be participants of which verbs either as the Subject or Object?
(3) In cases whereby Islamic/Muslim functions as an adjective, which nouns are described by these terms?
The arrival and development of Corpus Linguistics over recent decades has led to countless research into many aspects of language. Francis defines a Corpus as "a collection of texts assumed to be representative of a given language, dialect, or other subset of a language, to be used for linguistic analysis" (1982:7). Sinclair states that "the beginning of any corpus study is the creation of the Corpus itself" (1991:13). Corpus Linguistics allows the study of actual language in use, and Corpora can be created for any number of purposes. Sinclair outlines the following problem when designing a small corpus:
Of course there are some advantages of having a smaller sample as discussed by Hunston (2002:25): "It is difficult for researchers to obtain any potentially useful information by just looking at concordance lines". Using a small Corpus somewhat allows the researcher to zoom in on their particular area of interest.
When designing the Corpus, issues of fair sampling are raised. The decision to include a sample of 10 articles from each newspaper over the last year led to one Corpus being substantially bigger than the other. The Broadsheet Corpus consisted of 17,938 words whereas the Tabloids Corpus was just 4,786 words. Both, however, contained twenty articles so could be regarded as equal.
To begin the research, newspaper websites were searched, for articles published in the previous year, which contained the term Islamic/Muslim(s). The first 10 such articles from The People, The Sun, The Guardian and The Independent, were saved in two separate files, titled 'Tabloids' and 'Broadsheets', which would represent the two Corpora. In the articles, the search terms were highlighted in a bold print. The text was then proof-read and any instance of a search term which did not adhere to the conditions outlined in questions (1) to (3) above, was taken out of bold print and not included in the tagging procedure. Regarding the tagging procedure, a form of parsing was employed. Strictly speaking, parsing refers to a thorough grammatical analysis of all constituents of a text. Here, however, rather than tag every item in the Corpus, I have selected the three most open, and therefore the most extensive, classes of words to be parsed; namely nouns, verbs and adjectives. Although there are computer programmes designed for this purpose, it became apparent that it would be more effective to do this manually. Often because of inflectional morphology and the way language is used, words do not take on the function we assume it has, and an automatic parsing or tagging system would be likely to lead to errors.
In sentences containing Islamic/Muslim where items did adhere to the criteria outlined above, tags were inserted into the data. For ease and clarity I employed many of the conventional 'part of speech' (POS) codes used in the British National Corpus as illustrated in the BNC Handbook (1998: 230-233). After trial and error it seemed that rigid conformity of tagging in this manner led to much gathering of irrelevant information. It became necessary therefore to modify the tags accordingly and extend their meanings for the purposes of conducting such a small study. In a larger study with a vastly extended Corpus it would be feasible and even necessary to annotate data with scrupulous detail; parsing every last insignificant item. The tags eventually chosen are listed below with definitions of instances in which they were used:
<AJ0> was inserted after any instance of an adjective describing a Muslim individual or group of people. Adjectives when describing nouns representing Muslim groups of people were also tagged in this way, e.g., community, party. Numbers were disregarded and not tagged.
<NN0> was inserted after any noun, animate or inanimate, which was attributed with the quality of being Muslim/Islamic. Individual names of people were not tagged as they would show nothing about the semantic prosody of the text.
<VVB> was inserted following a verb which had as one of its participants any Muslim being or beings, i.e., something a Muslim 'does' or 'has done' to them. Modals and other auxiliaries were not included in this tagging system as I felt they were irrelevant to such a small study. The verb  to have when meaning to possess was tagged but not when it was acting as an auxiliary preceding a main verb. Similarly 
going to when representing the future tense was not tagged e.g., going to stop.
Phrasal verbs were treated as individual verbs and as a result the main verb was tagged with <VVB>and the participial was tagged with <>. For example kicked<VVB>
 them out<>.
When stative verbs with the meaning of 'being' or 'becoming' occurred, such as they are, the adjective following the verb are was a Complement of the verb to be and therefore tagged with <AJ0>. If the verb to be was complemented with not an adjective but a prepositional phrase for example, then this was not tagged. Other stative verbs, when they represented a hypothetical or unrealised action, such as Muslims should be clear were treated as one verb as the meaning gives the sense of another existing verb, e.g., clarify.
These tags were used only in sentences containing the search terms. The articles are in their entirety in the Corpora, however, as this opens the data up to a wider range of linguistic studies. Any hyphenated item containing one of the search terms was treated as a separate entry and therefore ignored. Although such criteria seem complicated, they enabled the recording of only the words with a direct relationship with Muslims, i.e., who or what is Muslim, what Muslim people do and how they are characterised.
The words collocated with Muslim/Islamic are given below.
Both newspapers contain many words with negative connotations associated with terrorism. As I decided to only analyse the sentences actually containing the search terms, much important information was left out. Other than noting words of a particular type, many having a negative semantic prosody, little could be inferred from the lists of words. I therefore decided to search the British National Corpus for the same terms to see if my Corpora were an accurate representation of a larger Corpus. The concordances are presented as whole sentences containing the terms, and are to be found in the Appendices. Using the same criteria outlined above, I have identified the words associated with Muslims and listed them below.
The main problem faced with such an investigation is that analysis and annotation of data necessarily involves native speaker intuition. The decisions made regarding these matters are likely to vary greatly across individuals.
Often in long and complex text, particularly from broadsheet newspapers, it was not clear when a lexical item was behaving in one way, and when it functioned as something else entirely. In a further study I would like to extend the searches and look at each emotive word and find the frequency in which it appears in that text. I believe this would highlight the tendency of tabloid newspapers to refer to Muslims with connotations of terrorism. When reading the articles it is clear that tabloids treat Muslims with a certain bias. Broadsheets on the other hand, although often use the same words to refer to Muslims, also feature articles where Muslims are considered in contexts other than terrorism. The BNC results are predominantly nouns, often inanimate, illustrating that Muslim/Islamic is mainly found as an adjective. This differs from tabloids which tend to involve what Muslims do and which attributes they have.
There are many advantages of using a larger Corpus. Primarily it enables the comparison of different types of text. In this case it would have been useful to compare articles of a different time period. Searching for Muslim/Islamic in the last year necessarily included coverage of July 7 th bombings and the earthquake of Pakistan so it was inevitable that this study would uncover perhaps an unrepresentative amount of words with a certain type of meaning. Another useful continuation of this theme would look at a diachronic as opposed to a synchronic corpus, enabling a comparison of language across time.