A corpus-based description of English enables further insight into language beyond that which we gain from reference books and introspection of our own native language. The arrival and development of this approach in recent decades has led to much research into the behaviours of individual lexical items and phrases. Corpus analysis is concerned with patterns and frequencies and allows us to discover what is probable in language, by looking at statistical tendencies. Hunston and Francis have extended the application of the corpus based computer program to enable the studying of specific grammatical patterns. They played an important role in the creation of the Collins COBUILD Grammar Patterns Series (Francisal. 1996) which was the first time that the comprehensive range of verb patterns were methodically organised. They investigate the following hypothesis: "that particular patterns will tend to be associated with lexical items that have particular meanings" (2000:83). Halliday seems to follow this ideology, arguing that "grammar and vocabulary are not two different things" but instead refers to them as "the same thing seen by different observers" (1992b:63). This essay looks to explore and evaluate some of the possible relationships between patterns and meanings, specifically of verbs, using examples set out by Hunston and Francis, which have additionally been tested in The Bank of English.
Having searched for numerous grammatical patterns in the Bank of English Corpus, Hunston and Francis were faced with concordance lines which feature a search term in the middle and a certain number of words on either side, thus exemplifying the words which were found to follow such patterns. They then divided the words, where possible, into various semantic groups, providing a basis for a study into the relationship between pattern and meaning. Whilst one of the most important observations is that this relationship exists, it is also important to realise that this is a complex relationship which very much varies depending on which pattern is in question. This is similar to the way that the verb has grammatical control over the other participants of a clause.
Berk states that it is the verb phrase that is at the heart of the sentence (1999:97). Furthermore in Transformational Grammar, it is the verb that dominates the tree diagram structure and thus commands the rest of the constituents in the clause (Radford 1998:119). It can be said that a verb possesses its own individual grammar. It therefore follows that verb patterns predominantly consist of a verb and the words which are preceded by that verb. Often in English, verbs have multiple possible aspectual meanings, or senses. Usually it is just one of these senses that fits the pattern. An exception is the verb come in the pattern V of n. Two rare senses of the total number of potential meanings of come actually follow the pattern. Namely the following: (1) she comes of a family of painters and (2) some good will come of all this (Hunston and Francis 2000:83). These sentences illustrate that in the pattern V of n, n is able to represent an entire noun phrase such as a family of painters in (1) above. Determiners, such as all in (2) above, do not stand on their own but rather are included in the noun phrase, so this method of searching for a pattern is very effective.
Continuing with V of n, there are numerous types of verbs which are found to follow this pattern. When Hunston and Francis look into this pattern and generate the list of adherent words, they acknowledge that at a glance the verbs lack any obvious connection. They then look more closely, however, and are able to categorize the verbs into groups which are somehow thought to be semantically linked. They identify the following five semantic groups: verbs meaning 'to talk'; verbs associated with mental processes; verbs connected to the physical senses of the body; verbs to do with 'knowing' or acquiring knowledge and the last group consists of only two words with a notion of 'losing', namely dispose and drain. Where there are five additional verbs which cannot be characterised in any of these ways, this does not deny the compelling evidence that a connection between patterns and meaning exists.
Of course just as in many aspects of Corpus Linguistics, the decisions involved in this grouping were made by no less than native speaker intuition. This gives rise to some questions of accuracy as these decisions could easily vary across individuals. Hunston and Francis address this issue, however, and believe that "most observers would arrive at meaning groups that were very similar to each other" (2000:86). Decisions of acceptability can also be made by native speakers as intuition often senses the probability that a particular word will occur within any given pattern.
It is stressed that purely because a verb appears in a list, does not mean that it does so in all of its senses. Similarly, any items in a list cannot be assumed to have any shared qualities with each other, apart from the fact that they both occur in that pattern with reasonable frequency. In fact the only information we are able to gain about the words themselves, is the fact that they all appear in this list. Some pairs or groups of words are partly synonymous, for example in certain syntactic environments. Not all part-synonyms will necessarily share a pattern though. In the case of V of n in fact it is more likely that they will not. It therefore proves impossible to foretell which words are likely to follow any given pattern. The verb think for example exhibits the pattern V of n in such phrases as think of England. The verb consider on the other hand, although partly synonymous with think, is not a potential candidate for following the pattern. In this case this is due to the transitivity structure of the two verbs. Think is intransitive whereas consider is transitive and thus requires an immediate direct object; something which must 'be considered'.
Searching a Corpus for any item or query is extremely useful for both learners and researchers of language, not only because it provides them with evidence of actual usage, but also because patterns can give clues towards the inherent meaning and structure of verbs. There are many types of relationships between patterns and meaning. Some patterns occur with an abundant entourage of verbs found to share it. Sometimes, however, a pattern is found to be attributed to only a very small selection of verbs. First of all it is important to consider that there is no direct correlation between individual patterns and the meanings of the words which follow them. Often the words which follow the pattern are placed in numerous semantic groups with several different meanings, but even then it is verging on the impossible to find a semantic category for each item.
Where there are many types of verbs which are able to exhibit the pattern V of n, and it is largely the individual lexical items that carry the meaning, there are some patterns on the other hand, which themselves carry a certain degree of meaning. Such a pattern is V n into - ing. Here, there are more restrictions on the types of words which can be said to follow the pattern. This pattern has a statistical tendency to mean somehow making someone do something that they have little desire to do. Verbs that frequently follow this pattern are often associated with persuasive conversation and include pressure, charm and  blackmail. Again Francis et al (1996: 397-398) manage to further divide the verbs into semantic groups of ways of making someone do something. These are the following: 'force', 'trick', 'charm', 'spur' and a leftover group of exceptional items. Although these subgroups exist, unlike the groups of verbs of V of n, these all have a shared meaning in the context of the pattern. When this pattern is passivised and converted to be V-ed into -ing, the meaning remains the same.
Such an observation is evidence to suggest that some patterns on their own carry a meaning, and sometimes any one of a vast number of partial synonyms can be used to create the same semantic effect. An overwhelming majority of verbs following the pattern V n into - ing have clear negative connotations, giving a sense of craftiness on behalf of the 'persuader'. It must be mentioned, however, that there is a small minority of verbs following V n into -ing, which give a more positive feel and the 'persuader' seems less devious. These are cited with extreme rarity in the Bank of English but nonetheless are there. Examples of such verbs are excite and relax. These are contrary to the negative semantic prosody inherent in the mass of verbs. For this reason it is impossible to observe a direct correlation between pattern and meaning; no assumptions can be made.
The reason that a compact number of items may rarely occur in a pattern, could be due to an intentional or unintentional analogy. As soon as a connection between pattern and meaning is established, speakers, often subconsciously, use a certain amount of creativity. Through either failure to come up with the desired word, or volitional creative flair, a new word arrives in the list of possible instantiations of a pattern. The verb expire for example, partly synonymous with the verb die, is cited in the Bank of English a total of 3519 times, only 6 citations, however, appear in the pattern V of n. It would be inappropriate either way, to make a judgement on whether or not a verb could be said to follow a pattern. Such a judgement would be unsubstantiated.
Sentences are not simply linear strings of words, nor is a grammatical pattern a ready-made structure that words can be slotted into and exchanged in a random order. The connection is a great deal closer than that. The work of Sinclair somewhat opposes that of Hunston and Francis, as he investigates only lexical items and their behaviour. Nevertheless after researching the exclusive patterning of the verb yield, he reaches the following conclusion: "It seems there is a strong tendency for sense and syntax to be associated" (1991:65). Hunston summarises the relationship between pattern and meaning (2002:46): "for the most part the meanings of words are distinguished by the patterns or phraseologies in which they typically occur".
The investigating of patterns and their connection with meaning does not show which verbs can or cannot be used in a certain way. As Hunston and Francis admit themselves, "if one subscribes to the view that to know a language means to be able, potentially, to generate all and only the sentences in that language, then such an omission is serious indeed" (2000:96). This reflects the wider context of Corpus Linguistics in general, as it is not meant to be a prescriptive way of telling us what we can and cannot say. Rather it is more of a descriptive way of analysing language performance, demonstrating the strong tendencies of a language or a feature of language. Corpora contain only linguistic material and no paralinguistic features are included which is sometimes where much of the meaning lies. No distinction is made between what is correct or incorrect, and the corpus may well contain some items which some speakers would find difficult to accept. Partington acknowledges a criticism of the Corpus based approach to language research:
"language is studied divorced from its context of communication. Any information derived from the type of corpus which contains texts from a variety of sources and authors, and the concordances arising from such a corpus, can have little validity since we tend to know nothing about the author of the message of a concordance line and their illocutionary intentions. (...) Concordance data are as decontextualised as any linguistic information could possible and therefore cannot count as communication" (1998:145).
It is precisely because there are no guidelines of correctness that analogy occurs. Both patterns and meanings are subject to change over time. Hunston and Francis attribute the following change to British speakers assimilating American characteristics of language. The verb impact is cited in The Bank of English highly frequently when occurring in the pattern V on n, as in impact on the education system. It is cited far fewer times under the pattern V n, as in impacted on the economy. This signifies a change of patterning due to a possible analogy with another verb, for example affect. Consequently, analogy is a feasible explanation for language change.