In this project, I aim to construct a small scale corpus of two match reports of the English national football team's games from each of the following sources - The Guardian, The Telegraph, Yahoo! Sport and BBC sport online. Although this sample is not as large as I would have liked due to lack of availability of such resources, I feel that for a study of this size it will be sufficient.
Looking at the samples, the most noticeable thing is that the broadsheet samples use far more adjectives overall than the online news sites (2.79% of the text to 1.61% of the text respectively). Another interesting point is that the broadsheet samples use far more neutral adjectives than the online news sites (40.48% of all adjectives are neutral compared to 13.79%).
The fact that more of the broadsheet samples are made up of adjectives would seem to suggest that online news sites are more concerned with reporting the match rather than giving too much comment or evaluation on how it was played. Fowler (1991) writes that the news can be a social construct. What this means is that the fact an event is reported is what makes that event news and not the fact that it has happened and that similarly how an event is reported can influence peoples opinions of the event. So, in this case if a newspaper says England have played well or badly this will influence how people view England's performance and therefore whether society believes they have performed well or not. This suggests that broadsheet newspapers are a lot more interested in putting across some kind of opinion or influence than online news sites. Reah (2002) agrees and writes that "word choice is an important tool for establishing an Ideological stance"
The presence of so many more neutral adjectives in the broadsheet sample also shows the difference between the target audiences of the two pieces. The fact the online news sites have so few neutral adjectives suggests that they are only interested in giving a brief summary of the events of the match. Given the nature of the two types of samples this isn't really surprising. The audience of an online news site would be someone who was only interested in a brief match report - or even just the result. It is doubtful that they would want to read through pages of text. The audience of a broadsheet newspaper however would be someone who has paid money for information and expected some analysis an opinion. In this way, the audience for an online news site would probably be someone who was looking for the news to be reported in a way more similar to televised news reports than newspapers.
This is supported by collocates of the sample of neutral adjectives I took (sections 5.213 and 5.223). Here, for the online sites there is no real pattern in the use of neutral adjectives. However, in the broadsheet sample seven of ten of the neutral adjectives are referring to the game taking place suggesting a greater evaluation of the game than the online sample.
There are however some similarities in how the samples use positive and negative adjectives. In both cases when positive adjectives are used they are much more likely to be describing individual players rather than the England team. Also, when negative adjectives are used they are more likely to refer to the England team rather than the England players.
This led me to conclude two possibilities - either in these contexts individuals are viewed more positively than the team or a general pattern of language use is that positive adjectives are more often used to refer to a group of people than an individual and that the opposite is true for negative adjectives.
The later is an interesting theory, and possibly enough for an investigation of its own. However, due to the size of this project I decided to only investigate it briefly, not to gain conclusive results but to see if any general tendencies occurred. I used the internet tool Sketch Engine to search the BNC online for four positive, four neutral and for negative adjectives (two from online news sites and two from broadsheet newspapers for each type) and grouped them either as referring to an individual, a group or an object. The results can be found in section 5.3 and support the idea that it is a general aspect of language use and not specific to online news sites or broadsheet newspapers.
In this project, I have shown that although online news sites share some features with broadsheet newspapers I also identified some shared features that the evidence I gathered from the BNC corpus suggests are part of language use in general.
I also identified differences in adjectival use between online news sites and broadsheet newspapers, relating them to the differences in target audience and also to literature on the subject.
Both online news sites and broadsheet newspapers have many shared features, however I feel this project has shown that the use of adjectives is sufficiently different to distinguish two distinctive styles which are aimed towards two different target audiences.
If I were to perform a follow up study it would be interesting to add transcripts of televised news reports and tabloid newspaper articles to the samples already collected to determine if the online news reports have similar adjectival usage to either of these groups. From the evidence gathered in this report, I would suggest a televised news report would bear a stronger resemblance to an online news report than either of the newspapers.