Everyone, everywhere makes choices about the language they use, some of these are obvious such as using a different code when going for a job interview than the code employed whilst having a casual drink with friends while others choices are not so obvious. Mesthrie (2000) agrees with this and says that "language varieties constitute a resource that may be drawn on in interaction with others". Indeed, the example just given shows that to being to switch codes in this way is a valuable resource as using a code in the 'wrong' situation can be seen as highly inappropriate.
So given that language is a resource that can be drawn upon, what this example also shows us is that people are obviously aware that certain codes are "correct" for certain situations, and that in these situations some codes are more highly valued than others. This then also suggests that the various codes employed by a language speaker all have some particular associations that suit them to the context they are used in. In her study of the German-Hungarian bi-lingual town of Oberwart Gal (1979) writes that the local Hungarian forms as opposed to standard Hungarian are "considered ideal for sincere, unassuming talk between native Oberwarters". This shows us that in Oberwart the local dialect is the preferred code for expressing honesty and sincereness, probably due the high solidarity using the local dialect creates.
Holmes (2001) agrees with the idea that the various contexts people find themselves in help determine what code they use and states  "Certain social factors - who you are talking to, the social context of the talk, the function and topic of the discussion - turn out to be important for language choice in many different types of speech community". She also states that the social factors dictating what language is used in 'typical' interactions can be grouped into what is known as 'domains of language use'.
So far, I have given examples of code switching where separate languages are used for each code. When two languages are used in clearly different domains, such as the example of Guarani and Spanish in Paraguay given earlier it is known as Diglossia. Wardhaugh (1998) writes "A diglossic situation exists in a society when it has two distinct codes which show clear functional separation; that is, one code is employed in one set of circumstances and the other in an entirely different set"
The important thing to note here is that in a Diglossic situation, the codes do not share the same function. Holmes (2001) Agrees and states that in the broader sense of Diglossia "Each variety is used for quite distinct functions; H and L complement each other". Holmes then explains that 'H' is typically the high, overtly prestigious variety while the 'L' is typically the low variety which although is not overtly prestigious may have a certain amount of covert prestige.
Looking at Gal's study of Oberwart we can see that in this case, the 'H' language is German. Gal (1979) writes "While Hungarian is the language of the past and of the old, German is seen as the language of the future, of the young people that are most able to take advantage of the opportunities that Oberwarters feel exist in the German-speaking world". In this situation, the language that is spoken by an individual gives people information about how successful they are. Wardhaugh (1998) writes "Diglossia reinforces social distinctions. It is used to asset social position and how to keep people in their place, particularly people who are not and the upper end of the social hierarchy". Gal (1979) agrees with this saying that in Oberwart "Hungarian is considered a useless language because only peasant work is possible without a thorough knowledge of German" and furthermore "The expertise and knowledge required for employment, and the sophistication that Oberwarters associate with Austrian urban life and that they seek, are both represented by the German language".
Another interesting point about Diglossic situations is picked up on by Holmes (2001) who writes "Often the grammar of the H is morphologically more complicated". This may explain why people view the 'H' variety as more prestigious than the 'L' variety, as in many people's minds to speak in a more 'complicated way signals intelligence.
Holmes also notes that since the 'H' variety is used in more formal domains "The H variety contains many more formal and technical terms". What this means, is that in order to talk about technical objects and ideas people must change code to the 'H' variety. Eventually because of this, these objects and ideas become connected in people's minds with the language itself. Gal (1979) suggests this is one reason why Oberwarters view German in the way that they do - "The language itself has come to symbolize the higher status of the worker and the prestige and money than can be earned by wage work".
Up until this point, I have spoken about code-switching without making any reference to any technical terms for the types of switching or how these types differ from each other. In this section, I will talk about situational code switching and Metaphorical code switching in more detail.
In this essay, I first introduced and defined code switching. I then introduced the concept of 'domains' and showed how a switch of domain is nearly always accompanied by a switch of code before outlining some reasons why this happens. I then investigated Diglossic situations, concentrating on what motivates people to change code in bi-lingual situations and relating it to language choice and code-switching. I finally looked at specific types of code-switching and why people select certain codes for certain situations as well as the various reasons that people switch between codes within a single situation or 'domain'.
From the evidence given, it is reasonable to conclude that not only code-switching, but any form of language choice in general gives speakers the ability to influence how other people view them. This is particularly true in code-switching where I have shown that by changing codes, speakers can draw on the identities associated with more than one ethnic group. In Diglossic situations this can be membership of two ethnic groups or often, speakers will attempt to associate themselves with the connotations of a certain language. Mesthrie (2000) agrees with this writing "Language choice has to do with maintaining or negotiating social identities in relation to others. Code-switching allows simultaneous access to both identities".
This statement also supports my second conclusion, which is that when changing codes it is often the fact that there is a change of code at all which is more important in telling us the meaning of what is being said rather than the actual words themselves.
What these conclusions show is that although I have identified many reasons why speakers code-switch the fact that it happens at all demonstrate that there is far more to language than just speech. What speakers do while code-switching is showing us that whether they are aware of it or not they are using code-switching as a communicative device in its own right in a way that can often tell us just as much, or even more about their feelings and intents than the utterances they use.