Writing in Fletcher and MacWinney (1995), Menn and Stoel-Gammon state that "In several ways children's words carry less phonological information that the corresponding adult targets" This would seem to suggest that in order to communicate, the child is changing the adult form into a form that they can produce. Menn and Stoel-Gammon agree and also suggest that "children usually have systematic ways" of reducing these forms. Stampe (1979) writes that children have an "innate phonological system" and that the child's task in acquiring adult pronunciation is to "revise all aspects of the system which separate his pronunciation from the standard" and that this is done by removing those phonological processes that are not compatible with the adult form.
There are three main categories of phonological processes identified by Ingram in Fletcher and Garman (1986) that the child may use to simplify the adult form to aid with production. Due to the space constraints of this essay, I will not go into detail, or attempt to list each one but I feel a brief summary of some common Phonological processes would be beneficiary to help understand the ways in which children change their production of speech using phonological processes.
Through-out this essay, I have given several examples of cases of variation between children. This is the most obvious and main criticism of the phonological processes theory - the fact that the theory seems to underestimate the influence of individual variation between children.
Writing in Fletcher and Garman (1986), Ingram suggests that phonological processes fail to take into account the influence of the phonological preferences of the child. Ingram defines a phonological preference as "a preference by the child for a specific articulatory pattern" such as class (fricative, nasal etc) or syllable structure (reduplication etc.). Ingram goes on to note that a child may also be influenced by factors such as the place of a sound in a word, or may even avoid using a sound they are unable to produce rather than attempt to modify it by a phonological process. As a result, Ingram states "the output from child to child may be quite different"
However, Ingram also states that "some children keep very close to adult models and use only the most familiar phonological processes" if this is the case for the majority of children (Ingram notes there has not been enough research to conclude if this is the case) then it may be the phonological processes theory holds correct for the majority of children, although it must still acknowledge that some variation exists.
Stampe (1979) does make some attempt to account for this variation, suggesting that "where processes overlap" the child will attempt to either suppress or limit a certain process which he then claims is what leads to individual variation. Ingram (1989) writes that this claim is "one of Stampe's major ways of accounting for individual variation between children". The problem with this idea is that it still doesn't explain why one child limits a certain process that another child may suppress entirely. Indeed by admitting individual variation but being unable to account for it in a way that the idea of phonological preferences can would seem to give support to the global perception theory discussed earlier.
It would however be foolish not to acknowledge the relevance of Stampe's phonological processes as common across child acquisition. Ingram (1989) writes that "general patterns do occur" and Smith (1979) states that 97% of A`s vocabulary can be explained by his realisation rules, although concedes that there are exceptions where "the rules make the wrong predictions"
Other theories such as Macken and Ferguson recounted in Ingram (1989) have suggested that making predictions of language acquisition based on a phonological theory of the adult language is not the best approach to take. Instead, they emphasise individual variation across children. This criticism of Stampe's theory doesn't seem to hold up to close scrutiny. It is quite obvious that when acquiring language the child's goal is to emulate adult speech and therefore a method that evaluates child language in terms of the adult language system (such as Stampe's) would be preferable. Furthermore although I have already shown a problem of the phonological processes theory is the lack of acknowledgement of individual variation between children, I have also shown that there are general patterns that are common across children. Therefore it would not seem correct to view the child's acquisition solely in this way.
In this essay, I have outlined the phonological processes theory, demonstrated how the a child acquiring language would use it taking into account various influences such as the child's first language, explained Stampe's distinction between context free and context sensitive processes and provided an evaluation of main problem of the theory - the idea that it doesn't take the individual variation of the child into account.
In the previous section, I showed that although the phonological processes theory does not entirely explain how children acquire language it does give a large amount of insight into a child's language acquisition.
The main critique of this theory is that it is too limiting in its approach. Writing in Fletcher and Garman (1986) Ingram suggests that the idea that a child's form is made up only of the adult form with phonological processes is unable to explain the massive variation between and immense complexity of children's acquisition of language. Ingram suggests that a better approximation is the adult form with the phonological processes but with the addition of the child's spoken form. He argues that it is important to acknowledge that children "actively operate on adult forms" based on the discussion in this essay, I would agree. Furthermore, writing in Fletcher and MacWinney (1995), Menn and Stoel-Gammon also acknowledge "the child must construct its own version of the adult system for word pronunciation"
What this leads me to conclude is that although the theory of phonological processes (and complete perception theory as whole) is too narrow in its approach to child language acquisition, the same can be said for approaches within global perception theory. However, as both theories have important points to make it would seem the best theory of language acquisition would rest somewhere within the partial perception theory school of thought.