The texts chosen for this comparative analysis have the potential to demonstrate the ways in which two different genres present with a similar topic: How should the West, notably the US and Britain, react to armament processes in so-called 'rogue states'? However, the analysis will show that the presentation of information in both examples is not as different as one might expect. It will also demonstrate how discourse analysis becomes more difficult when genres evolve and overlap.
The genres covered in this essay are political speech and academic writing. However, as both these genres contain a variety of subgenres, the following discussion will concentrate on their most central characteristic features and the features specific to the selected subgenres.
Text 1 is an extract from Prime Minister Tony Blair's statement opening the Iraq debate in the House of Commons (HoC), a communicative event belonging to the genre of political speech. Other communicative events of the same class, in Swales' (1990: 58) terms, are inauguration speeches, election campaign rallies etc. All of these text types share a set of communicative purposes, like persuading the audience to back or oppose a certain policy, attracting votes or establishing a feeling of sympathy and trust between author and audience. The discourse community, in this case, can generally be identified as politically aware members of the public. Some subgenres, like parliamentary debates themselves, may require more expertise from the audience due to prerequisite specialist background knowledge or their highly formalised language containing archaic expressions like "my right honourable friend", which make the discourse slightly less accessible for non-expert members of the discourse community.
The speech at the centre of this analysis, however, is different because of its special significance as part of a very public political campaign. The participants of the discourse event are not only the addressor, PM Tony Blair, and the addressees present at the time and location of the event, the MPs in the HoC, but also the whole country and potentially the whole world, due to modern media like television and internet. This is because the function of the speech is not only to convince MPs of the necessity of military intervention in Iraq, but also to gain understanding and support from the British public and the international community for a highly divisive policy. Thus, the public is what might be called a secondary addressee. Due to these circumstances, the situation (Cook 1989: 99) of this discoursal event cannot be restricted to the locality and time of the opening speech of a scheduled debate in the HoC, the Upper House of the British government, on 18 March 2003.
A similar complexity is evident in the physical form (Cook 1989: 99) of the text. According to Hasan (Halliday and Hasan 1989: 69), there are great structural differences between written and spoken genres. In a political speech however, these two macro-categories of genre overlap. The large majority of political speeches are carefully written, redrafted and tailored according to purpose and audience. Yet they are delivered as spoken discourse and are therefore subject to spontaneous alterations and the influence of extra-linguistic factors like gestures and intonation.
Normally the linguistic style of parliamentary speeches is quite formal. The analysis will show to what extent this applies to the present example.
Text 2 is an article by Gary Samore, entitled "The Korean Nuclear Crisis" and published in the Spring 2003 issue of the academic journal 'Survival', The International Institute for Strategic Studies Quarterly published by OUP. However, it is not a prototypical example for an academic journal article in terms of structure.
As commonplace in social sciences like history and politics, the traditional structure of a research article containing an outline of methodology, data presentation, analysis and evaluation etc. cannot be readily applied. The data employed in this kind of research is usually comprised of primary sources like documents rather than experimental results. The present article goes still beyond this discipline-specific variation as it does not even include a literature review. It does, however, include a short bibliography containing primary (White House statements) and secondary (newspaper articles) sources.
The content of text 2 is an overview of the past and current developments in the North Korean armament process and the response of the international community, most importantly the US, to these developments. The article's function is to evaluate the effectiveness of the responses and to pass recommendations on further action.
The addressor is the author of the article, Gary Samore. Due to content and function of the text, the addressees are likely to be not only academics, but also politicians and national security professionals in different parts of the world. The discourse community of text 2 will therefore be much smaller than the discourse community of text 1. This is also evident in the medium that transports the text, a costly academic journal rather than television or internet, and in the style of writing. Although the article is less 'dry' than the traditional academic article, it still contains quite intricate syntax and expert vocabulary, as will be shown in more detail in the analysis. Therefore medium, style and participants tip the balance towards an instance of academic writing, although it verges on journalism with regards to content and structure. This mixture of traditional with untraditional characteristics might be the reason why, within the genre of academic journal articles, articles from the social sciences seem to have been widely ignored. Swales' table "Overview of the Textual Studies of the English RA" (1990: 131-132) does not include any studies on articles from the social sciences.
Both text 1 and 2 are of an argumentative nature, with the goal of persuading the addressees to consider and eventually adopt the point of view of the author on an issue of politics. Thus critical discourse analysis is the obvious choice of approach, because it situates discourse into social context and thereby offers an angle to analyse linguistic choices in terms of their ideological intent, which can be evident in vocabulary, grammar and textual structures carrying experiential, relational or expressive values (Fairclough 1989: 110-111).
Given that rhetoric has been aptly defined as "the art of persuasive discourse" (Cockcroft & Cockcroft 1992: 3), this analysis must also consider aspects of rhetorical structure. However, the theories that will be applied do not focus on the classical oratory techniques discussed by Aristotle but around problem-solution-patterns as put forward by Hoey (2001) and others.
Both CDA and rhetorical structure analysis will occasionally draw on issues of information structure, like the fronting of certain elements and theme-rheme configurations. The addressor's choice of theme, i.e. the "point of departure" of the message (Halliday 1967, in Brown and Yule 1983: 134) represents a "staging" (Grimes 1975, in Brown & Yule 1983) of the sentence's proposition that will influence the addressee's interpretation of what is to follow (Brown & Yule 1983: 125), i.e. the rheme. Therefore theme-rheme structure can add a micro-level aspect to the study of ideologically motivated texts.
The addressee opens with a ceremonial phrase that functions as an indexical feature (line 1-3) (Halliday and Hasan 1989: 39) in parliamentary discourse. It activates a mental schema, i.e. a stereotypical pattern (Cook 1989: 73) in the addressees' minds that allows them to identify the discourse as the opening of a parliamentary debate, to be followed by the debate itself. This is a typical example for the ritualised and rule-bond character of this genre pointed out by Bayley (2004: 14). As line 1-3 are demanded by protocol and therefore beyond the addressor's control, it could be argued they represent a pre-sequence rather than an overt introduction to text 1. It could also be interpreted as a speech act (Austin 1962, in Cook 1989: 35) as it brings about a change of affairs in the world, namely the official opening of the debate.
If one accepts this interpretation, then line 4-9 can be identified as the actual introduction of text 1. This interpretation is supported by the discourse patterning signal word "outset" (line 4). Blair begins the actual speech with a rhetorical strategy called Antithesis and Concession (Mann and Thompson 1988). Instead of proceeding straight to the nucleus, i.e. the core of his message, Blair chooses to begin with the rhetorical satellite, i.e. the periphery of the argument (Matthews 1997). Instead of saying "I think we have to go to war" he refers to the "views of those in opposition to mine" (line 8-9). He claims to appreciate the controversial nature of the policy he is about to propose as a part of "democracy" (line 6). This concessive strategy has the interpersonal function of advertising mutual understanding between addressor and addressees and also 'pre-empts' criticism of his position. His affirmation of respect for his opponents is stressed by parallelism at the beginning of the two paragraphs in line 4 and line 8, his personal commitment underlined by the repetitive use of the personal pronoun "I".
After this quite evasive introduction one would expect the nucleus to follow, in the form of his judgement about the issue at question. But yet again, Blair starts with a concessive remark on the issue, without actually naming it: "This is a tough choice" (line 10). The choice of a demonstrative pronoun in the absence of any anaphoric reference point shows that he as addressor knows, and all the addressees know, the proposition of his message, due to previous extensive media coverage. This circumstance enables the PM to dwell on the satellite of the argument, and even his next sentence (line 14) is not a clear, neutral statement of the nucleus. The lexical choices he makes to describe the option "no war" have a strong connotation of retreat and backwardness: "stand down" and "turn back", whereas the "war" option contains positively charged terms like "hold firm" and the personal pronoun "we". It is not clear whether by "we", or indeed "our" (line 6), he means the government, the HoC or the British people. Interestingly, this is the first personal pronoun he introduces after "I". He does not directly refer to his potential opponents, instead he mentions "this House" (line 4) and "the views of those in opposition to mine" (line 9), and does not introduce the personal pronoun "you" as a counter position to his own. Instead, he aims to create a collective identity through the ambiguous use of "we" (line 14), in the combination "the course we have set", which creates a feeling of collective ownership of the government's actions leading up to the debate.
In the following sentence (line 14), the PM finally asserts his view on the issue to be debated, i.e. the nucleus of his argument. The sentence, which can be interpreted as the core of his argument, the central statement of his speech, contains numerous features that contribute to its persuasive, affirmative character: It is short, simple and constative, containing the two personal pronouns "I" and "we", which gives rise to an impression of shared agency. It also contains two verbs expressing modality, one epistemic ("believe") and one deontic ("must"), which attribute certainty and urgency to the propositional content. And again, this sentence contains the words "hold firm" and thus links Blair's assertion to the question posed in the preceding paragraph.
In line 15-40, Blair sets out to answer the question he poses at the beginning of that section, "Why does is matter so much?", a very effective text structuring device. His rhetorical choice is to elaborate on the importance of the issue before justifying his decision. Again, he avoids to name this issue, which is the question if Britain should invade Iraq, instead he uses evasive pronouns like "it" (line 16, 23, 32, 39) and "this" (line 22). He includes a lot of emotionally charged terminology like "fate" (line 30), "brutalised" (line 32) "next generation" (line 40), "future" (line 31), "21 st century" (line 35), "bitter" and "grave" (line 22). This section is very much concerned with the future. In the following section, Blair talks about the past.
The return back to the present and then the past from an elaboration on the future is clearly signposted through the sentence "But first, Iraq and its WMD" (line 41). What follows, is a chronicle of the diplomatic lead-up to the current situation. The sentences are kept short and the political detail is kept to a minimum, which is a further indication that Blair is not only addressing fellow politicians, an expert audience, but the whole nation. There are two recurrent features in the recount. One is the thematisation of adverbial phrases of time at the beginning of paragraphs and sentences (line 42, 62, 66, 67, 70, 72, 74, 76, 89, 92, 95, 97, 102, 106, 112, 113, 122). This choice structures a potentially confusing history in a very overt way and assigns 'relative prominence' (Clements 1979 in Brown and Yule 1983: 134) to the time dimension of the conflict, creating the impression of a long history. The other recurring feature is a claim-counterclaim pattern (McCarthy 1991: 79-80) made up of the constituents "declaration" or "full and final declaration" (lines 55, 56, 65, 71, 75, 92) and "false" (lines 57, 73, 94, 98). Together with other lexical choices strongly suggesting falsehood, like "blanket denial" (line 58), "game" (line 59), "undeclared" (line 63), "defected" (line 77), "denied" (line 81, 101), "revealed" (line 84), "prohibited" (line 90) and "lies, deception and obstruction" (line 115), the recurring theme of "declaration" followed by "false" is designed to leave the addressees with a deep mistrust of Saddam Hussein's regime and without any hope for a diplomatic solution. The repetitive structure and vocabulary iconically mirrors the repetitive history, aimed at making the addressees feel the same impatience for a solution to text 1 that the PM and his supporters feel about the armament conflict.
The overall structure of text 1 resembles a 'recycled Problem-Solution pattern' as discussed by Hoey (2001: 130). He describes the basic Problem-Solution pattern as:
In text 1 however, the Response (i.e. the diplomatic effort to make Hussein disarm) is not followed by a Positive Result or Evaluation (i.e. Hussein's disarmament) that would bring the pattern to a close. Instead, the Response is followed by a Negative Evaluation (i.e. that Hussein's disarmament is disproved), which causes the pattern to be 'recycled', i.e. resumed from the Problem as the new departure point. Repeated Negative Evaluation then causes the text to become circular.
To sum up, text 1 includes various devices designed to make it memorable, like structural and lexical parallelism, short and simple sentences, chronic order, and clear signposting at the beginning of paragraphs through thematisation of time adverbials and direct questions (line 15-17, 28, 124). Text 1 also includes a number of features with interpersonal function, aimed at making the addressees feel sympathy and trust for the addressor, like collective identity pronouns, concessive rhetorical moves, and modal expressions suggesting certainty. Text 1 is also designed to make addressees aware of the importance of its content, through emotive vocabulary and modal expressions suggesting urgency. All these features, jointly with the propositional content, are supposed to work together in order to persuade the addressees to adopt the addressor's point of view.
Text 2 is much longer than text 1, therefore the analysis can only include the most relevant aspects due to the time and space constraints on this paper.
The article starts without overt introduction with a paragraph summarising the present and potential future situation regarding North Korea's armament process. In the next paragraph, the addressor summarises recent developments and judges the US' response so far as ineffective. This is followed by a paragraph briefly outlining further options of action available to the US, including brief comments on their prospects of success. Then, the addressor gives a detailed account of the diplomatic history of the conflict since 1985, stretching from page 8-18 under the headings "Birth of the Agreed Framework" (page 8-11), "Death of the Agreed Framework" (page 11-16) and "Putting North Korea on ice" (page 16-18). Under the next heading "Red lines and pre-emption" (page 18-19), Samore examines and evaluates future military options and scenarios. Then, under the heading "Isolate or negotiate?" (page 19-22), he discusses and evaluates future diplomatic options and passes recommendations. Finally, under the last heading "High stakes" (page 23-24), Samore summarises his analysis of the situation.
The general rhetorical pattern evident in the article is a Problem-Solution Pattern involving Recycling, similar to text 1. The Solutions (i.e. diplomatic efforts to stop and undo Korean disarmament) to the Problem (North Korea's armament) are assessed by the addressor to have been ineffective. So the argumentative circle resumes repeatedly at the Problem of continuing Korean armament. The goal-achievement pattern (Situation  Goal  Method of Achievement  Evaluation and /or Result) (Hoey 2001: 146), which reflects the traditional structure of academic essays does not apply here, because the addressor has no way of assessing the effectiveness of the methodology proposed by him as he is unable to carry out the experiment. However, the category 'Goal' would be more helpful in this context than the category 'Solution' because Hoey defines 'Goal' as "an intended change in the Situation" (Hoey 2001: 146).
Although text 2 is generally structured in line with the Problem-Resolution pattern, this is far less obvious to the addressee because the circular content coverage is not emphasised by lexico-grammatical parallelism like in text 1. The article is clearly structured through headings foregrounded through font size, some suggesting linear development through the 'birth-death' metaphor. Chronicle progression in the sections covering the history is indicated through adverbial phrases of time and key vocabulary like "roots" (page 8). But the signposting is not as clear as in Blair's speech as there are much fewer adjunct themes specifying simple time relations (only once or twice per page on page 7- 9, 12,-16, 18 and 23). However, it does include numerous thematisations of complex time relations describing circumstances rather than abstract dates, like "During the Clinton administration" (page 10), "while the US was focusing its intelligence and diplomatic efforts on Kumchang-ni" (page 10), or "Around the time that Washington cancelled the Kelly visit" (page 12).
Interestingly, the few instances of parallelism evident in text 2 concern the very top end and the very bottom end of the macro to micro level scale. Samore chooses a macro structure that resembles newspaper articles, in so far as he summarises the most important points at the outset, only to return to them in more detail in the main body of the text:
One of the micro-level parallelisms mentioned above concerns a lexico-grammatical parallelism at the end of the "Isolate or negotiate?" section (page 22), i.e. the final sentence of the section outlining the addressor's recommendations:
Here, the addressor uses parallelism in syntactical structure and lexis to give his recommendations greater appeal and memorability. There are a few other instances of this kind ("rather than", page 20), but overall he makes little use of such overt measures to ensure easy access to his text.
This becomes apparent in his use of specialist vocabulary as well. Terms like "clandestine" (page 7), "brinksmanship" (page 21), "non-proliferation" (page 23) or "intrusive verification" (page 22) belong to the register of academic / political discourse and thus restrict access to the text to members of those discourse communities. Text 2 is also characterised by a comparatively high density of nominal groups, which is typical for academic writing (Coffin et. al 2003: 28):
In addition, the above extract exemplifies the tendency towards impersonal instructions commonly found in academic writing (Coffinal. 2003: 28), in the form of a passive construction and an inanimate subject. Text 2 also contains numerous instances of hedging through 'weak' epistemic modals like "would", "could", "might", and other words suggesting uncertainty like "potentially" and "in theory" (page 19). Nonetheless, it also contains lexical items emphasising certainty, like "will" (page 20) and "certainly" (page 22). Both tendencies are traditionally found in academic writing (Coffinal. 2003: 28). There are, however, two instances of word play, which is not typically associated with the genre: "radioactive" (page 11) and "genie" (page 23). Samore also uses a few idiomatic and informal expressions like "Putting North Korea on ice" (page 16). Thus his style is formal overall, but more relaxed than the styles traditionally found in academic journals.
In terms of ideological intent, text 2 is certainly not neutral as the recommendations it passes are tailored towards the US perspective. This is to be expected from an author whose background is not only academic but to a large extent political as he held senior positions within Clinton's US government and the US National Security Council from 1996 to 2000 (footnote page 7). But text 2 contains little emotionally charged terminology ("killed", line 16) and takes more actors into account than text 1, mostly impersonalised through geopolitical terms like "Washington", "Pyongyang", "Seoul" and "Tokyo" (page 23). All of these are referred to in the third person, so there is also no direct interpersonal engagement between addressor and addressees. The style is formal, with fairly long, intricate sentences and specialist vocabulary, but a lot more accessible than other instances of academic writing. Still, it is not quite accessible enough to appeal to a wider audience outside the discourse community. The same applies to its rhetoric. As academic texts should, text 1 contains patterns like elaboration on points summarised before, thesis and antithesis (page 22, 20), and Problem-Solution patterns, but no obvious blunt, manipulative strategies. The text is persuasive, but not through interpersonal means.
As previously discussed, both texts are concerned with a similar topic. Given that text 1 and 2 belong to different genres, one would expect them to handle the same topic in quite different ways. For the most part, this is the case. But both texts also show some surprising similarities.
The rhetorical strategies of persuasion in Blair's speech are more obvious than those in Samore's article. The speech also contains interpersonal devices, of which the article is completely devoid, as well as more emotionally charged vocabulary and structural parallelisms. Its syntax and lexis are much easier to understand than those of the article, which contains more detailed information on the subject itself, including specialist terminology. All these factors work together to the effect that Blair's speech appeals to a wider audience.
However, both texts are examples of genres moving from a closed, limited register (Halliday and Hasan 1989: 39) towards a more open register. This is a sign of a 'democratisation' of discourse genres, linked to the phenomenon of 'conversationalisation' discussed by Fairclough and Cameron (in Cameron 2001: 130-131), an instance of social change being mirrored and at the same time facilitated through language. Discourse communities that were formerly restricted to an elite membership, like academia and politics, are increasingly open to the wider public. These discourse communities increasingly seek wider support, in terms of votes and funding for example. In both genres, texts are becoming more 'promotional' (Fairclough 1992 in Cameron 2001: 130). Whilst this function is completely accepted in the field of politics, academic writing is generally still associated with objectiveness and neutrality, although it "is not about performance, it is about persuasion" (Murray 2005: 25). Text 1 and text 2 both 'sell' a political agenda, but their 'sales tactics' vary depending on audience and situation. Both texts are less formal than other members of their class of communicative events, but they retain a substantial amount of traditional features in order to enable their addressees to categorise them.
As genres are evolving with social and cultural change, discourse analysis will increasingly have to deal with texts that borrow many features from other genres. However, it is likely that most texts will still aim to be recognisable in terms of genre, because 'categorisability' will remain an important factor in the addressee's identification with the text.