Language play, the apparently purposeless use of language in a playful manner, has until recently been sidelined in linguistic studies. But David Crystal in 1998 and Guy Cook in 2000 demonstrated how pervasive this use of language is, among children and adults, and cross-culturally. Cook points to the importance of language play in the development and exercise of social and cultural skills, and has developed a list of criteria that help to define a genre as a form of language play. This essay will analyse an adult genre of playful language use, the limerick, in relation to Cook's definition guidelines.
In Crystal's view, limericks are "a perfect example of the way sounds and spellings interact in language play" (Crystal 1998: 45), but they contain many more linguistic, semantic and pragmatic characteristics worth of a closer investigation. The following description and analysis will show that limericks work on different, often opposite levels in order to achieve the desired effects.
That limericks make playful use of language is obvious to everyone who has ever heard such a verse. However, the following section will systematically establish whether the limerick is a form of language play according to Cook's list of "features of language play" (Cook 2000: 123):
As Cook points out, not every feature of the above is evident in every form of language play. But as the following analysis will show, the limerick contains almost each of Cook's features.
The preceding descriptive and analytical sections have established that the limerick is a formidable example of language play in Cook's sense. They display various formal linguistic, semantic and pragmatic features of language play, amongst them the most important, i.e. the patterning of language form, the creation of alternative realities and the inclusion/exclusion of people from a group (Cook 2005).
Compared to some children's rhymes or graffiti, the limerick might be regarded as a rather more refined and complex genre of playful language use. It has a high level of intertextuality, a very rigid formal structure and is practised by adults, often literary professionals. However, it serves similar cultural purposes, i.e. the exercise and display of linguistic proficiency, an essential skill in human societies. Whether or not its semiotics go beyond a superficial challenge of moral norms is an interesting question, but one that would call for a separate piece of work.