Whenever we are introduced to a new person, we make judgements about them based on their looks, their mannerisms, what clothes they are wearing and, although we may not realise it, on the language they use. In fact, even if we cannot see the person and only have a printed sample of their speech, we are able to analyse the linguistic evidence to make assumptions about that person's age, gender and social status. Trudgill believes that 'the internal differentiation of human societies is reflected in their language' (2000: 23) suggesting that language is affected by social variables to such an extent that we are able to associate certain language traits with different divisions of people within a society. This essay aims to discover how we are able to make these associations, by examining the effects of firstly class and then gender on the way we speak. It will refer also to the way in which these two social factors are linked and how this, in turn, has an affect on the different linguistic choices people make.
The term social stratification refers to the hierarchy of groups within society, based on such factors as income, education, occupation, residence and life style. (Milroy, 1987) In Western cultures, societies are stratified into social classes. Differences between the ways in which people from each social class speak, can be determined by looking at both social class dialects and social class accents, which take into account grammatical and lexical differences as well as phonological and phonetic variations.
In England we associate rural dialects and older language varieties with the lower classes and, if we analyse these dialects, we find that there is a dialect continuum as we travel from one side of the country to the other. The continuum shows a gradual merging of accents between each neighbouring area, with the dialects on either side of the chain sounding extremely different. However, it has been found that people who speak Standard English (which is very much the dialect associated with the upper classes) show very little variation from one area to the next. Trask (2004:78) referred to the following lexical example from Trudgill's 'The Dialects of England' (1990) to demonstrate this point: It was found that for a single word, 'girl', used in Standard English, there are 5 non standard forms used amongst the lower and middle classes: 'Girl', 'Lass', 'Mawther', 'Maiden' and Wench.
There are also large numbers of grammatical variations found in non standard varieties of English which are not found in Standard English. However, this fact becomes less significant to the argument that class affects the way people speak, if it cannot be proved that Standard English can actually be linked to the highest social classes as opposed to the lower social classes. This can be proved by taking a feature which is known to be associated with Standard English, such as the 's' affix at the end of the third person plural (for example 'he likes') and examining how often this is used by speakers from different social classes. This study was carried out in Norwich, using Labov's random sampling techniques to ensure fully representative and completely unbiased results. It was shown that, as suspected, there was a correlation between social class and the use of the affix 's' and that whilst lower working class (LWC) participants omitted the 's' 97% of the time, middle middle class (MMC) participants spoke with a Standard English dialect 100% of the time, never omitting the 's'. (Trudgill, 2000)
But why is it that one social class should show a certain linguistic trait when another does not? Often this has a lot to do with peoples' attitudes about what accents or dialects are prestigious. This is not only true in England with its 'superior' Standard English, but also in other societies. Studies have shown the importance of social attitudes and class in the construction of 'prestigious' language features. When looking at the post-vocalic (r), Labov found that in England accents without it have more prestige, whilst in New England accents without it have less prestige. (Edwards, 1979) This shows how people from high social classes from different areas of the world will conform to different linguistic rules in order to achieve the same high status. However, it is not always the case that groups of people seek to use these prestigious forms. In fact, quite the opposite was found in Labov's study on the island of Martha's Vineyard, where he found that lower class young men who wanted to identify themselves as vineyarders, used the vernacular forms (which were characteristic of vineyard speakers) more frequently than any other social group. In this way they were using language to make a statement, rejecting the 'values of the mainland' and the wealthy upper-class tourists who they saw as a threat to their way of life. (Milroy, 1987)
From the evidence above, we can conclude that people often use language as a means of identifying themselves with a particular social group. This need for identification can also be used to explain the differences between the way men and women speak, which in some languages are so great that entirely different words, pronunciations or grammatical forms are used by each sex. For example in Japanese, where a woman will use the word 'taberu' to mean 'eat', but a man will use 'kuu'. (Trask, 2004) A less extreme example is that in the Muskogean language Koasati different word endings are used by men and women, so that 'lift it' is spoken by a woman as 'lakawhol' but by a man as 'lakawhos'. (Fromkin, Rodman & Hyams, 2003). Whilst in English, differences between the language used by males and females are less obvious, there are still subtle ways of distinguishing the speech of a man from that of a woman. Women are said to use more tag questions than men and to make finer distinctions between areas such as colour. Eg they will use terms like 'scarlet' and 'mauve'. Research has also shown that women tend to use more cooperative language (attempting to reassure and support one another's ideas) as opposed to using the competitive language associated with men, who tend to interrupt more often and swear more frequently. Perhaps this can be explained by traditional social views that women are supposed to behave in a 'lady like' manner. Trudgill believes that
However, feminists take the view that women are not as free as men to say what they wish and that their conversations are not considered of much value by men. (Kramarae, 1981) In an article entitled 'Women's speech, women's strength?', Coates refers to a study by Kramer (1974) which showed that students of both sexes characterised women's speech as 'stupid, vague, emotional, confused and wordy.' (1989: 65). Coates argued that this description was inappropriate when looking at the usage of women's language in all female discourse. She took tag questions, (a feature strongly associated with women's language), analysed how they were used in all female discussions and came to the conclusion that women use them to 'encourage the participation of others' and 'monitor that the speaker has the support of the group.' ( 1989: 73)
As studies have revealed, both social class and gender play an important role in explaining language varieties and differences. However, linguists took this evidence one step further by investigating whether there was a link between gender and social class and how this affected the way people speak. In a study carried out in Detroit, it was found that the highest social classes use the non standard double negation 'I don't want none' much less frequently than lower classes and also, that men use it more often than women. Similar results were also found in a London study investigating the usage of glottal stops in words such as 'butter' (Trudgill, 2000). This has been explained by the fact that working class culture in England is often associated with masculinity, meaning that women are less likely to use non standard working class forms. Another argument is that men are attracted to the 'toughness' associated with the working class and so also show a preference for the language associated with it. Women, in contrast, have been shown to be more concerned with achieving higher social status than with attaining the 'prestigious' status which men associate with working class speech. This was shown by a study carried out by Labov, in which he proved that women would regularly report themselves as using more higher class variants of words than they actually did, and men would generally think that they used more lower class variants than was the case. Whilst factors such as social status do play an important part in determining the language varieties used by men and women, it is important to remember that there are other factors which influence their choices. One such factor is situation. Further studies by Labov showed that whilst women used more standard pronunciation in the formal part of interviews, they showed very similar results to men in the amount of non-standard pronunciation they used in non-formal interviews. (Smith, 1985) This shows that women are more likely than men to vary the way in which they speak in formal situations, where their desire to be viewed as having high status/social class becomes more apparent. This idea of consciously using language to identify yourself with a particular social group was also seen in the example (referred to earlier) of Martha's Vineyard. This time it was the men, who made heavy use of the vernacular form, to make a statement about their social group.
In conclusion it can be said that class and gender greatly affect the way we speak. They account for variations of a lexical, grammatical and phonological nature and allow people to make choices about the way they speak in order to control, to some extent, how they are perceived by other people. Lower social classes generally have a wider variety of both word choices and grammatical choices compared with the language of the highest social classes and make more frequent use of the vernacular forms. The difference between male and female speech varies greatly from one language to the other, so that again, we can see examples of whole word differences, grammatical differences and the more subtle, often subconscious differences found in the English language. The link between these two social factors, class and gender, can be explained by the fact that, as Trudgill states, 'society evaluates certain characteristics differently in the two sexes' (2000: 77) so that both men and women strive to be perceived as being from the class that they deem most desirable.