When learning to speak, children progress naturally through many different phases of development. Each stage prepares the child for the next until they reach a level of speech which can be described as adult language. During this process they learn how to produce the speech sounds of their target language, how to link these sounds to produce words which carry meaning and how to apply grammatical rules to sentences which enable them to communicate a wider variety of meaning. The period of the first 50 words is one of the significant landmarks in a child's acquisition of language, as it acts as a stepping stone to further learning and a more complex grasp of the language. However, it is not the first significant milestone.
A typical infant only starts to produce its first words at 11 or 12 months old, (), however, it is laying the foundations for learning a language during the whole first year of its life. In fact, before it even starts to experiment with producing words, it will learn to make eye contact and to interpret gesture, facial expression and tone of voice. These are all important aspects of communication. When an infant reaches the babbling stage, it begins to experiment with the different types of sounds that it can produce, often repeating syllables and stringing sounds together. Although these sounds carry no meaning, babbling is by no means irrelevant to the speech development process. It has been discovered that the 12 most frequently used consonants in all languages make up 95% of babies' first babbling (Fromkin and Rodman, 2004). After a while, however, infants will produce only those sounds which are found in their target language, i.e. those being spoken around them. This shows that at an early age infants are able to recognise and repeat relevant speech sounds. It is also during this stage that a child will learn the motor skills involved in the control of the vocal apparatus. Through babbling, infants produce sounds such as stops, nasals, glides and fricatives which are produced in different places in the mouth and require the use of different muscles, so showing that the infant learns a significant level of motor control. After the babbling stage, a child will begin to understand that sounds carry meaning, and will start to say its first words.
The period of the first 50 words is the next significant landmark in the child's speech process. This stage not only increases the child's vocabulary but allows it to develop simple grammatical rules and to communicate more effectively with the people around it. Since this is the main aim of the child, it makes sense that the words it acquires during this phase are mainly open class words such as nouns, action words and people's names, rather than closed class words, which can easily be omitted from a sentence without affecting the meaning of the message. Equipped with its first 50 words, a child will be able to start learning the grammatical rules which are the foundations of human language. They will start experimenting with question structure, negation and multiple word utterances. Without the vocabulary it has learnt during the acquisition of its first 50 words, a child could not progress to this stage, and these words could not have been acquired without the experimentation of sound production in the babbling phase. This shows that all stages in the speech development process are important and should be viewed as equally significant.
Speech can be defined as 'the realisation of language via an acoustic modality.' (Crystal and Varley, 2004). Human language relies very heavily on speech as its main channel of communication; however, this is not to say that it is the only channel through which we can communicate. When looking at language we talk about primary and secondary communication systems, primary being the more frequently used auditory/vocal channel, and secondary being the visual/graphic channel, which includes all types of writing systems. In children, speech develops a long time before written language, and it is clear that these different methods of communication are learnt in different ways.
Children learn to speak naturally through exposure to language during ordinary everyday communication, and while the quality and quantity of their language experience influence the rate at which children progress, speech is not taught to children in the same way that reading and writing are. () Children tend to progress quite naturally through certain well researched phases of speech development, without explicit instruction. Observations of children from different language areas of the world show that these stages are often identical or at least very similar. (Fromkin and Rodman, 2004). If speech was taught then we would not expect this to be the case. Parents from different cultures and even those from the same culture may unconsciously put more emphasis on different areas of speech when they speak to their children. In some cultures adults use less child directed speech when they talk to young infants and in others, children are rarely exposed to language at all. As a result, we would expect these children to go through different stages of speech development and, as we have seen, this is not the case. Therefore, we must wonder how children do learn to speak: This question used to be explained in terms of imitation and reinforcement (Trask, 2004). Imitation is used frequently in the class room when children are taught how to read and write by copying the shapes of letters and imitating a teacher's pronunciation of written words. However, this theory cannot be correct for speech. If children simply imitate language, then this does not explain how they can carry out the 'Wug test' accurately. (Children who have never come across the made up word 'Wug' before are able to pluralise it successfully based not on imitation, but on grammatical rules that they have learnt.) Chomsky offers an alternative, but rather controversial theory about how children acquire speech. He believes that 'nobody is taught language' but that a large part of human language is innate and that a language faculty 'grows' in children in the same way that other systems also develop. This is not to suggest, however, that language acquisition is a purely passive process. Indeed quite the opposite is true. As linguist Ray Jackendoff says, 'children look for language.' (Fromkin and Rodman) They will then extract the grammatical rules from the language around them and use these as a basis for their own language development. Few parents will be conscious of giving their children information about these rules, either by instruction or by correcting their mistakes.
There is no way that a child's ability to read or write could be argued to be innate. Children only learn to carry out these tasks after huge amounts of instruction and help, using the skills they have acquired more naturally through their speech. The teaching process starts years later than the speech development process and will continue for years after the child has reached adult competence in terms of its speech.
When answering this question it is important first to define what is meant by the term 'language'. One definition is 'the communication of thoughts and feelings through a system of arbitrary signals, such as voice sounds, gestures or written signals.' () Language is a human concept, setting us aside from all other species. Whilst most species have their own communication systems, (some more complex than others), none of these are as developed or efficient as human language. Even our closest relatives, the chimpanzees, show a poor level of both language production and comprehension when taught how to use a system of signs to communicate.
In the 1960s Allen and Beatrice Gardener ran an experiment with a young chimpanzee called Washoe. Washoe was encouraged by experimenters to communicate through signing. Similar experiments were carried out by other researchers, many of whom claimed that by the end of their trials, the chimpanzees were able to recognise and respond to hundreds of different combinations of signs. However, many critics argue that this is not language. In order to discover whether they are correct, we must examine the criteria of human language and use them to assess the chimpanzees' abilities.
Trask (2004) talks of some of the fundamental properties of language being duality of patterning, open-endedness and stimulus freedom. Duality of patterning is the idea that human language is made from meaningless sounds which are strung together in different combinations to produce meaningful units (words). In this way human language is unique, for all other species work with the idea that one sound carries one meaning. This considerably limits the number of messages that the species can communicate. Open-endedness is the principle that even if we have not come across a certain combination of words before, we will be able to understand the meaning of the message being conveyed. Finally, stimulus freedom is our ability to say anything in any context. Other species will only produce a certain call or signal when a certain stimulus is presented and triggers it to do so.
When looking at these design features with reference to chimpanzees, we can see that the sign language they are using does indeed confer to the rules of duality of patterning. It is a system of arbitrary signs linked together in such a way that they convey meaning. The chimpanzees also seem to possess the ability to understand new combinations of signs that they have not come across before and to express themselves spontaneously i.e. without waiting for a stimulus which provokes them to respond. This evidence suggests that the chimps did indeed develop a grasp of simple language. However, as Trask points out, there were doubts as to how reliable the evidence was. Most of the evidence gathered was not of much scientific value since it was purely anecdotal. It was also discovered that researchers were often quite relaxed about what responses they would accept as correct. There were even reports that some chimpanzees could see their carers acting out the signs and were simply imitating their carer's actions. When the experimental conditions were improved, the chimpanzee's success dropped significantly. Those that continued research reported that the chimps could only understand two or three hundred signs, showing a clear upper limit to the chimpanzee's abilities. It is when infants reach this level during their development that their grasp of language seems to increase dramatically. This highlights the obvious gap between the language abilities of humans and chimpanzees and shows that while chimps can be taught to communicate, to some extent, through signing, they will never have language.