It used to be thought that young children required many exposures to new words in order to learn their meanings. However, studies in the area of lexical development have shown that this is not always the case. Instead, 'fast mapping' and 'quick incidental learning' processes are employed by children as efficient ways of learning vocabulary. Using these processes, children are able to acquire the correct meaning of a new word after relatively few exposures to it, using internal constraints and inbuilt knowledge of how the lexicon work as sources of support. This essay attempts to explain what 'fast mapping' and 'quick incidental learning' are, and to draw information about the way in which children acquire language from investigations of these processes.
In order for a child to successfully acquire the meaning of a new word, they must first be able to distinguish the boundaries of the target word using their knowledge of speech segmentation. It has been discovered that even very young infants, of 7-11 months, have the ability to learn and use the properties of the sound patterns of their language, in order to segment a long sentence into separate words. (Jusczyk, 1999) However, even once they have identified the novel word from the rest of the sentence, how is it that children are able to know exactly what that particular word denotes? This must depend primarily on the context in which the word is used; although also of great importance are the child's existing lexicon and cognitive skills. (Kuczaj, 1975, as cited in Barrett, 1999)
In many learning situations, a child interacts with their caregiver and through joint referencing, where the child's attention is focused on a particular object as the caregiver labels it, the child is able to conclude that the new word has something to do with the object they are attending to. In this case, the new word has a concrete referent. However, children are also able to make guesses about a word's denotation, often having heard the word only a minimal number of times, regardless of whether or not there is a concrete referent. This event is known as fast mapping.
In Carey and Bartlett's 1978 experiment, three-and four-year-old children were presented with the word 'beige', a word they were unlikely to have come across before. They heard it initially in the context of the command 'bring me the beige tray, not the blue tray.' In this case there was no prior learning of the word 'beige' through joint referencing, and yet the child was still able to conclude that 'beige' referred to a colour, based on their previous knowledge of the words 'blue' and 'not'. This meant that they were able to bring the experimenter the correct tray. When these children were tested on the meaning of 'beige', even six weeks later, they typically remembered its meaning or, at the very least, showed some understanding that it was a colour term. (Carey & Bartlett, 1978). Heibeck and Markman gave evidence to suggest that two-year-old children are also capable of using fast mapping to make guesses about a word's denotation (Heibeck & Markman,1987), whilst Schafer and Plunkett (Plunkett,1998, cited in Barrett,1999)) used preferential looking tasks, which measure the length of time an infant spends looking at a specific object, to demonstrate that infants as young as 13 months old can use fast mapping to learn the meaning of a novel word after limited presentations of it. The idea of fast mapping, therefore, challenges the suggestion that multiple word exposures are necessary for learning word meanings.
In the case of fast mapping, learning occurs as the adult interacts with the child and there is usually an element of contrast where the new word is contrasted with a familiar word. Heibeck and Markman did discover that explicit linguistic contrast was not necessary for fast mapping to be effective. (Heibeck and Markman, 1987). For example, a child will still respond correctly to the instruction 'bring me the beige tray not the other one', despite the fact that the contrast word 'blue' is not used. However, you could argue that this command still includes an element of contrast. Quick incidental learning explains how children are able fast map words in more natural, non-contrastive situations.
Rice and Woodsmall (1988) asked children to watch a cartoon program. An ongoing narration, with novel target words embedded in it, was dubbed over the cartoon. The new words, for example 'artisan', were mentioned as part of the story, e.g. 'the artisan was coming down the road', without drawing attention to the objects they represented. (Rice and Woodsmall, 1988) There was also no attempt to indicate the object that the new word was referring to by means of contrasting it with another known object. In this way, the learning situation was very natural. Results from this experiment proved children's capacity to pick up new words from incidental exposure, without the need for explicit labelling or contrast, suggesting that their abilities are even more developed than fast mapping alone suggests.
So how is it that, without contrast or social pragmatic clues such as pointing and gesture, children are still able to guess the object that a novel word denotes rather than choosing one of many other possible meanings? It has been proposed that children rely heavily on internal constraints when coming across a new word for the first time. These constraints are inbuilt assumptions about how the lexicon works and extensive research has been carried out on the three proposed constraints on word acquisition. (For example Markman,1991 as cited in Hoff, 2001). The 'whole object assumption' refers to the fact that children will think a word denotes a whole object and not part of an object. The 'taxonomic assumption' is the child's assumption that a word will refer to things that are of the same type. So, for example the word 'ball' will denote not just one ball but a set of all balls in the external world. Finally, the 'mutual exclusivity assumption' allows the child to understand that if a word denotes one thing, then it dos not denote another as well. For example, members of the category labelled 'dog' do not overlap with members of the category labelled 'cat'. (Hoff, 2001) The idea of these constraints has gone a long way to explain how children are able to acquire words relatively quickly through quick incidental learning.
Both quick incidental learning and fast mapping have been studied extensively and from the results of investigations, researchers can gain valuable information about vocabulary learning. For example, the results from the Rice and Woodsmall (1988) experiment showed that whilst five-year-old children were very efficient at learning the meaning of words from the cartoon narration, three-year-old children were significantly poorer, learning almost nothing. (Rice and Woodsmall, 1988) We know that three-year-old children have the ability to fast map. In fact, some infants show fast mapping skills as young as13 months. (Schafer and Plunkett, 1998, described earlier and also Kay Raining Bird and Chapman, 1998 cited at  ) Therefore, the fact that the three-year-olds in Rice's experiment apparently lack the 'quick incidental learning' ability suggests that quick incidental learning emerges later than fast mapping and that to notice novel words and identify correct referents, children ages three and under are more heavily reliant on adult interaction and contrast. (Hoff, 2001) For example a three year old is likely to benefit from joint referencing, pointing and other social factors involved in caregiver-child interaction.
A study carried out by Grela, Krcmar and Lin, (2004) () emphasised the importance of such social factors by demonstrating that children are able to fast map more or less successfully depending on the type of learning situation in which a new word is encountered. They were interested in comparing the children's word learning abilities when novel words were presented in maximal and minimal learning conditions. Maximal conditions were those where the child and caregiver interacted. In these conditions the caregiver used child directed language and non-verbal input such as pointing to help the child associate the novel word with the target object. Children in the minimal learning condition category watched a cartoon. Television is a non-interactive medium where the speaker is unaware of the listener's behaviour or attention and where social pragmatic clues to the novel word's denotation are minimal or absent. When the children were tested, it was found that the children exposed to novel words in the maximal learning conditions performed much more successfully than those who encountered the words in the minimal learning conditions. Again this proves the importance of child-caregiver interaction to vocabulary learning.
The same study used a fast mapping task to investigate how internal factors such as age and vocabulary size influenced vocabulary learning. It was discovered, as expected, that in general the older that children get, the more readily they acquire new words and that children with larger vocabularies tend to learn words faster than children of the same age but with lower vocabulary levels. ().
Carey and Bartlett also found that age has a significant influence on fast mapping skills, concluding that before 18 months, the child is a slow mapper. (Carey and Bartlett, 1978). Many investigators believe that prior to the vocabulary spurt, which happens around the age of 18 months, children's words are radically different to those of adults. They are learned in a slow associative way, without the support of the word learning constraints discussed previously. (Bloom, 2000.) However, several researchers have proposed that it is vocabulary level and not age which is the best determiner for fast mapping skills. They suggest that a critical number of words has to be reached, in order to obtain some knowledge of how the lexicon works, before the child can use fast mapping to learn words more efficiently. This critical number, often believed to be fifty words, is known as the 'critical mass' and marks the beginning of the vocabulary spurt. (Marchman and Bates,1994 as cited at .) Carey and Bartlett's study also suggested that even when fast mapping begins, word comprehension dominates over word production. Furthermore, studies into quick incidental learning have shown that there are developmental progressions to the way in which children acquire vocabulary, with some classes of words being learnt more readily than others. For example, Oetting, Rice and Swank carried out research in 1995, into novel vocabulary learning by two groups of school-aged children, those who were developing language normally and those who demonstrated a specific language impairment. The children were tested on 20 words that fell into one of four semantic classes; object, attribute, action and affective state. For both groups of children, the greatest numbers of word meanings learnt were from the object category. () Action words came a close second, with affective states being the most difficult of word types to master. Perhaps this is because affective states are less easily defined and do not have referents that can be physically seen by the child. This would make guessing the word's denotation somewhat more challenging.
The fact that children show preference to learning the meaning of certain word types over others, suggests that they are aware, at least on some level, that different word classes exist. It has been suggested that children rely on syntactic clues to determine whether a novel word denotes a verb, noun or adjective etc. This knowledge will aid the child in finding the correct meaning of the new word. A study by Brown (1957) demonstrated this. He showed a group of pre-school children a picture of someone kneading a mass of material into a container. He described the picture differently to three groups of children. To the first group he described it as 'sibbing'. These children were able to infer that 'sibbing' was an action. The second group believed 'a sib' to be a container, whilst the third group who were told that the picture showed 'some sib' concluded that this referred to the material. Each group interpreted the meaning of the word differently based on the syntactic evidence given by the experimenter. (Hoff, 2001)
Fast mapping and quick incidental learning are processes utilised by children to aid the efficient learning of the meanings of novel words after limited presentations of them. These processes rely greatly on lexical constraints and knowledge of how the lexicon works. A child will build up this knowledge during the acquisition of their first fifty words and this will allow them to evolve from a slow mapper into a fast mapper. This development marks the beginning of the vocabulary spurt and a more effective way of acquiring the meaning of new words. Later on in the child's development, quick incidental learning emerges which allows word learning to occur in natural, non-contrastive learning situations. The fact that children of three years and under are unable to successfully acquire the meaning of novel words during quick incidental learning exercises, (Rice and Woodsmall, 1988) suggests that they are more heavily reliant on fast mapping, caregiver-child interaction and social- pragmatic clues, such as joint referencing, pointing and gesture, than children who are older than three. Indeed, there is evidence to suggest that age has a significant effect on the rate at which vocabulary is acquired. However, also of great importance to children are syntactic clues which help the child, on a subconscious level, to choose a meaning for a word from the correct word class, for example a noun rather than a verb. It has also been discovered that there are definite developmental progressions to the way in which children acquire vocabulary, with object words being the easiest of all word classes to learn. Results from research into both quick incidental learning and fast mapping processes, have demonstrated the importance of factors, such as age, vocabulary size, caregiver-child interaction, social-pragmatic information and semantic clues, to children attempting to learn the meaning of a newly encountered word. These Investigations have been extremely important in the field of lexical development and have given great insight into language acquisition.