'Clinical linguistics is a core element at the centre of the interdisciplinary education of students training for a professional qualification in speech and language therapy.'
Speech and language therapists work with individuals with language and communication problems. The problems they deal with can be extremely varied: they range from language delay in children, stammers and hearing difficulties, to communicative disorders such as aphasia which result from viral infections, trauma to the head or strokes. This essay aims to examine the importance of the study of linguistics to a speech therapist, looking specifically at its use in the assessment and treatment of two well known types of aphasia, Broca's Aphasia and Wernicke's Aphasia.
The ultimate aim of a speech and language therapist is to assess the severity of a patient's communicative disorder and to offer appropriate clinical management and treatment to that patient. Whilst a speech therapist will need a knowledge of psychology, medicine, biology and anatomy, together with clinical skills and counselling skills, it is their linguistic training that will enable them to make accurate and detailed linguistic descriptions of the patient's communicative abilities and enable them to measure the effectiveness of the treatment. Since communicative impairments can affect all aspects of language, it is essential that the speech therapist has knowledge of all the different levels of language (these include phonetics, phonology, morphology, syntax, and semantics) as well as other key areas of linguistics such as sociolinguistics, psycholinguistics and pragmatics. The latter two have become extremely important to speech therapy in recent years and will be discussed in detail later in the essay.
A speech and language therapist can only begin to analyse impaired language once they have gained an understanding of normal language development. Therefore knowledge of all linguistic areas and how they function in normal communication is very important. It allows the speech therapist to recognise when a patient is producing atypical language structures, whether their problem is extremely obvious or much more subtle.
Aphasia is a good example to refer to when looking at how linguistics is used in speech therapy, as it encompasses a variety of language problems and can range in severity from very mild to extremely severe. It is a language disorder caused by damage to the brain either by a viral infection, a stroke or head trauma. It affects the production and/or comprehension of speech and the ability to read and write. (). Aphasia may affect mainly a single aspect of language use, for example the ability to put words into a sentence or to retrieve the names of objects, or it may impair multiple aspects of communication, leaving few channels open for a limited exchange of information. () The latter is unfortunately more often the case, and it is the job of the speech therapist to decide the degree to which each of these channels are able to function for communicative purposes and to design treatment which might improve their use. For this, the speech therapist will have to use their knowledge of linguistics firstly to assess and then to interpret the aphasic's language abilities. Garman describes assessment as 'the identification of linguistic strengths and weaknesses, at an appropriate level of accuracy and detail' and interpretation as 'the activity of relating patterns of impairment to models of language structure'. (name of book, date) Without linguistics, the assessment and therefore interpretation of disorders could not occur.
The two disorders this essay will focus on are Broca's aphasia and Wernicke's aphasia. Despite the fact that these two disorders come under the same main heading of 'aphasia', patients with Wernicke's and those with Broca's suffer very different symptoms. Broca's aphasia is sometimes referred to as 'non fluent aphasia' because a Broca's patients' speech is severely reduced and the few words that are spoken are often laborious and clumsy. Broca's patients can have severe word finding difficulties and their speech is usually limited to short utterances of about 4 words and can be described as telegraphic (i.e. containing mainly content words such as nouns and action verbs, with very few prepositions, adverbs or adjectives.) Broca's aphasics may repeat words and there might be long pauses between their words and/or phrases. Despite this profound difficulty with their speech output, a Broca's patient's auditory comprehension is relatively good. In contrast, a Wernicke's aphasic's language comprehension, both in spoken and written language, can be very poor. However, their speech is fairly fluent and 'well articulated with phrases of normal length and melody'. (Murdoch, 1997). This does not mean, however, that the speech they produce is normal. Indeed, it is far from it, as Wernicke's patients often substitute entire words for other words that do not fit into the sentence. Occasionally they even make up completely new words (neologisms), leaving their listeners quite puzzled!
The following extracts, taken from Crystal and Varley's 'Introduction to language pathology' (2004), show a sample of a therapist's conversation with, firstly a patient with Broca's aphasia, and secondly a patient with Wernicke's.
From the samples above, a speech therapist would be able to use their skills of linguistic analysis to tell that patient A has Broca's aphasia and that patient B has Wernicke's aphasia. When analysing the language of aphasics, linguists often split their observations under two headings: grammatical or sentence processing, and lexical-semantic processing (Crystal and Varley, 2004). We can notice that the Broca's patient's speech is agrammatic. He uses reduced and incomplete sentences, with frequent pausing. There are also two instances where he selects the wrong word. He says 'seventy' instead of 'sixty-eight' and 'front' instead of 'back'. However, he seems to correct himself fairly quickly once he has made the mistake. This, and the fact that the mis-selected words are linked in meaning to the words he was trying to say, suggests that the degree of the lexical-semantic impairment is mild. This is typical of someone with Broca's aphasia. The Wernicke's patient, on the other hand, seems to have quite severe lexical-semantic difficulties. When the therapist asks him to point at a picture on the wall, he looks in the wrong direction, suggesting that he does not understand what the word 'picture' means. There is perseveration of some words, (for example he says 'picture of a mouse/. Picture/. Mouse/') and the square brackets show where he has produced a number of completely unintelligible speech sounds. However, this patient speaks fluently with quite long utterances and few pauses. Again, these are typical signs of Wernicke's aphasia.
Once a patient's language abilities have been analysed using linguistic assessment tests or, as in the case above, by analysing a sample of data, the speech therapist must then use their knowledge of linguistics to design appropriate therapeutic interventions to suit that specific patient's needs. One of the main concerns of the speech therapist is to make sure that patients learn the rules for language as a whole and are not just taught to repeat single sentences. An example of a learnt sentence can be seen in the Broca's patient's speech sample above, where he says 'I can't say it'. This is the only phrase he manages to say without any errors and shows that it has been pre-learnt and repeated often. Garman believes that remediation is more problematic than the assessment process of language disorders, as 'remediation strategies need to be based not only on assessment and interpretation but also on a large number of other factors, social and linguistic.' (name of author, 1993). This is where speech therapists often turn to psycholinguistics and pragmatics.
There was a time when people believed that the majority of linguistic theories were too abstract to be applied to real language use and performance in everyday situations. These people also struggled to see how such linguistic theories could be used in therapy to help patients with communicative disorders. However, with the development of psycholinguistics and pragmatics the last 20 years has completely changed this view. (name of author, 1993) Psycholinguistics is the study of language as a mental process, whilst pragmatics is concerned with the rules of discourse that allow us to engage in conversations successfully. () Some linguists argue that pragmatic skills are retained in aphasia. (name of author, 1993) If we take the sample above of the conversation between a therapist and a patient with Broca's aphasia (Crystal and Varley, 2004), we can see that the patient does indeed seem to be able to hold a conversation successfully. He responds promptly to the therapist's questions and gives appropriate information in his answers. However, it can certainly be shown that the problems that aphasic patients do encounter often have pragmatic consequences: Conversation does not always flow, or at times can break down entirely. This can be due, for example, to a Broca's aphasiac's long pauses as he struggles to retrieve the word he is looking for, or a Wernicke's patient's inability to clarify what he means, by talking around the subject or adding neologisms into his conversation. With the study of psycholinguistics and pragmatics, therapists are able to effectively analyse what exactly is causing the break down in an aphasics conversation and provide therapy specific to that problem. For example, the patient may need to work on word retrieval techniques.
The Pragmatic Protocol (designed in 1983 by Prutting and Kirchner) was developed to score 15 minutes of conversational discourse involving the aphasic adult, analysing both verbal and non verbal pragmatic abilities. (A.L.Holland and J.J.Hinkley, 2002) Pragmatically orientated treatment for aphasia is geared towards everyday events and interactions. Therapists work with aphasic patients on inventing communication strategies that can be used when their language skills break down. For example Milman and Holland (unpublished) worked with an aphasic woman who was frustrated about not being able to hold successful conversations with strangers. Together they developed a set opening line that explained that the lady had aphasia and then moved her on to asking questions to the stranger. This enabled her to keep the upper hand in the conversation and allowed for a more successful level of communication. (A.L.Holland and J.J.Hinkley, 2002). This is an example of how the knowledge of pragmatics and communication therapy can help speech therapists. However, other therapy exercises rely heavily on the use of different areas of linguistics, such as semantics and syntax. For example, when working with a Wernicke's aphasia patient, the therapist might show them a series of pictures and ask them to point to the correct picture when they hear that specific word being spoken. This would give the therapist an idea of whether or not a client understood the meaning of the words being spoken to him/her.
During therapy, it is important that the therapist works at the right level for the patient's ability. Working at too advanced a level would confuse the patient even more, whilst if the therapist simplifies their language too much, they might be in danger of patronising the patient. Therefore they must always think about the language they are using and apply their linguistic knowledge to produce language structures which the patient will understand but which will challenge them. In a study by Zurif et al, (1993) it was observed that most Broca's aphasic patients show sentence-level comprehension impairments. Their comprehension is particularly tested when one element must be interpreted with respect to another element in that sentence. The example of 'Bill watched John bandage him' is given. It was found that Broca's patients often took 'him' to mean 'John'. (Caplan and Hildebrandt, 1988) If a therapist was working with a patient who showed similar problems, they might invent sentences like this as practice for the patient and to test the syntactical level of their ability. However, they must also remember to simplify their language, using only simple, one clause instructions, so as to avoid misunderstanding.
The language problems encountered by Broca's and Wernicke's patients alone are so diverse that they show the need for linguistic knowledge of all the levels of language. However, if we consider the numerous other communication disorders that a speech therapist has to deal with during their professional life, it becomes clear why the study of linguistics is so vital to their training. It is not only in the initial assessment of a patient's language abilities that linguistics is useful, but also in choosing and designing appropriate exercises for the treatment of the language impairment, and in measuring the effectiveness of the treatment. Although the importance of linguistics to speech pathology cannot be questioned, it is useful to remember that a speech therapist must combine it with many other subjects and skills in order to perform their job successfully.