During the 5 th Century the Greeks developed a sense of identity between Greek and non-Greek. In this essay I will be using primary sources, such as Thucydides' History of the Peloponnesian War, and secondary sources to investigate how and why the Greeks formed a sense of Greek and Barbarian.
The Greeks saw themselves as a superior and civilised people. The Greeks believed that "no one could compare to the wise, courageous, judicious and freedom- loving Greeks." (Europe: A History by Norman Davies, Pimlico, 1997 p103) The Greeks considered all aspects of their lifestyles as very advanced, and this applied, in particular, to the political systems. Before the 5 th Century, most cities in Greece had been ruled over by Tyrants, leaders who had overthrown the previous Government, usually with the popular support of the people. However, Athens was the first city to adopt a Democratic system. Athens had a direct form of Democracy, whereby the male citizen population of the city would meet at an assembly to make important political decisions and to debate issues which were effecting the city. The Athenians were extremely proud of this system, which was considered by many of the citizens as much more advanced and civilised than any other political system that existed at the time. Democracy gave the people, the 'demos,' more control over the running of their state, the 'polis,' without having the rule of a single leader. Democracy started to spread throughout the Greek world and one of the only Greek cities to not adopt this system was Sparta. Many Greeks considered Sparta inferior to Athens, and in a speech to the Spartans, a Corinthian commented, according to Thucydides, "Thus it happens that the vast experience of Athens has carried her further than you on the path of innovation" (Thucydides History of the Peloponnesian War 1.71.) The belief that Greeks were very advanced also affected the military strategy, with the heavy infantry, the hoplites, working together, without being forced to fight. Unlike in Monarchies where the soldiers were forced to fight for their ruler, the Greeks fought "only for themselves, they reap for themselves the rewards of bravery or the penalties of cowardice" (Hippocrates Airs, Waters, Places 1.) It was believed that this made the Greek, and in particular Athenian, war machines far superior to any other army, since they were fighting for themselves, to help protect their own land, and this gave the men a much greater incentive to fight. The idea of citizenship was extremely important to the Greeks. Greece was not a nation state, but instead consisted of a number of city-states, which had their own political structure and system. The Greeks felt such loyalty to their city that "whilst there was a concept of national identity when faced with an outside enemy, as when during the Persian wars a Hellenic league was formed to combat Xerxes, most Greeks saw themselves as not primarily Greek, but as a member of their city state." (Ancient Greece Social and Historical documents from Archaic Times to the Death of Socrates (c800-399 B.C) by Matthew Dillon and Lynda Garland, Routledge London and New York, 1994). The Greek males who lived in these cities were granted citizenship, a very privileged position that gave new legal rights and responsibilities. For example, Athenian citizens were expected to attend the assembly, but were also not taxed as much as metics, who were freed slaves and non-Athenian people who lived in Athens. The requirements for citizenship were strict and before any person could be classed as a citizen they had to be male, non-slaves who had Athenian parents. As a result, no non-Greeks were granted citizenship, giving the citizens a legally superior position in the society. This developed a sense of difference between the Greeks and barbarians. As can be seen, the Greek sense of identity influenced many important areas of life, in particular the political running of the city-states and the legal status of the citizens.
The opposite of the Greek was the barbarian. The Greeks saw these non-Greek foreigners as strange, uncivilized and often savage. Even the word 'barbarian' was an attack on the speech and language of these non-Greeks, who were considered to be illiterate. Barbarians had unusual practises and traditions that contrasted greatly with those of the Greeks. As with the Greeks, this barbarianism affected all areas of non-Greek life. In many cases the Greeks believed that the Barbarians had different anatomies to the Greeks, often affected by the climate with "the small variations of climate to which the Asiatics are subject, extremes of both heat and cold being avoided, account for their mental flabbiness and cowardice as well." (Hippocrates Airs, Waters, Places 1) Herodotus, in Histories, claimed that the further a person went from Greece the more savage and unusual the local population became. As with the Greeks, barbarians also had their own form of government and the majority of barbarian people were ruled over by Tyrants or the Aristocracy. This was considered old-fashioned and did not offer the people any control in the running of their government. The Greeks also saw the barbarian armies as inferior to their own. Unlike the brave, heavily armoured and well-trained hoplite soldiers that were common in the Greek armies, the barbarians, such as the Persians, used inexperienced and lightly armoured men who did not feel a need to fight. This made victory in battle more certain for the Greeks. However, when the barbarians did have success they were often extremely brutal. For example, when the Thracians managed to break into Mycalessus they "butchered the inhabitants, sparing neither the young or the old, but methodically killing everybody they met" (Thucydides History of the Peloponnesian War 7.29.) The Greeks could also fear barbarians. The Greeks constructed some of the strongest images of the barbarians through tragedies. One of the most fearsome barbarian characters can be found in Euripides' Medea. This character was Medea, the wife of Jason, the famous Greek hero who had sailed in the Argos to Colchis to recover the golden fleece. Medea had married Jason and had returned with him to Corinth, in Greece. This was unusual, since Medea was a barbarian and the daughter of the King of Colchis, Aeetes. It was considered strange and wrong for a Greek Hero to marry a barbarian whose father was a Monarch, and would have been frowned upon in 5 th Century Athens, where the tragedy was performed. Medea quickly showed her barbarism, by firstly killing her own brother to aid her escape and by then killing King Pelias of Iolcus, who was Jason's uncle. In revenge for Jason leaving her and marrying Glauce, Medea murdered Glauce, Glauce's father Creon and Medea's and Jason's own two sons. This was a clever attack aimed towards Jason and by doing this she made it impossible for Jason to have a family and would also result in him living the rest of his life by himself, whilst Medea escaped unharmed. Medea was a warning to the Athenians, since she taught them to not only show distrust towards barbarians, but also to be wary of women. Although Medea was a barbarian woman, she showed her intelligence and strength of character over Jason, and had defeated a great hero. However, the Greeks did not generally fear the Barbarians. For example "the Scythians...were the ideal type of anti-Greek: non agricultural, non-urban, uncivilised, nomadic," (The Greeks: A Portrait of Self and Others by Paul Cartledge, Oxford University Press, 1993, p71) and so the Greeks did not have much to fear from these inferior people. This can also be seen in tragedy and "in his Persae, Aeschylus creates a lasting stereotype where the civilized Persians are reduced to cringing, ostentatious, arrogant, cruel, effeminate, and lawless aliens" (Europe A History, p103) As can be seen, the Greeks had some very prejudiced and strong views of the barbarians. As with their own sense of identity, the Greeks constructed a barbarian identity which was an opposite to their own. Whereas citizens were free men, barbarians were ruled over by a single leader or group of leaders and whereas the Greek soldiers were brave and experienced, the barbarian soldiers were weak minded, inexperienced and brutal.
The Greeks created the idea of civilised and barbarian as a defence mechanism. The Greeks had suffered during the 5 th Century from Persian invasions, which threatened to crush Greece. However, the Greeks agreed to fight side by side and proved their strength at a number of battles. The Athenians defeated the Persians at Marathon in 490B.C. despite being outnumbered. This was followed by the fighting at Thermopylae, in 480BC, where a Spartan force of only three hundred men succeeded in slowing the advance of many thousands of Persians, and at Salamis, where the Athenians successfully defeated Persia's fleet. These great victories gave many Greeks a sense of national pride and seemed to show the superiority of the Greek armies The victories also helped to form a feeling of superiority that affected the Greeks politically and ideologically. The Persian invasion was key in bringing the Greek city states together and created a national identity which had never existed before, and as Norman Davies writes "the Persian wars gave a permanent sense of identity to the Greeks who escaped Persian domination." (Europe A History, p100) This was solidified by the formation of a Delian league, a pan-Hellenic alliance that was led by Athens and was formed to help to defeat the future threat of Persian invasion. All cities in Greece were forced to join this coalition, and were expected to give money or ships to aid the war effort. The Delian league unified Greece and created a true sense of a Greek nation. However, the Athenians started to use the Delian league to their own advantage and used much of the money intended for defeating the Persian on elaborate building projects within Athens. The xenophobia of the Greeks was in some respects necessary. The idea of a national identity meant that, if Greece was attacked, the city states were more likely to unite to fight a common enemy, since the threat of Persian invasion remained throughout the 5 th Century. However, towards the end of the 5 th Century this identity became less important. The Peloponnesian War, between Sparta and Athens, began in 431B.C. and ended with the Spartan victory in 404B.C. Despite the Greece-wide hatred of non-Greeks, the Spartans accepted the aid of the Persians in the war, which would have been considered by many as impossible. As can be seen, the idea of Greek and non-Greek stemmed from the Persian invasion of Greece. Although the Greeks did not win easily, the victories that they experienced created a sense of superiority over all non-Greeks.
In Conclusion, it can be seen that the Greeks constructed a very strong image of the average Greek and non-Greek through their political systems, war machines, customs and behaviours. These were a result of the fighting that took place between Greece and Persia during the 5 th Century. The Greeks constructed their image of identity by comparing political systems, in particular Democracy against Monarchy and through tragedies such as Medea and the Persians. This had an important affect on the opinions of ordinary Greeks, and was emphasised by the system of citizenship which gave the Greeks a superior position in society.