Gladiators were not considered as heroes by the Romans, but became very popular attractions through their strength, violence and sexual appeal. These characteristics gained them public admiration. In this essay I will be investigating the reasons for the popularity of the gladiators. I will be using secondary sources, including Suetonius' The Twelve Caesars.
Gladiatorial combat was an extremely popular and brutal sport in the Ancient Roman World. Gladiators would fight as part of religious festivals or to celebrate important dates in the Roman calendar. The competitions did not only take place in the city of Rome, but were instead held throughout the empire, even in the small towns. The fighting was carried out in amphitheatres, large and significant structures that could hold the majority of a town's population. The combat itself varied in size and spectacle, from individual hand to hand combat between a small group of men, to a great naval battle held by "Titus, who flooded the newly built Colosseum in AD80 to stage a sea fight and other water-borne displays" (The Roman World 44BC- AD180 by Martin Goodman with the assistance of Jane Sherwood, Routledge, 1997, p189) The fighting also often involved animals. The gladiators were expected to fight, and die, bravely, to make the competitions as exciting as possible. The gladiators were equipped with a wide variety of weapons and armour, usually highly decorated to increase the spectacle of the combat. The competitions could last over several days, sometimes with several thousand gladiators participating in the bloody sport. The festivals were funded by important and wealthy members of the elite, to show their importance in society, and by emperors, who could afford the most elaborate shows. The vast majority of the population, including women, attended the amphitheatres, and as a result the amphitheatres became the focal points of society, in which the poor and the rich sat near to each other. The gladiators were not exclusively men, since many of the fighters were female. The gladiators came from all over the world, and many of the popular gladiatorial fights involved barbarians from the north, including Britain. As can be seen, gladiator fights were a very important part of society, and therefore it is unsurprising that gladiators were popular.
Gladiators were not considered as heroes in the Roman empire, but they were seen as extremely brave warriors. It was impossible to see the gladiators as heroes. Most gladiators were forced into the sport after becoming prisoners of war or becoming condemned prisoners, and so they were treated as prisoners. The gladiators were forced "to submit to fearful perils and a cruel discipline. His oath bound him to endure unflinchingly scourging, burning, or death. His barracks were a closely guarded prison" (Roman Society from Nero to Marcus Aurelius by Samuel Dill, Macmillan and Co., Limited, 1925, p242.) The gladiators were not permitted to leave their barracks and all of the time in the barracks was used for training for combat. In fact, the only prospect of freedom that gladiators had was that if he "survived for three years, he was offered the wooden sword of release, if for five, the cap of manumission." (The Roman Experience by L.P.Wilkinson, Elek Books, p163.) The gladiators were the very lowest elements of society, at the same level as slaves. As a result, it was impossible for the average Roman to consider a person of such low status as a hero. However, the strength and bravery of the gladiators was greatly admired and "children played at being Gladiators, and men practised their skills. They were typical topics of conversation." (The Roman Experience, p164) Gladiators risked their lives regularly, fighting each other and great wild beasts, often equipped with poor weapons or armour. During the fighting they endured great pain and many were killed. All of this was done for the entertainment of the crowds. However, there were some attractions for the gladiators. Despite their cruel treatment and the possibility of a terrible death, "the sense of being the focus of thousands of spectators, pride in prowess and satisfaction for blood lust, the adulation of fanatics, especially women, who might be, for instance, the partisans of the Samnite or the Thracian style of arms, and the possibility of enjoying a glorious retirement" (The Roman Experience, p163) slightly compensated for the dangers. This sense was increased by the support of the emperors, and for example "Augustus honoured all sorts of professional entertainers by his friendly interest in them; maintained, and even increased, the privileges enjoyed by athletes; banned gladiatorial contests if the defeated fighter were forbidden to plead for mercy." (The Twelve Caesars by Suetonious Translated by Robert Graves, Penguin, 2003) This gave the gladiators an increased sense of glory. Some people, such as professional soldiers and brave individuals, even volunteered and so "in all ages we hear of volunteers." (The Roman Experience, p163) The popular image of the brave gladiator gave the sport a sense of heroism.
Another important factor that made gladiators extremely popular was their sexual attractiveness. Women were amazed by the strength and the masculine appearance of the gladiators; this was one of the main attractions for women who spectated the combat. Of course, the most attractive gladiators were those who were successful since "Gladiators became sex symbols when successful" (The Roman World 44BC- AD180, p189.) The Gladiators would usually have been visibly muscular and strong. Women were admitted to the games, although they were often made to sit at the rear of the seating, where the view of the arena was the poorest. However, as part of the religious festivals, the Vestal Virgins were given seats at the very front of the arena. As a result, women were a significant part of the audience. Evidence of the female admiration of the gladiators can be seen in the graffiti at Pompeii, with many writings describing certain fighters, and despite the cruel conditions endured by the gladiators "many graffiti bear witness to the admiration and excitement which they none the less provoked in the hearts of the public, especially women." (History of Rome by Michael Grant, Michael Grant Publications Ltd., 1978, p246) The "unconcealed, and not always discreet, admiration of women" (Roman Society from Nero to Marcus Aurelius, p243) can easily be seen in the graffiti. However, there was also a sexual aspect for the male audience. The gladiators were admired by the women and envied by the men. Importantly, many of the gladiatorial fights included women and as part of the combat the women often fought topless, especially the 'mythological' combat which included fighting by women dressed as bare breasted Amazons. Despite the brutal fighting, this would have been an attraction for men to attend the games. As can be seen, the sexual aspect increased the view that gladiators as almost heroic fighters. Gladiators were seen in the same way which great heroes were viewed, as incredibly brave and strong, and this would have made them into objects of admiration for the many female spectators.
The main attraction of the gladiatorial games was the extreme brutality and violence of the sport. The combat was extremely sadistic and many thousands of people were brutally slaughtered in the name of entertainment. Augustus, in his Res Gestae, wrote "I gave three gladiatorial games in my own name and five in that of my sons and grandsons; at these games some 10,000 men took part in combat" (Augustus, Res Gestae, 22-3) showing the immense scale of the games. The games had originally simply involved sacrifices, but then grew to hand to hand combat and then developed into terrifying spectacles with some extremely vicious and bloody 'performances,' "to the point where the Circus Maximus and the Collosseum were in almost permanent session" (Europe A History by Norman Davies Pimlico, 1997, p180.) As the scale of the games increased, the people who ran the games were required to find new ways of keeping the crowds entertained. This led to the tremendous naval battles, such as the ones held by Titus, Julius Caesar, Augustus and Claudius. The games became increasingly brutal and "in time, acts of gross obscenity, bestiality and mass cruelty were demanded" (Europe A History, p180.) Although the violence of the games was terrible, there was little opposition to the games, especially from the people in power, since "the opinion of the powerful and enlightened class, with rare exceptions, made no effort to purify and humanise the grossness of the masses." (Roman Society from Nero to Marcus Aurelius, p235) The games were a method of state control, which helped to keep the population content with the leadership and acted as a release from the removal of freedoms. Some members of the elite did argue against the games, but not for the case of humanity. Instead, these members of the state were angry at the reduced free thought and intelligence of the people. According to Juvenal "the people who have conquered the world now have only two interests- bread and circuses" and it was this that worried the elite. More than any other factor, the violence of the games was the main attraction that drew the most spectators. According to Michael Grant "The sanguinary cruelty of these sports betrays the existence of a powerful streak of sadism in the Ancient Roman and Italian character" (History of Rome, p89) at the time when the society was extremely militaristic and violence was common. The gladiators were simply used as performers. As can be seen, the gladiatorial violence would have made the fighters seem heroic to a society that was extremely sadistic.
In conclusion, it can be seen that the view of gladiators as heroic characters was created by the bravery of the fighters, their sexual attractiveness and the violence of the games themselves. The bravery made the male population envy the gladiators, whilst the strength and sexual attractiveness of the gladiators gained them the support of the women spectators. The brutality of the fighting made the gladiators heroes for a society that was extremely sadistic and violent. All of these factors gave the gladiators a sense of heroism, despite their suffering, brutal deaths and extremely low position in society.