The Peloponnesian war had a large effect on the society and culture of Athens. This can clearly be seen in the comedies and tragedies from the time of the war, which had changed greatly from the pre-war period to reflect the feelings and events of the war. This essay will investigate the impact of the Peloponnesian war on Athenian culture and will examine several comedies by Aristophanes, and tragedies by Euripides to see the effect of the war.
The Peloponnesian war began in Plateia in 431BC after a series of disagreements between Sparta and Athens. The outbreak of war was greatly influenced by smaller city-states which were either members of the Athenian Empire, or supporters of the Spartans. The Athenians and Spartans had agreed upon a thirty year peace in 446/445BC, which divided the Greek world in half. However, this peace only lasted fifteen years. When the war began, the Spartans and Athenians adopted different strategies. Whereas the Spartans focussed their efforts on swift strikes on the Attic countryside, the Athenians retreated inside the walls of the city and decided to fight a defensive war, instead relying on the power of its navy. This was a great change from the wars of the past, where victory had often depended on a single major battle. As a result the Peloponnesian war lasted for seventeen years, with few major battles. Between 421 and 414BC the peace of Nicias was negotiated. However, the Corinthians, a major partner of the Spartans, refused to accept the peace, In 415BC the Athenians attempted a Sicilian Expedition, which resulted in a complete failure, "everything was destroyed, and few out of many returned home." This gave the Spartans an opportunity to strike their weakened enemy, and so war was declared in 414BC by the Spartans. The Spartans allied with Greece's traditional enemy, the Persians, who provided the Spartans with a navy in an attempt to finally defeat Athens. The war continued until 404BC when the Athenians were defeated at the Battle of Aegispotamai. Athens was captured by the Spartans, and the walls of the city were torn down. The Athenian democracy, and the Athenian Empire, ceased to exist, being replaced by Spartan government.
The Peloponnesian war had a great social impact on Athens. The city had started the war as a rich and powerful state. However, at the time of its defeat it had changed to a poor and weak city. The war and more importantly the Athenian reliance on a powerful Navy had acted as a great strain on the war time economy. This was worsened by the fleeing of the metics, the non-Athenians who were responsible for most of the trade within the city. The war had severely damaged the population of Athens, which had dropped by one third, caused by a terrible plague, war dead and the fleeing of the non-Athenian 'metics.' One of the most important sources of income, the silver mines at Laurium, was impossible to reach due to the actions of the Spartans and this resulted in the devaluing of the coinage. Whilst suffering from these, Athens was also responsible for the control and upkeep of its empire. The citizens, who had originally felt great loyalty to the city, also experienced a change and the attacks on farming by the Spartans caused many "households to put their own perceived security before the defence of the city." This weakened Athens' ability to defend itself, with fewer citizens feeling a need to protect the city when their own families were under attack. All of these factors had a terrible effect on the Athenian society, causing great suffering and the weakening of the once powerful economy.
The Peloponnesian wars had a great impact on the Athenian Society and most importantly its culture. The tragedies and comedies written and performed during the wars are a powerful reflection of the general atmosphere present in Athens. There was a sense of great despair as the war continued and "Thucydides, who as a first hand witness of the war describes it, in fact, as rather like a disease, worsening by stages and ending in the collapse of the ideals which he ascribes to Pericles." This "worsening by stages" can be seen in the plays of Aristophanes. At first, in his play "The Wasps" written in 422BC Aristophanes makes only a few short comments of the war, mentioning Cleonymus who was given the name "the great-shield dropper," referring to an incident during one of the battles with the Spartans. Written during the first phase of the Peloponnesian Wars, the play focuses primarily on the internal affairs of Athens. However, as the war continued the mood of Aristophanes' plays changed greatly. "Peace" was written by Aristophanes in 421BC, shortly before the negotiation of the Peace of Nicias. The entire play is focussed on the war, describing the adventures of an old farmer, Trygaeus, who travels to heaven on a dung beetle to rescue peace from its cave-prison. Although this is a comedy, with satire as well as slapstick humour, the play carries a strong message, describing the hopes of Aristophanes that peace would be reached. At the end of the play, after Trygaeus successfully rescues Peace, and her assistants Harvest and Festival, a great feast is held. During this feast of Trygaeus speaks a prayer:
This is an excellent indicator of the spirit of the time, showing how, despite some resistance from politicians, and in the play weapon makers, there was a wish for peace held by Aristophanes. As can also be seen, this passage describes the nostalgic belief that peace was associated with the past and the possibility of a return to the "joys of yore". Trygaeus, whilst speaking to Peace, says to her "show thyself in the entirety of thy noble beauty to us thy lovers, who for thirteen years have been worn out with longing for thee," indicating the hardships caused by the war and the length of the fighting. However, unfortunately for Aristophanes peace did not continue for long and war was again declared in 414BC. This led Aristophanes to write the Frogs, this time in the later stages of the war, in 405BC, only a year before Athens' total defeat. This play once again displays a complete change of mood in the comedy, and shows a sense of great despair and fear. In many ways the story of the Frogs matches that of Peace. However, instead of describing the journey of Trygaeus to rescue peace from heaven, Frogs is a story of the journey of Dionysus, the Greek God of Wine, into the underworld, Hades, to retrieve one of the deceased tragedians and return them to Athens to give a solution to the city's problems. Once again the play contains frequent slapstick and satirical humour, but also carries a message of despair and depression at the prospect of Athens' future, and makes several references to the events of the war. For example, when Dionysus attempts to cross the River Styx with his slave Xanthias, he is told "sorry sir, no slaves allowed. Not unless they fought in the sea battle" referring to the battle of Arginusae, after which all slaves who fought were freed and given citizenship. Upon arriving in the underworld Aristophanes uses the play to voice his opinions on the solution to the war, and as a result, Aeschylus tells Dionysus "well in my day everyone knew the answer: Treat enemy soil as yours, your own let go: your ships are wealth, all other wealth is woe." This is telling Athens that it should focus all of its efforts and resources on the building of a navy, which had in the past been the main source of its power. Euripides also suggests a complete change of leadership and "if we are putting our trust in certain persons, and not putting our trust in certain other persons, and the city is not being saved, then it seems to me the only reasonable hope of saving the city lies in reversing the procedure." Both of these plans suggest a return to the historic leading of Athens, focussing on the strength of the navy and in the case of Euripides reversing the way that the city had become reliant on several individuals. As can be seen, the atmosphere and general mood of the plays by Aristophanes changed greatly during the Peloponnesian Wars. The Wasps, Peace and the  Frogs each show different attitudes to the events of the war and show a large change in the confidence of Athens.
The Athenian tragedies written during the time of the Peloponnesian war also reflect the mood and atmosphere present in Athens. Euripides wrote several plays, in particular the Trojan Women and the Bacchae, which showed the fears of the Athenians. In particular, the Trojan Women describes the fears of the women left in Troy as the Greeks approached, reflecting the impeding sense of defeat that was present in Athens as the war started to turn to Sparta's favour. Euripides also cleverly used his plays to show his shock at the changes to the behaviour of the people caused by the war and "In the Trojan women, produced in 415BC after the massacre of Melos he voiced a shocked cry of despair at the conscienceless brutality which was infecting all Greeks." This shows another change of the belief in the Athenian character. Athens had considered itself more civilised than the other Greek cities in terms of its culture and politics. However Euripides believed that this had since changed and was beginning to damage Athens. The frequent indecision of the Assembly and the massacre at Melos were seen by many as a sign that Athens was no more civilised than many of the other Greek city-states, and this caused much surprise and discomfort for the Athenians. Euripides perfectly displayed this sense of change in Athens' behaviour in his play the Bacchae. This play focuses on Pentheus, a confident and strong man. However, despite his apparent civilised nature, this did not save him from the fury of his own mother, who, alongside other women, tore apart her son in a Bacchic frenzy. This showed to the Athenians that, despite their civilised society, they could not protect themselves from their true nature. In doing this Euripides succeeded in creating "a despairing recognition of the triumph of the Irrational, which breaks through the orderly faade of the human intellect like an animal shattering a flimsy cage." As can be seen, the tragedies written by Euripides were a strong reflection of the beliefs and fears of the Athenians. The Trojan Women showed the fears of the Athenians if they would be defeated. The  Bacchae shows Euripides anger at the violent human nature that was present in all Athenians, even if it had been well disguised by 'civilisation'.
In conclusion it can be seen that the Peloponnesian war had a great impact on the Athenian society. Some of these effects were material, such as the loss of the city's wealth caused by the upkeep of a navy and the fleeing of the metics. However, the most visible effects were on the culture of Athens. The plays by Aristophanes show the gradual decline in the confidence of the Athenians. Peace shows a strong belief that peace could be reached and the possibility of a joyful future. However after the recommencing of war, in the Frogs, a distinct sense of despair and fear can be seen. The tragedies by Euripides also show a sense of shock at the change of the Athenian character caused by the war, which became less civilised and consequently more brutal.