Carthage's aims during the First and Second Punic Wars differed greatly. During the First Punic War, Carthage attempted to gain power in Sicily, thereby creating opportunities for further expansion in Italy. Unlike the First, the Second Punic war was an effort by the Carthaginians to revenge the actions of the Romans in the First War, and the central aim of the war was to crush Rome. The First War was led by a large number of generals, many of whom, according to Polybius, were incompetent, whereas the Second War was driven by the personal ambition and objectives of Hannibal. It is difficult to find the true aims of Carthage during the war, since no Carthaginian primary sources survive, and the two main sources are Polybius and Livy. This essay will investigate the aims of Carthage during the First and Second Punic Wars, using Polybius and Livy, as well as various secondary sources, and will investigate the personal aims of Hannibal and the reasons for the survival of the Roman Republic during the war.
The First Punic War was a territorial conflict, and was an attempt by the Carthaginians to seize Sicily, which would act as a good stepping-stone for the Carthaginians into the peninsula of Italy. Rome and Carthage had been peaceful to one another for many years, with treaties between both powers dating back, according to Polybius, to 509 B.C. However, this began to change during the 3 rd Century BC, particularly after Campanian mercenaries captured Messana in Sicily. The Campanians were threatened by the Syracusans, and therefore requested assistance from the Romans and the Carthaginians. Both the Romans and the Carthaginians responded with aid, although only the Carthaginians were allowed into the city. However once inside the Carthaginians were once again persuaded to leave the city, and the Romans, led by the Consul Appius Claudius were allowed into the city. In response, Carthage sided with Syracuse and began a siege of Messana. These actions resulted in a war which lasted for twenty four years. Unlike the Second Punic War, in which Carthage was led almost completely by the ambitious Hannibal, the leadership of Carthage during the First Punic war was much larger, and consisted of many different generals with various backgrounds. Perhaps one of the most interesting of these is Xanthippus, a mercenary from Greece who succeeded in defeating a Roman army on African soil. However, after this single victory, Xanthippus returned to Greece. However, according to Polybius, many of the Carthaginian generals were incompetent leaders, and often suffered at the hands of their own men. For example, a general, Hannibal, who had succeeded in saving his men by fleeing with them from Messana after a being defeated by the Romans, was subsequently crucified after being blockaded by the Romans in Sardinia, resulting in the loss of many of his ships. The Romans eventually succeeded in carrying out an amphibious attack on Africa. This was terrifying for the Carthaginians since "they knew that Africa was extremely vulnerable to attack, and that the population would offer little resistance to any invader who succeeded in getting ashore." As a result, Carthage was forced to change its aims from an offensive strategy to conquer Sicily, to a defensive strategy to protect the city of Carthage itself. However, a determined general, Hamilcar Barca, eventually emerged, and through his leadership the Carthaginians succeeded in once again challenging Rome in Sicily. For much of the war, the main aim of Carthage was to use its naval superiority to overcome the Romans in Sicily. As a result, unlike the Second Punic War, the First Punic War involved many large and important sea battles. The Carthaginians were experienced at the construction of ships and also had experience of naval battles. In comparison, the Romans were mostly focused on a land army, and as a result lacked a dedicated navy at the start of the war. Despite this, the Romans repeatedly succeeded in defeating the Carthaginians at sea, ending Carthage's domination of the seas. Eventually, after many years of fighting, in Sicily, on the Sea, and in Africa, the Carthaginians suffered the affects of attrition and were no longer able to field an effective force, and were forced to surrender. As can be seen, the First Punic war was fought for the control of Sicily. The Carthaginians aimed to defeat the Romans at sea, and use their naval superiority to secure Sicily. However, the unlike the Second Punic War, the Carthaginians did not have a determined and ambitious leader with his own aims, and this caused serious problems during the fighting.
The Second Punic war was a conflict driven by the personal ambition and the aims of the Carthaginian leader, Hannibal, and by a desire to seek revenge for the events of the First war, during which Carthage had almost been destroyed. Unlike the First Punic War, much of the conflict was fought in Italy, as Hannibal tried to destroy the Roman Republic. The war began in 218BC, after the sack of Saguntum by the Carthaginians. In his article , the Strategy of the Second Punic War, E.T. Salmon argues "The truth is that they went to Spain after their defeat in the First Punic War presicely in order to build up a base. They hoped to make it a point  d'appui for their planned war of revenge against Rome: the Iberian peninsula was to be for them a springboard for attack." By doing this, Salmon claims, the Carthaginians would be able to carry out future attacks into Europe or even Italy, and suggests that the Carthaginians had been planning war since the end of the First War. Although this plan was perhaps in place at the time, the true force behind the Second Punic War was not the government of Carthage, but the leader of the Carthaginian army, Hannibal Barca. According to Livy, in Book XXI, the decision to attack was out of the hands of the Carthaginian senate, and was in fact being controlled by Hannibal. Livy describes a scene in the Carthaginian Senate, where a single senator, Hanno, pleads to the other senators not to allow the war to occur, since they had "sent to join our troops this dangerous and ambitious man, hot with the desire for power and seeing but one way to its acquisition- a life in arms amongst the soldiery, spent in provoking an endless succession of wars." Although this speech was written by Livy many years after the event, it is clear that Hannibal was extremely ambitious, and would have been able to see the direct outcome of an attack on Saguntum; " Hannibal knew perfectly well that he risked war with Rome." Hannibal would have welcomed a war, and believed that he would be able to crush the Roman Republic. When war was declared, it was clear that the main aim of Carthage, and of Hannibal, was to attack Rome. This created one of the first major differences between the First and Second Punic Wars. During the First, Carthage had possessed a powerful navy, and had succeded in sending troops to Sicily without difficulty. As a result, much of the fighting took place on the seas. In comparison, by the time of the Second, Rome's navy had grown considerably, making an invasion of Rome by sea almost impossible. As a result, a "land invasion was necessary because in 218 Rome had a much more powerful navy: 220 ships to 100 Punic." Hannibal led a dangerous crossing through the alps which caused the loss of many of his men. The march into Italy was a great risk. However, it is unlikely that Hannibal would have intended to march on Rome itself. Although Hannibal's men had some experience in capturing cities, in particular after Saguntum, Rome was an extremely large and formidable city. As a result, it would have been somewhat unrealistic at first to consider an attack on the city itself, and instead Hannibal decided to cut the city off from the rest of Italy, thereby taking advantage of the divisions within Italy and Hannibal hoped that "if these Italian states could be induced to abandon their several alliances with Rome, Rome's days of greatness would be over." This would have been particularly attractive, since it would not have involved an attack on Rome, but would have caused enough damage to the structure of the Roman Republic to seriously weaken it. However, there is a possibility that, as the war progressed, Hannibal may have been able to capture Rome. Throughout the early stages of the war, Carthage gained several important victories against Roman armies. Hannibal had defeated a Consular army at the River Trebia very early in the war, in 218BC, and succeeded in completely destroying a consular army and killing Flaminius, the Roman Consul commanding the army at Lake Tresimene in 217BC. This was followed by a great victory at Cannae, in 216BC, where Hannibal crushed the armies of two Consuls, Paullus and Varro. This essentially left Rome open to attack, since it could not immeadiately replace the large number of soldiers it had lost. Livy describes the scene after Cannae, with the commander of Hannibal's cavalry, Maharabal, telling Hannibal that "if you want to know the true significance of this battle, let me tell you that within five days you will take your dinner in triumph, on the Capitol... The first knowledge of our coming will be the sight of us at the gates of Rome." Although this is another of the speeches created by Livy, it is likely that an attack on the city of Rome at this stage would perhaps have been possible. Rome had lost much of its manpower during the fighting, and this would have made the city extremely vulnerable to an immeadiate attack. However, it is unlikely that such a strategy would have ultimately been successful. Although Rome had lost many of its men, it had very large reserves of manpower, in particular in the form of support from its many Italian allies. Although Hannibal had succeeded in undermining alliances between some of the northern Italian states and Rome, it had not experienced the same success in central and southern Italy. Even if Hannibal had succeeded in capturing Rome, it is unlikely that the he would have been able to hold the city uncontested for long. Many of the Roman allies benefitted from Rome's power and trade and so the arrival of a Carthaginian army would not have been welcomed by many. As a result, Hannibal did not attack Rome, but continued attempting to gain support from Rome's allies. Eventually Hannibal was defeated, and was forced to retreat from Italy. This was quickly followed by a Roman attack on Africa and the destruction of Carthage. As can be seen, the Second Punic War was led by the ambition of Hannibal. By attacking Rome, Hannibal hoped to revenge Rome's actions during and after the First Punic War, whilst also capturing the Italian peninsula for Carthage. This was extremely different from the aims of the First Punic war, and the methods used, which focussed on land rather than naval supremacy, were also a great change from the First War.
In conclusion it can be seen that the aims of the Carthaginians differed greatly between the First and Second Punic Wars. During the First Punic war, Carthage hoped to capture Sicily, yet lacked effective leadership. Carthage also hoped to use its domination of the sea to defeat the Romans, who lacked experience. In comparison, the Second Punic War was an attempt by Carthage to attack Rome. Unlike the First War, during the Second Punic War Carthage intended to use its land forces to attack Italy itself. Also, a major difference was the leadership of Hannibal, who led his armies with determination and ambition which were not present in the First Punic War.