The Roman emperor was considered divine, although the level to which he was worshipped as a god varied greatly. Roman religion was based around a public, state funded sphere and a private sphere. Although people were permitted to worship the Emperor as a living god in the private cults, state worship of the living emperor was never a feature of Roman religion. Instead of worshipping the living emperor as a god, the state cult performed rituals for the emperor's Genius, or divine spirit. The State cult also worshipped the dead emperors, the Divi imperators, who, it was believed, were deified upon their death. This essay will investigate whether the Romans believed their emperor to be a god, and will examine the beliefs present in the state and private cults.
The worship of the emperor varied greatly in the public and private spheres of Roman religion. The religions of Rome did not have a central governing body, such as a Papacy. As a result, religion was essentially divided into three main spheres, consisting of household, private and state. The top level of Roman religion was the State cult, which was funded by the empire and followed the rituals of the state cult in Rome. Each of these levels had their own considerations of the emperor's divinity, but 'the state cult recognized only the Divi imperators and the genius of the ruling emperor,' whereas many private cults openly worshipped the emperor as a living god. It was considered problematic for the state to acknowledge the emperor as divine. Traditionally the emperor was first among equals within the senate, and as a result accepting him as a god would have implied that the emperor was clearly superior to every other senator. This would thereby have undermined the perceived status of the senate. As a result of this, 'the sinister connotations of the emperor's state divinity left only one option for clearer formulation of the imperial office in the Roman state: the  Genius of the living emperor, a cult which did not imply divinity, but certainly did imply social humiliation for the senators involved." Although worship of the living emperor was frowned upon, it was considered correct to worship the living emperor's Genius, which was 'closely attached to his person, though it was not entirely clear whether the Genius was perceived as dwelling within his body or outside it, as more of a guardian spirit." It was believed that every person, including the emperor, possessed a Genius. Worship of the Genius constituted a large part of religious ritual, and was not specific to the emperor. For example, many people privately worshipped the paterfamilias, the Genius of the owner of the household. The paterfamilias was usually worshipped by slaves and freedmen, as they owed their living to the master of the household, and were considered clientes, subordinate within the household, by law and tradition, to the power of the paterfamilias. Similarly, the emperor's Genius could be worshipped as the paterfamilias of the Empire. Worship of the emperor's Genius in fact had several political benefits for the senators and important members of the Roman political system, as "the higher the emperor was placed on the status ladder of the world, the higher was the relative placement of the senators themselves; if the emperor possessed outright divine status, the role and self-esteem of prominent would be as good as in the old days." Worshipping the emperor's Genius thereby served a dual political purpose, avoiding giving ultimate power over Rome to this living deity whilst at the same time allowing the senators to gain improved approval from the emperor and increasing their status in the world. As the Genius was merely attached to the emperor, rather than making the emperor divine, this avoided some of the problems of offering the emperor full divinity. Conferring full divinity upon the emperor would have placed him far higher than his senators, whereas by worshipping the Genius, it was the emperor's divine spirit, rather than the emperor himself, which was elevated. However, the worship of the Genius created its own problems within the social hierarchy. By worshipping the emperor's Genius as the paterfamilias of the Roman empire, the position of entire population of the empire, including the senators, would be reduced to that of Clientes, no higher than the slaves and freedmen who worshipped the paterfamilias within the household. The position of the paterfamilias was almost monarchical, with great symbolic power attached, and so 'the time at which the living emperor's Genius began to receive state worship may thus be taken as the point where the Roman state formally acknowledged itself to be a monarchy." Although the worship of the emperor's Genius by the state cult did not necessarily have any practical implications, as it did not confer any powers on the emperor, it was a symbolic affirmation of the emperor's position within Rome. As can be seen, the state did not worship the living emperor as a god, due to the political implications. Instead, the only worship the emperor received was for his Genius. However, this had its own problems, as it acknowledged the emperor's power, as paterfamilias of the Roman empire, over his clientes, the citizens and subjects of the empire.
In addition to worshipping the Genius, the state cult also worshipped the Divus imperatores, or the deified dead emperors. Starting with Augustus, it was believed that the emperor was deified upon his death, and 'the princeps could only become the object of worship in the state cult after he was separated from the ranks of the living and then deified." However, the Emperor could only become a god if the senate voted in favour of this 'and then only in recognition of the fact (so the official version went) that they had, by their merits, actually become gods." This could be considered to have given the senate some power over the emperor, for if he went against the senate, or was a poor ruler, the senate could punish him by refusing his deification. This, however, did not have a great impact, as the emperor generally expected to be deified, and the senate would usually follow his will. For example, with Augustus, 'the expectation was expressed in his lifetime that he would ascend to his rightful place in heaven, and immediately after his death Augustus was duly made a divus." To indicate his deification, the dead emperor would have Divi added to their name, creating for example, Divi Augustus. The transformation of the emperor from a mortal into a god after his death had benefits for the state cult, allowing it to acknowledge the emperor's divinity, but only after he had died. This avoided the problems associated with the Genius, as it did not elevate the living emperor's political position. Although the deceased emperors were acknowledged as gods, their worship as such did not necessarily continue for long after their deaths. Whilst the worship of the Divi imperatores did not result in political advancement for the living emperor, it also did not provide many political benefits for the senators. Worship of the living emperor's genius could heighten the position of the senators, as it could gain the senator the favour of the emperor. However, worship of a deceased emperor could not provide this, as the living emperor would care little for the worship of his predecessors. As a result, the Divi were only worshipped for short times after their deaths, with the state cult focussing more on the worship of the emperor's Genius. As can be seen, as well as worshipping the living emperor's genius, the state cult also paid attention to the deceased emperors. When an emperor died, the senate would decide if he had earned deification. If the emperor was made into a Divi, he could be worshipped, allowing the senate to accept his divinity without providing him with any increased power. Although the state cult did not worship the living emperor, it is clear that it considered the emperor divine.
Unlike the state cult, the private sphere of Roman religion was not restricted by politics. Every household would have its own private shrine, which was often concerned with the worship of the paterfamilias, as well as various household gods. When outside the home, the private sphere consisted of cults and religious clubs, each of which worshipped various gods and performed rituals. As the cults were funded by private individuals, the state was unable to restrict their worship, allowing any divinity to be followed. Amongst the gods worshipped by these private cults was the emperor, both as a living god, and as the Divi. Some good examples of the worship of the deceased emperors can be seen in various inscriptions. A good example of the offerings made to the emperor can be seen in an inscription from Pergamum, which states that a new president of the singers should provide "pastry and incense <for offerings> and lamps for the image of Augustus" on each day of the mysteries. In addition, new singers were required to pay, as an entrance fee "to the gods <Roma and Augustus> double, 30 denarii, wine, 3 loaves." A glimpse of the worship of the emperor by the public cults can also be seen in an inscription from a local Greek magistracy, which states "[the agoranamos] (a local magistrate) shall celebrate the first day of the god Caesar Augustus, son of the god <Caesar> our Saviour and Deliverer." However, worship of the Divi Imperatores was not popular, as the emperor was of little importance once he had died. As a result, many more private cults were interested in worshipping the living emperor than any dead emperors, 'their interest was mainly focused on the living emperor." Although this would have created political problems within the state cult, this was not an issue for the private sphere, as the personal and private cults could not provide the emperor with any political powers. This allowed unrestricted worship of the living emperor as divine. It was believed that worship of the emperor had social benefits for the members of a cult. Whereas the power of many of the gods found in modern religion is absolute, the position and power of the Roman gods was not strictly defined. As Ittai Gradel argues in Emperor Worship and Roman Religion, the position of the gods was relative, and followed a hierarchy, with no one god exercising absolute control over the other gods. The power and position of the gods was not set in a single document, such as the Bible for Christians or the Qu'ran for Muslims, allowing individuals to decide if an emperor was human or divine, and how powerful the divinities were. This opened up the prospect of hierarchical advancement within the divinities, with the emperor essentially able to claim he was more divine than his followers, as well as other gods, even if he could not claim powers equal to that of, for example, Jupiter. In turn, by placing the emperor higher in the divine hierarchy, the position of those who worshipped was also elevated, 'they therefore uniformly chose to place him on the superhuman level, deliberately and emphatically so." By worshipping the emperor as a living god, the members of the 'imperial cults' rose above the position of normal citizens or subjects. As a result, private cults would not merely worship the living Emperor's Genius or the Divi, but would often worship the emperor as a living god, to raise their position as high as possible. As can be seen, the worship of the emperors was not restricted within the private sphere of Roman religion. Although the Divi imperatores were occasionally worshipped, cults to the living emperor were much more widespread throughout the empire. Worship of the living emperor increased his position in the divine hierarchy, and at the same time raised the position of the people who worshipped him. The population's widespread acceptance of the Emperor as a god clearly shows that, although largely influenced by the social and political benefits offered by this, there was a firm belief that the emperor was divine.
In conclusion, it can be seen that the Romans considered their emperor to be divine. Although the acknowledgement of the emperor's divinity varied greatly, from the state cult that only worshipped the Genius of the living emperor and the Divi, the dead emperors, to the private cults that openly worshipped the living emperor as divine, it is clear that the divinity of the emperor was accepted. Worship of a divine emperor offered several advantages, including a higher placing in the social hierarchy, but could also cause problems for the state cult, as acceptance of the emperor's divinity increased the emperor's grip on the political system of Rome. However, although the worship of the emperor was restricted within the state cult, it can be seen that even here the emperor's divinity was accepted.