Slavery and race are prominent features of Hollywood films on Rome, and are key themes throughout both Spartacus and Gladiator. Slavery and race are closely connected in both films. However, both films have different approaches to the topics, with Spartacus offering a political view of slavery and race, whereas Gladiator primarily uses slavery and race to create a setting for the film and does not create as significant a political statement. This essay will discuss and examine the role of slavery and race as themes in both Spartacus and Gladiator, focussing mainly on particular scenes, but also investigating methods used by the directors and the importance of various characters.
Spartacus was released in 1960, directed by Stanley Kubrick, and followed Spartacus, a Thracian slave, as he led a slave revolt against the Roman Republic. Unsurprisingly, considering the plotline of the film, Spartacus has slavery and freedom as its main themes. The film also addresses race, through the use of the nationality of the slaves, and also through the use of Draba, a black slave forced to fight Spartacus in the arena. The general underlying themes of the film are displayed from the outset in the first scene. The opening narrative states "the Republic lay fatally stricken with a disease called human slavery." This immediately creates a dark and oppressive atmosphere to the film, matched by the scene's music, a slow and ponderous rendition of the film's main theme music. The scenery is extremely bleak, set on a mountainside in a desert, and the scene shows slaves being forced to work in terrible conditions. Through this 'Rome's presence in the world is thus reduced to its basic impact: containment through force. Here slaves are worked to death in a hostile and barren environment, a physical manifestation of the institution of slavery." This first scene is in stark contrast to many previous films based in ancient Rome, which often open with a scene displaying the grandeur and wealth of Rome. By doing this, the film shows Rome not as a great empire, but as an oppressive, cruel and overbearing power, which has little regard for human life. The slaves are seen mining rocks, and carrying heavy baskets of stones on their backs. Throughout Spartacus, the slaves are shown to be treated as worthless animals by the Romans. The slaves are thin and heavily tanned, suggesting to the audience that they received little food and were forced to work in the extreme heat for most of their lives. The work they are forced to do is stressful, with the role of carrying the heavy rocks on their backs creating the image that the slaves are treated as mere pack animals. Spartacus is introduced when a fellow slave falls. Spartacus attempts to help the fallen slave, but is mercilessly beaten by the guards, and after biting one of the guards he is punished with death by starvation. The guards have the power of life and death over the slaves, as can be seen in the line spoken by one of them "Spartacus again? Well this time he dies." The slave who Spartacus attempted to help was dragged away and replaced, reinforcing the way view that the slaves were of no value to the Romans. The image of the slaves as animals is strengthened by the silence of the slaves throughout the scene, creating an impression for the audience that they are almost inhuman. This is greatly contrasted by the later parts of the film, where Spartacus is shown to be a brave and outspoken character, particularly once he gains his freedom, and by the communal spirit of the slaves when freed from their slavery. Through the use of Lentulus Batiatus, the first scene of Spartacus successfully contrasts the hardships suffered by the slaves with the decadence of Rome. First seen at the head of a small group of men, Batiatus is the opposite of the slaves who surround him. Finely dressed and pale skinned, Batiatus appears also to be well fed. This contrast is particularly clear when Batiatus stands next to the slaves, creating the impression that they are almost completely different creatures. The inspection of the slaves by Batiatus again creates a vivid impression that the Romans considered their slaves to be animals. The slaves are chosen according to the strength of their teeth, and Batiatus does not even address the slaves directly, instead asking them questions through the commander of the guard. This creates the impression that Batiatus does not consider the slaves human. The treatment of the slaves is clearly contrasted by Spartacus' character. Although treated like an animal, it can easily be seen that he is fiercely independent, first helping the fallen slave, and eventually leading the revolt against Rome. Spartacus is unwilling to accept his fate, and this is a major drive for the events of the film. The film addresses several different forms of slavery, of which mining is one. The lives of household slaves is also explored through the use of Varinia, Spartacus' love interest in the film. Unlike the mine-working slaves, the household slaves appear to be better cared for, although their treatment is generally poor. Varinia is given little freedom from her mundane tasks, and she is seen in various parts of the film sweeping a floor, cooking food and serving wine to guests. The female slaves are also treated as animals, and are even given as 'rewards' to the gladiators, acting as little more than sex objects. The depiction of slavery in Spartacus is similar to that of many other Hollywood epics, particularly from the mid-20 th Century. There are several reasons for this. The theme of a great power oppressing an entire people is largely influenced by the Second World War, which was still in the memory of much of the audience, and the Cold War, which was a contemporary issue that affected the audience's lives. The Roman's treatment of the slaves can be compared to the treatment of the Jews at the hands of the Nazis, and also the fear of communism that pervaded American culture. However, the film may also be a criticism of the McCarthy's House Committee on Un-American Activities, in which many writers were blacklisted for their communist views, including the writer Donald Trumbo, who co-wrote Spartacus. In contrast to the oppressive and materialistic Romans, the community of the freed slaves can be interpreted as an almost utopian communist society. In short, Spartacus can be seen as criticizing any form of oppression, and the slaves can be seen as representing the oppressed. As can be seen, slavery is an extremely important theme of Spartacus. The film repeatedly depicts the Romans as treating the slaves as animals, and shows the difference between the slaves and their masters through Batiatus, who represents the decadence and corruption of Rome.
The theme of race has an important role in Spartacus, and is closely connected to the depiction of slavery. This is shown through the various nationalities of the main characters, and particularly through Draba, a black slave who is forced to fight Spartacus in the arena. All of the slaves in the film are shown to be of a different nationality or race from the Romans. For example, Spartacus is a Thracian slave, and his love interest, Varinia, is a Briton. This creates a clear connection between slavery and race, as it shows the slaves are not Roman, and are an almost separate race from the Romans altogether. This follows the assertion of M.S. Cyrino in Gladiator Film and History "earlier films traditionally made Rome the imperialistic oppressor of implausibly virtuous and racially harmonious groups." The prejudice of the Romans is also seen in Batiatus, who, when asked if he wishes to purchase a Gaul, replies, "oh, I don't like Gauls, hairy." The portrayal of the slaves as being of different, non-Roman, nationalities helps to create a division between the 'good' slaves and the 'bad' Romans. However, the issue of race can most clearly be seen in the character of Draba. Although Draba only appears in a relatively short part of the film, his role is significant, both in the storyline and culturally in regards to the film's audience. Draba is chosen by wealthy women, who accompanied Crassus to Batiutus' gladiator training camp, to fight Spartacus to the death in the gladiatorial arena. During the combat, Draba gains the upper hand over Spartacus, and is poised to strike a fatal blow. However, just as this appears to be inevitable, Draba turns away from Spartacus and hurls his trident into the spectators. The imagery and camera work, as well as the fact that Draba was a black slave, would have had a great impact on the film audience. As Draba hurls the trident, the camera view changes to one within the group of spectators. Therefore, the trident appears to fly through the screen, attacking not only the spectators in the film, but also the cinema audience. Draba then attempts to climb up to Crassus, but is hit with a javelin and then stabbed by Crassus. The death of Draba can be seen as a major contributing factor to the slave revolt, as his brave, yet futile defiance of the Romans gave Spartacus great courage, 'Draba's refusal to kill Spartacus leads to his martyrdom and to the gladiators rebellion." This would have been very powerful for the audience, as Spartacus was filmed at a time when civil rights were a major issue in the U.S. Maria Wyke, in Projecting the Past, states that 'in locating the inspiration for revolt largely in the brave defiance of a black gladiator, Spartacus acknowledges the central role of black activism in the emerging protest movements which, in 1960, confronted Kennedy's new administration." In this way, Spartacus was making a strong political statement about race and oppression, connecting the fictitious Draba with the contemporary civil rights movement, which itself was an example of a people standing up against oppression. As can be seen, race is a very important theme in Spartacus. Connections between race and slavery are made through the non-Roman nationality of each of the slaves. In addition, the character of Draba, who combines slavery and race, is a definite acknowledgement of the struggle of the civil rights movement.
Slavery is an important theme in the film Gladiator. Released forty years after Spartacus, in 2000, Gladiator addresses many of the same themes, but takes a different approach to most of these, and on many occasions has an almost opposite presentation. Unlike Spartacus, Gladiator does not feature many types of slaves, focusing almost exclusively on the gladiators. In addition, the race of the main characters is not as prominent a feature. The film follows Maximus, played by Russell Crowe, a Roman general who, due to the actions of Emperor Commodus, is forced into slavery and made into a gladiator. Maximus eventually uses his new role to seek and gain revenge against Commodus. Throughout the film the slaves are treated as worthless animals, mirroring Spartacus. This can be seen shortly after Maximus is taken as a slave, when he is advised by Jaba "Don't die, they'll feed you to the lions, they're worth more than we are." This shows that the Romans had little regard for the lives of the slaves. However, Gladiator differs from Spartacus in terms of the motivations of the main character. Whereas Spartacus is driven by a wish to be free from the shackles of his slavery, Maximus is willing to use his new position as a gladiator to achieve his ultimate goal, revenge on Emperor Commodus. This displays a different attitude towards slavery than can be seen in Spartacus. Whereas Spartacus is shown as independent and leading a revolt in the hope of freedom, Maximus is shown to accept his new position in society, and is driven solely by a lust for revenge. Proximo, the slave master, is shown to be sympathetic towards Maximus, as he was a gladiator who earned his freedom, and treats his slaves relatively fairly. In some ways, the gladiators are presented less as slaves, and almost as employees of Proximo, as they are given a small level of freedom and even form bonds with their master. This shows a different approach to slavery, as the gladiators accept their position.
The race of the slaves is less important in gladiator. The character of Draba in Spartacus is paralleled in Gladiator, through the use of Jaba. However, the role of Jaba is less striking, and can be seen to reflect the attitudes of the director, Ridley Scott. Jaba is first encountered shortly after Maximus is taken as a slave. Maximus recovers consciousness, and sees Jaba looking over him. Unlike Draba, Jaba does not attempt to turn against his masters, and instead accepts that he is a gladiator. P.W. Rose in Gladiator Film and History writes that Jaba reflects 'a specifically Republican image of nostalgia for a lost golden age of race relations, in which blacks do not question whites and obey their superiors." This is a complete contrast to Draba, and to the portrayal of the slaves in general in Spartacus. Jaba is as accepting of his slavery as every other gladiator, whereas his counterpart, Draba, refused to follow the will of his masters and acted as the instigator for the slave revolt. Unlike Spartacus, Gladiator does not create many connections between slavery and race. Whereas it is made clear throughout Spartacus that the main characters are of various nationalities, this is not as obvious in Gladiator. Although Maximus is shown to be a Spaniard, and is know as 'the Spaniard' by the crowds, he is not treated differently because of his race. The slaves are shown merely as slaves, and their race is of little importance. This may be because of the different attitudes represented in Gladiator. The civil rights movement, although still important in contemporary society, is not one of the main issues addressed by the film. Unlike Spartacus, Gladiator focuses less on freedom and oppression, and instead can be interpreted as a critique of modern American society. The empire is shown as more corrupt, yet less oppressive, and appears to be obsessed with violent spectacle. The film is perhaps more of a criticism of American popular culture and the political system of the United States, than a statement of freedom and oppression. As can be seen, the portrayals of slavery and race in Gladiator contrast with the portrayal of these issues in Spartacus. Although certain themes are repeated, such as the treatment of the gladiators as worthless, in the main points Gladiator varies greatly with Spartacus. Maximus is willing to accept his slavery and instead uses it as a tool to seek revenge, rather than attempting to gain his freedom. Jaba, who can be seen to be very similar to Draba, is shown as willing to subject himself to the subordination of his masters, and even allows Maximus to give him orders.
In conclusion, it can be seen that race and slavery are major themes in both Spartacus and Gladiator. Spartacus focuses almost entirely on the themes of slavery and freedom. The slaves are shown to be very badly treated and considered little more than animals. Race is represented through the various nationalities of the main characters, and in particular the black gladiator Draba. His act of defiance against his masters can be seen to mirror the civil rights movement of the 1950s and 1960s, and eventually leads to the slave rebellion. Race is also connected with slavery, as the slaves are all non-Romans, strengthening the image that the slaves were separate from the Romans. In contrast, Gladiator's Maximus does not dream of freedom, and instead uses the system to gain revenge. The slave Jaba, although similar in role to Draba, plays a much smaller role and is clearly shown as submissive. This reflects the different attitudes of the directors and the change in the main issues of the time.