Somewhere above the sky, in a large luxury room, Zeus and Hera are looking into a chessboard, playing chess against each other just like a mortal husband and wife are playing a board game in their house for leisure. As Zeus picks up one of the chessmen and moves it forward, Hera's face gets clouded over with a worry towards one of her favourite immortal men, Jason, and meanwhile in the lower world Jason and his comrades in the ship Argo are attacked by a huge sea-monster. This motif of Olympian gods playing a game in the affairs of men, created by Don Chaffey in his film 'Jason and the Argonauts'(1963), is probably one of the most effective illustrations of a popular view towards the relationship between gods and men in the world of ancient Greek myth and epic. In Homeric epic, we are repeatedly taken up and down between the world of mortals and the Mount Olympus and are shown to how the affairs among gods affect men and how they turn the story. It should be pointed out here, however, that although the picture of gods playing chess and mortals treated like chessmen could be a brilliant summary of the relationship between gods and men in Homeric epic, the roles contributed by Olympian gods to the Iliad and the Odyssey cannot be discussed as straightforwardly as this. Gods in Homeric epic not only does manipulate and develop the story, but also they act as machinery that deepens the story and structure of the poem and, more to the point, they make Homeric epic 'Homeric' to a certain extent. In this essay, we shall first analyse gods' function in Homeric epic as a story-master, since this aspect of Homeric gods is most obvious and plays an important part in both the Iliad and the Odyssey. Then we shall move on to the examination of the other areas of the poems in which gods can be regarded as efficiently acting as Gtterapparat, divine machinery.
First of all, let us begin with analysing a view of gods' intervention in men's affairs as a causation of the story. We can find a lot of examples of gods 'playing chess' above the mortal world in both the Iliad and the Odyssey. In the Iliad, for instance, the battle between Greeks and Trojans begins because the goddess Athene, with a consent of her father Zeus, incites a Trojan soldier Pandarus to break the peace by shooting at Menelaus with a bow, whereas Odysseus in the Odyssey would have never been able to leave the goddess Calypso and to continue his journey home if Athene does not appeal to Zeus that Odysseus, pious and gods-fearing, has suffered too much and he should now be allowed to return home and to be reunited with his wife and son. Nevertheless, in Homeric epic the relationship between gods' intervention and story-manipulation cannot be oversimplified, in that it is nothing like that gods' have an absolute power to control the story line however they wish. In the first place, particularly in the Iliad, we can find quite a few examples of events going against the god's will. Some of the gods get wounded by a hero, for instance, as we can see in book 5 where Ares is stabbed by Diomedes' bronze spear with a help of Goddess Athene. Moreover, the gods sometimes lose their beloved sons and lament for them. In the middle of book 16, Zeus loses his son Sarpedon even though he was truly tempted to spare his son's life by using his almighty power. It is almost comical to see the gods, who have much more power than mankind and who seem to be in control over the human affairs, could still lose their precious descendants and grieve over the loss in the same manner as human beings do.
Another thing we should be looking at here concerning the gods function as motivating a story is the existence of the higher, or at least different, authority than the Olympian gods in the terms of story-manipulation. There are several events, again more clearly in the Iliad, which seem, at least explicitly, not to be affected by gods' will and the causation of which remains ambiguous. One of the examples of this is what Dodds calls 'Psychic intervention', by which he is referring to rather stupid human actions that is accounted to 'ate', or 'stunned bewilderment' without any explicit mentioning of divine motivation, one of the clearest examples of which may be Glaucus' unexplainable exchange of his gold armour with Diomedes' bronze. Here, Homer describes his action as a result of Zeus' 'robbing Glaucus of his wits', but this explanation is rather farfetched in the sense that we cannot think of any plausible reason why Zeus needs to make Glaucus agree to this unfair trade. Another example of control over the story beyond the god's authority is 



, which literally means 'allotment', 'portion' or 'share' and is often translated as 'fate', but by no means consists of the notion of what we call 'destiny' derived from the Christian belief in predestination. Homer never explains clearly what kind of relationship there is between the gods and 



 so there is no way we can find any 'logical reconciliation' between the god's will and this concept of personal fate or portion, but at least we can see that 



 is something even Zeus, the mightiest of all the gods, cannot change or interfere. This is illustrated well in the Iliad book 20 where Zeus expresses his fear of the possibility that Achilles 'cheats destiny' and destroys Ilium earlier than it is supposed to be. From this point of view, it is probably better to understand the gods' intervention and causation of the story as a chess-player, who are playing their game with a view to obtain a certain ending determined by fate rather than who can proceed the game however they wish, and consequently themselves being a puppet to some extent as well as a puppet master.
Now let us turn to another aspect of divine role which is utilised in Homeric epic. In the  Odyssey we have a few examples of what the audience may assume to be chance but in fact is stated as divine planned and motivated, as is Nausicaa's suggestion to her father of going on a picnic to wash her clothes. In the same way, in the  Iliad the cause of twists and turns in the Trojan War comes from that each god favours one side and tries to support it. But suppose if we are dealing these events in a modern literature, we are possibly able to treat them as merely a matter of chance and personal lucks. In this sense, it is possible to regard divine motivation behind each event in Homeric epic as illuminating 'chanciness of human affairs', rather than as Homer's attempt to prove his theology and to convince us that he is describing what the gods are really like in his poems. It would be another huge discussion if we tried to examine in more detail to what extent we can see Homeric gods as conveying Homer's theology, but here at least we can argue that Homeric gods are more or less Homer's invention as poetic machinery, in that the only way we can believe that Homer is truthfully illustrating the divine world in ancient Greece is to assume that Homer himself is some sort of god.
From this point of view, we may be able to see this structure of divine intervention prompting the story as effectively deepening the scope of the story. The Iliad, for example, could have been a merely dull documentary of what was happening in the battlefield during the Trojan War if there was no god, in that almost everybody, both in those days and today, knows that Trojans have lost and Ilium fell. But instead, we have the second drama above the world of mortal heroes in which we have no idea about what is going to happen at all. And so we can be thrilled and excited in places like book 14 where Zeus is seduced and Poseidon starts to help Greek against Zeus' will, who may wish to destroy all the gods when he finds out it later. This doubled structure, I guess, could entertain the readers much better than just to state that 'somehow' the Greeks managed to improve the army's morale and to fight back against the Trojans. In the Odyssey, on the other hand, this structure of 'drama upon drama' less frequently appears, but is used similarly effectively. The two scenes of divine committee inserted at the beginning of book 1 and book 5 brilliantly connect the tale of Telemachus and that of Odysseus without getting its readers lost from the story as a whole. Also it helps the audience to establish Athene's character, who constantly helps Odysseus to go home and to settle all the things which has gone wrong while he is absent from his fatherland.
We may even be able to extend this idea of double-structured drama to fitted-in viewpoint of the audience in the poem. On the one hand, the gods are certainly described as superior to human beings in their immortality and supernatural power, and there is a clear and wide gulf between humans and divines. Emlyn-Jones quotes the passage from the Iliad book 14 where Zeus and Hera are together going to their bed, and by focusing how beautifully Homer describes this immortal couple she argues that there is no possibility for us mortals to be better than the gods in any respects. On the other hand, there are certain aspects in the gods' characters in which the audience can reflect themselves. For example, although we are closer to heroes than to gods in that we are human and mortal, but as the audience we are rather in the position of 'immortal' in a sense that the events happening during the Trojan war and wandering of Odysseus never threaten our life. In fact, we can apply exactly what Zeus says in the Iliad book 20 to describe our relation to the poems as a reader: '... I am going to stay here seated...from which I can enjoy divine spectacle." In this sense, one might argue that the Olympian gods act in Homeric epic in a similar way in which the chorus works in Greek tragedy. Bremer points out on this issue that the role of the Greek chorus is to reflect their emotions and reactions in a tragedy from the lesser social and moral status from the main characters, so that 'unheroic' audiences, in contrast to the heroes central in the story, would not be left out from the poems. Nevertheless, as Bremer goes on, the effect that Homer has achieved by his gods is much more complicated than what the chorus enabled the tragic poets to obtain, in a sense that although the Homeric gods do provide the audiences with the way to fit their point of view within the story, we may also project ourselves in heroes by acknowledging that our lives are also subjected to the unexplainable force, which we might call 'God', 'luck', or 'destiny'.
If we term the functions of the Homeric gods, which we have been looking at in the previous sections, 'manipulation' and 'expansion' of the story respectively, we could call the third that we shall be examining here, 'spicing up' the story. Let us analyse the two poems separately in this respect, since what sort of extras the gods are adding to each poem seems very different between the two. In the Iliad, on the one hand, the events happening the upper world of the divines are not only used to cause and motivate the human affairs, but also are in parallel to the activities carried on by mortals in order to mirror each other. They quarrel, deceive and fight against each other to get what they want. They cry out and complain like a child when they get wounded, as we can see in the cases of Ares and Aphrodite in book 5. In a word, they are so humanised that we may sometimes forget that they are immortals and have the higher authority than humans, and just take these divine affairs down to the human levels and find it comical and entertaining. As so, some argue that Homer's way of treating the gods is problematic in that he clearly dishonouring the gods by degrading them through too much of humanisation: in fact, even in as early as late sixth to the beginning of fifth century, Homer was accused by Xenophanes of having put in people's head a wrong image of the gods, who are actually not like human at all, through illustrating the gods disgracefully and shamefully. This accusation towards Homer may be reasonable to a certain extent, however, we cannot overlooked the fact that theses comical divine deeds are also making a sharp contrast with the rather tragic human affairs in the war, and are helping this poem not to be too serious and heavy by providing the audiences a sort of breathing space between cruel and ruthless killings and tragic lamentations of the heroes.
On the other hand, the gods are not portrayed as spectacularly ridiculous and bad behaving in the Odyssey. In this second poem of Homer, the gods are rather appear to be supporting and observing what we may call justice or morality, which clearly is indicated by Zeus' saying in book 1 that it is humans' 'own transgressions' that brings calamity upon mortals. Indeed, except for Poseidon's unreasonable punishment of the Phaeacians who helped good Odysseus to go back home safely, there is an obvious structure of 'the righteous rewarded, the wicked punished' throughout the poem. Not only the arrogant suitors are all slaughtered near the end of the story, they are also constantly warned by Telemachus and Odysseus that they would have to pay for their immoral behaviours unless they honour the house of Odysseus and stop consuming his its property, which leaves no room for them to make any complaint about their cruel death penalty. In the same way, Odysseus' homecoming alone can be justified in that what takes the lives of his comrades away is, to a large extent, their own sins and wickedness, as we can see in book 10 and 12 where they undo the bag containing Zeus' wind and Eurylochs urges his companions to eat the forbidden cows of the Sun respectively. Consequently, as Lesky argues, the Odyssey as a whole 'becomes a moral paradigm' and thus is in distinctively different tones from the Iliad
. In fact, the view of Olympian gods as a moral converter and supervisor is so firmly established in this poem, that Odysseus and Telemachus even need to deal with the revenge for the killing of suitors before the gland finale.
As we have been investigating in this essay, the gods are playing various and remarkable roles in Homeric epic. It might be no exaggeration to say that without this epoch-making invention of divine machinery, Homer would never be able to survive for more than two and half millenniums and have been buried deep in earth already. While almost all the experts in Homeric epics have agreed that the functions assigned to the gods in the two poems are unique and significant, however, there is a constant argument among them on if we should regard the Homeric gods as pure poetic machinery. Bremer supports a view suggested by Engelbert Dreup that claims the Homeric gods are not invented to make the poems religious, in which case the Homer's way of treating divines should be regarded as a technique rather than theology, and the accusation towards Homer for being blasphemous is therefore invalid. On the contrary, there are some who argue that the gods being gods itself has a significant religious implication, and so we must always analyse the divine roles in the Homeric poem without ignoring the concept and definition of the gods. In this sense, therefore, Homeric gods are like having a double personality and thus Homer's divine machinery needs to be regarded as essentially paradoxical.
I would like to conclude here however, from the all analysis we have made on divine functions in this essay, that we cannot consider the Homeric gods to be any more than a product of Homer as a poet because the nature of the divine existence is fundamentally unknown to us and beyond our understanding. In other word, even if Homer meant his description of the gods to be theological statement, it could be nothing but a mere metaphor of divine existence in that, as I have pointed out earlier on in this essay, nobody but the God only is able to know what the God is really like. As so, I suggest, that although we could explore the gods with a view to discover religious and philosophical implications behind them if we wish, the divine roles in Homeric epic may be summarised best as multi-functioned poetic machinery which makes the structure of Homeric epic more sophisticated and pleasurable. It is simply because, regardless of the validity of Homers theology, as a pure poetic device 'they are so perfect'.