The Oresteia, the latest work of Aeschylus among those which have been survived until today, is very important in that it provides us with valuable information about the formation of trilogy in ancient Greek tragedy. At the same time, however, it is also an exciting material to study which enables us to thoroughly enjoy Aeschylus' use of imagery, the most notable features of his language. In the first place, since the Oresteia was produced at the very end of Aeschylus' career, we can see these three plays as almost perfecting his long interest and experiments in the effective use of imagery. Secondly, since 'plays are written to be performed and experienced in linear fashion by the audience' rather than to be read and analysed repeatedly and closely as many scholars of present time usually do, the form of trilogy, or continuous stories related to each other, is a great place for authors to effectively deploy imageries in order to give the audience a certain emotion and interpretation by using them repeatedly or placing them in a way which imprints a certain association between two objects in the mind of spectators.
In this essay, as such, we shall particularly focus on the images which recur throughout the play and help us to realise the change of situations - either in positive or negative way - as the story goes on. I chose three categories from the images that are used in all three plays continuously and repeatedly; first we shall look at how 'nets' and 'snakes' are employed to illustrate the situation concerning revenge, then we move on to analysing the notion of justice through examining 'red' and 'black' and the implications which might be associated with these two colours, and in the final section we shall devote our focus on several clues in Aeschylus' imageries to find out how Aeschylus is challenging the idea of motherhood.
First of all, let us begin with the examination of two images concerning the situation about revenge. 'Nets', which we shall look at first, are one of the most frequently used images in the Oresteia. The first net image in the trilogy appears in the beginning of Agamemnon, where after hearing that Troy has been captured, the chorus describes the fall of Troy as the result of the king Zeus and the queen Night slinging the net on Troy. This beginning of the net imagery seems to suggest two implications that Aeschylus put into the picture of nets. Firstly, if we recall how the impregnable city of Troy has fallen, that is, how the Greeks deceived Trojans by placing a number of soldiers into the wooden horse and successfully made a surprise attack on the Trojan army when all the Trojan soldiers are peacefully sleeping at home, we may be able to see the net the Night slung on Troy as a death trap. As Lebeck points out, this net-trap image is reassured and finalised when the audience are shown the actual 'net-robe' which entangles Agamemnon to his death, and are announced by Clytaemnestra that she killed her husband by coiling him with 'an all embracing net' and striking him three times.
Secondly, the net of Zeus could be regarded as an actual cause of the war - that is, the vengeance for Paris' taking Helen away from her husband Menelous. In this sense, we could suggest that the net indicates person's fate, or more precisely, the reckless circle of revenge. This aspect of the net imagery can be most clearly observed in the middle of the Libation Bearers, where the chorus of slave-women describes Electra and Orestes who are determined to take revenge for their father as 'corks to the net, they rescues the linen meshes from the depth' so that 'this linen will never drown'. In other words, Orestes had to kill his own mother and her lover in order to make sure this circle of revenge is going to turn round properly and not be left unfinished.
For both sense, the fact that among many characters who are presented as 'caught in the net', Orestes alone is described not as being trapped by the net but as 'breaking away through the net' in the third play has a significant implication in story-telling. In the first sense, this implies that Orestes has escaped from the fate of death, which otherwise he would be cruelly driven into by the Furies. But more than that, in the latter sense this image gives us a bigger picture of the story that the house of Atreus finally managed to cut off the long lasting chain of revenge with the killing of his own mother by Orestes. Through examining the imagery concerning the revenge circle, therefore, we could see clearly that Orestes is presented as a special figure who is different from anybody else in the trilogy and thus who has a capacity to bring an end to the ruthless repetition of revenge.
Snakes are the other imagery which could be seen as connected with the idea of revenge. By putting into this imagery into the ancient Greek context, we can find enough ground on which to argue that snakes are specifically treated as an avenger, not merely as a killer or a pursuer. There already existed a special connection between snakes and vengeance in the pre-Oresteia period which probably was derived from snakes liking of tumuli and other graves that helped people to associate snakes with the spirit of death seeking vengeance.
Now, the characters who are often described as a snake in the trilogy are off course Clytaemnestra and Orestes, who are the actual perpetrators of the murder. But the distinctions in the way how the imageries present for these two figures are very obvious. To start with, while 'snake' is more en external judgement for Clytaemnestra's characters and deeds, Orestes recognises his position as a snake or an avenger after having heard about Clytaemnestra's nightmare and declares by himself that 'I turn serpent'. Moreover, after fulfilling his revenge, Orestes is 'cowering like a hare' in front of the Furies, willing to entrust his destiny into the hands of Athene, whereas Clytaemnestra stays arrogant and insists her innocence and therefore keeps her reputation as a snake throughout the second play. Not only that, after she is murdered she even calls herself a dragon, the contrast of which with a snake could be seen as implying that her grudge against Orestes is even greater than that against her husband.
Interestingly, after Orestes 'humbles' himself to a hare from a snake, not only the snake imageries but almost all the animal images which are so predominant in previous two plays suddenly seem to cease. In other words, while the two murders committed in the first two plays rather appears as wild animals killing each other, the dominant image in the third play is the court and trial, which is exclusively human activity and has no room for animals to be involved. This picture may be indicating that, as Goldhill makes a point in his writing, the animal imagery represents natural world against culturally sophisticated world, that is, Aeschylus here is intending to contrast how savage and uncivilised the previous situation was and how the third play presents intellectual 'human' solution to the ruthless circle of revenge.
Now, let us move our focus from revenge to the idea of justice, and examine how the situation concerning justice changes in the course of the trilogy by looking at Aeschylus' use of colour. The so-called 'carpet scene' is one of the most famous scene in the Agamemnon. Here, the audiences are shown to red tapestries laid in front of the house of Agamemnon, while Clytaemnestra is using all sorts of deceptive language as a weapon in order to catch her husband with her deadly trick. By this point, it is already so clear to the audience that despite Clytaemnestra seems to be welcoming her husband dearly, she is in fact treating Agamemnon as a mere object of hatred and is firmly determined to murder him. This recognition itself is enough to make this tableau symbolic, which leads us to associate the red presented in front of us with the blood of Agamemnon. Near the end of this carpet scene we get almost totally convinced that this 'red-blood' association is exactly what Clytaemnestra intended to create, when we hear her exclaiming, 'let the red stream flow and bear him home he never hoped to see - Justice, lead him in!'
This strong association between red and fear for the future bloody murder, however, appears slightly problematic at the very end of the Eumenides, where after everything gets perfectly sorted we see Athene ordering the Athenian women to dress the Furies with 'red' robes to mark their metamorphosis into the Eumenides. It is highly likely that the use of red here gives the audience an impression that there is a certain shadow in this outwardly happy finale, which might be warning us that the blessing of the newly born Eumenides would not last long and another disaster may await the Athenian people. In fact, Fagles intentionally chose to use the word 'blood-red' to describe the colour of their clothes in this scene, as if he wanted to carve this frightening implication into relief.
We could suggest several explanations to work out why it was necessary for Aeschylus to bring an outstanding imagery of red again at the end of his trilogy. Firstly, it might be argued that the use of the colour resembling blood is more meant to function as a reminder of what happened in the past and therefore helps to prevent from the same tragedy to happen again, rather than to cause worry towards the future Athenian prosperity in spectator's mind.
Or, if we can adopt the idea suggested by Whallon, the reappearance of red indicates that the old law stated in Agamemnon which says that the blood of man fallen to the ground cannot be called back again, was revolutionarily overturned, possibly as a result of divine intervention. In other words, the Eumenides' blood-coloured robe here is not meant to scare the audience with a negative image concerning blood, but rather has a positive indication that Athene and the Eumenides together brought back, or even cancelled the consequence of, all the blood which has been shed out of this revenge circle, and give us a guarantee that this blood would never again cause cruel serial murders again.
Here, however, I would like to propose another possibility, using slightly different approach to the matter. If we analyse the text very closely, we soon notice that the 'red-blood' connection is not actually presented so strikingly and frequently in the trilogy. In fact, the murderers who are supposed to be covered with freshly shed blood of their preys are not described with 'red', but more often associated the colour 'black'. Clytaemnestra, for example, declares in front of the corpse of the Agamemnon that 'the murderous showers dyes me black', and in the following sequence the chorus of old men also describes her as 'black widow' even though at this point she must look more red with her husband blood on her cloth. In the same way, in the second murder the dominant colour image haunting the mother-killer is also black. Orestes, whose hands are still wet with newly shed blood of his mother, are soon driven away from the stage by the women in black like gorgons. The actual blood which stains these two murderers might appears as vivid red on the stage, however, linguistic imageries seem to almost persist to expand the image of black.
From this point of view, it could be argued that throughout the trilogy Aeschylus might intend 'red' to be not only associated with blood, but rather to be representing the idea of justice. In contrast, 'black' can be seen as symbolising the idea of guilt or sin. That is, although the act of revenge itself may have had enough ground to be justified for both Clytaemnestra and Orestes, in both cases impermissible guilt occurs in the process of carrying out the revenge.
In the Agamemnon, Clytaemnestra, as a murderer, welcomes her prey at home, and with deceitful language she craftily tricks her husband in a murderous web. Clearly there is guilt of deceiving and betrayal. On the other hand, this situation is completely reversed in the Libation bearers, and there appears a structure of a victim receiving a murderer. As a result, the image of guilt which is dominant in the second play and which the audience is likely to compare the guilt of Orestes to is that of 'biting the hand that feeds one.' The nightmare of Clytaemnestra where she dreams herself giving birth to a snake clearly has an implication of cruel reciprocity for the tender acts, and also the chorus sings some stories from myth which gives us the similar impression, such as that of Scylla who, being blinded by gold offered by Minos as a price, cut her father's hair off that was preserving his immortality. In this sense, the Eumenides in the red robes could be seen no longer as a threat to the happy ending, but as a protector of the real justice that has been established in Athens as a result of the trial.
Finally, by looking at his use of imageries, we shall analyse how Aeschylus is treating the idea of motherhood in his trilogy and is challenging the common view towards this issue. Many critics have been agreed that the character of Clytaemnestra as a mother is essentially lacking consistency throughout the trilogy. In the first play, even though she is an outrageous woman who deceives and kills her own husband, she could still get sympathy from the audience to a certain extent in that as she tries to justify her deed she continuously mentions her pain towards the loss of her daughter Iphigeneia, sacrificed by the hands of Agamemnon. But in the second play, she appears paradoxically to be treating her other daughter Electra like 'a vicious dog' on the grounds that Electra does not approve her mother's murder of her husband. If she has been grieving so much for Iphigeneia's death, it is slightly unreasonable that she is not cherishing at all her other daughter who is very fortunately left for her.
Even more surprisingly, from the end of the second play to the beginning of the third, her pursuing of her own son is presented remarkably cruel. She cursed her own son just before her death, and as she promised there, she urges the sleeping Fury, who otherwise could have let him flee away, to wake up and keep pursuing Orestes until his destiny comes to an end. Interestingly, she is still doing so even though in the second play she seems to recognise that only human who can bring the end to this ruthless revenge circle is Orestes, from which we may be able to conclude that she knew that her death by Orestes was inevitable if she wants the real justice to be done.
This so cruel pursue of Orestes by his mother almost leads us to suggest that the existence of the Fury and the ghost of Clytaemnestra is largely representing Orestes conscience, rather than mother's enmity towards her son. However, Rosenmeyer reminds us that the concept of conscience did not develop firmly enough by the time of Aeschylus for the audience to grasp its connotation. In fact, just as if Aeschylus is trying to convince us that the destruction of mother Clytaemnestra is exactly what he intended to present, the image of the motherhood in the Oresteia is also completely turned over in the third play as the character of Clytaemnestra collapses towards the end of the trilogy.
Throughout the trilogy there is a constant association between motherhood and the source of life. For example, it is the Mother Earth whom Pythia gives honour in her prayer first among all the gods at the very beginning of the third play, and also there is a clear statement made by Electra in The Libation Bearers that the Mother Earth 'brings all things to life and makes them strong'.
This consistent notion of mother and life-giver association, however, seems to be completely denied in by Apollo and Athene at the trial in the third play. Apollo openly claims that 'the woman...is not the parent, just a nurse to the seed, ...the man is the source of life', and this very argument is the decisive fact with which Athena makes her mind in voting for Orestes and therefore Orestes obtains innocence. Not only that the value of motherhood gets crushed in this final judgement, but Athena also dismiss the importance of marriage by saying that 'I honour the male, in all things but marriage', which can be treated, together with the fact that Athene and the Eumenides who bless and protect Athens are both the virgin goddess, as threatening the superiority of marriage towards virginity.
The whole issue concerning this particular topic is very controversial, and it is very difficult to lead the single clear-cut conclusion about what argument Aeschylus is trying to make here on gender issues. It could be argued that the imagery of father as a provider of seeds and mother as a take carer of seeds may be corresponding to a world view in ancient Greece, which looks the mother Earth as nursing people's life but actual human affairs as being controlled by the hands of the Father Zeus. However, the fact that it is the goddess Athena, rather than Apollo or even Zeus himself, who leads everything into the perfect harmony itself is kind of dashing cold water over this assumption. The relation between virginity and marriage also remains ambiguous, in that marriage is the way to produce the offspring and without this reproduction there is no future prosperity in Athens that is wished in the very end of the trilogy. Moreover, the virtue of marriage is supported by Apollo, who declares that 'marriage is... Fate itself, stronger than oaths, and Justice guards its life', which seems to be indicating that there is a controversy over this subject even among divines.
As we have seen, tracing the imageries in the trilogy we can get the vivid picture of how things change as the story moves forward, and what ideology and implication may possibly be laid hidden behind the scene. But the important thing to remember here is that the argument I have developed in this essay is not necessarily the ultimate answer to how we should read these plays and what we should gain from them, since the biggest advantage of imagery may be that it allows numerous different interpretations for the readers and audiences with different perspectives. There is no way to determine if it is right or wrong. We have examined how the Aeschylean imagery helps us to grasp the storyline as the movement from savage and uncivilised circle of revenge to the more intelligent, sophisticated and human society, and indicates the possibility that the trilogy embraces a kind of anti-feminism, but at the same time it is completely probable that one might reach the totally opposite conclusion. In one way or another, nevertheless, this lively, graphical language of Aeschylus, which we might even be able to call 'the art of ambiguity', definitely has huge influence on our reception and perspective of his plays, and it contributes in making his stories more attractive by largely deepening the structure of his drama.