'I hate and I love. And if you ask me how, I do not know: I only feel it, and I'm torn into two." This is probably one of the most famous verses by Catullus, the poem LXXXV. This poem seems to indicate that Catullus was well aware of the fact that love relationship embraces two completely opposite aspects. Affection and hatred, happiness and disaster, they all co-exist in one relationship, even if we will never be able to work out how. Catullus' view towards marriage and friendship, both of which could be seen as a form of love relationship, also follow this theory. Marriage is a kind of goal for a couple where a proper lover and a beloved should end up, and friendship, while occurring normally between people of the same gender and not involving sexual relationship, in other aspects has similar characteristics to Love. For Catullus, all these three types of relationship seem to be working in the same way: that is, similarly evoking both positive and negative emotions simultaneously. In this essay, we shall focus on Catullus' use of marriage and friendship and examine how Catullus emphasises this two-facedness of love relationship through the reflection of the gap between ideal and reality of marriage and friendship. We will analyse first the use of marriage and next friendship: for each topic we shall first closely examine several verses from Catullan poems which can be regarded as representing the ideal, and then move on to other places where we can see Catullus' recognition that both marriage and friendship do not always produce desirable outcomes in the real world.
Let us begin with examining how Catullus treats marriage in his poems. The theme of marriage is particularly remarkable in his long poems, LXI to LXVIII, and indeed all his long poems almost seem to be united under this central subject. Marriage is, of course, very contradictory theme for Catullus who on the one hand respects and longs for marriage, and on the other infringes this sacred relationship by committing adultery with Lesbia. He himself experiences profoundly the reality that theoretically marriage should be perfect and profitable but not the all marriage relationship is going to work in that way. Here, we shall first look at his view of ideal marriage in the poem LXI, which celebrates the wedding between Manlius Torquatus, possibly a friend of Catullus who let Catullus use his house to make love to Lesbia, and Junia Aurunculeia. The below is an extract from the poem LXI, lines 46 to 50, and 56 to 65.
Hymenaeus, or Hymen, who is praised and sung about in this poem, is the god of marriage who lives in the Mount Helicon accompanied by Muses. Throughout this poem Catullus repeatedly emphasises that this marriage god is the most important and praiseworthy god of all, and here particularly Catullus claims that it is because marriage is a natural outcome of love. Hymenaeus is the god who is desired most by the lovers, but notice that Catullus makes it clear that it is only the case for lovers who are also 'beloved'. Marriage requires an agreement from both parties, so marriage is not going to happen, or even if it happens it would not result in happy ending, unless there is 'two-way love' between a couple. This illustration is a sharp contrast with the situation Catullus is in, where there is an unfixable gap between Catullus as a lover and Lesbia as a beloved, and Catullus knows that he will never be able to become 'beloved' lover.
The second paragraph, and one between this and the first paragraph which I omitted because both are dealing similar subject, is a realistic aspect of marriage. Even though a boy and a girl love each other, the fact remains that marriage takes a girl away from her family and leads her to sacrifice her one and only unrecoverable flower, virginity, to her young man who is becoming like a 'savage' animal because of his sexual desire for her. In another translation, this feature of marriage illustrated more explicitly as Hymenaeus 'plucking the flower from the mother's lap'. The Latin word gremium, which is translated as bosom and lap by Godwin and Whigham respectively, could also mean 'womb', which might make this picture of the marriage god snatching a precious flower from her mother's womb more cruel and painful particularly for bride's parents.
This realistic and rather negative aspect of marriage, however, is overturned in the next paragraph. Loss of virginity itself may be seen as damage for a bride and her parents, but Venus, the mother of 'the spirits of love' Cupid, could derive benefits out of marriage and bless a couple if this plucking of flower is approved by Hymenaeus. In other words, the ideal form of marriage should involve a couple who love each other being united into one under the blessing and approval of the marriage god, from which Venus can extract a lot of benefits such as love, sexual pleasure and children.
This notion of 'proper' marriage reminds us of Catullus' poem LXX, where Catullus says his 'woman' said to him that there was no one who she would rather want to marry except Catullus, not even Jupiter. Some may argue that Catullus' main subject of this poem is changeability and cruel capriciousness of his beloved, but this short poem could also be seen as suggesting that Lesbia is violating Catullus' ideal marriage in almost every respect. Not only is Lesbia willing to betray her married husband by having an adulterous relationship with Catullus, but also presumably she had already had so many physical relationships with Catullus and other lovers when she made this statement. It is, therefore, very clear that her reason of marring Catullus is not at all to be physically united with him under the approval of the marriage god. The grief of Catullus is also expressed in his use of the word mulier instead of puella, which shows that Catullus is well aware that the lady who is expressing her willingness to marry him is not a virgin girl but a wife of somebody else, whose marriage to Catullus would consequently never be either approved by Hymenaeus or blessed by Venus.
Now, having made it clear the ideal form of marriage in his first long poem, how then could he reconcile his position as an adulterer with his belief of marriage as a fruit of pure love relationship and justify his love towards Lesbia? As we have noted already Catullus' view towards love relationship is never one-sided, and from the poem LXII onwards, in fact, Catullus shows us a lot of different examples of marriage, some of which worked very well and others ended up in a disaster. And roughly speaking, we could read two most significant reasons why quite a few marriage relations do not work and therefore Catullus could safely say his Love with Lesbia is justifiable.
Firstly, marriage is not purely about love, but it is also an important social institution. As Catullus points out in his poem LXI, marriage is essential in that it provides children who 'aged parents can lean on', and will be 'defending the borders' of their land. In other words, marriage is a basis for both the family and the country to be firmly established and to prosper. In the poem LXII, again Catullus let the chorus of young women, who argues that marriage takes away all the charms of a girl by beheading her flower of virginity, be defeated by the chorus of young men singing that keeping virginity is meaningless in that it neither matures nor 'brings forth a ripe grape'.
Ironically, though, because marriage is necessary for social stability, there are many examples of marriage out of necessity or convenience rather than as a result of love. Although Catullus does not deal with a direct example of marital failure of this sort, we can still read that Catullus highly respects marriage as ultimate love relationship and dismisses the notion of marriage as purely social necessity from the poem LXVI. Queen Berenice had to assassinate her first husband Demetrius, with whom her mother had fallen love and to whom her mother had forced her to marry, in order to get her true beloved King Ptolemy Euergetes as her husband. And Catullus calls this deed 'brave', which put an end to both her mother's abnormal sexual relations to her son-in-law and her loveless marriage life, and expresses no negative assessment towards her murder of her ex-husband.
Secondly, Catullus shows us that 'fanatical devotion and despairing devotion' drive us into temporal madness and lead us to make a speed decision which we may regret after we come back to ourselves. The two most obvious examples can be found in the poem LXIV and LXIII, the story of Ariadne who is deserted by her 'husband' Theseus, and of Attis who had 'irreversible marriage' to Cybele respectively.
Ariadne, in the poem LXIV, fell in love with the handsome stranger at the first sight, provided him with a sword to kill the Minotaur and a thread to guide him out of the labyrinth, left all her family members who love her so much behind to follow her passionate love for Theseus, and eventually ended up with being abandoned just like Queen Dido or Medea. Attis, on the other hand, completely fascinated by the Mother Goddess Cybele, had emasculated himself to become one of the eunuch priest for her, and next morning when he recovered his conscious he grieved over his sexual identity which he had lost completely and would never be able to restore again.
Both situations described in the poems LXIV and LVIII not only do illustrate the possibility of unsuccessful marriage due to thoughtlessly made decisions and uncontrollable temporal passion, but also clearly reflect Catullus' own position to Lesbia in which Catullus devotes himself to his beloved madly, loses his masculinity completely, and gains nothing from it. On the one hand these illustrations of failures in marital relationship definitely help Catullus to justify himself of messing up Lesbia's marriage, but on the other they remark Catullus as a miserable and helpless man who is well aware of the fact that his Love with Lesbia would not produce any positive outcomes and still could not rescue himself out of this morass.
Next, let us move on to looking at how Catullus employs the idea of friendship in his poems. Although Catullus is universally known as a love poet and most of the scholars agree that his main subject is his beloved Lesbia, about three quarters of his first sixty short poems are actually addressed to, or under the subject of, a male or two men, who are almost always called by their name. In a way friendship can be seen as very similar to Love, so that Catullus may be trying to use friendship as a mirror that reflects several features of emotions between a lover and a beloved. Again, we shall first closely examine an extract from Catullus' collection, the lines 1 to 4 and 15 to 24 of the poem LXV, in which he seems to describe what friendship should be like, and then analyse the reality of friendship which is far more complicated and essentially two-faced.
The purpose of this poem is to express his grief over the death of his brother and to make an apology to Hortalus, his patron and lawyer, for the delay of the poem which Catullus promised him long ago. In a modern context it might sound strange to call the relationship between a patron and a patronised friendship, however, it was very normal for the Roman friendship to embrace two parties unequal, one of which came under 'the shadow of the other'.
In the first four lines, Catullus explains how severe the loss of his brother was, which hindered him almost completely from his poetic imagination and creativity. 'And yet', he says, even though this unfortunate event has made him sick and 'barren' so that he cannot produce 'the sweet offspring of Muses' out of his love life, he still wants to fulfil his promise with Hortalus by doing what he can do, that is, to send him a translation of Callimachus. He was so desperate to urge himself to keep his promise, in spite of being in the middle of deep lamentation, because he did not want Hortalus to think that Catullus had completely forgotten about their promise, just as if Hortalus entrusted his word 'in vain to the wondering wind'.
This could be seen as an interesting contrast with his poem LXX, where he declares that what a woman says to her lover should be written down on wind or on running water. It seems that, even though he does not hesitate at all to present himself as feminised and lost in sexual identity in his Lesbia poems, here Catullus totally rejects to be seen as like a woman to her lover in his friend relation to Hortalus, and distinguishes the male friendship as masculine, solid and trustworthy compared to the fluid and unreliable Love between a male and a female. From this point of view, it may even be argued that Catullus considers taking a feminine position in man to man relationship to be as serious humiliation as being penetrated in the homosexual relationship.
In the last six lines, he makes further comments on how friendship works differently from Love. The apple, a symbol of love, which is secretly entrusted to a girl by her lover, will eventually roll out from the girl's lap and makes this innocent girl feel guilty and ashamed. This illustration could, as Godwin argues in his commentary, be taken as simply describing that Catullus is still feeling ashamed of his delayed deliver of his poem to Hortalus, which he does not need to feel guilty about anymore because the promised poem is being sent to him already. From another angle, however, it could be seen as Catullus' implicit criticism towards unaccountability of woman: in fact, one of the Roman proverbs says 'One should entrust nothing to a woman or a lap', which means that as often what has been placed on someone's lap falls out when they have forgotten about it and carelessly rise, so as woman's mind that is changeable and flighty could keep nothing. In other words, Catullus is emphasising that friendship is not at all like an apple on a girl's lap, that is, there is stability and eternity in masculine friendship which Love could never obtain.
Now, let us examine how Catullus illustrates that friendship in reality can take widely divergent forms and thus is not always as masculine and reliable as Catullus describes in the Poem LXV. First of all, friendship can be, just as Love can when both parties involved are faithful and loving to each other, very sweet and tender. Fro example, in the poem IX, Catullus seems to be so excited about that he will soon see Veranius, a friend of his who is 'more dear than any 300,000 of his many dear friends' and have been away for a while. The list of welcomes which Catullus said he would give Veranius when he first sees him, such as embracing and kisses, could be seen as almost overreaction for just a friendly greeting, which would probably be more appropriate on the occasion of reunion of a long separated couple. Similarly in the poem L, Catullus describes himself as if he is in love with his friend Licinius: the excitement of the daytime together prevents him from falling asleep and stirs up his longing for another daytime to converse with each other, and towards the end of the poem his burning passion even leads him to address Licinius 'my beloved'.
Friendship could also contain some sort of rivalry, as in the first poem while Catullus express his friend-love towards Nepos by nominating him as an ideal reader of his poems and dedicating the collection to him, simultaneously he implies that his new, neat and polished poem book is as valuable and aesthetic as Nepos' huge, tedious and labouring Italian history books. Or in the poem XIII, Catullus admits that he cannot host a fabulous dinner party like his friend Fabullus because 'his purse is only full of cobwebs', but instead he can provide 'Love's essence' from which Fabullus can sniff a charming and seductive fragrance, which is so attractive that Fabullus would be begging to gods to change him into a big nose.
At the same time, however, friendship can also result in a complete disaster and full of hatred if it is broken or betrayed, just like Love and marriage do as we have already seen. The poems LXXIII and LXXVII directly deal with Catullus' friendship which has been spoiled completely, where Catullus explicitly expresses his disappointment and hatred towards whom once he called a true friend. To some extent, we may be able to argue that Catullus sees friendship as more vulnerable than Love, because whereas Catullus seems to be able to keep loving Lesbia even though she repeatedly shows her unfaithfulness to him and repays his love with betrayal, friendship tends to disappear when one party becomes disloyal to the other and the mutual benefit ceases to exist.
The sequence of Gellius, consisting of the poems LXXIV, LXXX, LXXXVIII to XCI and CXIV, is a very interesting material to study in order to find out how friendship can change and be turned over from love to hatred. It is always difficult to decide in what chronological order each poem was composed because the poems are not arranged from the oldest to the newest in the collection. Nevertheless, Tatum suggest that we could see one possible storyline by reading these seven poems as (a) Gellius is angry because of the poems LXXIV, LXXX and LXXXVIII to XC which were presumably written by Catullus with a view to 'devastate Gellius' social reputation' through revealing his unnatural and adulterous relation with his aunt, (b) this offence against Gellius is as revenge for his act described in the poem XCI, that is, the stealing of Lesbia, and (c) Catullus is trying to reconcile with Gellius in the poem CXVI through employing the poetic medium as a 'peace offering'. We cannot read from the poem CXVI if or not Catullus' managed to restore his friendship with Gellius with the help of the Muses, but at least friendship is less problematic than Love for Catullus because, due to its breakability, friendship never leads Catullus into a blind alley where he keeps sacrificing himself for his beloved and gaining nothing.
As we have seen in this essay, Catullus challenges the complexity and self-contradiction of love relationship by viewing marriage and friendship from all sorts of angles. Catullus' complicated emotion towards his beloved, which sometimes takes a form of tender love and sometimes of inconsumable anger and hatred, is all magnified into the illustration of these two love relationships which are similarly inclusive of both positive and negative feelings. This paradoxical picture of love relationship is, however, nothing new to us nearly two thousand years after Catullus' death, and still remains almost identical. After examining numerous examples of love relationship getting upside down, and falling from happiness to disaster instantly by small chance which seems to be almost completely irrational and beyond our understanding, we seem not yet to find any better observation towards this fact other than Catullus' 'I don't know how.'