Agesilaos, whom Theopompus described as 'the greatest and most famous of his day', reigned in Sparta during the period which saw, either inevitably or coincidentally, the absolute downfall of the Spartans, 'who had never before been mastered by living man." It is very likely, therefore, that there have been numerous accounts written on this sensational Spartan king, both on his own character and on the historical events he underwent. But unfortunately only the works of Xenophon, in particular his historiography called Hellenica and the encomiastic account Agesilaos, have survived intact to our time among the contemporary sources, which provide us with a vivid picture of who Agesilaos was and what his reign was like. Amongst the later accounts, on the other hand, we have rather more fortunately a complete biography of Agesilaos produced by Plutarch, which quotes, both directly and indirectly, the lost historical sources such as Ephoros of Cumae and Theopompus of Chios, to which we would otherwise have no access. The points of view that are employed in these three main sources mentioned above on Agesilaos are, nevertheless, very different. We shall, therefore, analyse and compare the three accounts in this essay, with a view to assessing them under the criteria of objectivity. First, we will attempt to define 'objectivity' so as to clarify what we should focus on when examining the accounts, and then we shall move onto the detailed analysis of each work both individually and comparatively.
First of all, let us begin with examining briefly the concept of objectivity itself. According to a dictionary, being objective basically means to be dealing with or laying stress upon 'the object of perception or thought, as distinct from the perceiving or thinking subject', and thus being 'external to mind', 'exhibiting the actual facts, not coloured by the feelings or opinions of the writer'. This definition may seem reasonable at first sight, however, unlike science disciplines to emphasise the object does not necessarily result in the distance from human mind and the exhibition of actual facts in historiography, simply because a complete separation of subject from object is impossible in social sciences in general, as they consist of the study of human affairs by humans. In historiography, in other words, while historical events themselves might be regarded as 'value neutral', through the process of placing them into a certain context to make them meaningful and valuable historians inevitably introduce subjectivity of some kind into their accounts.
As such, it is almost impossible to obtain an absolutely objective history. Moreover, it is also extremely difficult to assess the objectivity of historical accounts accurately and 'objectively', I suppose, since it merely adds another human perspective to an analysis of human affairs conducted by a historian. We could probably attempt to set some sort of scientific criteria for judging objectivity, such as a linguistic analysis of grammatical features based on the supposition that the use of the pronoun 'I' and first person verbs indicate subjectivity, while a narrative told from a third person's perspective being essentially objective. However, although it is true that Xenophon's Agesilaos deploys first person verbs and pronouns much more frequently than the other two works which may contribute in its apparent impression of subjectivity, this criteria nevertheless allows us only a limited investigation into the nature of an account since in many cases the boundary between objectivity and subjectivity lies in choices of materials, rather than their presentation. Thus in this essay, we should probably give up our hope of conducting a scientific and clear-cut analysis of each text on their objectivity, but adopt slightly more compromised and ambiguous criteria: that is, to see how successfully each account is avoiding a distorted, unbalanced and one-sided presentation, which 'no reasonable person would argue with'.
Now, let us turn to examine the two works of Xenophon. As we have seen in the first section, his works are the only contemporary account wholly preserved on Agesilaos, which can provide a valuable insight derived from 'exceptional familiarity with Spartan institutions'. Nevertheless, many scholars tend to devalue them for their remarkable subjectivity that largely comes from Xenophon's closeness to the events he is describing both in time and space, particularly his personal interactions with Agesilaos and admiration for him as an ideal commander and a perfect exemplar of virtues. His Agesilaos, in fact, is written with the style of an encomium, where there is not even an attempt to claim objectivity. In other words, objectivity is not so much his priority in this account, but his ultimate aim is to record his virtuous actions 'briefly in a style deliberately intended to enhance their merits.'
Consequently, Xenophon's description and analysis of historical events are sometimes inadequate and biased. For instance, the total decline of the dominance of Sparta in the Greek world is simply portrayed as something which at least 'cannot be said that they were incurred under the leadership of Agesilaos.' Xenophon may mean here that the decisive loss at the Battle of Leuctra which marks the beginning of the fall of Sparta was not led by him but by Cleombrotus, the other king of Sparta. But even so there could not be found any adequate and logical ground on which we might argue that Agesilaos, the highest authority in Sparta at that time, had no responsibility for this fatal failure. Xenophon in this particular account also avoids mentioning other outstanding figures of those days such as Lysander, who contributed tremendously to Agesilaos' exceptional succession to the throne, and Epaminondas, who above all was the Theban commander at Leuctra, so that they would not blur the monopoly of focus on Agesilaos and throw a wet blanket on his 'perfect' career.
His Hellenica, in contrast, has a broader focus on numerous different players of history and sometimes even adopts direct criticisms towards Agesilaos, but nonetheless it often becomes a focus of even stronger criticisms for being partial in both displaying bias and in omitting events to an extent that it may distort the appearance of history significantly. One of the reasons for this disapproval of the Hellenica may have arisen from the fact that Xenophon for this account employed a genre of historiography, under which many scholars believe that a good level of objectivity is essential, but he nevertheless sticks to his general favouritism towards Agesilaos and Sparta as a whole as well as his hatred towards Thebans, and to some extent Athenians. It is probably possible, in fact, to argue that Xenophon was not so much interested in producing a 'good' history, but simply wished to create 'an apologetic account' for the Spartans by presenting Thebes as a villain and omitting the events which might to be used for making an attack against Sparta and Agesilaos. He even deploys the divine causation to explain why the Spartan domination had to end in order to minimise Agesilaos' responsibility in the matter, which has to be regarded as showing his lack of logical insight and enthusiasm for making his account valuable as a historiography.
Next, we shall move our focus onto Plutarch's account of Agesilaos, which was written more than 400 years after the king's death. Relative objectivity compared to Xenophon is already apparent from his background: because of his physical and chronological distance from Agesilaos and his reign, there was no need for Plutarch either to defend Agesilaos or to be too nave about criticising him directly and openly. Moreover, there are several evidences in his account that he had access to numerous different records of the 4 th century Greece, which enabled him to examine the events from multiple view points and to conduct a comparative research to find out which description is most likely to be faithful to the truth.
Plutarch's overall aim for writing based on this vast amount of research is to derive moral lessons from the past that could be still valuable in the public life, which 'are to be found among deeds motivated by virtues' and may encourage 'a desire that stimulates one to emulation.' In any history writing decision making on what to include and what to omit is necessary to a certain degree and this naturally does not exclude Plutarch's biographies, however, his criteria in choosing materials nevertheless seems not so much to hide 'dark acts out of the record' as Xenophon did, but rather to obtain brevity and clarity for his moral education. Plutarch also admits that he sometimes needs to concentrate on 'a casual action, the odd phrase and a jest' rather than major military and political achievements in order to bring the character of a great man into as full relief as possible. But this statement probably should not be overly emphasised as evidence to breach general objectivity in Plutarch's biographies, as it is possible that he raised the point in the introductory section of Alexander simply because writing about Alexander in specific made him more aware of the potential conflict between famous militaristic deeds and morally inspirational minor events, as opposed to the theory that this was Plutarch's general idea towards biography writing at large from the beginning.
At the same time, however, it is also true that moralising purpose could occasionally distort a fact in order to get an idealised illustration of virtues. Not only does Plutarch's account have an overall positive tone in portraying Agesilaos' deeds, but we could also find the most striking example in where Plutarch describes Agesilaos' immediate decision to return to his home country from Asia Minor when the Corinthian War broke out and the ephors ordered him to set off to Sparta at once for aid. Here Plutarch praises Agesilaos for showing 'a perfect example of obedience and morality' by giving up his supreme authority in Asia Minor as soon as the messenger arrived, having completely ignored the king's distress and grievance for the vanished hope for honour and glory. On this particular topic Xenophon in the Hellenica gives a more realistic psycho-analysis of Agesilaos, who eventually decided to keep his loyalty to his country after the initial disappointment over the ephors' request.
Another example of Plutarch's subjectivity may be seen in his synkrisis, a comparative study of two lives pared in his biographies that is given after the end of second life as a sort of epilogue to the whole structure. With Agesilaos he contrasts the life of Pompey, a Roman general, and presents his own judgement on which man might be seen as better in what way by using mainly first person verbs. This comparison, however, seems to be fairly equal and fundamentally avoiding conclusions as to which man should be considered better after all, in contrast to the encomiastic comparison in which the act of comparing is a mere tool to benefit the person whom you are praising. In this sense, it may be argued that the function of synkrisis is not so much to impose Plutarch's own moral judgement of the lives of great men on readers, but more to present an example of how to make a moral judgement in order to stimulate the act of recognising virtues in human lives among the readers.
Much analysis has been done on the style of the three texts. In this last section of the essay, we shall look at some actual passages from each account which describe the same event, and see how different impressions on the event each text might give us. The example we shall examine here is the account of Agesilaos' accession to the throne.
Xenophon's Agesilaos, to start with, presents the scene almost as if Agesilaos gained the kingship only by his own virtues, despite the fact that in reality Lysander, Agesilaos' chief counsellor, played a major part behind the scenes. In addition, he also omits an explanation altogether as to why there needed to be a dispute between Agesilaos and Leotychides, the son of the former king Agis who was supposed to be the undisputable heir to the throne, or why Agesilaos, the brother of Agis, came to be considered 'more eligible in point of birth' than the son. In the Hellenica, in contrast, Xenophon not only mentions the contribution made by Lysander in Agesilaos' succession to the throne, but also gives a short summary of the death of Agis, and then moves on to the dispute between Agesilaos and Leotychides. According to Xenophon, Agesilaos first argued against the legitimacy of Leotychides' inheriting the throne on the basis that Agis, who was suspicious that his wife might have had sexual intercourse with somebody else while he kept himself away from her bedroom because of the earthquake sent by Poseidon, had never acknowledged Leotychides as his own son.
There is no more background information given to this argument in Xenophon, however, Plutarch goes deeper into the story of Agis and his wife Timaea and then he finishes it off with the episode that Agis in his deathbed finally agreed to acknowledge Leotychides as his true son. Another notable difference between the Hellenica and the Life of Agesilaos on this particular story is that Plutarch credits Lysander with being the driving force behind Agesilaos' claim to the kingship, while Xenophon tries to create the impression that it was all down to Agesilaos' own ambition and determination, with Lysander helping him only in arguing against the oracle which advised the Spartans to be aware of the lame kingship.
From the analysis we have made in this essay, we may able to conclude that Xenophon's accounts of Agesilaos are essentially one-sided and distorted, while Plutarch dealt with the life of this Spartan king from a more balanced and impartial point of view. Although objectivity was probably not Plutarch's primary concern in his biographies, in order to make his moral teaching as practical and meaningful as possible he naturally needed to aim for creating a realistic portrait of great men, rather than an idealised and flattering picture. But what did Xenophon think about objectivity? Did he really have no concern whatsoever in being objective but merely desired to shine the perfect virtues of Agesilaos with the brightest light possible? Unfortunately there are no means left for us to speculate what opinion Xenophon had on the importance of objectivity more than two thousand years ago, however, we could at least suggest the possibility that Xenophon did not willingly and actively gave up objectivity in his accounts, but rather he was forced to do so in order to counter-attack against the predominant public perspective at that time that saw Agesilaos and his reign as to be fundamentally blamed for Sparta's absolute failures. If several accounts that were totally against Agesilaos had survived until today, then Xenophon's works could have been seen as important to create an overall 'objective' illustration of Agesilaos' character.