The statement above is the so called 'Ninngenn Senngenn (Declaration of Humanity)', which was issued under the name of the Japanese Emperor of those days, Hirohito, and published on the newspapers on the first of January, 1946, after Japan experienced the utmost loss in the Second World War. To our modern perspective this piece of comment merely seems to be claiming what is totally unnecessary to be reassured, or it may even scare us with its tone of determined self-respect and arrogance. For the contemporary Japanese citizens, however, this declaration was truly an unexpected upset, which utterly overturned their strong belief that the emperor was a living god and that therefore the most honourable virtue humans could possibly obtain was to fight for him and die for him.
The same sort of contrariety between our viewpoint and that of the ancient Romans might hinder our understanding of the similar institution in the Roman Empire, namely the Roman imperial cult. In fact, many of the modern scholars are sceptical about the probability of the imperial cult as a religious entity and choose to understand it as fundamentally political, through which the state manipulated its subjects and the subjects attempted to gain diplomatic advantages. But before we hurriedly draw our conclusion on where to place the Roman imperial cult in our understanding, there are at least two problems we must consider. Firstly, our essential hesitation towards the idea of imperial cult may be largely influenced by what Simon Price calls a 'christianised' view of religion. Secondly, we should carefully consider if the modern scholars are right in putting 'politics' and 'religion' on two opposite ends of the spectrum when they try to grasp the idea of the imperial cult. On this point, it might help to analyse the Japanese imperial cult which was a fairly recent phenomenon flourished from the end of 19 th century until the middle of last century, which seemingly possessed political and religious characteristics simultaneously. In this essay, as such, we shall begin with the attempt to clarify and to remove fixed ideas of religion shaped by the prosperity of Christianity, and then move on to examine the Roman religious system in order to see if the imperial cult in any respect as a religious institution could have been cultivated there. Finally, we will briefly look at the Japanese imperial cult, with a view to exploring if we are truly able to distinguish political and religious elements of the system so clear-cuttingly.
First of all, let us consider the influence of Christianity on our understanding of what religion is. Price and Gradel repeatedly argue in their writings that the tendency of Christianity is to pre-require the individual participant's psychological involvement as the essential condition for the authentic religion, and to neglect and deny the religion as a 'public cognitive system', central importance of which is the act of conversation with 'another world' through a means of 'dialogue', such as sacrifice and prayer. In other words, the christianised perspective narrows down the definition of religion so as to exclude any forms of rituals which do not embrace a mental dimension. This concept of religion, more or less, certainly obstructs and blurs the question if the Roman imperial cult should be understand as religious or political, by shifting the focus of question to the psychological dimension as to whether the participants of the cult truly perceived the emperor as divine.
In addition to this, I suppose, Christianity contributed to a large extent in spreading of the idea that god is a fundamentally monotheistic entity. Here I will discuss two examples, in which this monotheism might be seen as alienating the Roman religion from us and thus severing our sympathy to it. The first notion predominant in Christianity is that God has to be ever-present both in time and space, which may lead us to reject the capability of the Roman religion of incorporating new deities whenever they found it necessary as sacrilegious. In contrast, however, it is quite natural thinking for the Romans under their polytheistic religious system to regard that there are countless gods in the world and there must be, therefore, some gods who have been living in a foreign land and have never revealed themselves to the Romans yet. In other words, polytheism always has an extra space for a potential unknown deity to join their community. As Gradel puts it, the polytheistic gods are not 'of all men', but rather concerning only their worshippers.
Another example is the idea that the god is almighty and sovereign. This presupposition can be seen in Price's use of the statements, for instance, that no Romans ever prayed to the emperor in the time of sickness or shipwreck. He argues that this fact could be used either to support the argument that the imperial cult was essentially political and not religious, or to prove that the cult was 'of a higher spiritual type' which does not require the give-and-take relationship between the worshipping and worshipped. From the polytheistic point of view, however, this argument completely ignores the characteristic of polytheism that under this system a god is not supposed to aid the humans in every situation. It is, therefore, not surprising at all that the Romans did not cry out to the emperor concerning their health or personal sufferings simply because the emperor was supposedly linked more to politics, warfare and statecraft, and this incident alone should not lead us to think that the emperor has a peculiar position among the deities in Rome.
Next, let us turn to the analysis of the Roman religious system with a view to assessing whether the imperial cult as a religious entity was at all acceptable in Roman society. First of all, as we have already seen partly in the previous section, their essentially polytheistic religious thinking was the central key to understanding the nature of the imperial cult. In fact, to a degree polytheism may be one of the preconditions for a form of human cult to be able to exist in the state level. The pre-war Japanese society, which successfully cultivated and nurtured the imperial cult, also embraced the polytheistic religious view based on the Shinto belief in 'Yorozu no kami', literary meaning eight million gods.
Under this system, because of its ability to include an almost unlimited number of gods into its religious system, the nature of the gods can be very ambiguous, even to the level that deity could include anything which is beyond a human being. The classic example of this fluidness of the concept of the divine can be seen in the New Testament, where St. Paul and Barnabas received the divine respect from the public following their performing a miraculous healing of a lame man in Lystra. An interesting incident can be found in Japanese Shinto history as well, in which the death of a political authority who had been demoted from the position in the central government to the regional one just before he died, was associated with the series of unexplainable calamities and natural disasters that happened in the capital and the honour of apotheosis was given to him by the people who thought that the cause of disaster was the fury of the dead. From this respect, we could probably argue that the only one type of god unacceptable for polytheism is the one which tries to eliminate the other deities, such as the Christian God.
Outside this polytheistic view of religious matters, there were several other traditions rooted in Rome and its empire which may justify the imperial worship. To begin with, Julius Caesar, who was the first to be granted the numerous divine honours and to be apotheosised, was able to claim his divine descent from Aeneas, the son of Venus, although ancestral divinity was not peculiar to the emperors but was widely believed for the kings and great men in general both in Greece and Rome. Secondly, there was a stream of philosophical thinking which claimed that all the major gods were once human, called 'Euhemerism', based on the Greek account on the gods' origin written by Euhemerus and translated into Latin by Ennius. In addition to this philosophical concept, there existed a popular mystic belief among the Romans that the best men were promised an immortality after death, which reduced the distance between divine and mortals significantly and which made all men 'at least potentially divine'.
Thirdly, the Romans traditionally worshipped 'the divine in man' under two aspects: the Genius which was perceived as a guardian spirit of the paterfamiliae, and the Lar or two Lares which was probably interpreted as some sort of spirits of dead ancestors. On which divines to worship at the level of the house cult in each household other than these two deities, the paterfamiliae had the authority to choose. In this respect, we may able to argue that the imperial cult was a phenomenon that came out from a natural discourse, in which the members of the state at large worshipped the divinity of its head, the paterpatriae, and whatever deities he decided to incorporate into his community, as opposed to that the members of the individual household worshipped the Genius of the paterfamilae.
So far we have been looking at the supporting evidences for the imperial cult as a religious institution, but there were of course several factors which talk against the statement and tempt us to assess the cult as rather more political. The political advantage for the rulers to become a god to legitimise and strengthen their regime had been recognised long before the imperial cult by Aristotle, partially under whose advice and partially under his father's influence Alexander the Great successfully encouraged the establishment of his own cult among his subjects. Fundamentally political motivation for instituting the imperial cult may, moreover, not only come from the ruling side wishing to gain some sort of political control by imposing, licensing and manipulating the cult, which can often be observed particularly in Western provinces of the empire, but also from the ruled side who voluntarily adopt the form of cult to flatter to their rulers in order to gain diplomatic advantages, which is said to be essentially a phenomenon of the Eastern Greek cities.
There is also linguistic evidence which may suggest the hesitation of the Romans and its subjects in placing the imperial cult in exactly the same importance and religious significance as their traditional cults. In Latin the term divus, as distinguished from the traditional gods deus, was used as official terminology from Julius Caesar onwards to refer to the deceased emperors and members of their family. In the Greek speaking East, sacrifices were made for the living emperor on many occasions but predominantly they were described as the sacrifices 'on behalf' of the emperor, rather than 'to' the emperor. These linguistic ambiguities might exemplify the tendency of the Romans and their subjects to avoid elevating the imperial cult as a religious institution so high as to displace their traditional pagan deities.
But now we have to go back to our first question posed in the first section: are we right in presupposing that 'religious' is an antonym of 'political'? In other words, is it really impossible for the imperial cult to be religious as well as political? In the rest of my essay, I shall briefly investigate the pre-war Japanese imperial cult and its characteristics in order to reach a conclusion if religion and politics are really incompatible with each other.
Unfortunately we do not have enough space here to conduct a detailed examination on how the Japanese imperial cult came into existence, but one thing noteworthy here is the fact that it was started by elites, not only with a purely political insight but actually with a high level of mental involvement in the ideology as well. By the time Japan placed itself in the middle of the warfare in the beginning of the 20 th century the cult had already acquired highly political characters and was reduced to a mere political tool for the authorities to ensure an absolute loyalty from their subjects, however, at least it was initially promoted by the elites who actively came to a conclusion that the notion of the divine emperor is credible and trustworthy after much logical thinking and academic research on the topic. For example, Yoshida Shin, a Japanese philosopher in the 19 th century, first studied the Shintyoku, a mythical statement by the most influential of the Japanese local gods proclaiming that the imperial family is his descendant, as a mere political ideology which was used to rule the people. After the long-time study of the concept and Japanese history, however, he changed his opinion totally and came to believe this as a religious ideology, and began to proclaim that Japan should overthrow the form of government of that time and reconstruct the central government as emperor-oriented.
After the old government had collapsed and those who strongly believed that the divine emperor should gain the supreme political authority over the country occupied the high positions within the new government, the imperial cult emerged and was established through highly political means such as a constitution and educational doctrine. The former Japanese constitution, which was enforced in 1890, clearly indicated that Japan should be ruled by the emperor and his direct descendants (Chapter1, Article1), who is holy and should not be violated (Chapter1 Article3). In a year prior to this, the Imperial Rescript on Education was also promulgated under the name of the emperor, which stated that the Japanese citizens were obliged to devote themselves to helping the emperor who rules the country according to the divine will, particularly in the time of crisis. Nevertheless this extremely manipulative and therefore political aspect of the imperial cult coincided with, interestingly enough, the passionate belief in the emperor's true divinity held by those who initiated these utilisation of political means. The record shows that Inoue Kowashi, one of the people who contributed in the production of a draft for both the constitution and the educational edict, chose every single word with an extreme caution because he acknowledged that any mistake or contradiction would be attributed to the emperor himself as dishonour, which would be an irredeemable sin.
In spite of this forceful and premeditated imposition of the cult on the Japanese citizens, or maybe rather because of this, the cult was quickly spread out all over Japan and accepted by its inhabitants with great enthusiasm. This may seem slightly strange that highly political stratagems could stir up a religious sensation among the people. In reality, however, if one wishes to establish the cult as largely a political institution so as to manipulate and ensure stable loyalty of his subjects, it is not enough just to force reluctant people to participate in the cult unwillingly but you have to derive the active involvement and truthful respect towards the cult out of your subjects.
Another important factor, other than political propagandas and cruel oppression of opponents of the cult, which might have helped the Japanese people to absolve the cult into their everyday life, is the fact that this belief in the emperor's divinity could provide a means of self-respect with the worshippers. As we can see in Ito Hirobumi's Commentaries to the Japanese former constitution of which he himself was responsible for overall editing, he declared that 'The Sacred Throne was established at the time when the heaven and the earth became separate' as a comment to the position of the emperor. This statement clearly shows that the emperor's divinity is not only the matter of the Japanese nation, but it is expanded to the creation of the world as a whole. It may be argued, from this notion, that divinity of the emperor not only elevated the emperor himself high, but also encouraged his subjects to regard themselves as a chosen nation, directly reigned over by the lord of lords.
Whatever the crucial factors were, the imperial cult successfully took firm root in Japanese society. Hence the people's truly painful reaction mentioned at the beginning of this essay, when the end of the cult was officially announced under the name of the emperor. At the same time, however, nobody would totally deny it, I suppose, that the Japanese imperial cult was in many respects highly political. In this sense we may be able to conclude that to ask whether a form of state cult is essentially political or religious is misleading, since politics and religion are not always inversely proportional to each other: they can coexist side by side, and thus a cult can be both largely political and religious simultaneously. The attempt to investigate the character of a cult under the clear-cut categories of authentically political and genuinely religious entities is, therefore, just like trying to navigate a foreign city using a map of the world. Unless we switch the map with an appropriate road map, that is, we choose the right criteria, we would never get to our destination of assessing the nature of the imperial cult accurately.