"Would ya listen to him? He's makin' the story sound like some Greek tragedy!" - the opening sequence of the Hercules starts with a scene in which one of the muses, who are giving the narration to this film by singing gospel tunes, interrupts Charlton Heston's voice over with this word. This prologue can be seen as Disney's clear declaration that this film arises from its desire to create a film set in the ancient world but dealing antiquity in an innovative way that conventional classical films have never tried before. To some extent, Disney's Hercules certainly seems to be free from the influences of its predecessors and to have succeeded in winning the audiences of different types from usual classical film goers. At the same time, however, some critiques point out the fact that the Hercules did managed to keep distance from the fixed image of historical or mythical films merely means that this film ended up with being a mediocre and typical Disney film, as such, in this essay we shall examine how this film appears to be distinct from most of the films featuring the ancient world but to follow Disney's convention almost perfectly. We will firstly discuss some of the common features among ordinary classical films, and then move on the detailed analysis of several characteristics of the Hercules which can be regarded as be strongly affected by other works of Disney or Disney's established ideology.
First of all, let us clarify what kind of characteristics we normally expect when we watch films set in the ancient world. Generally speaking, antiquity can be regarded as having three advantages as a subject matter for films. First, it has a capacity to provide the audience with magnificent spectacle. For example, chariot racing or ancient warfare with combat involving a mass of soldiers dose not require any cheap tricks to be made into an exciting shot, and the reproduction of the life in the old days such as costumes and buildings itself is attractive enough to stimulate our general interest in history that we can neither witness nor experience in our daily life. Secondly, not only is the ancient world full of powerful historical figures whose names and characters are known to many people, but also to a fairly large extent it allows filmmakers to embellish the story in order to make a scenario more suitable for the main theme of a film because history and myth have very complicated structure and usually consist of several contradictory accounts so the audiences normally do not have enough knowledge to spot changes filmmakers made in the plot unless they are an expert in this field.
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, the ancient world was the very source of our modern society after all. No matter how the ancient culture and human life reproduced on the screen seem different from those we familiar with in today's world, we can still recognise that many of our ideologies and customs actually have their origin in the ancient society in which people were acting in very much the same way as we do now. In this sense, we can see that one of the most popular aims which filmmakers try to achieve through deploying antiquity in their productions is to illustrate universal truth such as the importance of love and heroism while retaining a high quality of film's visual pleasure. Consequently, films based on history and myth tend to be magnificent and dramatic and thus long and costly. They usually require huge sets and a countless number of casts or high CGI technology to multiply several extras into thousands, which often leads critiques to argue that the ideological message of these classical films is likely to include the praise for the greatness of the United States, pointing out that it is almost only the Hollywood that is capable of providing enough resources to produce films on such a big scale.
Now, let us move on to the analysis of our core question: can we regard Disney's Hercules as a typical film adopted antiquity that embraces the features we have examined in the previous section, or should we consider that Disney approached to Greek myth in a totally different way from those other filmmakers employed? To begin with, we must point out that not only does the Hercules apparently seem to be contrary to our image for ordinary classical films in that it is musical, not serious and its length is just an average, but also we can confidently say that this film is completely 'Disney', rather than 'classical', in every respect through examining it carefully and in detail. In the rest part of this essay, therefore, we shall focus on finding out what makes the Hercules so Disney and distinguishes it from other films dealing the ancient world.
In the first place, there are enough clues for us to believe that from the beginning Disney had no intention at all to make the Hercules based on antiquity. The most obvious example which indicates that Disney was focusing on the film's popularity among the Western audience much more than on its status as a classical film might be Disney's choice of character's names in this film that we can regard almost as 'selfish'. For instance, Philoctetes, the satyr who trains Heracles and helps him to obtain enough strength to become a hero, is obviously given this name merely because it is easy for children to remember him as Phil as well as it can effectively enable this character to remain Greek-ish. Originally Philoctetes is the man who helped Hercules to die and inherited his bow and arrows, and killed Paris near the end of the Trojan War. There is no account that says he was half man and half goat, although there is a record that Heracles was a disciple of the civilised and deep-thinking Centaur Chiron. More over, Odysseus and Theseus who Philoctetes said were his disciples are actually the men came after Heracles, and Achilleus who is also portrayed as having been trained by Phil is certainly an ancestor of Hercules and was a follower of Chiron but he had nothing to with Philoctetes at all. From this point of view, we can see that Disney picks up several elements from the Greek myth without paying much attention to the historical accuracy and patches them up in order to reconstruct the ancient Greek world which reflects and is based on American culture.
We may, nevertheless, still be able to argue that what Disney did in this film through ignoring film's authenticity and messing up characters' name is not very far from other classical filmmakers did in order to fit the ancient world to modern culture so that the audience would understand and enjoy the film better. However, we can possibly deprive Disney of all the excuses for not being true to Greek myth and putting priority on Disnificating the story through making an analysis on the employment of Megara as a heroine of the film. Except that the name Megara can be abbreviated as Meg that sounds quite American and thus can be considered an advantage at least for a Disney film, this choice can be seen as utterly inappropriate, especially if we take into consideration that the main storyline of this film is the process of Hercules becoming a true hero through realising what the true love is. In original Greek myth, she is certainly one of the Heracles wives, however, she is a one who was treated most cruelly by Heracles who was at that point driven mad by Hera, the Heracles' real mother in the film but one of his biggest enemies in Greek myth who did not approve the love affair between Zeus and Alcmena, Hercules' mortal mother. Different historical accounts disagree on whether Hercules actually killed her, but at least Hercules murdered his own children by her and used quite a lot of violence on her. In this sense, one of the most famous line of Hercules 'Meg, I would never ever hurt you' is nothing but the perfect irony, and from these facts we can assume that Disney used Greek myth as a source of inspiration for the modern romantic love story but was not really interested in making a film 'based on' the ancient Greek culture and traditions.
Secondly, there is a fundamental and absolute difficulty for Disney to compromise its films with Greek myth. As Wasko points out, common features of Disney films include the optimistic and fantastic story with distinct beginning and, almost without exception, happy ending, moral tales that represent certain values, especially those having a strong connection with American culture such as liberalism and individualism, and most crucially, the storyline which is always based on perfect rationality. Especially taking into account Disney's strong attachment to the rationality of the story, we can argue that the relationship between Disney films and Greek myth is just like that of water to oil, that is, they are the two which can never be mingled or in harmony with one another. In other words, there was essentially no possibility that Disney could make the film that reflects the ancient Greek world as other films set in the ancient world normally aim to: the best thing Disney could do, and actually did to the story of Hercules, is to pick up interesting and useful bits from the myth associated Hercules and to spin them into a completely different and Disney's original myth.
Let us look at one clear example which suggests that we cannot really be encouraged to see the Hercules as a film dealing with antiquity. In this film, Hades is presented as an absolute evil revolting against the established order, through which Disney effectively succeeded in rationalising and simplifying the relationship between good and evil in the world. In reality, however, Greek myth portrays him as simply a god of immortals who exercises his power over the underworld and even a very important part of the world's order since life comes from death and death from life, even though he is quite often hated by people because they fear death itself. Hades neither ill-treats the souls as he did to Megara in exchange for her boyfriend's life in the film nor plots to hold sway over the world, but rather he is an ally of Zeus who plays a crucial role in keeping the good balance between the mortal world and immortal world. Nevertheless, Disney, hoping to make the Hercules appropriate for carrying its brand name, changed Hades' character into a symbol of pure evil and disorder who the audience may expect to be perished or destroyed in the end. There is absolutely no need for us to feel any kind of sympathy with Hades who is finally trapped with everlasting suffering in the underworld because he is not only trying to mess up the world by freeing Titans and attacking heaven, but also he tramples Megara down by abusing her pure love towards her insincere boyfriend and Hercules. This structure of the world under which the good can always be victorious over the evil and thus can be seen as completely rational, forms a sharp contrast with the Greek mythical view of the world that is usually portrayed as being at the mercy of divine intervention and containing a lot of unfairness. Particularly, as one of the strongest worshippers of American social and political system, Disney completely denies the power of the gods to choose men's destiny which is crucial for Greek myth, and instead emphasises the value of liberty under which we can open up a way that leads us to the happy and promised future by making our own effort.
As we have seen in this essay, it seems quite difficult to categorise the Hercules as a 'classical film' despite that the Hercules is the story about one of the most popular Greek mythical heroes. Disney certainly utilised mythology for creating a lot of aesthetic graphics in this film and to some extent succeeded in producing the entertaining well-made love story which is inspired by Greek myth, however, Disney manipulates and recreates so crucial and fundamental features in the original story in order to make Hercules an appropriate protagonist for its film that we may even doubt whether there were any specific aims or benefits for Disney to choose Greek myth as its film's subject matter. In a word, it is probably more appropriate to conclude that the Hercules is the outcome of the Disneyfication of mythology based on Disney's powerful ideology, rather than to see it as influenced by the conventions of other films dealing with ancient characters and themes. Whether this Disney's attitude towards mythology can be seen as merely having resulted in defiling the ancient world, or whether it should be accepted as an epoch-making way of employing antiquity in film making - that would be another discussion.