'I have given suck and know how tender 'tis to love the babe that milks me; I would ... have plucked my nipple from his boneless gums and dashed the brains out, had I so sworn.' Lady Macbeth, in Shakespeare's Macbeth, says this to her husband in order to incite him to kill the current king and to take the throne. Overwhelmed by her fierce determination, Macbeth responds to her, 'Bring forth men-children only, for thy undaunted mettle should compose nothing but males.' Probably it is not only Macbeth who feels unspeakable fear at her declaring this, but most of us may agree that it is the last thing a mother can do in any circumstances and for any reasons to kill her own children. This is one of the reasons why Medea, who deliberately murdered her children just to take revenge on her dishonest husband, is often regarded as a person who does not have any consistent characteristics, or even a kind of supernatural monster-like figure. Is Medea, however, really a lady who does not possess any humanity representing merely a horrific nightmare that Athenian men could ever think of? Are we certainly unable to find anything in Medea's actions that we can sympathise with or understand? With a view to investigate what message Euripides exactly hopes to communicate to the audience through the story of Medea, we shall look at some significant factors which we can recognise in Medea and other characters' speech in the text and then conclude whether Medea can give us anything other than the example of terrific consequence of the wrong marriage.
To begin with, let us briefly look at the plot of the Medea. The play starts with the nurse's speech stating how the past events led to the present disaster. Medea, a daughter of the king of Colchis, fell in love with Jason, who travelled there by the ship Argo in order to search for the golden fleece. She left everything and went to Greece with Jason, where she murdered Jason's usurper uncle Pelias by tricking his daughters to kill their father. As a result, both Medea and Jason had to live in exile in Corinth, at which point the play's story begins. After Medea gave birth to two male children, Jason betrayed her and got married to the daughter of Creon, the ruler of Corinth. Creon, fearing that Medea's jealousy would lead her to harm his royal family, orders her to leave Corinth immediately. Creon eventually grants her one day's delay moved by her heart-rending begging, which enables her to take revenge on Jason in the most disastrous way possible. Medea sends her two children to Creon's palace with a poisoned dress and coronet, by which Creon and his daughter go through a terrible suffering of death. In addition, Medea murders her children with her own hands, by which she believes Jason will be punished most horribly. Completing the whole action she determined to do, she finally appears in front of Jason as a god-like figure, flying above the stage in her magical chariot. This ending of the play is one of the most significant peculiarities of this story, which we shall look at in more detail later on.
Now in the first place, it should not be overlooked that Euripides actually does not present Medea as a typical image of a woman. At the beginning of the play, he allows the nurse to clearly mention that Medea is 'no ordinary woman.' At the same time, however, Medea sometimes speaks as if she represented the deep-rooted grieves that many of the women in those days might commonly possess. She says, 'Of all creatures that have life and reason we women are the most miserable of specimens' and the Corinthian ladies who surround Medea seem to totally agree and sympathise with her. In some sense this can be regarded as a quite cunning way that Euripides invented in order to give voice to a woman's case. We can argue through the study of ancient Greek culture that it probably was not really easy or acceptable for Athenian men to publicly express their sympathy for those who were recognised as inferior such as women and slaves. But here Euripides made it possible to communicate women's point of view to the audience, which presumably consists of mainly Athenian free males, without causing too much antipathy among them by clearly stating that Medea us an extraordinary example of a woman: the audience can, at least in theoretically, choose either to accept what Medea says as women's true opinion or to merely dismiss it as a mad woman's nonsense. From this point of view, Medea's eccentric characteristic can be seen as a sort of device that enables Euripides to deal with women's view towards life in an explicit and direct manner.
Another important factor to be considered here is whether Medea's actions, especially the murder of her own children, are really beyond our understanding. Firstly, although Medea eventually managed to kill her two sons, there was a considerable hesitation beforehand. 'Ah, stop, my heart, do not do this deed!' Medea cries, even though she 'hates her children and takes no pleasure in seeing them' after Jason left her. She wavers immensely between the love for her children and the boundless hatred towards Jason, and finally decides to carry out her intention. Medea's this inner conflict is indeed one of the most attractive and dramatic elements of the play which makes the story very human and thus highly praised throughout different ages. In this sense Medea is my no means merely a figure of brutal demon who disguises itself as a female human being: rather, she is a person whose swings of mood are by far too violent and therefore her emotion easily surpasses her moral sense or human customs. Her action and emotion are so closely linked to each other that her passion tends to lead to her to act an instinct alone, which is certainly unusual but not purely incomprehensible.
Secondly, Medea is not the first and only person who killed her own children: for example, Agamemnon also killed his own daughter Iphigeneia as a sacrifice in order to calm the anger of Artemis and make it possible for his ships to sail out. Of course Medea's motivation to murder her children is totally different from and probably far more unacceptable than Agamemnon's, however, both of them had to make a similarly difficult decision and had to be committed enough to actually carry it out. Medea is a figure who is truly 'determined to act' (Schlesinger: 1983, 295), which is presumably considered more frequently as a masculine characteristic rather than as feminine. In addition, Medea dominates the play completely: she is always in the centre of the events, that is, it is almost always her who makes something happen even before the beginning of the play. Again, in the real world of this age, it can be assumed that it is normally men who are predominant and make important decisions in everyday life. From this point of view, Medea could be seen as not just a typical woman but rather as a human being who, to some extent, is beyond the traditional category of gender. There is no longer any ways in which we can clarify what exactly Euripides intended to express through illustrating Medea as a masculine female, however, it might be one of the possibilities that Euripides, either consciously or unconsciously, in somehow realised that there were not as many differences between men's abilities and women's as the society suggested, just like some Athenian people understood at the back of their mind that the slaves who they treated as a wild beast were actually not very different from themselves.
The final significant feature of the Medea that we shall investigate in this essay is the fact that despite a number of murders she committed, she never suffers from any god's punishment. By the end of the play, Medea murdered at least six people: she killed Pelias indirectly by tricking his daughters, and then slaughtered her own brother in order to delay the pursuit while escaping from Colchis, killed Creon and his daughter with poison, and eventually even murdered her own two sons. In the world of Greek myth, it was a long established tradition that a person who killed somebody for whatever reasons must repay with his/her own life. Here, however, not only did Medea managed to flee to Athens without being punished in anyhow, but also at the end of the play she even appears above the stage in a magical chariot as if she became a kind of semi-divine figure. The finale of the play is, indeed, the complete triumph of Medea over Jason. Jason's word 'May you be struck down by our children's avenging curse and Justice who punishes murder' probably represented most of the audience's expectation at that time, but this was rejected shortly and completely by Medea saying 'What god, what spirits listens to you, the breaker of oaths, the deceiver of hosts?' and indeed nothing happened until Medea disappears with her dead sons leaving grief-stricken Jason alone on the stage, which was probably really shocking and unpredictable ending for many of the Athenian audiences. Presumably Euripides realised that this finale was more likely to be less popular than Medea actually being punished in the end, however, he rather chose to boldly express his scepticism and resistance to gods dominating world and man's fate.
As we have seen in this essay, Medea is not presented not merely to frighten the Athenian man through showing how dreadful consequence awaits them if they make a wrong choice concerning their marriage, but her characteristics could communicate Euripides' view of the world to the audience in several different ways: her being a exceptional woman enables Euripides to directly illustrate women's voice towards a society, she is also fundamentally more human than anybody else and stands aloof from social distinction between males and females, and finally she represents Euripides' scepticism concerning gods through denying god's power over human activities. Although Medea's actions are almost totally beyond our imagination, the text could not survive for more than 2000 years if it is merely a horrific tragedy. We are shocked, terrified and probably feel hatred for Medea's killing her children with her own hands, but more than that, she certainly thrusts undeniable human nature that nobody cannot declare they would never understand.