Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) are defined as "a formal process used to predict the environmental concerns of any development project." (UEM). This means that the potential problems are foreseen and addressed at an early stage in the planning of projects. Biophysical, social, and other relevant effects of development are taken into account, and decisions made accordingly in order to minimise any negative effects of development (Senecalal. 1999). Within the EIA processes, scoping is becoming an increasingly used tool to help with identification of potentially significant impacts and also to improve EIA quality.
The process that is known as scoping is one of the initial stages in an EIA. It involves the identification of the major issues that may occur during the EIA, prior to the commencement of studies, once the potential impacts have been identified (RTPI 2001). Scoping is carried out primarily in order to focus the assessment on the environmental impacts that are likely to be most significant and have most impact. It is also responsible for identifying the depth of research that is required in these identified areas, and to create a forum where methods of impact assessment can be discussed and decided upon. Impacts that are thought to be potentially significant are studied in various categories are identified. Compliance with the statutory requirements is ensured. Those impacts that are considered not to be significant are eliminated to refine the focus to the most significant impacts (Glassonal. 1999). Here, the early inclusion of all parties that are to be involved is encouraged and the content of the Environmental Statement is determined. If requested to do so, the Planning Authority is required to give a written opinion on the information that is to be assessed and included in the Environmental Statement.
A developer can identify the main issues from the Scoping Report, and using this information, can produce a thorough EIA (Reed 2004). The process of determining the scope of an Environmental Survey should include utilising the regulations and relevant criteria and checking the relevant plan provisions. References should be made to published guidance documents such as the DETR guides. Preliminary contacts with Local Planning Authorities and statutory consultees as well as other expert bodies should also be made (RTPI 2001). Once the main issues are identified, possible changes can be predicted and assessed with the use of baseline information.
Baseline information can be collected by primary research or a literature review. Once the Scoping Report has been carried out, the significant impacts need to be predicted and assessed. With the use of the baseline information and knowledge of the proposed development, the effects of the project can be generated for the constructional and operational phases. Some projects will experience more environmental effects during the construction phase, and other projects may experience more effects during the operational stage, and this also needs to be taken into account along with any inter-relationship between impacts. Making sure that any indirect, secondary and cumulative effects are not overlooked should be a key focus in impact scoping as well as obviously important issues. This should involve both the geographical study area and the precise topics that are to be studied (RTPI 2001).
Scoping should start with identification of individuals, communities, local authorities and statutory consultees that are likely to be affected by the project. It is not mandatory, but 'good practice' to get these people together in meetings of some kind, along with the developer. Here, an impact identification technique can be used to structure a discussion, and suggest issues that it is important to consider (Glassonal. 1999).
The components that should be considered during scoping are: the 'construction phase', the 'operational phase' and the 'decommissioning/restoration phase'. The 'construction phase' or the footprint phase is the short term effects and will also include the high risk of accidental contamination. 'The operational phase' is the longer term impacts of the project. This is a more predictable phase because the risk of accidental impacts is reduced. Within this phase, beneficial effects such as jobs, services and improved quality of life should also be included in the scoping. The 'decommissioning/restoration phase' involves waste management. There are often recreational advantages that should be considered during this phase.
There are a number of methods that are currently used for impact scoping. These come under three major categories, Checklists, Matrices and Overlays. Checklists are lists containing the information on both project characteristics and environmental characteristics. These identify features of the development project that may yield significant environmental effects within the three phases mentioned above, and to identify sensitive areas within the environment. Matrices are the most widely used method of scoping; they are typically used to score interactions in terms of impact magnitude and impact significance. The benefits of matrices are the reduced risk of overlooking potential effects, but they only provide a two-dimensional snapshot of time. An EIA network provides a word model, rather than quantities and therefore is easier to use. This is sometimes used to help consolidate the information that is obtained from matrices and checklists. Overlays have been in use since the 1960's and predate both matrices and checklists. They identify the location and extent of zones of environmental constraint and zones of development opportunity. Recently this tool has become increasingly informative. A layered diagram is produced, sometimes in conjunction with GIS, and can be used to show areas of environmental sensitivity in gradients.
An example of a scoping report with the use of 'good practice' is the Gloucester Strategy Environmental Impact Scoping Report (Environment Agency 2003). This report was made available on the Internet in order to inform local people and organisations about the proposed project. It provided an outline of how the Environment Agency intended to develop a strategy for flood risk management in the area. The report identified a range of potential flood risk management options along with a number of environmental factors that needed to be considered. This included plans for forthcoming developments within the area, environmental sensitivities, and opportunities to incorporate environmental objectives into flood risk management options (Environment Agency 2003).
The first legislation that required environmental assessment was put into place in 1969 in America (Scottish National Heritage 1999). This Act required that actions that may significantly affect the quality of the human environment are to be included in a detailed statement to assess:
A UK report was produced by John Catlow and Geoffry Thirlwall in 1976 and published in 1977. This was intended to examine the scope for both feasibility, and the introduction of Environmental Assessment to the UK. This report led to the implementation of many of the recommendations within it, but this is just a guide to good practice and has not been made mandatory (Scottish National Heritage 1999). The first EC regulations were not introduced until July 1988, and within this there were gaps in compliance mentioned in the Kings Cross Main Site (2002). This therefore led to the production of a series of further regulations. This included the amendment by Directive 97/11/EC (Kings Cross 2002).
The Directive (85/337/EEC) that was produced in 1988 was set up to ensure that any environmental consequences of a new development are known and taken into account, to encourage developers to consider environmental concerns the whole way through the development project (Scottish National Heritage 1999). This meant that the developers were responsible for having analyses carried out, and were required to promote interaction between project design and the environment. As a result of this, a distinct improvement has been seen in the quality of Environmental Statements since about 1992. It is thought that a large contributing factor to this improvement is a wider availability of published good practice guidance, and an increase in scoping and consultation early on in an Environmental Statement (Scottish National Heritage 1999).
Scoping is an important step within the EIA process. It has been suggested that the best Environmental Statements that have been produced involve thorough scoping and continuing consultation (Scottish National Heritage 1999). Before 1999, it was recommended that a developer should consult with the Competent Authority and statutory consultees, and carry out scoping, before preparing an Environmental Impact Survey. However, this only actually happened in about half of the cases (Fuller 1992).
Some developers produce a scoping report as a matter of 'good practice'; this indicates their proposed coverage of the EIA. Uncertainties that have been identified can then act as a basis for further studies and public participation (Glasson 1999). Analysis of 179 British Environmental Statements showed that many of them contained poor quality and limited information which meant that insufficient information was given and therefore made it impossible to assess the implications of proposed schemes (Brooke 1998). Consequently, the legislative EU EIA directives, which require the impacts on the flora and fauna to be addressed, were not being met (Brooke 1998).
Directive 85/3337 Annex III was interpreted in the UK to mean that legislation is part mandatory and part discretionary. Although mandatory requirements were generally correctly carried out, the discretionary elements were not carried out as often. An increasingly higher proportion of EISs are, however, including the relevant information (Glasson 1999).
Since 1999, scoping has not been legally mandated in the UK (Glassonal. 1999), but the 1999 regulations did provide a structured approach. Part IV of the 1999 regulations consists of the following elements:
Part IV of the 1999 regulations has been further improved by the SEA Directives (2001/42/EC). These were set up in 2001 and entered into force in EU member states in 2004. This states that potential impact or consequences on the environment must be included in the initial stages of an EIA (EIA Training Resource Manual 2002).
IEMA (Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment) was created in 1999 to promote best practice in environmental management, auditing and assessment. It aims to review the Environmental Survey and ensure that it contains all necessary information for decision makers, in accordance with the regulations, government guidance and good practice (Kings Cross 2002).
With respect to scoping, some of the major criteria are embodied in Schedule 4 of the regulations, chapter 2 of the 'Good Practice Guide' and appendix 5 of the DETR 'Guide to Procedures'. Schedule 4 of the regulations explains the requirements for the coverage of an Environmental Survey. Parts I and II identify the information that is needed to assess the potentially significant effects of a proposed development (Kings Cross 2002). Chapter 2 of the 'Good Practice Guide' provides advice on defining the scope of an Environmental Survey, and appendix 5 of the DETR 'Guide to Procedures' contains a checklist of issues that might need to be covered in an Environmental Survey.
Impact scoping is an important step in the EIA process because it enables the limited resources of the team preparing an EIA to be allocated to best effect. It also minimises misunderstanding between the parties concerned, about the information required in an Environmental Impact Survey. Scoping also identifies key issues that can later be monitored further along in the EIA process (Glassonal. 1999). Circular 02/99, paragraph 82, describes that the role of the EIA is to examine the main, or significant effects likely to arise from a development. This would involve screening in order to minimise the work involved in carrying out an EIA (Broom 2006). From impact scoping stem many other important, fundamental stages of the EIA. Mitigation is the elimination, or the reduction to an acceptable level, of adverse environmental impacts (Scottish Executive 1999). Mitigation measures that have been taken should be described in the Environmental Statement and this can only be carried out once the environmental effects have been identified by scoping. Although, usually, some negative impacts to the receiving environment is inevitable (Byron 2000), the action of mitigation as a consequence of scoping will allow the Planning Authority to determine which impacts have been prevented, reduced and offset. This all helps to provide information and aid an educated decision about the development project in question. Scoping is also crucial for identifying potentially relevant impacts and to avoid an unnecessary environmental investigation (RTPI 2001). Research has identified that early consultation on scoping affects the quality of the EIA positively (Doe 1996). Therefore, it can be argued that another of the most valuable roles of the EIA process is also to encourage consultation (Glasson 1999).
It has been the tradition that EIAs have been focused on protected species and habitats. This has meant that other features of biodiversity are less likely to be addressed (Brooke 1998). It was therefore likely that components of biodiversity that are already protected were more likely to be included in an EIA. This is of concern because the other components may prove to be more important within the ecosystem with respect to long-term biodiversity sustainability (Bagri et al 1998). This means that it is extremely important to carry out a balanced Scoping Report, in order to identify the key areas for concern for not only the present, but the assessable future, that are to be considered for the rest of the EIA. As a result of such studies, changes needed to be made in order to make sure that all levels of impact assessment meet legislative requirements, guidelines are provided, and training and impact assessment practice is carried out (Brooke 1998). A checklist of biodiversity requirements for legislation and guidelines was consequently created by Bagri et al (1998), and this included the following points for scoping:
A number of different methods are used for scoping, of which matrices are the most widely used to cover the major stages of a development process. Impact Scoping is a key feature within the EIA processes, but most regulations concerning scoping have not been made mandatory. Current Good Practice regulations and legislative bylaws have provided a structure which has improved both the number of EIAs that involve scoping, and the quality of scoping in these EIAs. Research has indicated strong evidence for the improvement of EIAs that involve scoping as an initial process. Scoping has been reported to use the limited resources of a team preparing an EIA to best effect.
Development is very important for the continuing evolution, and economic success of an area. It is, however, very important that scoping is carried out with the use of the legislative requirements and good practice in order to limit both short and long-term damage to the environment.
The need for regulations at a local level is undoubtedly a good thing. However, I do feel that longer-term and larger-scale implications are not currently considered sufficiently, and the cumulative effect of developments can go largely overlooked.