The initial thought on the causes for vegetation changes since the last ice age was that it was largely due to climatic changes (Goudie 2006). More recently however, the actions of humans during this prehistoric period have been thought to play a vital role (Behre 1986). The soils of any given area have proved to be very important for agricultural communities throughout history and pre-history. The exploitation of the soils that has taken place has a huge effect upon the soils of Great Britain now and has throughout time (Thomas 1990). Direct and indirect evidence such as pollen diagrams, aerial photographs, geophysical surveys and chemical soil analysis can be used to suggest ways in which the soils have been exploited in the past. Soils have been used to show patterns of prehistoric agricultural development by interpreting the formation process of soils in archaeological sites (Wilshusen and Stone 1990). Due to the importance of archaeology in the quest to find the effects of prehistoric Man on present-day soils and the importance of soils, in any study of prehistoric settlement, a great deal of agriculture involves pedology or the study of soils in their natural setting (Wilshusen and Stone 1990). In the 1950's when pedology was a young science, soils were only just beginning to be studied according to process rather than morphologically (Carter and Bendleton 1956).
In order to investigate the effects of man on British soils, first land clearance is considered. This has played a major role in all eras of prehistoric man. Then, the effects of Neolithic, Bronze Age and Iron Age man are investigated seperatly.
The increase in population size and the settling of humans in one place appears to have the greatest impact on soils. The practice of agriculture has a huge effect of change on the ecosystem by altering the main components of the microclimate and the vegetation. One of the major effects that man has had on the soil is the removal of vegetation from the area. With extensive land clearance, the change in the soil, vegetation complex may change markedly. This consequently leads to soil degradation, wind and water erosion (Dimbleby 1976).
Land clearance has been a crucial part of agriculture in Britain from Neolithic times right up until the present day. As well as loss of diversity of both plants and animals, another problem caused by this is the exposure of soil. Vegetation is key to the prevention of soil erosion by the plant roots acting as meshes within the soils, and the above ground vegetation cover reducing the exposure of the soil to wind. The roots anchor the soil and the leaves and branches break the force of the wind. With land clearance, there are no roots to protect the soil from water erosion. A study that was carried out showed that, on a slope, soil erosion of bare soil can reach 17.69 tonnes lost per hectare per year, whereas on a similar slope which is grass covered, an erosion rate of 2.39 was observed. No erosion of soil occurred on a similar slope which was covered by woodland (Morgan 1977). It is for this reason that since the introduction of agriculture, the rate of erosion has exceeded the rate of soil formation (Lowdermilk 1935). This means that, over time, with continued agricultural practice, the quality of the soil will continue to degenerate.
Three main effects of land clearance have been identified. These are:- 1) Change in microclimate at soil level as a result of the removal of the overhead canopae. 2) The roots of the removed trees are lost. These are instrumental in bringing nutrient reserves from the deep layers of the soil profile into circulation and therefore offset the action of leaching. 3) When the trees are felled, the soil nitrogen levels rise due to the death of nitrogen-rich roots and their subsequent nitrogen release. If this is exploited by the growth of crops however, this enrichment will be transient (Dimbleby 1976).
Burning as well as felling, has also been used throughout history and pre-history as a useful management tool in order to remove any dead material from previous crops, and to stimulate a fresh green growth of fresh stock (Green 1996). The use of fire liberates bases in a soluble form which provides short-term benefit to the crops, but any nutrients added to the soils in this way are likely to be lost in drainage due to the soluble nature of the nutrients (Dimbleby 1976).
The Neolithic period began approximately 6,800 years ago and it is the time period in which farming of the land began in Britain. With the beginning of the Neolithic period, the role of humans in Britain changed from that of a passive component to an active element that impinged directly on nature (Goudie 2006). The early pioneers of agriculture were restricted to primary settlement zones along the coastlines and rivers (Clark 1947). This is because these areas had few trees due to the locations, and because they were the most accessible areas of Britain. Consiquently, there was little initial forest clearance, and therefore the soils of the area were maintained in a sustainable way. During the Neolithic period, high quality soils were concentrated upon. Evidence provided by Chapmanal. (1987) indicates that of 18 Neolithic farming sites that were studied, 16 were areas of high quality soil, with the other two sites being a cave site with easy access to marine resources, and the other being stony soils (Chapmanal. 1987). Later in the Neolithic period, however, almost all of Britain that was appropriate for agriculture was used. This involved the removal of many of the native trees such as almus, fraxinus, juniperu and tila, which were so promimant in the late Mesolithic period. Due to the felling of large numbers of trees, blanket peat arrived. During this period, the farmers owned their fields, and farmed them in the same way, using the same wooden ploughs, for long periods of time. No form of crop rotation occurred and, for this reason, the soil became massively deprived of nutrients and of poor quality. During the Neolithic period, due to ploughing and the planting of certain crops, farmers eliminated many species of the native vegetation and replaced it with crop plants. It is thought that this would have reduced the stability of the ecosystem (Goudie 2006).
During the early Neolithic period, the climate was good; the soils were fertile; there was lots of rain and the British population boomed. There was plenty of food for the population because most of the crops grown were introduced and therefore had few or no pests that reduced the yield. The large areas of forest were burned in order to make space for more agriculture and for building material as well as other uses and. This left nutrient rich soils for farming on. It was not until the mid Neolithic period that there are signs of things starting to decline. The climate began to cool, blanket peat grew more widespread and there is indication that the settlements began to be abandoned and that scrub began to take over these areas. It has been indicated with the use of pollen diagrams that, during this period, a major vegetational change occurred. This involved a dramatic decline in the Ulmus (elm) population through Europe. Initial reasons that were attributed to this was that the climate changed, and became colder and wetter. This has recently been largely dismissed, and it is now thought that the role of humans, the progressive soil degradation and the spread of disease are more likely to be reasons for the decline that occurred (Rackham 1980). It is also thought that the rise of domestic animals added to the decline. This is because these animals were fed on the elm tree branches that were gathered, as these were known to be nutritious (Troels-Smith 1956). Due to the decline in soil quality and the change in vegetation, man began to depend more and more on animal products. This affected the soils and the vegetation further, because it meant that the soils were abandoned. The late Neolithic saw the stabilisation of the population at a lower level than in the early stages. The farming involved that of both animal products and crops, but due to the earlier soil degradation, there was considerably more emphasis on the meat products.
Neolithic man also directly altered landforms and soils that were present. An example of this occurred in East Anglia where antler picks were used in order to dig out deep pits in the chalk land. This was done in order to obtain good quality flint to make tools, but had the effect of depression and water logging on the acidic, light, and sandy soils which are associated with chalk. These pits can still be recognised today (Goudie 2006).
The different phases of the Neolithic period saw the development of an array of different habitat types that are known to man today, such as heath land. It also saw however, a reduction in the soil nutrients and a reduction in most tree species at that time.
The Bronze Age dates back to 3,700 years ago. This period of time had more open landscape which was much more heavily cultivated than it is today. This time also shows a great increase in the diversification of settlement patterns and land use for agricultural purposes. This is indicated, again by Chapman et al (1987), by an increase in the areas and soils types in which pottery scatters are found and this diversification is due to an increase in the tendency towards capital investment in land management at this period. (Gilman 1981).The bronze smelting that took place over this period of time meant that large amounts of copper and tin were extracted from the soil. This would therefore cause the soil composition and nutrient levels to change, particularly in Cornwall where huge extraction of the minerals took place.
Woodland cover was further reduced within England from about 95 percent to approximately 5 percent of the land cover of Britain, with the major decline in the Tilia trees. This is due to the stripping of the phloem fibres in order to make string. Also, during this time weed species gradually became more and more prominent. This period is recognised as the first time that pollen values in sediment became less than 50 percent of their Holocene maximum percentages, a definition of deforestation (Birks 1988). Within the late Bronze Age, the climate deteriorated. Due to this, upland Britain settlements were abandoned in the later Bronze Age. In lowland Britain, track ways were developed for ease of movement within the damper soils, and these were made from trees from coppice woodland trees. These were extensively managed for the reason of producing and managing trackways. This period saw the major growth of blanket peat, and during this period moorlands developed. One feature of the Bronze Age which had massive impacts on the land use is an 18 year period that saw very little vegetation growth. This is indicated by tree rings from this time being very close together. This means that crops would have been poor quality and of low quantity at this time. During this period, people began to move out of upland areas to the sea side in order to fish rather than farm. This took a reasonable amount of pressure off the soils of Britain at this time, but traditional farming continued to take place. This climatic decline was a natural occurrence, but, without the input of humans, is unlikely to have had such a dramatic effect on the soils of Britain. Instead, the effects included a dramatic decline in soil nutrient content due to leaching and reduced vegetation growth, as well as soil erosion. Although the climatic decline was entirely a natural event, man had already by this time, created a soil system that was not in equilibrium (Dimblebyal. 1965). It is the two of these factors combined that lead to such dramatic reduction in soil quality, which, in turn, had a marked impact on the quality of life and therefore the population size of humans at this time.
The main way of assessing the methods of land use that occurred during this time is the use of soil analysis and pollen diagrams. The composition of soil has been used in conjunction with any records of the time period to suggest the land use at the time.
The Iron Age dates back to about 2,500 years ago. This period saw the westward movement of the Celts due to a deteriorating climate and soil nutrients of the continent. The Celts introduced an array of new crops and also brought with them the knowledge of iron smelting, which made huge changes to the way farming way done then and the soil and vegetation composition of Britain. The ability to smelt iron allowed the use of a more efficient 2-ox plough (Chadwick 1970). This, in turn, improved agriculture significantly. The new iron plough allowed the turning of soil. This suppressed weeds and, in turn, increased crop yields and allowed the exploitation of heavier and previously non-farmable soils, which were potentially richer but previously had been non-usable. This period also saw the novel incorporation of terracing soils of potential value (Champanal. 1987). The ability to farm previously untouchable land initiated a fresh and distinct campaign of forest clearance, as well as a huge nucleation of the population (Chapmanal. 1987). Unlike the forest clearance that was carried out in the Neolithic period, the forest clearance was much more rigorous and was necessitated by the extension of settled agriculture and therefore the permanent removal of woodlands (Clark 1947). This period saw the second phase of significant deforestation, with the pollen values within the sediment levels dropping again to below 50 percent of the Holocene maximum percentage (Birks 1988). Due to this, it is thought that perturbations to lake ecosystems were caused (Frizt 1998), and it is thought that, alongside other factors, humans at this time contributed to the acidification of lakes (Andersonal. 1990).
During this period, the population of sheep increased due to the vast increase of open ground to use for grazing areas. In order to protect these sheep from the bears and wolves that existed in the woodlands at that time, barriers were put up to pen the sheep.
Man has an effect on the soils which itself has effects on future generations of humans. Although there were other factors that lead to the choice of crops that were grown within Britain, (the most obvious of which being climatic change), it appears that it is the influence of man, in the form of agricultural practices over time that has proved to have the most dramatic effects on the crop use, vegetation structure and quality and subsequently, soil type and quality of the area (Hubbard 1976). The agricultural techniques used by humans throughout pre-historic times, in the second half of the current post-glacial, continue to have an impact on the soils, erosion and degradation in current times (Dimblebyal. 1965). It is thought that the effects of the Neolithic people were intense and local and that it was not until the Bronze age until the effects of man became more regional and widespread (Fall et al.).
The actions of pre-historic man have reduced the forest cover all over Britain. This has given rise to many different types of habitats such as Moreland and chalk grassland, in which a great deal of species exist that would not otherwise be present in Britain. These actions have also proved to be very important in providing areas for modern day settlement and farmland. Therefore, the way in which farming and everyday life has evolved in Britain since has been greatly affected by the actions of our pre-historic ancestors.