A weed is a species of plant that, as humans, we consider to be undesirable. More specifically it is a species that competes with humans for food, or reduces the value of a product. The way weeds are considered is subjective, so a species may or may not be considered a weed according to the context in which it exists and the demands of humans (Beganal. 2003). Weeds tend to be successfully colonising, r-type, opportunist competitors. The crops that are grown in the fields that are planted there by humans do not usually have such aggressively competitive characteristics. For this reason, weeds of crops have proved to be of great economic significance and hard to remove with no negative effects to the crop plants or the non-target surrounding species, and therefore the biodiversity of the surrounding areas. Initially, weed numbers have been kept down by the use of chemical herbicides. This has allowed increased production of food crops in a way that has revolutionised farming. This has in turn allowed the population of the world to increase to such a level, that, in order for enough food to be produced, weeds control is now a vital part of agriculture. Unfortunately, it has been discovered that the herbicides that are used have had huge detrimental effects on biodiversity and the environment. A huge problem that faces ecologists today is how best to control weeds in order to maintain high crop yields, whilst maintaining the maximum level of biodiversity possible. This report assesses the possible methods of weeds control that are available.
The traditional agents that were used such as DDT's, were inorganic chemicals. These however, are being continuously replaced and in many countries banned because of their effects on the environment. These problems are mostly due to the problems of resistance and non-specificity. Inorganic chemicals are broad spectrum chemicals that have a lethal effect on all organisms in the area where they are applied. This includes the non-target species that may be beneficial or neutral to the area. By the accidental removal of the non-target species, the biodiversity of the area is reduced, therefore causing farmland that is traditionally high in species diversity to become areas of low diversity.
The phenoxy and hormone weed killers are highly successful and tend to be much more selective. This means that the target species only can be removed, with little or no effects on the surrounding area. This however, does have its own problems. With the use of these chemicals, the weeds can become resistant over time by means of natural selection of survival of the fittest. This means that, in order for the chemical to have any effect, more and more of the chemicals have to be applied and this, again, has negative effects on the environment. The effect of the build up resistance can however be turned around to be made positive, by selecting mutant crop plants with increased resistance to the herbicide within cultivars. Induced mutants may be created with increased resistance to certain herbicides (Pinthusal. 1972). This means that, if the crop plant and the weeds are very similar (eg wheat and wild wheat), resistant strains of the crop can be created. This means that the field area can then be treated with the herbicide, with negative effects restricted to the weed species; but this can only remain successful until the target weed species has itself built up a resistance to the chemical. This, therefore, is not a long term solution to a weed problem.
A further problem with the use of chemical herbicides is that they need to be frequently reapplied in order to have the desired effect over a period of time (Tomkinsal. 1977). This has been known to cause problems further up the food web due to the accumulation of toxins in top carnivores. A well studied example of a herbicide that has been known to have this effect is DDT. This is a chemical that has been used in agriculture for many years. It did have the desired effects on the weed populations with respect to eradication; however it was found to cause problems to top predators in the food web. For this reason, DDT has been banned in England and many other countries. An example of the problems that were caused was in raptor populations. These saw a dramatic decline with the use of DDTs. At first it was not known why, but it was discovered that it was due to the use of DDTs caused the shells of the birds' eggs to become increasingly brittle and thin. This meant that fewer and fewer eggs were hatching. The reason for this is that the parent raptors were crushing the egg shells whilst nesting their eggs. Due to the negative effects of DDT on biodiversity and the environment, it has now been banned in many countries.
Chemical herbicides intentionally reduce the levels of diversity of an area by means of attempted eradication of the target species. Thus, recently, in growing numbers, farmers and researchers all over the world have shown concerns about the long-term use of many farming methods that involve the frequent use of herbicides and therefore the damage to the environment (Liebmanal. 1993). They have also suggested that agricultural sustainability is dependent upon improvement in the understanding and careful management of ecological processes that include nutrient cycling and regulation of pest populations (Liebmanal. 1993). This would involve the movement away from chemical herbicides. An attempt to do this has come in the form of biological control.
In some cases, chemical means of weed control are found to be unsatisfactory for the reasons stated above. An example of this is the case of Optuntia stricta in Australia (Hoffmann 1998). The Prickly Pear (Opuncta stricta) in Australia provides a good example of the successful use of biological control. It has been described as "one of the world's most spectacular achievements in the history of economic entomology" (Johnston et al.1982). The Prickly Pear is a cactus native to North and South America. About 26 of the many hundred species have been released into Australia and have become a weed of serious significance, especially Optuntia stricta. These were introduced to Australia by early settlers who arrived on ships that brought European convicts and soldiers (Johnstonal. 1914). In just 61 years, by 1880, the plant was recognised as a pest. By 1900, it occupied an area of approximately 40,000 km and had spread to most parts of Australia, eradicating or threatening many of the native species within the area (Krebs 2001). The rate of infestation with  Opuntia over the following 25 years is shown in figure one.
Many Opuntia species have become weeds of economic significance around the world (Volchanskyal. 1999). The reason why the Prickly Pear has had such large-scale effects is because, it is capable of propagating very rapidly by seeds or broken stem segments which are transported by animals, strong winds or floodwaters. Furthermore, when introduced to non-native parts of the world, there are no natural enemies present to control their numbers (Freeman 1992). The costal and interior areas of Eastern Australia proved to have climatic and edaphic characteristics that are very well suited to several species of Prickly Pear. This further accentuated the problem. In the past, in response to this growing, global problem, careful surveying of the enemies of Opuntia species had been carried out in various countries. Research shows extreme care was taken, and sufficient tests carried out regarding the natural ecology of the areas in question, to avoid introducing undesirable insects to the areas (Cockerell 1929). This is because it was recognised that some insects useful in reducing Opuntia, sometimes attacked other plants and therefore caused undesired effects on the local diversity of the area (Cockerell 1929). These methods were effective in bringing Opuntia stricta Var. stricta and Opuntia stricta var. dillenii under control (Dodd 1940).
As long ago as 1924 we saw the first attempt at addressing this problem, with biological control: a wild cochineal insect. This was found to be effective on some species of Prickly Pear. However, it failed when used on the major pest (Opuntia stricta) (Osmond and Monro 1981). Therefore the Queensland government stopped further biological control experiments (Freeman 1992). In 1927, an insect which previously failed to acclimatise was reintroduced to Argentina which was suffering from a similar problem due to the same weed species. This time, the eggs hatched and adult moths were produced. These moths (Cactoblastis cactorum) showed a single-minded preference for the Prickly Pear species and also bred prolifically (Freeman 1992). In addition, the eggs incubation period was three to five weeks: a suitable amount of time for them to be transported from the hatcheries to the infested zones (Dodd 1940).
Once they had hatched, the caterpillars introduced to Australia quickly reduced the plant to a pulpy mass. This biological control was successful in Australia extremely quickly; but this caused the caterpillars' food supply to be literally exhausted by 1931. By 1933, therefore, new Prickly Pear infestations began to sprout from seeds scattered previously. More of the biological control insects were then added, and, by 1934, any new growth of the plant had been almost totally devoured (Johnstonal. 1982). Following this resurgence of the pest, a balance between the cactus biomass and insect numbers was established. With the exception of the occasional regional outbreak, the balance has been successfully maintained in Australia ever since (Freeman 1992).
Until recently, in South Africa, Opuntia stricta var. stricta was considered to be a minor problem (Moranal. 1991). More recently however (since the Moran and Zimmwemann paper), in South Africa, Opuntia stricta has invaded almost 16000 ha of conserved, natural habitat, becoming a particular problem in Kruger National Park (Hoffmannal. 1998). It is now the most troublesome weed in that particular National Park. This problem is further accentuated by birds and other wild animals which relish the fruits (Hoffmannal. 1998), dispersing the seeds even more. Despite initial success, South Africa has not experienced the same level of control as Australia by the introduction of Cactoblastis cactorium (Hoffmannal. 1998). The same biological agent has been much less successful in Kruger National Park than other areas of the world (Hoffmannal. 1998). This lack of success has been attributed to the high level of ant predation of the eggs (Robertson 1985, Robertsonal. 1989). It has, however, been noticed that, when the biological control was used on the weed (Opuntia stricta) previously treated with herbicides, substantial constraints were imposed on the invasiveness and vigour of Opuntia stricta. Although the biological control when used alone did not have significant effects, larval damage continually stunted the growth of the plants. The number of sexually mature plants in the weed population was consequently much lower than it would have been if the biological control was not present (Hoffmannal. 1998). These two methods when used in conjunction are relatively successful but, are not effective when used separately. An integrated pest management programme has therefore been suggested to control the problem in South Africa. This involves spraying the weeds with herbicides and re-spraying every two years, and also allowing Cactoblasis cactorium to exist on the surviving plants and seedlings. It is hoped that this method will be the answer to the problem of the Opuntia stricta in South Africa.
Predators are not the only form of biological control, but the example of Australia and South Africa, given above provides an early example which in the end was a successful approach to the problem.
Pathogen control has been studied and used, although the results so far have not been as successful as the above predator control. (Stakman 1966). Both viral control and fungi control can be used for the pathogen control of pests, although viral control tends to be more concentrated on insect rather than plant pests. Fungi has been used in the biological control of weeds. The most important example of this has been the introduction of the rust fungus. This was taken from Europe in 1971 and introduced to Australia in order to control the skeleton weed (Chondrilla juncea). This is a weed that was introduced to Australia from Europe with no pathogens that were specific to it (Beganal. 2003). Pathogens tend to maintain a high genetic diversity of the target. This is because they tend to concentrate on the most common forms of the target and not totally eradicate the target species. They therefore remove individuals with a similar genotype and not the more genetically diverse organisms (Schmid 1994). For this reason, the genetic range of the weeds species will become more variable with the use of pathogens as a weed control. This means that the weeds species will be more sexually reproductive, and the population will become more stable and therefore more difficult to reduce using other methods. This could be a problem if the weed species is outcompeting other species and therefore causing the biodiversity of the area to be reduced.
The concerns connected to the use of biological pest control are the potential harmful effects on species that are not targeted, of non-indigenous pests introduced for the purpose of biological control, and the stabilisation of the weed populations. Although there are few documented incidences of damage to non-target organisms or the environment from introduced, non-indigenous species released for biological control. This does not, however, mean that biological control is safe because the monitoring of biological control organisms is minimal (Simberloff and stiling 1996).
Although genetic control has now been used for many years in a selective breeding sense, genetic manipulation that would not occur naturally, is a fairly recent method of weed control. One method of genetic control that has been used is the genetic manipulation of plants that are resistant to herbicides. This allows the free use of herbicides in order to kill the weeds that are threatening the crop but not the crop itself (Beganal. 2003). But this could prove to be a problem with respect to biodiversity. This is because, although the crops themselves would be resistant to the herbicide, any surrounding, non-target species would also be removed from the area due to the use of the broad spectrum herbicide. This may well be of economic benefit to the farmer in terms of crop yield, but this kind of weed control is likely to be costly to the environment because, this involves the use of chemical herbicides and this in turn brings along all the problems associated with their use and the huge potential negative effects on the surrounding environment. Other forms of genetic control that are being investigated include two different strategies. 1) To genetically change the crop in order to make it more resistant to the weed. This is likely to involve increasing the competitive ability of the crop so it can therefore out compete the weed species more successfully (Krebs 2001). 2) To modify the weeds species in some way to decrease its competitive ability, usually by decreasing the ability of the weed to reproduce (Krebs 2001). These two methods are specific to pests of crops and if used in an open ecosystem, it is possible that they could cause an in balance to non-target species. Also, if a competitive advantage is artificially given to a particular species which occurs in the wild, in order to out compete the weeds species, it is likely that the modified species will become a pest itself. Along with these potential problems that are linked to genetic control of weeds, there are many ethical, moral and health concerns that are linked to the insertion of foreign DNA into the genes of a species. For a combination of these reasons, much greater research is needed before genetic control of weeds can be considered. This approach however, may well be a possible future success as some insect pests are already being controlled by genetic modification.
The development of economically viable, environmentally friendly weed management strategies is a major problem that is faced by both developed and developing countries around the world (Liebmanal. 1993). Until recently, approaches to weed management have been dominated by a focus on herbicide technology rather than weed ecology and the development of non-chemical methods (Zimdahl 1991). The amazing efficiency of herbicides and their apparent success of them when initially used have allowed a revolutionary method of crop production to be practised. Maybe, with the power of 'hind sight' the best strategy would have been to leave the pests at the levels they were and balance crop yield with environmental, biological and health issues. The initial use of chemicals has now led to serious and unpredicted increased weed problems. In order to maintain the same or increased levels of crop production, herbicide use therefore needs to be intensified (Fryer 1981). This in turn has negative effects on the diversity of surrounding areas and exists in greater concentrations, therefore also reaching greater concentrations in top carnivores. This highlights the need for alternative weed management approaches, such as biological control, or genetic control or a combination of methods. This knowledge is faced by a great deal of resistance from the large companies involved with the production of herbicides, whose priority seems to be profit rather than biodiversity and conservation. This paired with the contentment of farmers to use chemical herbicides all the time because, it is economically efficient and easier to do so (Frayer 1981), is a great threat to the world biodiversity.
This study illustrates that, with respect to biodiversity, the use of predators as a form of biological control is to be favoured and maybe used as part of integrated pest management. It is clear that, for biological control to be used successfully with minimal negative impacts on surrounding biodiversity, each case must be considered separately and the ecology of the area taken into account.
Unfortunately, due to the huge amounts of money that can be made from the production and sales of chemical control, and the current monopoly of weed control by large chemical companies, this approach is not likely to be favoured over chemicals. Other methods of weed control are not likely to be used preferentially until responsibility is taken by governments to regulate methods of weeds control, and this is agreed on a global scale.