Genetically modified (GM) food is food that has had genes, not normally present, added to it. Genes are transferred from one organism to another via modified strains of viruses and bacteria. Some of the reasons given for genetic modification include delayed ripening, decreased allergens, crops that are more resistant to climate extremes or disease, altering the nutrient content of foods and increasing the efficiency of food production systems. A key reason for genetic engineering is to make production cheaper and easier. There are also many negative consequences and risks to take in to account; such as loss of biodiversity, risk to human health, increased power of giant biotech firms, contamination of crops through cross-pollination and the potential for 'super weeds', which would be pest resistant. For these reasons genetic modification is a highly controversial topic.
The attitude of individual consumers is influenced by their perceptions of the benefits and risks posed by GM foods, levels of risk aversion, knowledge of science, views about government and corporations as well as their moral and ethical views. Consumers are constantly being influenced by sources such as newspapers and television programs, which are not always reliable but add to ones paradigms. That said; a study carried out by the University of Manchester found that the only source of GM information, which over 10% of respondents said they would 'definitely trust', was universities/educational organisations. The government was widely distrusted in the field of GM technology. The study also found considerable variation in preferences in terms of class, age, gender, attitudes and the presence of children in the household. Studies have also found that socio-economic factors do not have a major influence on consumer choice regarding GM produce. It is very hard for consumers to become adequately informed on the topic of genetic modification from non-biased sources, which would enable them to form their own informed judgement on the matter. With that in mind, this essay aims to compare the attitude towards GM food of the majority of consumers in Europe with the USA.
Products containing genetically modified ingredients first appeared on shelves in the UK in 1997. This new technology was not well received as was shown by over 30 crop destructions, protests and rallies in the UK 1999. The most high profile of these events, which Lord Melchett; the then head of Greenpeace played a part in, was the destruction of herbicide-tolerant maize belonging to the biotechnology company AgrEvo. Subsequently UK food retailers began removing GM foods and ingredients from their supply chain. A national survey, conducted by the Food Standards Agency (FSA) in the UK in 2003 concluded that around 80% of consumers were against GM crops and only 2% would eat GM foods. However another survey carried out by the FSA in 2002 showed a decrease in public concern over the previous 3 years. Similar resistance has been observed throughout Europe. One survey found that 70% of the European public are against GM food.
Due to the success of the anti-GM movement no GM crops are currently grown commercially in the UK. However, food made from or containing GM products grown abroad (e.g. GM tomatoes, Soya, maize) is on sale in the UK, and many more GM products are awaiting EU approval. Europe has imposed restrictive regulations on GM crops in any portion of the food chain, and any food or drink products in the UK will be labelled as containing GM Soya or corn protein.
It has been found that the main consumer concern to do with GM crops is the potential risk to the environment, although there is still a lot of worry regarding the safety of GM food. These concerns could well be justified. According to Dr. Mae-Wan Ho from the Institute of Science in Society there is a serious risk of horizontal gene transfer and there is enough evidence to indicate that it's possible for transgenic DNA in GM crops and products to be spread by viruses and bacteria as well as by plant and animal cells. Horizontal gene transfer poses many health risks. These include the spread of antibiotic resistant genes to pathogenic bacteria, the creation of new viruses and disease causing bacteria and the transfer of transgenic DNA into human cells, causing cancer.
As an example of negative consequences, E.coli is a normally harmless bacterium, which has commonly been used for gene transfer, but modified strains have managed to escape from laboratories. E.coli 0157:H7, which can be fatal, was first detected in the US in 1982. In 2002 there were 1084 reported cases in the UK. Meat and raw milk are the most common sources of infection. Furthermore, the New Scientist reported an environmental crisis in Argentina where Soya has damaged soil bacteria and allowed herbicide-resistant weeds to grow out of control.
The four main producers of GM crops are the US, Argentina, Canada and China. The crops being commercially grown include pest-resistant maize and cotton, and Soya resistant to weed killer. In contrast to Europe, the US is a large producer of GM crops and is also pressurising other trading countries to accept GM too. According to the USDA's National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS), biotechnology plantings as a percentage of total crop plantings in the United States in 2004 were about 46 percent for corn, 76 percent for cotton, and 85 percent for soybeans. Estimates also predict that 60 - 70% of processed food products on American store shelves contain some trace from GM crops.
Nevertheless, despite agricultural technology being so widespread in the USA, public acceptance is still very mixed and genetically modified food remains a topic that the average American consumer has very little knowledge of. There is a low awareness of biotechnology in general amongst Americans, as was shown by a national study carried out by the Food Policy Institute, Rutgers University of New Jersey, in late 2003. This survey claims that only half of Americans are aware that foods containing GM ingredients are currently sold in stores. When asked directly, about half of Americans reported that they approve plant based GM foods, and about a quarter approve of animal-based GM foods. The study also found that opinions of GM foods could be easily influenced. Approval increased when specific benefits of GM food were mentioned.
A study by Benjamin Onyango, a research associate at the Food Policy Institute found that male, white, southerners and those with some college education are more likely to consume genetically modified fruit and vegetables. He found that once the respondents were well informed of the risks of the product, their willingness to consume such products greatly diminished. This supports the claim that their opinions could be easily influenced.
The Food Policy Institute study found the stance of Americans on labelling of GM foods to be unclear. When asked directly 94% agreed that GM ingredients should be labelled as such, however before GM was mentioned less than 1% mentioned GM ingredients as something they would wish to appear on labels. It is not currently law for food products in the USA to be labelled as containing genetically modified ingredients. However, at the next session of the Codex Committee on Food Labelling (Ottawa, Canada, on May 1-5, 2006), the Committee will be discussing "proposed Draft Guidelines for the Labelling of Foods and Food Ingredients obtained through Certain Techniques of Genetic Modification/Genetic Engineering."
In conclusion, there is a large difference between the attitude towards genetic modification in Europe and the USA. Of all countries, consumers in North America are among the most willing to accept GM produce, whereas consumers in Europe hold the most concerns. However many Americans still harbour concerns and consumer attitude is critical to the acceptance of a new technology. This is shown by the refusal of major food companies Mc Donald's and Frito-Lays to the use of GM potatoes.
Nevertheless, it is important to analyse which of these concerns are real, and which are perceived. Consumer concerns should not be simply dismissed as false perceptions due to their lack of understanding. Rather, the concerns should be acknowledged; and unbiased information regarding the technology should be made readily available in order to enable the consumers to form better judgements. It should be the consumers right to have access to this information. Consumer acceptance of GM foods is critical to the future development of this technology.