Proteins are monomers with monomer units consisting of amino acids for which there are about 20 commonly found in biological systems. Proteins range in molecular weight from 10,000 to about 1,000,000 Daltons and can have highly complex structures. They are formed in a condensation reaction with amino acids: -
And a peptide bond is formed between the carbonyl group of one amino acid and the amino group of the other to form a polypeptide. Each amino acid is specifically placed due to the action of translation which occurs in cells.
Proteins are present in many things within the body including cellular membranes and tissue as well as being a tertiary source of energy after carbohydrates and fats. Being that Protein counts for 10 15% of total energy, determining the protein composition in foods is important so that one can use the recommended intake for a group of individuals and help provide a rich source of protein from different foods. Protein assays are one of the most widely used forms of protein determination in general science research, as it's a fundamental stage in many analysis namely protein purification and electrophoresis. There are a range of different assays that can be used but as they all have their advantages care has to be taken in considering their sustainability for the application.
In this investigation three different assays will be used to analyse the protein concentration of cow's milk, Soya milk and a bovine serum albumin (BSA) standard of an unknown concentration
As Stated in the Practical Booklet Experiment number 3
The first method used was the Lowry method which is meant to be highly regarded as one of the most used protein assays as it's : -
Problems occurred during this experiment, the duplicates of the standards where obtained but the samples proved to be a little more difficult to get right. As the absorbance was being taken at a wave length of 750nm one would have expected both the samples and standards to share similar properties with respect to colour. This did not occur, only after the third attempts did the unknown sample finally give a reading which was in the range one would expect. It is known that many substances can interfere with this experiment and so that may be one of the reasons that the absorbance reading that was obtained for the unknown sample was too low to reach the calibration curve.
The accuracy especially for the standards is hard to question as they where done in duplicates and an average was taken to try and minimise the amount of error.
The formal titration method was relatively straight forward to carry out, although with the amount of glassware being used the amount of error begins to add up that values obtained where not terribly far away from that taken from the actual nutritional information on the milk cartons. The whole milk had 3.2g/100ml of protein and the value gained here was 2.57 which isn't too bad. That for the Soya milk was a little further away with the experiment obtaining a value of 2.73 and the actual value being 3.7g/100ml.
The Bradford method is based on the fact that Brillian blue shifts from 465nm to 595nm when binding to proteins both ionic and hydrophobic interactions stabilise thee dye causing it to change colour. This experiment produced results and the concentration of the unknown was found from the calibration curve to be about 0.53 L, which is relatively low but looking at the value obtained from the formal titration method the amount of protein in the unknown sample is about 0.312%. The Bradford method has been said to be rather sensitive to bovine serum albumin more so that other protein assays by a factor of about two.
The Lowry method is the most extensively used by biochemists for protein concentration determination but it is easily interfered with by other reagents as well as taking a relatively long time to perform, these are some of the reasons some have moved to using the Bradford method, as it's a lot faster to perform and it's colour remains relatively stable over a longer period of time compared to the Lowry Method. For the experiment carried out here the most appropriate may have been the Bradford method especially due to it's elevated sensitivity to BSA.
Another Protein assay that could have been used is the Kjeldahl method which determines nitrogen content of a food and converts that into the protein concentration by means of a numerical factor which differs per product. Milk is said to contain about 3.2% protein 15.7% of that being nitrogen so the amount of protein is than determined by 6.38 (1  15.67). This method does also have it's problems as all do and as not all nitrogen in foods are from proteins this can create a problem as the total true proteins are not always that ones being accounted for.
To increase the accuracy of the results in these experiments almost all standards where made in duplicates and samples in triplicates to reduce the error, an average of all results where taken.