The above mission statement comes across as if it's selling you a dream, a lifestyle you don't have but want and don't want to pay too much for it. Initially Lastminute dot com was a mainly product orientated company and as although 'barriers to entry are low, the barriers to success are high' a reputation had to be built. Product orientated businesses assume their customers are interested only in the product and buy it only on the basis of it's quality and so this becomes their main focus to increase the quality of the good or service. One major assumption made is that the customer even wants the product in question and even if they do a satisfied customer is not always a loyal customer, so the main aim is to gain people to repeat purchase as a product or service is attained as a solution to a problem, once this problem has been solved the customer is likely to go for a cheaper option and so the company must begin to emphasise the unique qualities of their product compared to the competition. As the companies brand starts to build steam opportunities present themselves as last minute dot com's suppliers realised that the platform for sales was increasing and that it's potential as a distribution channel was promising this being so with an increase in competition the company then had to be able to compete. As the volume of sales begun to increase the number of competitors entering the industry increased and as barriers to entry are somewhat low now the company must begin to promote unique attribute of their products to stand out from the crowd of competition, they must also being to try and increase their market. Now the consumers who know they need us have found us, now we need to find the consumers who do not yet know. This is where the company begins to evolve. The firm has to begin taking an outward looking strategic view of likely developments and options, they can now promote their strengths , build on their weaknesses and attract a larger market. They developed into a more marketing oriented firm becoming a 'lifestyle retailer' using customers as their main driving force for development and production. The focus of the firm is now to find out the customer needs and for fill them. It's now based on the benefits a consumer receives from a product, hence the mission statement, this all had to be done as the company evolved in order for them to remain in the industry, as the industry changes they need to be aware of how these changes in the external environment effect them as a company now and in the future in order for them to remain a company.
They list their core services as being 'inspirational and providing solutions' which reflects their marketing orientated structure by providing solutions to existing problems. With respect to products what is made isn't the only important thing, how it's made and ensuring life and profitability of the product all tie in with product management which must be maintained as quality of goods and services can have a large effect on the companies brand name. 'Putting last minute buyers in touch with last minute sellers' is their definition of their position as agents. Development of new products can also easily occur in this case allowing an entire evening to be booked and paid for including the transport is now part of what they offer, their product management and branding allows for relatively smooth development of products especially within the services for which they already provide.
With goods such as these the concept and type of packaging is somewhat different. One doesn't have a physical entity to look at, but the effect of packaging is still the same, to entice the consumer by communicating the product information and brand character to help the consumer make a choice, it can be an important element in creating a brand position to a consumer. Last minute dot coms' packaging is more in the form of quality of service and the ease of use of the selling/ buying medium, these become attributes of the service which make the biggest impact on the consumer in advertising the company and their products. This is reflected somewhat in the large technical department in place to maintain and manage the internet infrastructure for which most transactions and communication takes place. Having been on the site it is relatively easy to use and rather self explanatory to anyone with reasonable computer/ internet literacy.
The price can be considered as the value which is placed on something being bought, or the willingness to pay of a consumer, but price is complicated and can indicate many things about a firm and it's products. Consumers may view the price as an indication of the quality and durability of a product. Last minute dot com are 'lifestyle retailer' who having gained a stronger brand image over time are now providing goods and services to time poor consumers which are value for money as oppose to initially trying to sell whatever products they could. As a company they are known for their cheaper prices compared to some competitors , but in the market low prices can be seen as a signal to start a price war and will inevitably be under cutting competitors like estate agents. A company must also remain profitable and so there are a number of internal and external factor which influence price decisions in a company and they are shown below.
A sound distribution structure has to be in place to ensure consumers get the right product at the right time and in the right place, this places allot of responsibility on the manufacturers and retailers on for example the store location. Is the product in an area in which the target market have easy access to the product. A marketing channel can be put in place to link an organisation or producer to a service within which it can be made available to consumers. Last minute dot com can be looked upon as an intermediary, describing them selves as agents they act on the behalf of the manufacturer and make their product and service more accessible to consumers by ' bring together lat minute buyers with last minute sellers'.
Channel structures are put in place which are shown above, show the benefits of intermediaries. The role of an intermediary is to reduce the costs normally incurred by individual transactions and increase efficiency, reducing these costs may be what allows last minute dot com and it's suppliers to have such low prices. One advantage to intermediaries is that under their specific category they may offer a large range of goods as last minute dot com offer leisure and gift ideas which is a benefit to the consumer as then it's unlikely for them to go else where and would do so only if they require a completely different product.
Promotion is based on the communication of a product to potential buyers and covers.
Advertising is a form of non personal or personal transmission through a larger medium. Last minute dot com recently formed a relationship with Granada TV to increase the traffic towards the company using complementary media to increase their reach. Type of advertising used by a company depends on the stage it's in, in the product life cycle. For the type of products being sold by last minute dot com a key issue for them is timing as advertisements on the website change during the day to reflect consumer needs and product deadlines. Advertising also plays a role in supporting other areas of marketing activity.
Advertisements can be linked with sales promotions to support selling efforts by providing information to a wider audience. Sales promotions like buy one get one free (BOGOF) sometimes need mass media ads to support sales. Sales promotions are seen as tack ticks which are designed to add value and appeal to a product in order for the firm to meet specific sales and marketing objectives, they may include rebates and free goods. Lastminute dot com offer some holiday packages in which flights and hotels can be booked together to save the customer the costs if they where done separately.
Direct marketing is a way in which companies specifically target consumers based on information obtained about them from recent purchases, this is used to advertise items or services which are similar and so to which they may be interested it. This can help a firm build customer relationships and increase consumer confidence in the service as well as creating new distribution channels. This can also give a firm a competitive advantage due to the maturity of this brand consumers would be more willing to give out personal details. Last minute dot com use direct marketing by sending out specific newsletters to consumers based on their database, this means that they are less likely to dismiss it as junk mail as it's more relevant to them as a customer.
There are so many confusing definitions of PR, the way I understand it is that PR is the ' middle man' (or woman) between a firm and the public and their main function is to maintain all publicity and ensure a good relationship between a firm and the public including but not only it's customers, this includes advertising the corporate image, maintaining press relations, media publications and organising events and meetings and using sponsorship as a way to increase the company profile. Last minute dot com have teamed up with Granada TV company to increase PR by taking the initially internet based firm to a wider audience, increasing their reach and have also ensured customers are now able to purchase goods using more conventional means i.e. telephone and by more modern means like WAP and interactive TV.
The marketing mix is namely so as successful marketing relies on the synergy or mix between all elements. Last minute dot com provide a means of purchasing goods and services at a reasonable price, they are mainly an internet company but have slightly divulged into both modern and more conventional forms of communication to ensure the medium for which they mainly choose as their 'place' to sell goods doesn't effect their sales. They have also moved into other products which have increased their market but not at a huge expense as it's more development and expansion of existing products and themes rather than diversification. Using TV as a medium for which to advertise they are reinforcing their marketing oriented practices by moving into mass media forms of advertising while still using forms of direct marketing to maintain existing customer relations. All aspects of the marketing mix must be united about what they depict of the firm and their products, if just one thing is out of place it will all not work i.e. a bad product with the best advertising will not work, the consumer will just reject it. So the combination of the marketing mix has to give a firm a competitive edge and an advantage which helps them distinguish their product amongst similar goods.
An extended marketing mix was proposed my Booms and Bitner in 1981 which included people, process and physical evidence.
It has been said that the quality of a good or service has a lot to do with the interaction between people as they add value and dimension to the package. This may not be very appropriate for last minute dot com as with many modern internet based companies, human contact has been somewhat eliminated from the equation and therefore value is based on the service one gets from the company. This is mainly due to it being an internet mainly firm, consumers have the opportunity to visit an estate agent but those who do not are obviously willing to give up the human contact for cheaper prices and convenience. Based on the existing marketing mix for last minute dot come this doesn't seem to tie in with anything specifically.
Process reflects reinforcing consumer confidence in a service by maintaining a certain structure. This doesn't apply to manufacturing processes as they are normally carried out behind closed doors. As last minute dot com have majority of sales occurring via the internet and phone many of their transactions are not seen by the customer but in order to maintain confidence automatic e-mails are sent out and ensure receipt of the transaction and to assure consumers that their queries are being dealt with, this does have some effect and may tie in with promotion to a certain extent as it's maintaining customer relations.
Physical evidence ties in mainly with place when thinking about last minute dot com, physical evidence is a reflection on the image , atmosphere and design of the premises in which consumers buy their goods or services. As this is a main point of contact for companies like this it's very important to maintain.
Internet intermediaries allow supplies to reach a larger market than normally possible without the internet. The place a company is in is important as they aim to be accessible to majority of their target market, when using the internet this increases to a much larger scale that isn't possible other wise. Being mainly computer based means all business transactions can be automatically backed up which from a business point of view increases efficiency and reduces the amount of paper work that has to be done. Along with having a much larger market, using the internet would also increase sales as it allows the consumers to shop at their convenience and so the supplier would gain from an 'open all hours' policy.
Using an internet intermediary means that any companies are also competing with stores, the problem for the supplier begins where consumers may prefer the shops as they can physically see most of the products they are going to buy before they commit to anything, and they get personal selling, as said in the extended marketing mix people add value and dimension to a package and this may be preferred by some rather than speaking to people on the phone and never actually getting human reassurance about a purchase.
Using the internet automatically makes assumptions about the target market, mainly that they have access to the internet and that even if they do, will they know how to use it, one could say they have tried to get around this by using the telephone, WAP and interactive TV but these all still require a certain amount of technological literacy, this eliminates a percentage of the market. last minute dot com describe them selves as agents and agents normally work on a commission basis from every sale they make, this can be costly to the suppliers as they wouldn't incur these costs if they where to sell the goods them selves, but this is the choice they make in order to expose them selves to a larger market.
In such a thriving industry like travel as soon as any kind of profit is being made competitors begin to increase as companies move into the industry to try and capture some of the profit. As travel and flying isn't exactly patented it allows many firms to set up as agents to be the 'middle man' between the suppliers and the buyers but you and I both know that we are more likely to shop and H&M rather than 'Blue Fashions'. Reputation does allot for any company and takes time to build. To begin with last minute dot com where mainly product oriented and trying to sell as many products as they could, this allowed them to build up their brand name but also meant that as competition increased their focus had to change, ensuring consumers knew how to differentiate them from the ' new comers'. Barriers to success are high due to the fact that trust and reputation mean allot especially as large amounts of their market may be wary about buying goods online they will begin to stick to what they know. The success of a firm is not based on just getting people to buy the product or service, it's getting them to repeat their purchase. This only happens with experience, building a brand name which promotes quality and safe online shopping takes time and money.