In this experiment the Kjeldahl method is being used to determine the amount of nitrogen quantitively in two samples, one being flour the other is glycine. Glycine is one of the most simple protein structures with the display formula
Where the R group in glycine is hydrogen. By observing the structure one can see that all proteins contain nitrogen with the average content being 16%. There are also other sources of nitrogen which includes nucleic acids and lipids but these are normally in very low quantities. Protein nitrogen can be determined by the difference between total nitrogen and non - protein nitrogen. The non-protein nitrogen can experimentally be determined by precipitating all of the protein with a protein precipitating agent, here 50% sodium hydroxide has been used, the nitrogen content of the filtrate can then be determined. The Kjeldahl method is a two stage process.
50% Sodium hydroxide is a corrosive substance spectacles and gloves should be worn at all times, if any contact is made wash immediately with cold water. All acids being using during this experiments are irritants and may cause corrosion to skin and clothes and so lab coats, glassware and gloves should be worn at all stages of this experiment
Here the sample is digested or boiled in a mixture of concentrated sulphuric acid and potassium or sodium sulphate, which is used to raise the boiling point which will include the use of a catalyst which in this case is mercury. This oxidises the organic matter and carbon dioxide is produced and the nitrogen is fixed as ammonium sulphate, volatile constituents like nitrates can be lost during this stage.
Heat 2g of flour and 0.4g of glycine with two kjelatabs ( which contain 5g potassium sulphate, 5mg selenium) and 20 ml of concentrated sulphuric acid
Heat both samples in a digestion block in a fume cupboard until they become clear and then for a further 45 minutes
Allow the solutions to cool and dilute them both to 250 ml.
Excess sodium hydroxide is added to an aliquot of the digested mixture from the stage and the liberated ammonia is steam distilled into boric acid. The amount of ammonium borate can then be determined by titration against a standard acid and an indicator.
First perform a sample titration using ammonium sulphate solution as the diluted digest using the method below, and then repeat them for the flour and glycine solutions.
Transfer 50 ml of the diluted digest and 50ml of distilled water into the distillation flask by using a pipette and measuring cylinder respectively.
Add a few anti-bumping granules and grease the splash head, attach the splash head, funnel and condenser.
Add 50ml of boric acid into the receiving flask plus a few drops of screening methyl red indicator place the receiving flask in position and ensure the receiving tube dips into the boric acid solution, make sure all joints are tight and leak free.
Add 35ml of 50% sodium hydroxide solution into the distillation flask through the stopper funnel and replace the stopper immediately after. Add about 5ml of distilled water into the top of the stopper funnel.
Light the Bunsen and boil the solution to distil about 100ml of liquid into the receiving flask.
Transfer the solution from the receiving flask into a 250ml graduated flask. Disconnect the apparatus and wash the condenser and delivery tube with distilled water and add the washings to the graduated flask and make up to the mark with distilled water.
Withdraw a 50 ml aliquot from the diluted distillate using a pipette. Transfer this solution against 0.01M sulphuric acid until the solution turns colourless.( Pink indicates an overshoot, excess acid has been added)
According to table 7.6 on page 174 of Technology of Cereals by Kent and Evers 4 th edition, the amount of protein in flour in 1992 ranged from 11.0% to 14.7% in wholemeal. This makes the value determined in this experiment relatively low although the literature values are more than 10 years old in general using the Kjeldahl method does not completely recover all nitrogen present in a given protein. This is due to extremely firmly combined heterocyclic rings (histidine and tryptophan), which requires prolonged boiling of up to 10 hours before they can be converted into ammonium sulphate. Along with this the possibility of ammonium ions being converted to volatile nitric acid due to vigorous oxidising conditions during digestion. Although the latter may only cause negligible loss in nitrogen it would still have an effect on the amount of nitrogen collected.
The main reason why wheat flour is the main type used for making aerated bread is due to the properties of the proteins which when mixed with water forms gluten an elastic substance. Protein has a significant effect of the quality of the bread as there is a positive correlation between it's concentration and the specific volume of the loaf.
The amount of nitrogen in glycine was calculated to be 22%, this is higher than the value obtained by calculation from the molecular formula as the average concentration of nitrogen in proteins is stated to be around 16% and the value obtained from calculating the mass in one mole is 18.67%, an ideal value would have been between the two. The value obtained in this experiment may be down to the concentration of glycine used or error during distillation or titration. To try and eliminate this type of error one would attempt to gain two titre values ideally within 0.05ml of one an other to show consistency and accuracy both in the method given and the way in which it was being applied.
Steps taken to ensure accurate results in this experiment include gaining two titre values to aid in the calculations which would attempt to reduce error and an average of the two values would be used. Transfer of liquids was done as quickly as possible as moving with a pipette full of solution across a room to place it into a volumetric flask allows for leakage along the way and one drop is around a 0.05ml loss. Pieces of the dilstillation equipment where washed out and the washings where added to the filtrate to accumulate as much of the distillate as possible.
Aside from human error there is normally a standard error with each piece of glassware. For a burette it's +/- 0.05 of the value obtained so in this experiment it would have worked out to be: -
Flour
There are a few other methods of determining protein content which can also be used, one is the Dumas-Pregl method. This involves burning the sample to produce carbon dioxide, water and nitrogen by dry ashing and then analysis is carried out by gas chromatography, or carbon dioxide and water can be removed and the volume of nitrogen determined.