Sensory profiling is a very useful technique and is one of the most in depth sensory evolution techniques that is commonly used. It involves a panel of people who will discuss the attributes of a specific sample, and the quality of these may then be evaluated. Sensory profiling, unlike other methods, allows the panel to determine what they actually believe the attributes to be, and then go on to score (and rank) the samples under these specific attributes.
In this instance, sensory profiling was used to assess the attributes of four brands of milk chocolate. A panel of 12 individuals was used to assess each of the four attributes with two repeats. To quickly summarise the approach, each panel member tasted the unbranded chocolate samples and each individual came up with their own attributes to describe the four samples (this included attributes under the headings; aroma, mouth feel, flavour and after effect). The panel then came together as one, to discuss the attributes determined and a full list of attributes was defined for the sample set. The chocolate samples were then tasted again, and scored using the attributes previously defined.
A brief summary of the method is described above. To go into a little more detail, four milk chocolate samples were tasted, these were;
Each oh these chocolates was assessed using a profiling technique which, would normally involve four steps; assessor training, development of vocabulary, quantitative assessment of attributes and analysis of results. In the development of the vocabulary section, each of the panel members went away and described the sensory attributes of the chocolate samples in their own words. The class (sensory panel) then reassembled, and discussed all the attributes that had been raised and a consensus was reached as to whether the attributes brought up could be used for the samples. In this case, consensus was reached on 23 attributes which could be used to describe each of the chocolates. It may be, for example, that different panel members have used different words to describe the same attributes and clarification such as this can be resolved during the development of vocabulary.
Once the 23 attributes that were to be assessed had been finalised, the panel again went away and tasted the chocolates. This time, however, each attribute was scored using a line scale (it is also important to note that the scoring of attributes was done in duplicate with a 30minute interval between sets). The line scale allows the panellist to score each of the attributes from 'zero' to 'maximum'. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was then used to show any statistical differences between the attributes of the four samples.
The table below shows the mean score by attributes for each of the chocolates tasted by the sensory panel.
This data has also been represented graphically (where significant by sample) in chart 1 which may be found attached at the end of this document. The significance of the results has been highlighted with the *, ** and *** star methodology where *** represents results in which most confidence can be placed.
Firstly looking at the significance (by assessors) for the various attributes, it can be seen that, all but two are significant at 95%, with many being significant at 99 and 99.9%. From this, we can state that there is a clear difference in the assessor's opinions of the various attributes. The reasons for this variation can be numerous, and will certainly included factors such as this is the first time that this panel has been assembled together. With this said, however, looking at the significance (by samples) column, it can be seen that fifteen of the twenty-three attributes were found to be statistically significant. The significance of variation by sample, type takes into account the variation by assessors so these fifteen attributes can be said to be significantly different across the four samples (this is the data plotted in chart one).
Taking a quick overview of chart one, it can be seen that the Cadbury's and Galaxy milk chocolate score similarly in the fifteen attributes - this is particularly true with respect to the after effects attributes. It can also be seen that in attributes such as 'sweet' (both after effect and flavour) and other attributes such as flavour : 'creamy' and after effects : 'mouth coating', the Waitrose chocolate scores significantly less than any of the other three. In these areas too, the other three chocolates score very similar levels. In all the attributes, when looking at all four chocolate samples, there is good distribution along the scale.
Looking at the Galaxy chocolate, it can be seen that it scores the most extreme in many of the attributes. It is reassuring that in both after effects and flavour where the Galaxy scores most 'sweet' it also scores least 'bitter' (this is true for both attributes). The Galaxy also has the least 'hard first bite' and is the 'smoothest' and 'fastest melting' in terms of mouth feel. As previously mentioned, the Cadbury's chocolate scores very similarly in many of the attributes to the Galaxy, however, they are less extreme in their rating. This is with the exception of 'cocoa' aroma where Cadbury's scores the highest and Galaxy, the lowest.
The Waitrose chocolate is the most consistent for scoring across all attributes. It can be seen that for the majority of the attributes it score approximately 50 (on the scale of 0 to 100). In some cases such as the after effect of 'drying' this positions the chocolate between the other samples. However, in the majority of cases the other chocolates are generally perceived to have much more (or less) of any of the given attribute.
The Asda chocolate can often be seen to fall between the outliers of the Galaxy and Cadbury's at one extreme with the Waitrose at the other. This is with the exception of the 'mouth coating' and 'drying' after effect attributes where the Asda chocolate gains this highest score.
The profiling method used for the purpose of this practical is fairly robust in terms of the data that has been produced. This was achieved by the way in which the profiling technique was conducted. Firstly, each panellist sampled each of the chocolates on two separate occasions. This allows comparisons to be made between the two sets and to ensure that on both occasions the attributes were rated at similar levels. The samples were also presented in a random order to each of the panellist and this eliminates any effects which may be gained when trying one sample followed by another. The samples were also randomly numbered and any markings on the chocolate had been removed. This again ensures no favouritism is given to a specific sample.