Yes, you are quite correct regarding the interest of plant polyphenols. These are naturally occurring within plants and there are approximately 8000 which are known. The term polyphenol is an umbrella term which covers many sub groups including; lignins, flavanoids, phenolic acids and stilbenes. The interest in these compounds has been increasing since the mid 1980s. Of all the polyphenols, flavanoids are perhaps of the most interest as too are carotenoids. Flavanoids exhibit a classic three ring (a, c, b) antioxidant type structure; and as such, has many properties associated with those of antioxidants (the diagram above shows the structure of Quercetin).
The importance of polyphenols within the context of plant health has been understood for some time. As well as contributing to the pigmentation of plants, they also contribute to a plants ability to defend it self against predators. Many of the health benefits of eating plant derived food stuffs is now understood to be strongly correlated with the respective polyphenols they contain.
As previously mentioned polyphenols and in particularly flavanoids, act as extremely efficient antioxidants within the body. It has been proposed that by reducing the oxidation of low density lipo-proteins they will help to prevent cardiovascular disease (conclusive in-vitro research within rats has proven this). Flavanoids are also thought to have some anti-carcinogenic properties. Much research has been done comparing diets with a high intake of fruit and vegetables (rich in polyphenols such as flavanoids) versus diets low in polyphenols. The evidence from these studies shows that people who have a diet high in flavanoids do have a reduced rate of cardiovascular disease.
These compounds work in a number of ways in the body but, as stated earlier can essentially be regarded as antioxidants. The way they are metabolised in the body is also very similar to the way in which antioxidants are metabolised in the body.
Polyphenols and particularly flavanoids have been measured to have up to five times the oxygen reducing power of regular antioxidants such as vitamin E. They therefore act to prevent free radical oxidation and associated oxidative stress - as mentioned above.
Currently, little is known about the bioavailability of polyphenols in food. Therefore, making any health claims in this area should always be aired with a little caution. It is known, that polyphenols and in particular flavanoids, are not particularly well absorbed from the intestine. There is also evidence to suggest that the form in which the polyphenols is found (Quercetin, a flavanoid, for example, can be found in numerous forms) will have a strong link to how it is metabolised and therefore, how well it is absorbed.
In the healthy diet of an individual living in Britain for example, there should be plenty of polyphenols. Their diet is likely to contain in excess of 1000mg day -1 flavanoid.
Of all the polyphenols, I would recommend the addition of either a carotenoid to your food product or a flavanoid such as Quercetin. Polyphenol additives can currently be purchased from health food stores in a tablet form and come with a recommended dose of between 20 and 30 mg day -1. At this relatively low level within a healthy diet, however, any beneficial affects would be negligible so a considerably larger dose would be required (as would be the case in your food product). This brings into question the toxicology of polyphenols at high doses. Rather than adding any supplementary polyphenols to your product therefore, I would aim to produce a product naturally high in them and not add any. You can then play on the claim 'naturally high in polyphenols' rather than using any additives.
There are a whole range of products which your company could consider producing all of which could have some sort of polyphenol claim. Cereals, nuts, pulses, fruit, vegetables and even wine are all naturally high in polyphenols. You could, therefore, consider the production of some sort of cereal bar - perhaps covered with a layer of dark chocolate (another rich source of polyphenols).
An alternative route may be to consider some sort of fruit shake. This could be blended from a range of juices including things such as blackcurrant and apple both of which are naturally high in flavanoids.