The sample data concerns the marks of 408 students obtained in first year statistics exam (qtmark) and a plethora of variables which might affect the marks of these students majority aged 19. A summary of descriptive statistic in Appendix 1 shows that the average marks obtained was 64.9%. The median was also 65% while the minimum and maximum were 9% and 95% respectively. A standard deviation of 13.06 implies that majority of the results vary between 51.8% and 77.9%. The correlation matrix in Appendix 1 shows that some notable variables with positive effect on exam results include ability, attendance and time spent on revision while variables like expenditure on alcohol and coming from the UK are found to have a negative impact on qtmark.
Amongst all the variables, ability was found to be the most significant variable affecting qtmark as demonstrated by its high correlation of 0.37. The fact that the ability of all students is normally distributed suggests a fair and adequate sample for regression. According to Romer, generally students with good attendance perform better in examinations. This concurs with the strong positive correlation of 0.28 and 0.24 between qtmarks and attending classes (attc) and lectures (attl) respectively in our data set. Most of the students attended an approximate mean of 80% for both lectures and classes. There is a slight disparity in the data set because there is a weak negative correlation of 0.006 between the proportion of revision lectures attended (attr) and the test result. This could be attributed to the low mean proportion of revision lectures attended, 47%. Nevertheless, when attr was tested it was found to have a positive impact on qtmark. For students who have been consistently working hard, as evident from the number of A-grades obtained at A-level (alevelsa) which is also positively related (correlation of 0.22) to qtmark, the higher positive correlation of 0.091 compared to 0.06( hrsqt1)
 proves that more time spent on revision (hrsqt) would result in higher marks.
Some of the data do not appear to be very convincing because of the small sample size. There are only 126 observations as to whether a student has a home computer and this is only available for the year 2004.It would have been more useful to find out in addition to owning a computer, the number of hours spent on using the computer for statistics. There does not seem to be a simple explanation for the outliers in the scatter plots in Appendix 1 for the regression of qtmark against variables like alcohol expenditure. However, their impact on the regression is not significant.
First, restrict the sample to those having ability and  hrsqt to obtain a bivariate regression for these respective students only. Table 2.1 in Appendix 2 shows that there is a positive relationship between (qtmark) mark in first year statistic exam and the (attr) proportion of revision lectures attended; if attr increased by one percent then qtmark would increase by 0.002263 percent. If attr were zero, qtmark would be about 64.73999%.In addition, 0.0049% of the variation in qtmark is explained by attr because the R value is about 0.000049. In a bivariate model, the R 2 value is a good measure for how good of a fit the model truly is; the higher the R 2 value, the better the fit for the model. In this case we can see that this regression is not the best fit.
Next, test the null hypothesis that there is no relationship between qtmark and attr, that is, the true slope coefficient 
1 = 0. Holding all other variables constant, the estimated value of coefficient 
1 is 0.002263. Under the null hypothesis, we observe that the t-value is 0.129684 and the p-value of obtaining such a t-value is 0.8969. In other words, accept the null hypothesis that attr has no effect on qtmark. Under the same null hypothesis that the true slope coefficient is zero, the F-value is 0.016818. If we square the t-value of the slope coefficient of attr, we will see that this will be the F-value. This shows the close relationship between the t and the F statistic. This can only be true when the degree of freedom for the F-statistic is 1, which includes this particular regression. Hence we can see that at the 5% level, we do not reject the null hypothesis.
In (2b), the variables hrsqt and ability are independent variables and part of the regression. However, the sample is still restricted to students having both hrsqt and ability - the number of observations are 347 students in both regressions. This multi-variate model is assumed to be linear in parameters. The coefficients of ability, hrsqt and attr are called partial regression coefficients. Table 2.2 in Appendix 2 shows that there is still a positive linear relationship between qtmark and attr because a 1% increase in attr will result in a 0.105959% increase in qtmark, given that all other explanatory variables (hrsqt and ability) are held constant. However, the intercept has changed; if ability, hrsqt and attr all equal to zero, qtmark will be 36.82527%. The R 2 has increased to 0.221924. As R 2 is bounded by zero and one, the goodness of fit for this model is still relatively low. In this three-variable model, the multiple coefficient of determination R 2 is the proportion of the variation in (this case) qtmark explained by the variables ability, hrsqt and attr. This is an extension of the two-variable model in (2a). The multiple correlation R is simply the measure of the degree of association between qtmark and all the explanatory variables jointly.
Where ; ;  and the default is
F statistic=
Therefore at the 5% significant level, do not reject  and conclude that the dummy variables are not jointly significant to this regression.
Referring to the line graph in appendix 2, conclude that there is nonlinearity in the effect of hrsqt on qtmark.
Restricted model:
Unrestricted model:
The results from the three regression (in Appendix 4) showed that in except in 2004, the number of A-grades obtained at A-level had the largest effect( compared to other variables like ability and proportion of class attended) on the marks obtained in first year statistics exam. The coefficient on ability was the largest in year 2002, implying that an increase in ability had the greatest effect on marks for the 2002 respondents. On the other hand, an increase in class attendance had the greatest impact on marks for the 2003 respondents.
Restricted model:
Unrestricted model: year 2002:
Year 2003:
Year 2004:
F statistic= ,
Therefore at the 5% significance level, do not reject  and conclude that the slope coefficients are constant across the three regression equations.
The attributes of a good model are (i) Parsimony- a model can never completely capture the reality; some amount of abstraction or simplification is inevitable in any model building. The Occam's razor or the principle of parsimony states that a model be kept as simple as possible. (ii) Identifiabilty- for a given set of data, the estimated parameters must have unique values. (iii) Goodness of fit- Since the basic thrust of regression analysis is to explain as much of the variation in the dependent variable as possible by explanatory variables included in the model, a model is judged good if this explanation, as measured by the adjusted Ris as high as possible.(iv)Theoretical consistency- No matter how high the goodness of fit measures, a model may not be judged good if one or more coefficients have the wrong signs. In constructing a model, we need to have some theoretical underpinning to it. (v) Predictive power- Milton Friedman, the Nobel laureate notes: "the only relevant test of the validity of a hypothesis model is comparison of its prediction with experience". Taking into account the above five attributes of a good model, my statistically preferred model for qtmark is as follows:
where Mgrad is split into 4 dummy variables : mgrad1 (default) = grade A and IB 7, mgrad2 = grade B and IB 6, mgrad3 = grade C or D and IB 5 or 4, and mgradnone = No maths/stats