A The reasons that obesity levels are increasing world-wide can largely be put down to the fact of decreased energy expenditure levels. It is commonly assumed that reasons for increasing levels of obesity, are due to the fact that as a society as a whole, we have a higher energy intake than at any other point in the past. This, however, isn't the case and in fact, in recent decades, particularly within developed countries, there has been a steady decline in the levels of energy we intake.
So, with this in mind, and looking at the energy balance equation (energy consumed, minus energy used is equal to energy laid down in the body) it can be seen that the reason for increasing levels of obesity must be down to decreasing energy expenditure levels. The reasons for this are numerous; firstly, again, as a society as a whole, we are leading ever more sedentary lifestyles. Both the jobs we do and the labour saving devices we have to do day-to-day tasks are partly responsible for this. We also now have more leisure time than ever before, however, this time is being spent doing things such as watching television and going to the cinema. Therefore, even though we are consuming less energy then at any point in the past, we are also expending less, and the consequence for this is the increasing levels of obesity that we see today.
A The table below shows where the UK stands in the world league table for obesity. As can be seen, the table shows the UK to stand in third position behind only Mexico and The United states (which can be seen to be way out in front). The table shows that 22.4% of the population aged 15 and above have a BMI greater than 30.0 (this is the World Health Organisations official definition of obesity).
A For a long time, it was believed that obese people were so, as they had a lower metabolic rate than others. This, however, is now known not to be the case. Many studies have shown the relationship between body weight and metabolic rate. That is to say; as your body weight increase, so too does your metabolic rate. Your metabolic rate is the basic amount of energy required by the body to perform its basic life maintaining functions and includes factors such as breathing and pumping blood around the body as well as many other cellular activities. As your body increases in size/weight, the number of cells requiring this basic energy level increase, and so too, therefore, does metabolic rate.
A Looking at some families, you would probably comment that; 'yes obesity does run in families'. However whether this is down to genes or lifestyle (nature vs. nurture) has been the cause of much debate over recent decades. There is now substantial evidence to support that there are genes which express obesity. With this said, however, obesity is as a result of a combination of factors.
Lifestyle plays a larger role in obesity. It may be that you are from a thin family and don't have the genes which express obesity. However, with an unhealthy lifestyle (high energy intake with a sedentary, low level expenditure) there is no reason to stop you from becoming obese. Ultimately, therefore, obesity is a disease which is dependant upon voluntary behaviours.
A Physical activity levels are intrinsically related to obesity levels. The basic equation that energy intake minus energy expenditure is equal to the energy laid down as fat deposits in the body is proof of this. Your level of physical activity is also the most varied proportion of total energy expenditure - this basically means that the best and easiest way to loose weight is to increase levels of physical activity.
Physical activity is an umbrella term which can be used for many activities from cleaning a house to running a marathon. Obviously, these are going to utilise very different amounts of energy. For the purpose of activity and obesity, activity may be defines as any activity which elevates heart rate. Children are recommended to take part in at least 30 minutes (and preferably 60minutes) of physical activity every day of the week. And for adults, the Health Education Authority currently recommend 30 minutes of exercise (which can include things such as brisk walking) five times a week with on of these being at a higher sustained level.