The use of detergents to remove fatty deposits works on a basic principle - the addition of a molecule which has both polar (hydrophilic) and non-polar (hydrophobic) groups. In effect, this molecule will act as a 'bridge' between the oil and the water which would otherwise naturally repel one another. Below is a rough diagram showing this - the fat molecule is at the centre of the diagram and it is surrounded, in a shell/skin type configuration, by the molecules containing the hydrophilic/hydrophobic groups - these are known as surfactants;
The ionic/hydrophilic 'head' of the detergent enables it to dissolve in water, but when it does so; it forms spherical groups of carboxylate chains called micelles. Because the 'tails' of the micelle are lipophilic they will dissolve into a fat molecule if there is one present. The other point of importance is once the fat molecule is surrounded, it effectively has a cloud of slightly negative charge around it. Because of this, the oil droplets will not be able to rejoin as they are now naturally repelled from one another.
Detergents, particularly washing up liquids, contain a number of ingredients which assist them to dissolve oil/fat in water. These include; non-ionic surfactants (usually 5-15%) and anionic surfactants (usually 15-30%). It is these ingredients within common household detergents that help to remove grease from dirty dishes. Anionic surfactants are generally used in toiletry type products from which lather is wanted, for example, shampoo, bath and shower products. They have a negatively charged carboxylic, sulphate or sulphonate group at the end of an alkyl chain and are commonly in the form of salts of sodium and magnesium. Non-ionic surfactants have structures in which the hydrophilic region contains lots hydroxyl or ester groups which have double bonded oxygen atoms which are able to bond with the hydrogen atoms of water - they are mostly used as emulsifiers. There are two other groups of surfactants, these are; cationic and zwitterionic of which zwitterionic is commonly used within the food industry.
Detergents will remove grease, food particles and any other contaminants from food service. They will also remove micro-organisms; however, micro-organisms will not be killed. For this to be achieved, a disinfectant must be used.
The method was followed exactly as described in the practical class handbook. In summary, two dilution series (210%) were made with two different detergents. 10ml oil was the added to the solutions and they were shaken until a good emulsion was formed (approximately 5 minutes). The solutions were then allowed to separate and 50ml of the lower layer (the emulsion) was removed and placed in an evaporating dish. This was then placed in an oven at 105C so that the water could be removed. The amount of oil recovered could then be determined by taking the difference of the before and after weights of the evaporating dish. The results were then tabulated and plotted on a graph.
The first important thing that can be concluded from the results is that even just the water (without detergent) is able to suspend some oil in an emulsion; 0.2g. It is known that water and oil naturally repel from one another so, at first, this result may seem anomalous. However, the water and oil mixture was shaken very vigorously for approximately five minutes. During this time, the size of the oil droplets within the water would have been greatly reduced. This therefore means that the time required for the oil droplets to coalesce and eventually come out of suspension will be fairly significant. In this case the dish containing the oil/water emulsion was placed in an oven at 105C. This means that the water would evaporate before all the oil had time to come out of suspension. It is for this reason that 0.2g was set as the y axis intercept on chart 1. This then gives a true indication of how much oil, each of the detergents, at various concentrations, is able to suspend in emulsion. It should also be remembered that the procedure was carried out with cold water and that detergents are designed for use with warm water and that oil will naturally disperse more easily if the water (and, therefore, the detergent) is warmer. This in affect is cancelled out by the fact that the mixture was vigorously shaken for five minutes, and this, although not directed by the manufacturers, will aid the dispersion of the oil within the water. This means the results obtained will roughly reflect the performance of the detergents in the home.
Looking at the graph it can immediately be seen that at all concentrations, the Persil detergent was able to suspend more oil in emulsion than the Asda own brand detergent. The Asda detergent was only able to dissolve between 50 and 85% of the oil that the Persil detergent was able to do at each of the concentrations examined. The reason for this is to do with the composition of the detergents. Detergents are composed of two main parts which are of interest with respect to this experiment, these are; anionic and non-ionic surfactants. Both of these act to decrease the surface tension between the oil and the water and therefore allow the oil to be suspended within the water, in affect, creating an emulsion. The larger the composition of these two ingredients within the detergent, the better it will be at emulsifying oil in solution. Below is a table showing the composition of the to detergents;
In cheaper detergents, the bulk of the liquid is likely to be some aqueous based substance which will be substantially cheaper than the non-ionic and anionic surfactants. However, looking at the table above it can be seen that the Asda detergent is comparable to, if not better than the Persil detergent. It must therefore be concluded that the Persil detergent has better quality surfactants. It can therefore be concluded that a larger volume (up to 50% more) of the Asda own brand detergent will be required to have the same cleaning affect as the Persil detergent - or at least in helping to remove the grease/oil from washing-up to the water.
If this experiment was to be repeated, as well as doing more repeats (the reliability of the results cannot be expressed to any great extent as only one repeat was done) it would be interesting to see how the Persil detergent compared to the Asda own brand at lower concentrations. Another factor which would have affected the results was how well the samples were shaken - samples being shaken by someone's right hand may be more vigorously shaken if that person is right handed. Therefore, shaking the sample an equal time in each hand would over come this. Better still would be to use a machine to do this and thus eliminating any differences which may be caused by different shaking methods from different people. When using detergents such as these to wash dishes they would be used at much lower concentrations, probably less than 0.05% (approximately 2-3ml detergent in 5L water). The problem with doing this with the volumes used in the experiment is that the amount of oil held in emulsion would be virtually impossible to measure so a much greater volume of solution would need to be made so that the weight of oil to measure was realistic.