In recent years, globalization has become one of the important economic factors, which externally influence the businesses everywhere. Despite being a very important issue in economics, a popular controversy has been brought about as well, which is that anti-globalists take a much more critical view, demonstrating that moves towards liberalization through bodies such as the WTO (World Trade Organization) are driven by the rich countries and developed countries exploit developing countries by paying low wages. Also, they consider the agreements achieved to be favoured for the interests of multinational businesses and richer economies rather than indigenous producers in local economies, whereas supporters of more liberal world trade argue that globalization brings benefits of wider access to markets and cheaper goods and services, the growth in trade that follows benefits both consumers and workers by encouraging innovation and investment, so from an economic point of view, free trade is very beneficial for all the countries involved. Hence countries lowered their trade barriers since the Great Depression in the 1930s and now there are important free trade areas such as NAFTA and the EU, which play important roles for our Nationwide Supermarket businesses.
NAFTA stands for the North American Free Trade Agreement, which was launched in January 1994 by Canada, the United States and Mexico, and formed the world's largest free trade zone among the tree countries. Since this Agreement was achieved, the barriers to trade in have been eliminated by the reduction of many tariffs, and the cross border movement of goods and services between the territories of the Parties have been facilitated as well; conditions of fair competition in the free trade area were promoted; additionally the investment opportunities in their territories were increased substantially, as a result, it brought prosperity to Mexico, cheaper goods to the US, the ignite job growth in all three countries as well as the economic growth and rising standards of living for people in all three countries. Apparently, NAFTA won't have any effect on our nationwide supermarket, however, concerning with one of the objectives of NAFTA, which is to establish a framework for further trilateral, regional and multilateral cooperation to expand and enhance the benefits of this Agreement, if there was a free trade arrangement between the UK and NAFTA partners, there would be no significant economic obstacles, to the contrary, there would be important economic benefits, not the least of which would be to cement the already substantial economic relationship, as well as serve as an instrument to improve the trade relations with the EU. Additionally, due to the close cultural links between the UK and Canada and the UK and the United States, trade and investment among these countries would be enhanced and accelerated, so trade between the UK and the North American countries would be subject to relatively few trade barriers and the UK would liberalize faster and more extensively. Generally, as predicted by " U.S SENATE COMMITTEE ON BANKING HOUSING, AND URBAN AFFAIRS August 2000" that so long as the UK-NAFTA arrangement was achieved, there would be a complete elimination of tariffs on products traded between the UK and the United States, UK imports from the United States would be increased by 11 to 16 percent, also, overall tariff reductions may increase the availability of agricultural products at lower prices and thus increase the range or variety of products available to consumers. As a result, our company as a Nationwide Supermarket in the UK would be strongly affected and benefit from sourcing out more and more better quality and much cheaper food from Northern American countries.
Another external effect on our business is from the European Union. The EU is credited with being the model for many other regional trade groupings. Since the Treaty of Rome was sighed in 1959 to establish the European Economic Community (EEC), the aim has been to further integrate the economics of the European countries and gradually eliminate tariffs and other restrictions that national governments use to protect domestic industries. This was broadly achieved by 1968, and led to further efforts to bring about closer economic integration between the member states. This culminated in the Single European Act of 1986 that aimed to create a single internal market by 1993. This further extended the scope for companies to operate in an integrated way across Europe. Companies were able to offer their goods and services much more widely throughout the EU, leading to a rapid growth in trade within the region, so the trade, distribution and developing barriers of our business within the EU have been greatly minimized and we have a considerably enlarged free trade environment to expand our new business areas. There are a number of factors present from the EU that have affected our business, one significant factor is CAP (Common Agricultural Policy), it is a system of European Union agricultural subsidies which represents about 50%-70% of the EU's spending. These subsidies work by guaranteeing a minimum price to producers, which provides some economic certainty for EU farmers, thus ensuring the sufficient production of a certain quantity of agricultural goods. Upon the aims of CAP, which comprise increasing productivity by promoting technical progress and ensuring the optimum use of the factors of production, in particular labour; ensuring a fair standard of living for the agricultural Community; stablising markets as well as providing consumers with safe food at reasonable prices, our company is enabled to hunt freely for best quality fresh foods at reasonable prices around the EU countries , also the raltionship and trade between our supermarket and the EU farmers or fresh food suppliers could be further stabilised. In addition, according to the reform of CAP on 26 th June 2003, as indicated by , the new CAP will be geared towards consumer and taxpayers, while give the EU farmers the freedom to produce what the markets wants. In the future, the vast majority of subsidies will be paid independently from the volume of production. Serving the link between subsidies and production will make EU farmers more competitive and market-oriented, while providing the necessary income stability, so consequently, a much more various selection of agricultural foods will be produced, which faciliate us maxmise our existing product ranges to a great extent. Besides, the EU plays an important role in maintaining high standards of food safety and quality. The EU agricultural policy encourages farmers to produce a large choice of quality staff, including organic production. For instance, our business has benefited from this point, which is we expanded the variety of our strawberry products by linking to the growers in Spain who produce a kind of organic giant straberry of around 57mm in circumference, and European wide legislation serves to keep food free of harmful substances and to keep consumer well-imformed through the labels on the food, so the quality of the foods we bought from the farms and suppliers have been largely controlled and ensured, which will affect our the reputation of our business positively.
Last but not least, the impact on our business outside the EU comes from WTO (World Trade Organisation), which was established in 1995, based in Geneva and now have 148 member states. It is an organisation for liberalizing trade, it is the only international institution that deals with the rules of trade between nations world-wide. Its overall aim is to make tradable goods and services flow as freely as possible between nations and markets, the complexity of which made the former General Agreement of Tarriffs and Trade (GATT) (introduced in 1947 and still remains in force) outdated and called for a new system that resulted in the foundation of WTO. WTO is subjected to a wide range of roles: handling disputes between member states, monitoring national trade policies, faciliating technical assistance for developing countries, furthering trade liberalisation negotiations and administering existing trade agreements. Decisions are usually taken by consensus among its 148 member states and become legally-binding after ratification in national parliaments.
There are a couple of fundamental principles as the fundation of the mutilateral trading system, which would affect our business: Firstly, MFN (most-favoured nation), which means every time a country lowers a trade barrier or opens up a market, it has to do so for the same goods or services from all its trading partners-whether rich or poor, weak or strong; Secondly, free trade, which is expected to be gradually formed through negotiation. Lowering trade barriers is one of the most obvious means of encouraging trade. The barriers concerned include custom duties (or tariffs) and measures such as import bans or quotas that restrict quantities selectively. With repects to these WTO trade principles, the advantage for our nationwide business is that a fair and non-discrimination trade environment has been created for our nationwide business to access to different territories more eaily to hunt for the best sources of foods and distribute our products with a lowered trade barrier. As the main goal of WTO is to advance the process of progressive liberalization by lowering tariffs on agriculture and textiles while allowing the negotiations between developing and developed countries, then developing countries pursuing an open trade regime will be able to export only goods in which they have a comparative advantage. On the other hand, our Nationwide Supermarket has the strategy to buy food from national suppliers, as the wages are high in Britain, the foods are expensive. However, if WTO reached tariff reductions so that food of developing countries won't be made more expensive by tariffs, this will have bad effect on our business, because our Tesco supermarket will then sell the cheap food and it will be more difficult for our Nationwide Supermarket to sell expensive products.
To end up with, in my opinion, a successful WTO has both advantages of providing larger free trade area and further development opportunities for our National Supermarket business and disadvantages of forcing our nationwide supermarkets to sell cheap goods; and with the proposed formation of free trade area between the UK and NAFATA will make our business benefited, besides, EU plays the significant roles of enhancing and proctections of our business economically, politically and legally.