A PESTLE analysis can be used to examine Tesco's external environment and Porter's five forces to examine the conditions in its own industry. The political and economic environment in the UK is a stable economy, with low unemployment and an affluent population (with high GDP per capita in relation to other countries around the world). Consumers in the UK have a relatively high level of disposable income to spend on retail and grocery items. This gives supermarkets such as Tesco a favourable environment in which to sell its goods. A possible threat to Tesco may occur if the economic environment moves towards instability. Rising interest rates or an increase in unemployment will decrease the amount of disposable income.
As technologies and the supply chain have developed over the previous decades it has become possible for supermarkets to source food items from abroad and ensure consistently fresh and quality products. This has led to an increase in consumer demand for reliable, good quality food products and a demand for variety.
Socio-cultural changes have altered the way people shop. Over the last few decades the number of working parents and single parent families has increased. This is one factor which may have led people having to spend less time shopping. As consumers become more interested in convenience they want to buy all their food items in one shop as opposed to going to the traditional butcher, bakery, and grocery shops.
Legal and environmental barriers such as planning permission may restrict supermarkets from expansion into certain areas of the country. Activist groups also try to put pressure on supermarkets to inhibit their growth and damage their reputation.
Within the retail industry the bargaining power which supermarkets have over their suppliers allows them to push down the price at which they purchase products and sell them at a low price to consumers. Exploiting their economies of scale opens up opportunities to move into non-food retail goods and services. As the article states '(Tesco) only had 5 per cent of non-food - and would be targeting its over-priced high street rivals.'
To some extent there were still threats to Tesco in the supermarket industry; 'as a new breed of discount food retailers from continental Europe entered the UK.' However the table below shows how Tesco has grown over the last 7 years and developed a substantial share of the market, making it very difficult for new entrants to pose a threat.
The table above indicates some of Tesco's main rivals in the UK. The strategy clock below shows some other potential rivals in the supermarket industry. Supermarkets such as Waitrose, Marks & Spencer and Kwiksave do not feature in the table above because they have a smaller share of the market. However, they are still rivals to Tesco because to some extent they provide the same goods.
Tesco is in the hybrid position at point 3 on the strategy clock because there is a simultaneous emphasis on low prices and differentiation. Sainsbury's is similarly trying to obtain a hybrid strategy by offering both an 'economy' and 'taste the difference range.' Waitrose and Marks & Spencer try to differentiate themselves from other supermarkets. They focus more specifically on the quality of their products and steer away from low prices, to generally attract customers with a higher disposable income. Asda and Morrison's focus more on low prices but still try to differentiate themselves to some extent. Morrison's place some emphasis on a high quality customer service and a pleasurable shopping experience whereas Asda sell a range of non-food products such as clothes and electrical items.
Kwicksave is at position 1 on the strategy clock which represents the 'no frills' concept that Tesco started off with- 'pile-it-high, sell-it-cheap.' Tesco has changed position over time moving around the strategy clock although even during its early years it did show some signs of differentiation. Tesco established the first loyalty scheme which involved giving out green stamps that customers could collect and exchange for gifts or vouchers.
The multi-dimensional perceptual map above represents where the focus of each supermarket's strategy lies. It shows how each supermarket differentiates itself from the competition by focusing on specific areas. Tesco is in the middle of these four areas of diversification showing how it diversifies in several ways.
Tesco offers a low price 'value range' while differentiating itself from other supermarkets, such as Kwicksave, by focusing on providing superior customer service. This included such things as; making staff available to help customers pack bags and take them to the car; having a policy of opening checkouts if there was more than one person in a queue. Other areas of customer service improvements also enhance loyalty amongst customers. These include linking in with the Airmiles group in relation to its Clubcard and the provision of facilities such as baby changing units, restaurants and coffee bars. This focus on customer service was also developed through successfully introducing shopping and home delivery via the Internet.
Tesco also offers a 'finest' product range as well as a brand called 'Free from' for customers with special dietary needs; to be in close proximity to the area of high quality products (and appeal to the same segment as Waitrose).
Sainsbury's have a similar position on the perceptual map as Tesco however one attribute which differentiates Tesco from this competition is the location and range of stores. Tesco have set up small inner city store locations to move into the convenience store market. This has also set Tesco apart from Asda who have focused on big out of town hypermarkets. Tesco put emphasis on having a range of products and an array of variety which other supermarkets do not provide. Sainsbury's seem to be following a similar strategy to Tesco but are one step behind them in innovation. When Tesco bought out the Clubcard, a scheme to encourage loyalty from its customers, at first Sainsbury's dismissed it as a gimmick.
The diagram above shows some of the possible development directions which can be adopted.
Tesco occupy the whole of this grid as they have pursued development in four areas. Increasing market share of the UK grocery market is a market penetration direction because Tesco is trying to grow its share of the market which it has an existing share of. Growth of non-food is a product development direction. They have also started diversifying by developing new products in new segments. This includes the retailing services such as financial, dot com and telecommunications which have been set up. International expansion is part of their market development. This does differ from Carrefour and Wal-Mart. These other supermarkets have also sought out market development from international expansion.
Wal-Mart are the largest retailer in the USA and moved into the UK market (as Asda) to subdue the growth of Tesco and prevent the inevitable threat that Tesco would pose internationally. Wal-Mart, similar to Tesco, is also interested in market penetration and is protective over its home market in America; ensuring that it retains the customers in that segment. Carrefour failed to sustain growth in its home market and focused too much on market development through international growth ('over aggressive expansion'). They neglected their pricing strategy that had made them so successful and lost their reputation for low prices in their home country. Rival supermarkets have stolen Carrefour's market share which has led to some withdrawal from the international market. Their strategy now is to consolidate in the home market to get back some of the segment it lost and to cautiously develop its international market by being 'in the top three (in a country) or not be there at all.'
The suitability of a development direction is concerned with whether the strategy fits with the circumstances in the environment, the organisation's resources and competences and the expectations. Tesco is in a good position to conduct market penetration and developments because it is already market leader in the UK. It has superior resources and competences, which can be exploited in both its own country and internationally.
Tesco also have the resources available to conduct product development and diversification. Economies of scale used to lower the price of grocery items can be exploited in providing a lower price for non-food products and other retail services.
Acceptability is concerned with the expected performance outcomes of a strategy. It can be separated into three areas-return, risk and stakeholder reactions. An assessment of the likely returns from a strategy will be helpful in reviewing its acceptability. This can be carried out by financially analysing the profitability and the impacts on shareholder value. A cost-benefit analysis will also be useful to see the wider impacts of a strategy on people and organizations; but this is more difficult to quantify. An assessment of risks will also help Tesco as projects with some uncertainty are pursued. Financial ratios and sensitivity analysis defines the robustness of a strategy. Tesco can also conduct stakeholder mapping to identify the expectations and power of stakeholders and understand the company's priorities.
Feasibility can be used to determine whether Tesco has the resources and competences to fulfill a strategy. This includes the financial feasibility- a funds flow forecasting can be used to identify if funds are available to meet the strategic requirements. Resource deployment analysis will also determine how Tesco's resources and competences would need to change to undertake a strategy and whether they have the unique resources an competences to sustain a competitive advantage.
Tesco has been a success story in the UK market because of its innovative strategies which meet the needs and requirements of customers and make it unique amongst competition. The way in which Tesco capitilises on their strengths such as buying power and translates it into an aggressive pricing strategy has been a core competence to its success. The adoption of a hybrid stratergy has also spread Tesco across a range of market segments to attract a variety of customers.