Before the merger in 2001, the important issue in the macro environment surrounding British Steel was the formation of the European Union and the United Kingdom's abstention from joining the euro. This occurrence changed the economic environment of favourable exchange rates, which helped British Steel prosper in international trade, into unfavourable exchange rates. This was because the pound Sterling became stronger than the euro which makes exporting to Europe less profitable.
The industrial environment changed greatly before the merger of British Steel, posing more difficulties. Initially the privatisation of the steelmaking industry in the UK provided an increase in investments and gave fresh opportunities. The acquisition of 30% market share of the distribution chain, investment in information technology and product development along with management re-structuring and adaptation of working practises all led to an increase in profitability. The threats that were present in the industry at this time came from the UK based buyers of steel. The amount of steel used in manufacturing metal-based products (steel intensity) was declining due to technological advances leading to the use of substitute metals. Also the tough competition manufacturing companies in the UK (who used steel) faced, in their own industries, led to them making cut-backs. The buyers are likely to have used their bargaining power to put pressure on British Steel to lower prices.
Within its own industry, British Steel was the first steelmaking producer to become internationally based and had some success. Appendix 3 shows how the pre-tax profit moved from a loss in the years 1991-1993 into increasing profits after 1993. When British Steel moved into the international market, they were competing with national companies in Europe which had government subsidies. This made competition difficult because of the excess capacity, and may have stunted British Steel's development.
The efforts to become an international based company and survive in the competitive environment of excess supply and low prices led British Steel to merge with Hoogovens, from the Netherlands, to form Corus. Much of the macro environment remained the same after the formation of Corus with continuation of unfavourable exchange rates. The competitive forces within the steel industry were also similar, and Corus faced further pressures from excess supply in the market leading to a decline in prices. One way in which Corus responded to this was to cut back on costs by using their purchasing power over suppliers. The number of suppliers was cut back, and a few suppliers were given higher volumes to provide at a lower price.
The merger with Hoogovens did open up a new market segment for Corus because they were also able to produce aluminium based products. The merger also gave Corus a greater production capacity which would enable them to lower costs and compete with the declining prices.
In response to the changing external environment, initially British Steel and following that Corus, developed a strategy which they hoped would enable them to survive and prosper. The success of this strategy depended on their strategic capability. This is the adequacy and suitability of the resources and competences of an organisation for it to fit with the environment and thrive in it.
After the privatisation of the UK steel industry, British Steel responded well to the opportunities the environment presented. The increase in investments, changes in management structure and revolution in working practises helped to increase performance. Prosperity followed this success and was enhanced by the exploitation of information technology to further reduce costs and enhance customer service.
As British Steel moved into the international market many of the critical issues that were encountered involved the organisation's resources. During this time (1990-2001) the organisation was under pressure because of the excess supply of steel and the resultant decline in prices. The response that British Steel made was to become more efficient by driving down costs, reducing the number of employees, and increasing productivity.
This increase in efficiency helped the organisation to remain in the industry but was not enough to out-perform against the competition. There was a failure to develop critical success factors to prosper during this time. British Steel's initial movement towards globalisation was a bold response to the external environment but was not developed well. The opportunity to move into developing markets, where manufacturing costs are lower, was not taken. As the exchange rates became unfavourable the organisation did not have the resources to alleviate the pressure.
Knowledge is one of the most important resources an organisation can have in fulfilling their strategic capabilities. British Steel has been operating since the 1970s, so must have a very good knowledge of the steelmaking process and some highly qualified experts in their group of employees. This would have contributed to the organisation becoming more efficient but they did not seem to have capitalised on this by using it as a critical success factor. The organisation could have focused on developing a competitive advantage by creating technological expertise in a market segment, for high-value specialised products. Instead of this they produced bulk carbon steel which was being produced in excess of its demand. This highlights an area in which strategic capability of the organisation did not meet the change in external environment. The knowledge was available within the organisation but was not applied with enough speed to exploit the fast-changing environment.
Towards the end of the 1990s, after the merger to form Corus, further cost reductions had to be made to adjust to the difficult environment. The organisation was able to respond to this by exploiting the use of information technology, enabling a further increase in productivity. This change once again demonstrated that the organisation has the strategic capability to fit with the environment. However the continued over-capacity of the steelmaking industry and price pressures that led to the 2001 crisis reveals the strategic incapability of Corus to prosper, and create new opportunities.
Stakeholders are groups or individuals who are dependent in some way on the organisation for fulfilment of their desires and purposes.The major stakeholders for Corus are as follows:-
Conflicts exist between the major stakeholders because each has their own interest in Corus' performance. The primary responsibility that Corus has is to fulfil the desires and purposes of the shareholders. However, because Corus is a result of a merger there will be two sets of shareholders- one from British Steel and the other from Hoogovens. In the United Kingdom there tends to be a lot of shareholders, all with a small ownership of the company, therefore limiting the power of individuals. In the Netherlands, (where Hoogovens originates), shareholding is often shared between a small group, sometimes a founding family, giving them more influence over the organisation's activities. If the two sets of shareholders have different expectations from Corus it would be difficult to design a strategy to fulfil both.
Although both are looking for profitability from Corus, conflicts of interests exist between shareholders and chief executives. Chief executives and managers are more interested in the short term strategy to become profitable (to have successful careers) whereas shareholders are more interested in long-term profitability. This is what may have led Corus into making cost reductions instead of investing in new product developments. A difference in expectations also exists here between employees and executive managers. The job cuts that Corus made will help to prosper the executive managers' careers by making the company more efficient but does not fulfil the interests of the employees whose jobs are sacrificed.
Trade unions and the government are also not pleased with the strategy that is causing job cuts because their interests lie in keeping unemployment to a low level. Although they are not a major stakeholder in Corus they do have influence as pressure groups and are to some extent dependent on the organisation to fulfil their purposes.