Since ancient times, plants have been used for medicinal purposes. It is only in recent investigations that the nature of the benefits they offer, in promoting good health and prevention against disease, are being realised. Plant polyphenols cover a wide range of compounds found in the plant kingdom. They are split up into a number of sub-groups. Most of the research that has been conducted thus far has been on two groups, phenolic acids and flavonoids.
There is a particularly high occurrence of flavanoids in foods, over 8000 are known to exist (and this number is growing). The flavonoids that have received the most interest include catechin, quercetin, kaempferol and taxifolin. These are also found in fruits; as well as red wine, tea, chocolate, herbs, spices and vegetables (onion, broccoli). The phenolic acids that are often the most abundant in plants include caffeic acid and gallic acid. These have been found in foods such as fruits (blackcurrants and blueberries).
Currently there is a lack of research that has been conducted on the effects of supplementation of plant polyphenols in foods. It is also currently viewed that polyphenols can not be exclusively related to health benefits. Other components in the complex of compounds in the plant will directly contribute to or enhance the effects of polyphenols. So health benefits are more likely to be gained from a food containing the actual plant substance rather than a supplementation of just the phenolic compound.
One of the first links made between the consumption of plant polyphenols and a beneficial effect on human health has been termed the 'French Paradox.' The population of France are well-known for drinking red wine on frequent occasions, which is rich in polyphenols, but have a relatively low risk of coronary heart disease (CHD). There are other aspects of the French diet and lifestyle which can be related to this low risk of CHD, but research into this inverse relationship has highlighted the potential for plant polyphenols to have beneficial influence on health.
There is growing evidence from studies to suggest that regular consumption of polyphenol-rich foods is inversely associated with the progression of diseases such as cardiovascular disease, neurodegenerative diseases (Parkinson's and Alzheimer's), strokes, bowel disease and cancers. As the dietary intake of polyphenols is increased the progression of these diseases is inhibited. Although there is significant evidence that these diseases are in part caused by excessive oxidative damage, and that polyphenols can suppress this action, it has not yet been proved that this is the primary cause of the diseases. Therefore it is considered that plant polyphenols may have cardioprotective effects and other similar health benefits.
Within the normal functionality of the body oxidative stress is caused by the presence of reactive oxygen species, called free radicals. These species exist as by-products of the body's metabolism, as a result of exposure to environmental influences and as part of the ageing process. They are molecules with an odd number of electrons which are highly reactive as they seek to pair up with another free electron. Free radicals therefore have the potential to cause oxidative damage to the body's DNA, cells and tissues.
Dietary antioxidants, such as plant polyphenols work in a similar way to antioxidants in foods, by preventing oxidation. In this case they are thought to have the ability to prevent the formation of free radicals or indeed 'mop them up.'
Oxidative stress is an underlying factor in health and disease. A balance between oxidants and antioxidants is involved in maintaining health. Altering this balance in favour of oxidants may result in responses which lead to disease. Similarly, epidemiological studies have shown that an increased antioxidant status within the body is associated with a reduced risk of several diseases.
The diversity of polyphenols in the diet has posed challenges when measuring their bioavailability. Their absorption is complex as it is dependent on numerous transporters and enzymes within the body. It is also not known how other dietary constituents may affect their absorption.
There is indirect evidence to suggest that polyphenols are absorbed through the gut barrier. This was identified through the association that after the consumption of polyphenol-rich foods an increase in the level of antioxidants in the blood occurred. The chemical structure of polyphenols is also a factor that will determine their rate and extent of absorbtion.
It would be appropriate to add a similar amount to a product as what is known to have beneficial antioxidant effects. This value can range from 250-800 mg/100g of food.
As there is a lack of research into the supplementation of these types of antioxidants and their bioavailability, at this stage, it would be most appropriate to develop a product naturally high in plant polyphenols. This could include fruits such as blueberries, blackberries; vegetables such as onions, broccoli; spices such as cinnamon, cloves; or a cocoa based product.