The risk of microbiological contamination in posting smoked salmon by mail was evaluated using the computer programme for 'predictive microbiology.' The micoorganism of concern, which is able to multiply in certain favourable conditions, in this food is Listeria Monocytogenes. The level of concern, at which there is risk to the consumer, for this microorganism is 10 3 cfu/g. Assuming that the initial contamination level is 1 cfu/g, if the salmon contains 3.8% (w/w) NaCl; has a mean pH value of 6.2; and is stored at 5 degrees C the shelf life will be 10 days. This is because it will take just over 10 days for Listeria Monocytogenes to multiply to the level of concern, (10 3 cfu/g). If the salmon is posted in a simple lined cardboard box the level of contamination will be unacceptable. This is because the Listeria Monocytogenes will multiply to 10 3 cfu/g before the end of the first day. When the customer receives the package of fish it will already be unsuitable for consumption.
If these conditions were suitable for posting the fish; prior to dispatch the standards for Listeria Monocytogenes should be set at a level not greater than 1 cfu/g.
If the time taken to make a delivery is 3 days and the storage conditions between a delivery being received and the fish being consumed is 5 days at 5 degrees C the following conditions would be adequate to ensure an acceptable level of Listeria Monocytogenes:-
To carry out the first set of conditions, the pH must be lowered. This can be done by placing the fish in an acidic solution. Lemon juice may be used to lower pH and may also enhance sensory characteristics. In performing the second set of recommendations the salt concentration must be increased. This could be done by simply placing the fish in a solution of sodium chloride. In the 3 rd set of recommendations the temperature of the fish needs to be reduced and this can be done by placing the fish in a cooling bag. For the customer to be assured that correct conditions have been maintained during transit it would be important to conduct quality assurance tests on a regular basis.
Vacuum packing the salmon is not appropriate because it provides an environment with a lack of oxygen which will favour the multiplication of Listeria Monocytogenes. Another potentially harmful microorganism, Clostridium Botulinum, can form spores which release toxic substances, in conditions of low oxygen.
In order to assure a safe product to the consumer it would also be more appropriate to pack the salmon in a controlled or modified atmosphere with higher levels of oxygen.
The risks of Clostridium Botulinum poisoning from the recommendations above (for ensuring an acceptable level of Listeria Monocytogenes) are as follows:-
! - The computer programme was unable to calculate these values because they were outside the model's limits. But because at an initial C. Botulinum population of 10 4 /g the risk is zero it can be assumed that at an initial level of 1 spore/g there will also be zero.
* - These values had to be amended from the initial recommendations set for Listeria Monocytogenes to fit with the limits of the computer programme.
If the 1 st set of conditions were adopted the time taken to reach half the maximum probability of 10 4 /g of C. Botulinum spores existing would be 7.1 days. This is higher than the time which the salmon will actually be subjected to these conditions, which is just 3 days.
Similarly, if the third and fourth set of conditions were used the time taken to reach half the maximum probability of 10 4 /g of C. Botulinum spores existing would be 10.3 and 5.8 days respectively. Therefore these conditions are also acceptable for preventing the growth of C. Botulinum spores in the salmon, over the 3 days during transit.