An important principle in forensic science is that "every contact leaves a trace" meaning that if a trace e.g. fibre can be identified, this can provide valuable evidence of the contact e.g. suspects clothing. X-ray diffraction, otherwise known, as XRD is an effective and versatile analytical technique used to identify and characterise unknown solid crystalline and partly crystalline materials.
Its use in forensics is vast as paints, paper, drugs, and fibres plus explosive and gunshot residues all fall under these categories so can be analysed using the technique. In forensic science a diffractionist will be asked to perform one of two types of analysis either 1) Identification, when they are presented with a one off sample e.g. a white powder found on an individual in the street or 2) A comparison, to see whether two samples originated from the same source, e.g. a glass fragment seized from a suspects clothing, with that of a control sample taken from the scene.
There are two types of XRD, which differ in the type of sample they analyse, which can be either a single crystal or a powder, respectively known as single crystal diffraction and powder diffraction. Diffraction use in forensics usually implies powder diffraction, as single crystal provides full structural analysis, which is rarely required, because of this the added expense single crystal requires to perform cannot be justified. Most samples required for analysis are very small often only a few mg's meaning that the XRD equipment must be able to perform small specimen analysis.
The sample is bombarded with a parallel beam of monochromatic x-rays, which acts as a 3-d diffraction grating causing the x-rays to be diffracted at specific angles and intensities onto an x-ray film, which produces a diffraction pattern. A diffraction pattern is often referred to as a "fingerprint" as every crystalline material will produce a characteristic pattern making the pattern unique to the sample. The angle and intensity information that this pattern provides can be used to identify any crystalline compounds contained in the sample even if it is a complex multi-component sample, by comparing it to those contained within a large database available from the ICDD powder diffraction file, which contains ~500,000 XRD patterns taken from pure substances of metals, alloys, organics and inorganics and other partly / crystalline materials.
Recently X-ray diffraction instrumentation has seen an advance in its technology by the use of X-ray diffractometers. This equipment is much improved compared to the previous methods at collecting diffraction patterns and is therefore said to be truly capable of small specimen analysis a major criteria of any equipment used by a forensic scientist.
The pattern produced containing the diffracted angles and their intensities depends on the samples structure and provides valuable information about what the structure comprises of itself.
When analysing the diffraction pattern an equation known as the Bragg equation can be used to convert the diffraction angle at 2 into d-spacings (interplanar atomic spacings) using the formula: - = 2d sin which is rearranged producing: - d = / 2 sin .
The position of the diffracted peaks provides additional information on how the atoms are arranged within the sample, which can in turn indicate unit cell size and lattice parameter, knowledge of this can help an analyst understand the extent of solid substitution in the sample. Which is when one element is partly or completely substituted for another, this occurs in some metal alloys.
The intensity of the highest peak is assigned an arbitrary value of 100, with the relative intensities of the rest of the peaks determined by dividing their new intensities by that of the highest peaks.
The intensity of the diffracted beams also helps determine the type and nature of the atoms present. When the d-spacings and intensity are used together they can help to quantitatively estimate the amount of that crystalline component in a multi-component mixture. Which is very useful to a forensic analyst as they are often presented with samples from a scene that are not clean, single-component materials and can on occasion also be contaminated with other material from the scene.
XRD is considered a largely versatile technique available to a forensic analyst as it can be used to analyse a variety of materials, as the samples only pre-requisite for analysis, is that it has to be a solid crystalline or partly crystalline material as its needs to be able to produce a diffraction effect. This doesn't disclude many substances that a forensic analyst is confronted with as metallic crystals; ionic crystals, covalent crystals and molecular crystals, meaning a large majority of organic and inorganic substances are crystalline. Materials such as paint, fibres and some plastics are partially crystalline. With materials such as building materials, drugs, minerals, soils, paper, vehicle underseals and explosive and gunshot residues also being able to be analysed under this technique.
Flakes of paint are often sent into an analytical laboratory for examination as these are a common evidence type found at a scene, so can therefore provide valuable evidence to help link an individual to a crime, and because dried paint is partially crystalline with the pigments and extenders being crystalline and the matrix they are held within being non-crystalline XRD can be used to help analyse them.
There are many paint types that may be sent in for analysis including, metallic which could be from a vehicle involved in a hit and run incident, or from a window or door pane at the scene of a burglary. The first course of action an assigned case analyst takes when presented with paint which will often consist of two samples one a control taken by the SOCO from the scene of the incident and the second seized from the suspect, is to decide if they are a visual match, if evident they are termed a metameric match. They next need to establish whether there is also a chemical match, achieved by taking a single layer of the suspect flake and the control sample. XRD can be used to determine whether they're chemically similar by comparing the resulting diffraction patterns and identifying crystalline components by comparison to standardised reference materials.
The control sample results are added to an XRD database to help establish the frequency at which the same combination of pigments and extenders in a certain colour category occur. This data can help determine the significance of a diffraction pattern match and therefore its evidential relevance. Achieved by considering the amount of crystalline material in the sample, as if high or with the sample containing an unusual crystalline component the relevance of the results will be substantial.
Common drugs encountered by the police on the street are those found as loose white powders, which are rarely identifiable by visual analysis, these drugs include cocaine, heroin, and types of amphetamine. This type of drug is often mixed with other substances known as diluents or adulterants. XRD is not normally the first type of analysis, but can often follow the initial visual examinations by eye and occasionally by use of visible light microscopes, and the chemical testing used to correctly identify the drugs present. XRD's usual role is to either: - 1) Identify the exact chemical form of the drug, which could be salt, base, or acid, or to 2) Correctly identify any diluents or adulterants present or lastly 3) to compare one drug confiscation with another.
Paper is another material that can call upon the use of XRD for analysis, paper is often presented to a forensic analysis when used to write ransom notes, threatening letters including hate mail or used to wrap up drugs. Again XRD may not be the first point of call but may be put to action after an initial visual examination by botanical or fibre experts. XRD is used to identify the fillers present in the paper and provide information of the percentage crystalline composition of the cellulose. Each dependent in the quality of the paper and differ from where they have been purchased.
There are many advantages and disadvantages associated with the use of XRD as an analytical technique. Some of the advantages to this technique include, its non-destructive nature mainly cause by the ease of sample preparation, meaning that the sample is preserved and can therefore be reanalysed afterwards using other techniques, and not only does it provide qualitative information identifying any crystalline phases present but also a quantitative estimate of their amounts. It requires relatively small amounts 1mg, which is important as specimens given to an analyst from a suspect / scene, can often be small. Which can also often be a contaminated, multi-phase specimen, but this also doesn't affect XRD analysis as it has the ability to analyse many types of material organic, inorganic, and metallic and alloys simultaneously.
Plus it identifies compounds present as opposed to just the elemental analysis that techniques such as x-ray fluorescence, XRF, perform. Allowing XRD to differentiate between differing hydrate forms and polymorphs (compounds that crystallise in different forms.)
There is also because it is an established technique, a large library of known crystalline structures, available from the ICDD powder diffraction file, which contains ~500,000 XRD patterns taken from pure substances of metals, alloys, organic and inorganics and other partly / crystalline materials. Allowing easy rapid comparisons and therefore comparisons to be made.
But there are also various disadvantages to be taken into consideration before this analytical technique is used, including that it can only analyse solid crystalline or partly crystalline material not gases or liquids or solid amorphous materials. Also it is considered to be fairly insensitive and therefore not really a trace technique, as components present in small amounts (1-3%) often go undetected under this technique.
When taking all this into account XRD can be considered a very valuable analytical technique available to a forensic analyst, because of its non destructive and therefore preservative nature should be considered as one of first types of analyse to perform on an unknown sample. Because it provides valuable qualitative and quantitative information about what the sample consists of as well as being able to provide this on multiple types of material simultaneously it is a valuable source of information. But it does have its limitations mainly in the type of material it can analyse and the fact that it is not regarded as a trace technique, meaning that it should be used in conjunction with other analytical techniques in order to produce and therefore be able to present a convincing case to a courtroom.