The object of the experiment was to synthesise diphenylsilanediol, and then to convert this compound into octaphenylcyclotetrasiloxane. Polymers such as diphenylsilanediol, a type based on the Silcon-oxygen linkage, are the only major commercial polymers possessing an inorganic backbone. They are prepared by hydrolysing an organo-dichlorosilane, which is followed by the spontaneous condensation of the produced silanediol involoving the elimination of a water molecule. This long-chain polymer is commonly referred to as silicone but its correct chemical nomenclature is "polysiloxane". When the reaction is carried out at low conc. it is kinetically more favourable for two ends of the same chain to react together than with two different molecules, which results in the formation of cyclopolysiloxanes.
During this experiment the intermediate silanediol (Ph 2Si (OH)2) is isolated, this is possible because of the stability of diaryl compounds relative to their respective dialkyl 's. Condensation of the diphenylsilanediol can occur in both acidic and basic environments, but this experiment was conducted under basic conditions using a basic Sodium Hydroxide catalyst.
Compounds with the general formula R2CO behave very differently to that of their corresponding organsilicon compounds, most obviously in their bonding and therefore their structures. P-P bonding is common in Carbon chemistry but this becomes less apparent as you go down the group, because p-orbitals become larger and more diffused meaning that the overlap between them will become weaker.
This is shown by the relative enthalpies of the C to O and Si to O bonds, as C=O has a bond enthalpy of 806 Kjmol-1, which is significantly larger than that for the C-O bond 359Kjmol-1.
The opposite can be said for Si, as the Si=O bond enthalpy 642Kjmol-1 is greatly bigger than that for the Si-O bond 466Kjmol-1.
Silicon and other heavier elements in the group possess vacant d-orbitals, silicon has a vacant 3d orbital which allows d-d bonding to occur, this partial -bonding allows Silicon to form stable planar structures unlike Carbon, e.g.
Carbon based compounds of this type usually adopt a monomeric structure compared to Silicon compounds who prefer polymeric or cyclic structures, as Silicon is larger and so can more easily become four coordinate and there is less -bonding in Silicon structures.
This could be regarded as a relatively high-risk experiment as caution should be taken when using a variety of the chemicals being used, the risks associated with them are as follows: - Highly flammable- Toulene, t-amyl alcohol (2-methyl-2-butanol), and ethanol. Corrosive- Diphenyldichlorosilane and 10% (w/v) aqueous sodium hydroxide. In addition to this as an extra precaution all parts of the experiment should be conducted in the fume cupboard.