Ferrocene, otherwise known as bis(cyclopentadienyl)iron (II), was discovered in 1951 and since then there has been a vast increase in the amount of complexes containing aromatic ligands such as the cyclopentadienyl anion that are bound to a metal. The termed aromaticity is best described using Huckels rules for aromaticity, which are that a considered molecule is aromatic if it is flat (planar), cyclic, and has a continuous overlap of p-orbitals around the ring. This system is stabilised (aromatic) if it contains 4n + 2 electrons, but is destabilised (anti-aromatic) if it contains 4n electrons. The common feature of bonding in these complexes is that of donation of electrons from ligand - orbitals to the metal and to a lesser extent back-donation from metal d-orbitals into anti-bonding orbitals of the ligand.
Because of its structure Ferrocene reacts in such a way that resembles benzene and because of this it is sometimes referred to as inorganic benzene.
During this experiment Ferrocene will be acetylated with the products being separated by two types of Chromatography TLC and column, and will finally be reduced to a Ferrocecyl alcohol.
Ferrocene does obey the 18 electron rule as both of the C 2H 5 rings donate five electrons and the Iron also has eight valence electrons which it can donate two from its 4s orbital and six from its 3d orbital.
This could be regarded as a relatively high-risk experiment as caution should be taken when using a variety of the chemicals being used, the risks associated with them are as follows: - Highly flammable chemicals - Toulene, diethyl ether (ether), ethyl acetate, petroleum ether (60-80 petroleum), sodium borohydride, methanol, and hexane, Corrosive Chemicals - Acetic anhydride, phosphoric acid and iodine, lastly Toxic Chemicals- Iodine.
That found after column Chromatography had been performed:
These results are relatively close and so are therefore consistent with that given for the compound at this stage.
That found after the experiment was completed:
Structure of the compound at the end of the experiment-
When analysing NMR spectra two important points should be noted; the relative heights of the integrals indicates the relative numbers of protons present in each chemical environment, and where the peaks at slightly different values of the applied external magnetic field depending on their precise chemical environment
There is only one peak in the spectra of the Ferrocene at 4.15ppm as there is only one Hydrogen environment in this compound, resulting in all ten Hydrogen's in the compound having the same chemical shift.
The peak at 2.32 corresponds to the three Hydrogens making up the CH3C=O group attached to the Ferrocene. The peak at 4.13 corresponds to the five Hydrogens making up the lower aromatic ring of the Ferrocene, these protons resonate a slightly lower magnetic field, 4.13 compare to 4.15, as the C-H bonds have become polarised because of the electronegative Oxygen atom attached to the same Carbon, this causes electron density in the vicinity of the H to be reduced, decreasing the shielding factor causing the peak to move downfield.
This effect is also apparent with the other two peaks in the spectra which each represent two Hydrogen's, the more deshielded peak at 4.69 corresponds to the two Hydrogen's attached to the two nearest Carbons to the electronegative Oxygen, these feel more of a deshielding effect from the Oxygen, compared to the Hydrogen's responsible for the 4.42 peak, which still feel the effect but not as greater extent.
Chromatography is a widely used technique for separating mixtures as it is often inexpensive and can be used to generate both qualitative as well as quantitative information. The simplest method is thin layer chromatography, which requires the use of TLC plates (in this case a silica based aluminium strip of paper) that act as the stationary phase, capillary dropping tubes and bottles. Firstly a solution is prepared, involving in this case dissolving a little of the product prepared earlier in the experiment (10mg) in toulene (1mL). A pencil line is drawn near the bottom of the TLC plate (0.5mm) as to not damage the silica, and by use of the capillary dropping tubes a conc. drop is placed onto the centre of the line. This plate acts as the stationary phase and is placed inside a bottle, a solvent is then added below the spot, this solvent acts the mobile phase and is absorbed onto the stationary phase. As the level of the solvent rises the materials in the spot also begin to travel upward, their rate depending on how strongly they adhere onto the stationary phase, there is a continuous extraction-taking place between the plate and the solvent. The solutes attracted more strongly to the plate rather than the solvent move the fastest. When the solvent has risen nearly to the top of the plate its level (solvent front) is marked again with a pencil. This procedure was repeated using five different solvents 1) Petroleum ether (60-80), 2) Toulene, 3) Diethylether, 4) A mixture of 10% ethylacetate and 90% petroleum ether (60-80), and 5) Ethyl acetate. The spots of material were located more clearly by placing them inside a bottle filled with iodine vapour the spots were then ringed. Each material can be identified quantitatively by calculating its Rf value (retention factor) the time it spends in each phase: -
The more strongly the solute is adhered to the stationary phase, the longer it will take to travel up the plate and so the larger its Rf value will be
It was then determined which spot was Ferrocene, achieved by dissolving 5mg of Ferrocene in 1mL Toulene. A slide was then spotted with this sol. And eluted with the solvent which previously gave the best separation (mixture of 10% ethylacetate and 90% petroleum ether (60-80). The Rf value of Ferrocene was measured, which was then used to determine which spot was ferrocene on the slides.
Column Chromatography was also used in this experiment, which involves many of the same concepts as TLC. The stationary phase used were small particles of Silica, or another substance such as alumina, what is not very reactive and has a specially prepared surface to help increase their ability to absorb solvents. The silica gel column is prepared by placing a small amount of glass wool at the bottom of the burette followed by some sand, then a prepared slurry containing the silica and the preferred solvent found earlier is added, followed by a small amount of sample and lastly more of the solvent. As soon as the solvent has been soaked in more is added. The solutes travel slowly down the column and are eluted at the bottom (Ferrocene and 1-acetylferrocene are collected seperatly). If the mobile phase is less polar than the stationary phase, the less polar solutes will be eluted first and the more polar ones last.
The reduction of 1-acetylferocene into 1-ferrocenylethanol involves the addition of a Hydride in this case Sodium Borohydride to the carbonyl group. During this reaction the Hydrogen atom, as well as the pair of electrons from the B-H bond are transferred to the Carbon atom of the Carbonyl group.
The oxyanion produced in the first step can help to stabilise the electron-deficient BH 3 molecule by adding to its now empty p-orbital with a H+. This produces a tetravalent Boron anion, which can therefore react again further with another aldehyde.
Europium like other lanthanoids act as electron donors and interact with the Oxygen atom in the 1-Ferrocenylethanol creating Diastereoisomers, both R and S, these will both be detected in the NMR resulting in two sets of peaks being produced.