Supramolecular polymers are polymers composed of monomeric subunits held together by directional and reversible non-covalent interactions such as hydrogen bonding, - interactions or metal coordination. These polymers are produced through use of self-assembling monomers, which have bonding sites incorporated within them. Apart from in biological systems, such self-assembling systems are mainly found in organic and non-polar solvents. Interesting properties have been demonstrated using specific monomers such as ureido-pyrimidones that can rearrange themselves to form very long chained structures. Supramolecular polymers combine conventionally known polymer properties with reversibility and responsiveness, which will be discussed in more detail later. The area of research into polymer chemistry, has become more developed due to the discovery of supramolecular polymers, which before was restricted to only macromolecular polymer species where only covalent bonding hold the repeating subunits together.
Supramolecular polymers have attracted a vast amount of interest due to their unusual properties resulting from their unique bonding. Such properties include: - their spontaneous formation, which does not require an initial stimulus e.g. catalyst, their dynamic and therefore reversible formation, and finally the limited amount of termination processes that occur during their assembly, this results in the degree of polymerisation only depending factor being the strength of interaction between the subunits, which makes them a very valuable material. Many uses for these favourable reversible interactions have been developed in the past but they only occurred when the structure was immersed in solution, but after careful reconstruction of their bonding these structures have been made to show polymer properties in both solid and aqueous states. Some of these uses are in smart films, hot melts and coatings.
Supramolecular polymers are a type of stimuli-responsive polymer as they can display a change in properties in response to external stimuli such as changes in temperature, ionic strength or pH, also with the addition of biological and chemical analytes, and by the presence of an electric, magnetic or mechanical field. This can make supramolecular polymers more valuable to an analyst as properties such as degree of polymerisation, lifetime of the chain, and its conformation, are dependent on the strength of interaction within the polymer, which can be adjusted by changes to external stimuli, whereas traditional macromolecules do not display these changes.
These systems provide the possibility of combining different monomers to create supramolecular copolymers, or instead produce branched or reversibly cross-linked polymers by adding monomers of higher functionality. Both techniques allow the resulting polymer properties to be adjusted by simple additions in contrast to covalent copolymer production, which requires further synthesis.
The formation of polymers that possess thixotropic character has been highly sort after, where for example if the structure is exposed to high stress such as that experienced during processing a film the polymer would act as a liquid but when this stress is removed such as during conditions experienced after processing it would return to its original state. These materials have potential usage in the form of smart films, which are found in sensors, actuators, and electropic devices.
A recently produced class of responsive metallo-supramolecular polymers that are held together by metal-ligand interactions was investigated. The polymers were firstly prepared using the tridentate ligand, bis (2,6-bis (1'methylbenzimidazolyl)-4-hydroxypyridine (OH-BIP) and were then reacted with diiodopentaethylene glycol to create a bis-ligand functionalised monomer.
This monomer was found to combine with both transition and lanthanoid ions in ratios of 2:1 or 3:1 respectively. A range of gels could then be prepared using these ions in differing amounts, where the transition metal ions act as chain extenders and the lanthnoids as cross-linkers. The researchers then added 3 mol % La (III) nitrate to a CHCl 3 / CH 3CN solution of the bis-ligand functionalised monomer followed by the addition of 97 mol % Zn (III) perchlorate, where the resulting product could then be swollen in acetonitrile, which resulted in the spontaneous production of a metallo-supramolecular polymer gel product of a concentration of 11 wt %. These gels are thixotropic as on shaking they acted as a free-flowing liquid but upon standing transfered back into their gel-like states. It was this property that the research went on to investigate and demonstrate further. A dynamically controlled stress sweep was carried out on the gel at a frequency of 1.0 Hz from 80 Pa to 330 Pa over a duration of several minutes, during which time the storage modulus, a measure of elasticity and the loss modulus, a measure of viscosity of the gel were measured. At small stresses, as predicted from the nature of these gels they behaved as a strong gel where the storage modulus (1.2 x 10 4 Pa) outweighed the loss modulus, and as the stress was increased the strain within the gel increased linearly, but the storage modulus remained constant. When the stress reached a value of ~ 155 Pa the storage modulus became virtually non-existent and the strain within the gel increased dramatically to ~ 40,000 %. At this point when the stress-strain relationship becomes non-linear, the stress was defined as the yield stress and the strain the yield strain, the values of which were c =155.4 Pa and y c =1.3 % respectively. Beyond this point the strain started to increase linearly again indicating that the polymer had broken down into its consisting monomer fragments and could then be referred to as a Newtonian solution.
The experimental value for the storage modulus was then compared to two theoretical values calculated using the classical theory of rubber elasticity. The experimental value was found to fall between the two theoretical values. The first was calculated assuming there were affine deformation of junction points G'affine = 2.74 x 10 4 Pa, and the second assuming they were mobile cross-links, which had a value of G'phantom = 0.915 x 10 4 Pa. It was expected that the networks would deform affinely and so the inconsistency between experimental and theoretical values indicated that there were fewer elastically effective chains than that predicted for a perfectly formed network. It was concluded the cause was due to a vast amount of metal ions not being fully complexed, and possibly because of losses in elasticity through polymer formation.
The recovery of the presheared gel to its gel-like phase was monitored by conducting a series of repeated dynamic shear sweeps with increasing lengths of recovery time between each. Partial reconstruction took place within the first 16 seconds but complete reconstruction occurred only after ~18 minutes. This process seemed to occur in three distinct phases, the first being after formation of a loose gel, where the storage modulus remained stable but the yield stress and strain increased linearly. Then the storage modulus greatly increased but the yield strain decreased, which the analysts interpreted meant that the loose-formed gel might be comprised of mainly 2:1 ligand: Ln (II) or ligand: Zn (II) complex formation leaving many free chain ends. Lastly the final phase where two possible theories were suggested the first being that the 2:1 Ln (II) were being converted to 3:1 cross-linking sites and/or the formation of 2:1 Zn (II) complexes which make use of the free chain ends. An alternative mechanism may involve the metal-ion provoked self-assembly of the bis-ligand monomer into cross-linked fragments that form the gel on aggregation.
The length of a supramolecular polymer chain is one of the many properties described previously that can be adjusted by use of external stimuli; one such stimulus may be the introduction of complementary base pairing between nucleotides placed within monomers. The preparation of one such complementary supramolecular telechelic polymer, poly (tetrahydrofuran) that contained either a thymine or N 6- (4-methoxybenzoyl) adenine nucleotide on either end of their chains has been documented, and the effect this modification to the monomer fragments had on the resulting polymer properties investigated. The following results were obtained: -
As can be seen from the table derivatization of the starting material produced various obvious changes in property of the resulting polymers. Mainly in the melting points with a vast difference of over a hundred C observed between that of the starting material and both modified monomers. This was shown to be the result of the inserted nucleotide bases and not by the amide groups, used to attach the bases to the monomers, as this vast diffrence was not observed with the bis-acetylated material that acted as a control.
Differences were also observed between the two derivatized macromonomers, for example when heated the T2T had a melting point of 155C and when cooled a crystallisation point of 145C. But A An2A An showed three endotherms when first heated at 83, 106 and 134C, but when heating and cooling were repeated only a change at 22C was observed. Films and fibres could also be extracted from the clear melt of the A An2A An between the melting and crystallisation temperatures of 130 and 104C when the material formed supramolecular polymers. This was not the case for either the T2T, underivatized starting material or bis-acetylated control, suggesting that this property must be the result of the presence of the N 6- (4-methoxybenzoyl) adenine nucleotide. The production of these films and fibres is in accordance with the fact that the A An2A An had a higher mechanical stability as it could assemble itself into higher molecular weighted supramolecular polymers.
The reason for this difference in behaviour was questioned as the homodimerization of both the nucleotides was found to be very weak 3.5 M -1 for thymine and 2.4 M  - 1 for adenine in CDCl 3. Meaning that there must be other factors which aided supramolecular polymer formation in the solid state. Factors such as dipole-dipole interactions, - stacking, phase segregation between the hard nucleotide bases and the soft poly (tetrahydrofuran) chain, and hydrogen bonding of the amide bond which attaches the nucleobase to the polymer, may also aid the polymerisation and so allow film and fibre formation. The fact that T2T had a higher crystallization temperature and a reduced surface in comparison may be the cause for its lack of fibre and film production.
The following mixtures were also produced A An2A An: T2T in both 9:1 and 1:1 ratios to help support these statements. The expected outcomes were observed with the mixture containing only 10% T2T forming fibres and the mixture with 50% T2T producing no fibres.
But it has been a challenge to expand this concept of chain length expansion using specific monomers such as ureido-pyrimidones that can rearrange themselves to form very long chained structures that combine conventional polymer properties with reversibility and responsiveness to aqueous medium. An amphiphilic molecule was synthesised which could easily be produced on a large scale due to the ease in its preparation and purification. This molecule is a perylene derivative comprised of a large hydrophobic aromatic centre, surrounded by four hydrophilic arms.
This structure can combine with water molecules by intermolecular -stacking and/or hydrophobic interactions, with the four hydrophilic arms expected to help prevent side aggregation and ensure water-solubility.
The directional and reversible bonding in supramolecular polymers is always accompanied by many other weak interactions that do not possess the same directionality, this results in the formation of microphase- separated structures or gelation due to network formation. In order to produce linear supramolecular polymers it is necessary for the monomers to be linked with highly directional, strong and reversible bonds, but this is not easily achieved. The use of highly directional and so ideal use of multiple hydrogen bonding has failed due to its instability and the difficulty in its preparation. Also the use of metal ion to ligand is problematic due to its limited reversibility and ease of adjustment. But it has recently been discovered that units of monofunctional 2-ureido-4-pyrimidone can be used to produce derivatives that are easily prepared, are unidirectional in their bonding which prevents uncontrolled multidirectional binding and are strongly dimerised by a self-assembling DDAA (donor-donor-acceptor-acceptor) array of four hydrogen bonds. Which is why after the discovery of these monofunctional 2-ureido-4-pyrimidone units, their use as an associating end group in reversible self-assembling polymers was investigated into in great detail. One such study used 2-ureido-4-pyrimidone (1) to prepare (2a) and (2b) bifunctional derivatives, using a commercial mixture of 2,2,4- and 2,4,4- trimethylhexanedisocyanate isomers as shown below: -
(1)
(2)
Both of these prepared bifunctional derivatives had differing properties that were investigated; both formed viscous solutions in CHCl 3 whose viscosity was found to be highly concentration and temperature dependent. Their differing conc. dependence was shown in plots of the specific viscosity of each against the log of conc. as 2a produced a linear graph with a slope of 3.76, with the high value of this slope meaning that over the conc. range under study the derivative's viscosity displayed behaviour which followed Cate's model for reversibly breakable polymers. The other bifunctional derivative (2a) however, considering its structural similarity displayed quite different behaviour. At low conc. the viscosity was low with a slope of approx. 1, this continued until the conc. reached over 100g.liter  - 1 when the curve turned upwards producing a slope of over 6. The derivatives were also found to differ in their Rayleigh ratios during static light scattering experiments carried out at 90, where the 2a derivative had a value 3.5 times higher than that of 2a. 1H NMR spectra also produce different but expected results with 2b producing multiple sets of signals at concs. below 100g.liter  - 1, and a single set of signals above this conc. 2a produced 1H NMR spectra the opposite way around with one set of signals apparent above 5g.liter  - 1, and multiple below this value. These spectra were in agreement with the derivatives structures, and the proposed equilibrium between them, having either linear polymeric or oligomeric cyclic structures. 2b as it is more bulky and so a more restricted conformational freedom was more likely to form ring structures, and 2a linear.
The highly directional nature of the hydrogen bonding in 2a and 2b was proven by the addition of 2-ureido-4-pyrimidone itself, which can act as a chain stopper to its derivatives. After its addition to 2a, a dramatic drop in viscosity was witnessed, observed meaning that this association process is reversible and that no uncontrolled multidirectional gelation occurred.
Polymers formed using units of monofunctional 2-ureido-4-pyrimidone that associate with each other using quadruple hydrogen bonding, have many unique features, which distinguish them from other polymers and make them very valuable. The molar mass of these polymers are very high compared to that of normal condensation polymers as a result of the units being self-complementary, the lack of reaction products during polymer formation that may act as chain stoppers and their large dimerisation constants which result in polymer-like behaviour being observed even in semi dilute solutions.
The highly directional nature of their bonding prevents microphase separation through crystallisation in the bulk material or gel formation when in solution. This is particularly useful in reversible networks with the bonding also being highly adjustable as it means that control can be asserted over its structure with the degree of association, degree of branching and the distance between cross-links all able to be modified by changes to the polymers environment.
The thermal and mechanical properties of reversibly cross-liked supramolecular polymers based on bifunctional and trifunctional telechelic polyesters using units of 2-ureido-4-pyrimidone as end groups were investigated. Firstly macromonomers were prepared by reacting both polycaprolactone diol and polycaprolactone triol with an isocyanate-functionalised 2-ureido-4-pyrimidone derivative. The polycaprolactone diol is a waxy solid whereas its polymer is a strong and elastic material, and the polycaprolactone triol is a sticky paste when found at room temperature but its polymer forms a strong semi-crystalline material. Other differences were observed when the original polyesters and their polymers went under thermal analysis using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). The polymer formed from polycaprolactone diol produced a T g at - 59C, polycaprolactone triol had a T g at - 68C and a T m at 23C, whereas its polymer had a T g observed at - 15.6C and a T m of 89.8C. This large difference in T g values was a result of a drop in mobility caused by reversible cross-linking from hydrogen bonding.
Supramolecular copolymers of the two polyesters were then formed consisting of varying amounts of the two macromonomers, by dissolving them in chloroform whilst stirring; films were then produced by solution casting. Films containing a greater amount of the polycaprolactone diol macromonomer were found to be more transparent, and increasing the amount of the polycaprolactone triol macromonomer they became increasingly more opaque. The thermal properties of the copolymers were also studied using DSC and the following results obtained: - 1- polycaprolactone diol macromonomer, 2- polycaprolactone triol macromonomer.
All of the produced materials were semi-crystalline, with the value of T g found to increase with increasing amounts of the polycaprolactone triol monomer in the mixture. This indicated homogenous mixing of the two monomers, and was consistent with the observed decrease in chain flexibility caused by the increased amount of reversible cross-linking within the polymer.
Two melting transitions were found for the polymers that contained a large percentage of polycaprolactone triol. The melting enthalpy for the first transition occurred around 40C decreased with increased amounts of polycaprolactone triol, while the other melting transition increased in temperature and enthalpy with increasing amounts of polycaprolactone triol. The T m of pure polycaprolactone triol was found to be higher than that of the covalent polycaprolactone found to be 57.1C; this was proof that the 2-ureido-4-pyrimidone units have a role in the formation of the crystallites by either changing the structure of the caprolactone crystals or by forming crystal structures themselves.
Tensile testing on the materials was also performed to find their mechanical strength; all the materials appeared relatively brittle under the testing conditions, but all the supramolecular polymers demonstrated that they could produce strong molecules, with their tensile strength's varying between 4 to 10 Mpa. This was a little weaker than that of 16 MPa found for covalent polycaprolactone, but was in the same order of magnitude. These results indicated that by using quadruple hydrogen bonding between the monomeric subunits, supramolecular polymers of the same strength as covalent polymers could be produced. This was made clear by the observation that as the amount of trifunctional polycaprolactone triol was increased the polymers became increasingly stronger and stiff but at the same time more brittle. The observed activity of these copolymers is equivalent to that of covalent polymers, but properties of supramolecular copolymers can be adjusted by just combining two compounds with no additional synthesis being required as in covalent copolymers. They are easily produced including the cross-linked form, as the hydrogen bonding can be reversibly broken down through heating.