Transcription is a process that involves the transfer of genetic material from DNA into RNA. With protein-encoding DNA, transcription is the start of a long process, which leads to the translation of the genetic code via a RNA molecule, into a functional protein. Very few RNA are transcribe directly into the final mature RNA. A primary transcript is a newly transcribed RNA molecule it consists of exons and introns; exons are the part of the DNA that contain the information needed to prepare proteins, but only ~3% of DNA are exons. The rest of the material is referred to as introns these are the non-coding part of the strand and are often referred to as 'junk' DNA. In order for this strand to be useful in the production of proteins the non-coding sections (introns) must be removed. Firstly the primary transcript is capped which prevents the needed information contained within the transcript from being hydrolysed. There are many different types of cap which may be used such as m7G, this means that this cap is methylated at the seven position (in the phosphate ring) and attaches to a guanine nucleotide base. The removal of unneeded nucleotides then occurs by use of both endonucleases and exonucleases they cut at specific points indicated by regions that may consist of many bases. Endonucleases cut at specific sites within the RNA and exonucleases cut the ends of a RNA precursor. A poly (A) molecule that acts as a terminating signal to the previous cleavage is then attached, it tells the cell to stop methylating; this process is known as polyadenylation. The final part in the process of converting a primary transcript into a mature RNA molecule is splicing this involves the removal of the introns and brings together the coding exon regions, to form a mature mRNA, this now consists of a sequence that can be used to create the desired protein.
One technique that is used for amplifying DNA is molecular cloning. Cloning is a process where an identical copy of an original organism or thing can be created. Cloning is a technique that allows DNA to be removed from an organism and placed into a different host where it can propagate. This technique allows small sections of a genome to be isolated, which can then be amplified. It allows DNA to be sequenced leading to the identification of sections of the strand which control gene expression. These regions can be referred to as open reading frames (ORF's), which are any sequence of DNA or RNA that can be translated into a protein.
Cloning requires the use of plasmids, which are DNA molecules that are separate from chromosomal DNA and normally found in bacteria. They are typically between 1- 200 x 10 6 Daltons in length, mainly circular and double stranded, and are often coiled. Plasmids used in this way are termed vectors that contain an antibiotic-resistance gene; they transfer DNA fragments isolated from DNA by use of restriction enzymes, these enzymes are designed to recognise and cut at specific bases causing the resulting fragments to have overhanging bases termed 'sticky ends'. The plasmid is also treated with the same restriction enzymes causing the plasmid to have complementary overhanging bases. The DNA fragment and plasmid then combine producing recombinant DNA, but there are no bonds between phosphate group's just bases, but DNA ligase is then used to fill the gaps in the phosphate backbone. The plasmid is then introduced to a cell by transformation and grown on antibiotic medium, as the plasmid contains an antibiotic-resistance gene this cell survives but other cells that do not contain this inserted plasmid will not survive.