The range of countries in this analysis is based on upper middle income and Central Asia and Europe countries. The reason why I chose these ranges of countries is because I expect upper middle income countries to have relatively high GNI per capita but not all Central Asia and Europe countries are upper middle income countries. Thus, I expect some Central Asia and Europe countries to have lower GNI per capita and also low life expectancies compared to the other. The set of countries are shown below;
The two indicators of economic development used are GNI per capita and Life expectancy.
GNI per capita (formerly GNP per capita) is the gross national income, divided by the midyear population. GNI is the sum of value added by all resident producers plus any product taxes (less subsidies) not included in the valuation of output plus net receipts of primary income (compensation of employees and property income) from abroad. To smooth fluctuations in prices and exchange rates, a special Atlas method of conversion is used by the World Bank.
Life expectancy at birth measures the number of years a newborn infant would live if prevailing patterns of mortality at the time of its birth were to stay the same throughout its life.
A histogram is used to graphically show the characteristics of the GNI per capita distribution in this sample of countries.
From Figure 1.1 above the modes can be detected cause the modes corresponds to strong peaks in a histogram. Therefore, the modes appear to be in the range of $6001 to $10000.
The median is the number in the middle of a set of numbers; that is, half the numbers have values that are greater than the median, and half have values that are less. The median is one of several indices of central tendency used to indicate the point on the scale of measures where the population(GNI per capita values) is centered. Thus, this means that most of the countries in the set had approximately $6270 of GNI per capita. This is a reasonable number for upper, middle income countries. Numerically, half of the scores in a population will have values that are equal to or larger than the median and half will have values that are equal to or smaller than the median. Therefore, most probably the first half are the upper middle income countries around the world while the other half of countries are countries in Central Asia and Europe with a lower income.
The mean is one of several indices of central tendency that's used to indicate the point on the scale of measures where the GNI per capita is centered. It is the average of GNI per capita values in the set of countries. Numerically, it equals the sum of the values divided by the number of countries. The formula for mean is represented below;
Standard deviation is a measure of the variability (dispersion or spread) of any set of numerical values about their arithmetic mean. It is specifically defined as the square root of the arithmetic mean of the squared deviations.. The formula for standard deviation is as follows:
Where x is the sample mean AVERAGE(number1,number2,...) and n is the sample size.
Table 1.2 shows that the standard deviation for the set of countries and their GNI per capita is $42132.2. This reflects that the variables were quite dispersed from the mean. In other words, there were countries with a GNI per capita of about $10000, but also countries with very low GNI per capita of about $2000. This gives an idea of the range of values in the set of variables.
The variance is one of several indices of variability that is used to characterize the dispersion among the GNI per capita measures of the set of countries. To calculate the variance of a given population, it is necessary to first calculate the mean of the scores, then measure the amount that each score deviates from the mean and then square that deviation (by multiplying it by itself). Numerically, the variance equals the average of the several squared deviations from the mean. Basically the variance is standard deviation squared. In this case the variance of the set of GNI per capita variables of the set of countries is ($4213.2), therefore the variance is $17750924.8. Formula for variance:
Where x is the sample mean AVERAGE(number1,number2,...) and n is the sample size.
Skewness characterizes the degree of asymmetry of a distribution around its mean. Positive skewness indicates a distribution with an asymmetric tail extending toward more positive values (Negative skewness indicates a distribution with an asymmetric tail extending toward more negative values). Table 1.2 demonstrates that the skewness for our data is 0. 08295, so it has a positive value, therefore it represents a distribution with an asymmetric tail extending toward more positive values. The equation for skewness is defined as:
Where x is the sample mean AVERAGE(number1,number2,...) and n is the sample size.
The chart below shows the relation between GNI per capita and life expectancy.
The Chart above clearly demonstrates that higher GNI per capita values, results in higher life expectancy. This is because high GNI per capita is one of the basic feature of high living standards. Thus, as GNI per capita gets bigger, life expectancy increases, as people are less likely to die at early ages, either because they can support the medication and healthcare, or they live "good" standards of life and therefore don't face as many risks as people living in poor countries would.
Falling prices, and increase in output are usually seen as a good sign in an economy. However, falling prices and increase in output has reached such a point in Japan that it is becoming more malicious for the economy than anything else.
Companies make more than what can be consumed and the Japanese customer simply does not want what is on offer, however cheap it may be. There is a surplus of supply, in consequence firms set prices very low to attract more consumer demand. Usually falling prices are good for the economy but only if there is a productivity gain.
As Japanese GDP grows, it's competitiveness in the global market falls because it's currency, Yen, appreciates. As a result of no productivity gain there is unemployment, The Times, points out that bank managers need not fear unemployment because affiliated companies minimizes publicly available shares. This is to say that share prices are maintained high and there is a lot of demand for bonds, in effect of high liquidity of money. People want to buy Japanese bonds, and save instead of keeping liquid money. There is a high amount of liquid money in the economy because consumer goods are very cheap, so less income is needed to buy the basic consumer spending of an individual, let alone the Japanese culture of people saving rather than spending makes things even worse. In consequence, to encourage people to spend more the Bank of Japan is keeping interest rates as low as possible, so that the cost of borrowing and reward of saving is low.
The sites were quite useful in providing information. Some websites, like BBC and CBS news, had useful links to seek further information about the issue. Other websites lacked this feature. BBC has an exquisite feature as it allows users to view other articles written about the same issue in different intervals of time. Thus, the user can find information about the issue released in the past. There wasn't significant grammatical errors and all websites were all up-to date. One feature that caught my attention was that the data in Ludwig Von Mises Institute website was a bit biased. In contrast, only in Ludwig Von Mises Institute there was information about who's providing the information, who was Frank Shostak a Ph.d. scholar at Mises Institute.
All four website had search engines and help links which were very useful. There was just one thing that disturbed me on one of the websites, which was the layout and the colour scheme of the CBS website. The information was too stacked together and the page layout badly organized, also the choice of colours was not so good, cause a bright blue with black background disturbs the eye quite a lot.