The project could be wrecked in a variety of ways. The software could not be what the user is expecting or requiring or the project may eventually cost more than the client is willing to spend. The software may not work at all, or may not be compatible with the client's current systems. The client or their staff may not be able to understand it.
To reduce the risk of this happening:
As defined by Adams v Lindsell (1818) and Household Fire Insurance Co v Grant (1879), the postal rule states that acceptance is complete as soon as a letter of acceptance, if properly addressed and stamped, has been posted. This does not apply to instantaneous communications, such as oral, telephone and fax.
The grey area is the application of the postal rule to email, which could be argued to be non-instantaneous. There are numerous potential problems here. The main problem is the lack of a single organisation to deal with the communication. A letter is handled by the Postal Service, but an email may go through the servers of many companies. If the email is lost on the way, whose responsibility is it?
Also, what happens if the email is encrypted and unreadable, or if it bounces from the recipient's account due to lack of space?
As the Electronic Commerce Regulations 2002 concentrates on receipt of orders, and says little about entering into agreements, it is of limited use here. We really need to re-examine the law and decide on a definitive decision about how the postal rule applies to modern communication methods.
The technical research community should always be on the lookout for new technologies. Some of these will change the market in a drastic way, and others may close the market on existing products. If handled badly, either of these could have a severely negative effect on the company.
The key here is to find the technology fast. It is best to employ people not only to research into new areas, but also to find what is being researched elsewhere. It is also useful to look into more 'off the wall' ideas, so the areas people look into don't become stagnant and unimaginative. Employees could anomalously post these ideas into a box, and they could be read by a team once a week and investigated if appropriate.
If a new disruptive technology is found with enough warning, there will be time for consultation and debates between management and the technical teams into how the company can best meet this challenge. The company may decide to begin moving one of its existing markets in another direction, or it may decide to create a new market to get a head start on the competition.
Whittard of Chelsea is primarily a retailer of tea and of coffee. It also owns the majority of Barney Holdings.
The tea market in the UK in 2001 was worth 523.6 million, with 72% of the population regularly drinking tea with an estimated 163 million cups being drunk per day. The problem is that by 2005, this market has declined by some 12%.
Coffee is the second most valuable legally traded commodity on Earth, after oil. The demand in the UK has decreased from 2.25KG per person in 1995 to 2.19KG per person in 2001.
This is obviously a very difficult time for a company in the tea and coffee trade. Whittard has done surprisingly well through most of this period, increasing the value of its shares on the London Stock Exchange from 30p in 2001 up to over 200p in 2004. More recently, however, it has slumped to around 74p. Things may be turning around now, however, as the Icelandic retailer Baugur, which owns Oasis, Coast and Goldsmiths, has bought Whittard for 21.5m.
Baugur plans to merge Whittard with the health store operator Julian Graves, buy Whittard shares for 90p, and make it into a private company.