Based on the preliminary surveys of the existing IT facilities, it is clear that both organisations are using basic techniques for administrative work which are very error prone and time consuming. Efficiency and productivity can be greatly increased with electronic systems, but finding the correct software to implement a suitable system can be difficult. The management team's aspirations have been identified during consultation, and a solution needs to be put forward in order to solve these issues, and for the transition to be successful. Software needs to be introduced that can:
Clearly the Wye Valley Hospice and the Carholme Trust have many requirements that need to be met, but it is difficult to find suitable software because there are numerous factors that need to be considered before the software can be chosen. Each piece of software is different as they all provide slightly different functionality even if they are designed to do the same job; some have many advanced features for those who are very computer literate and need the package to do a lot for them, but others are much more basic and provide a much simpler solution. The underlying issue to keep in mind when choosing software is that you are trying to meet the requirements at the lowest price possible, and this can be hard because there are many hidden 'overheads' that can be overseen. As well as paying for the package itself, you may need to acquire a license which may need renewing, there is a charge for ongoing maintenance and support, and it maybe necessary to send staff on training courses to ensure that the software can be put to maximum use. It is important to select the correct software package for the requirements so that it increases productivity and efficiency which is the primary purpose for an investment into new software.
The two organisations are merging and locating on the Wye Valley Trust premises creating less floor space, and one charity shop is closing down as it is in an unsuitable location meaning less rent is now being paid. Along with the additional online donation feature which is to be introduced, the organisation will have a fair amount of money, and can afford to buy reasonable software. It is obviously not sensible to buy the most expensive software because it is not necessarily the best or most suitable for the solution.
Before searching for software it is necessary to determine how closely the user requirements need to be met, as there are many different software classes to consider. One option is to use custom developed software or a modifiable package, but this would not be sensible nor would it be economical to run a 'simple' system using software developed this way as although the solution would work perfectly, the system is not going to serve a critical function, and would therefore be unnecessary. In this instance commercial off-the-shelf software (COTS) would be beneficial because it can be used to provide answers to the requirements. Software of this kind is usually intuitive meaning that staff training would be minimal if necessary at all, and support is easily obtainable whether it be online or over the phone. Commercial off-the-shelf-software is readily available, rich in functionality and upgrades are available.
After looking closely at the requirements, it is clear that they can be met by implementing an Office Suite. It will be more cost effective than using individual packages and paying for separate licenses, even though the trust would receive a discount for being a charity, and there may be serious compatibility issues. Office suites provide a common feel between programs with shortcut keys, menus, and graphics, they have compatible formats so documents and files can be embedded within each other (for example a spreadsheet showing cash flow in a document for a business report for the Hospice), and only need one licence instead of many individual ones.
There are currently many Office Suites on the market that provide very similar functionality and so each needs to be analysed taking into account the considerations mentioned above. The PCs bought by Wye Valley Hospice and the Carholme Trust have sufficient resources to run Windows XP as an operating system and so suites such as Star Office that are Linux based and can not be used.
Three of the biggest names in this market are Microsoft Office XP, Corel WordPerfect 2000, and Lotus Smart Suite Millennium Edition. They all have a word processor, Microsoft Word, WordPerfect and Word Pro; a spreadsheet, Excel, Quattro Pro, and 1-2-3; a database, Access, Paradox, and Approach; and a html editor, Frontage, Trellix, and Fastsite respectively.
WordPerfect is a suite best suited to larger companies as it has many features that exploit client-server networks which are not necessary for an organisation of this size. The database application Paradox is very complex and not user friendly for novices which many of the staff are at the trust. For this reason, many online documents are stating that Paradox makes WordPerfect not suitable as a general-purpose office suite. The support is not as extensive as that for Microsoft Office and more emphasis is put on self-help from discussion boards setup by users. WordPerfect does allow documents to be saved in PDF format which Lotus and Microsoft do not, and this can be a useful feature when storing documents that have been scanned in order to keep a soft copy. It also boasts that it is supported by many platforms and so there are not any compatibility problems in this area. The software is therefore available to a larger audience of people so greater revenues can be obtained. This is a good selling point for the Wye Valley Hospice and the Carholme Trust and other organisations in a similar position, because this extensive compatibility can reduce costs if there isn't any need to upgrade the operating system as well.
Lotus has a very different menu structure that can be complex as there are many tabs containing a lot of detail. Training is required to use this package because it is not very intuitive, however, training is readily available. A major issue to think about is whether the word processors in Lotus and WordPerfect are compatible with Microsoft Word because many typed documents from external sources will be in a foreign format (e.g. .doc). If the word processor cannot read the file due to issues concerning compatibility then it is doubtful as to whether the suites are suitable. As it happens both Lotus and WordPerfect do let themselves down here, because even if the suite component does not crash whilst importing, tables and inserted objects are lost or not editable, macros do not function correctly, colour quality in presentations is lessened, and Microsoft Excel features are lost.
When selecting software, you should always look to the future and assess how easy it is to upgrade existing software and if there are any compatibility issues. Microsoft users have reported that Microsoft Access 2000 is not backwards compatible with Access 97 and problems have arisen for people that are upgrading their databases. This gives WordPerfect the edge in this field as no such issues have been reported and it may be perceived as the better option because of this. Although this may not happen to other Microsoft applications in the future, it is still an issue to consider when selecting a Microsoft solution.
However, Microsoft Office has many advantages over WordPerfect and Lotus as it offers excellent integration between all applications and programs meaning importing from one to another is smooth with no loss of data. It has a consistent, nice looking and intuitive GUI (graphical user interface) and it is stable. Microsoft in general is notorious for its extensive technical and user support on and offline as it is well documented; it also has many training opportunities and downloadable add-ons and service packs.
Microsoft Office seems to be the best solution for the Wye Valley Hospice and the Carholme Trust as it has all the necessary components needed to meet the requirements; Access can be used to keep records of stock and its attributes, and it can create patient records and assign points to each individual depending on how frequently they visit. Professional looking forms can be created to capture client data and queries performed in order to sort and search through records by individual criterion. These can then be viewed as reports and printed off so stock levels can be identified for example. Excel can be used to provide a method for creating and maintaining a payroll, and is a useful component of the suite as it has many features that can vastly speed up previously tedious processes normally undertaken by the staff at the trust. Formulae can be used to add up totals, for example how much the staff are being paid a month, macros can be created to perform regular tasks, and validation techniques implemented to ensure staff are being paid the correct amounts. Word is ideal for creating typed documents such as letters to patients and staff. It has a mail merge feature for adding personalisation to documents, headers and footers for adding a professional touch to all documents from the trust, and it can create templates so that all documents have the same style. The requirements also state that all software must be friendly to users with disabilities. Microsoft Office can also be adjusted for patients to use as it has many optional settings that cater for the visually impaired and people with dyslexia. Icons, pointers and text can be made larger and colours can be made more vivid for those who cannot distinguish between low contrasted colours. Publisher is included in the suite and this will allow the trust to design professional looking newsletters to pass around on paper or in emails, and Front Page can edit html code and aid in the creation of a new secure webpage to allow for online donations.
However, Microsoft Office does have the highest price for yearly rental but the trust does have a lot of cash at the moment and the suite does fit the requirements closer than the other available suites. It uses a common user interface in all components and the suite is fast becoming a 'de jure' standard as it is used in the majority of workplaces and schools. This is not necessarily because it is always the most suitable suite available, it is because Microsoft has become preponderant due to market conditions.
A client-server network is needed to create an emailing system for all members of staff. I suggest using an Ethernet architecture as it is the easiest and relatively inexpensive to implement. The network would be very efficient in tasks as there is also distributed processing power at each client; they are far from being dumb terminals. There needs to be an email server (it is not necessary for more than one physical server) so that generic addresses can be formed. To provide generic addresses, a username can be created for each person and this can form the first part of the address and the Internet domain name of the company can be used in the second part of the email address. This network can also be used to pass information around such as newsletters, and it can allow sharing of expensive peripherals such as printers.
As many records are being kept and are frequently changing, back ups need to be kept regularly. The server can act as a central back up for all of the clients on the network and prevent the need for individual back up which can be neglected by staff. A main advantage however is that software such as Microsoft Office does not need to be installed individually on every machine, it can be split to different locations so that all can access it. The server will need a network operating system in order to operate and Window Server 2003 is the best way forward. It is sensible to stay with another Microsoft product as there will definitely not be any compatibility issues and there are joint licensing agreements which can save money. Windows Server 2003 has extensive wizards that makes configuration simple for file and peripheral sharing, and creating servers with various roles (for example, an email server). It ensures a secure network from the core to the furthest edges and is generally suitable for a trust of this size.