The study of growth kinetics is conducted in order to determine the process of bacterial growth in a closed culture. There are many ways in which the cell growth can be monitored, each slightly different in methodology and each producing slightly different sets of results. For example, the cell growth can be monitored by following the change in viable count, measuring biochemical changes within the sample, for example protein concentration or as we aimed to do, by measuring bacterial growth through the change in culture absorbance. In this way we aimed to follow the growth of Serratia marcenscens and collect absorbance data that would enable us to draw a growth curve upon which we would be able to locate the different stages of bacterial growth.
In addition we aimed to collect data for nine different species of bacteria in order to determine the composition of a mixed culture. This section of the investigation relied upon common microbiological practises such as the gram stain and the plating of different organisms onto different selective agar plates.
The method for this investigation is described on pages forty-seven to forty-eight of section one, and pages twenty-four and sixty-nine to seventy-one of section two of the laboratory handbook. At no point did we deviate from this method. The calculations for the serial dilutions are shown in section two of the appendix.
The results for the identification of the mixed culture were obtained from a previous investigation. The method for this is described on pages forty-four to forty-six of section one and sections nineteen, and twenty-three to twenty-five of section two of the handbook. There were no deviations from this method.
The graph showing the relationship between absorbance (at 600nm) and time (in minutes) is shown on the additional sheet. The data we obtained to plot this graph (shown in section one of the appendix) clearly show the first five phases of the culture growth. Phase one (the lag period) occurred between 0 and 30 minutes during which time the absorbance increased slowly from 0.05 to 0.07. The second phase is the acceleration phase when the absorbance increased more rapidly from 0.07 to 0.099 before entering the exponential phase between forty minutes and one hundred and twenty minutes. During the exponential phase the change in absorbancy occurred at the greatest rate. It is also during this phase that the specific growth rate was calculated as 0.912 (as shown in section three of the appendix). Our graph also shows the retardation phase when the rate of change in absorbance began to slow and the maximum population phase when the absorbance showed a plateau. These are marked on the graph as phases four and five respectively.
The gram stain results for each of the organisms studied last week are shown in figure five of the appendix. In total we identified three gram negative organisms and six gram positive organisms. The appearance of the colonies of each species is also described in section five of the appendix.
The results from the plated samples of mixed culture are shown in section six of the appendix. The plate which contained the boiled sample showed evidence of Bacillus pumilis, the plate containing the antibiotic Kanamycin contained Flavobacterium aquatile, the plate containing the antibiotic Nalidixic acid showed E.coli, and the nutrient agar plate contained  Bacillus pumilis, Flavobacterium aquatile, E.coli and Pseudomonas fluorescens.
As shown on the additional sheet and described in the results section, the data we obtained for the growth of Serratia marcescens depicts the typical bacterial growth curve. This theory can therefore be used to explain the changes in absorbance over time.
The first phase (the lag phase) occurred in the first thirty minutes of the investigation. This was the time period when the cells in the culture were getting ready to enter the active growth phase and therefore had to synthesis all the enzymes needed for transport and metabolism of the available nutrients, and for the production of new cell products. Although the data we collected showed this phase to be quite inactive, if we had collected data for protein concentration for example, this phase would have shown quite the opposite result. The second phase shown in our results is the acceleration phase (phase two on the graph). The absorbancy in this time period increased as some of the cells began to increase in size and divide. Although the growing cells at this point are growing at the maximum possible speed, the increase in absorbance is still quite slow. This is because due to the natural heterogeneity of the population some of the cells are still in the lag phase and therefore haven't started to grow and divide at this point.
The point at which all the viable cells in the culture were growing and dividing is shown by the exponential phase (i.e. between forty minutes and one hundred and twenty minutes on the graph). It is only during this phase that calculations regarding the rate of growth can be calculated (for example the specific growth rate and the doubling time). The values for these two growth rates were calculated to be 0.912 absorbance increase per hour and 0.760 hours respectively. The doubling time value is confirmed from our graph. It took approximately forty minutes for the initial absorbance to double i.e. approximately the same time as the calculated doubling time value of 0.760 hours.
The next phase (the retardation phase) is a reflection of the gradual depletion of available nutrients, which slows the cell growth. The rate of growth at this point also decreases as some of the cells stop growing before others until all of the cells stop growing and the absorbance remains constant i.e. the stationary phase. This is shown in section five of our graph on the additional page.
The second section of our investigation was to determine the composition of our mixed culture. Firstly, using the plated boiled sample we were able to identify the presence of Bacillus pumilis. This was because the Bacillus pumilis was the only organism to survive the heating due to its production of endospores. The presence of this organism in the mixed culture was also reinforced by the mixed culture motility test which identified motile rods (i.e. Bacillus pumilis) and the gram stain test, which identified gram-positive rods (Bacillus pumilis is gram positive). This organism was also identified to be growing on the nutrient agar plate seeded with the mixed culture.
The second organism to be identified in the mixed culture was Flavobacterium aquatile. The identification of this organism was primarily due to the appearance of its colonies as they were a distinctive yellow colour. This same colony was also identified on the mixed culture agar plate. The gram stain of the mixed culture also proved that Flavobacterium aquatile was present as it showed negative rods.
The third organism was identified using two methods. Firstly colony comparisons identified the organism growing on the Nalidixic plate to be either E.coli or Pseudomonas. However when a motility test was carried out the organism was shown to be E.coli as it was motile but not highly motile as this would have indicated the presence of Pseudomonas. The presence of this organism in the mixed culture was also identified in the mixed culture gram stain (which showed gram negative rods) and the mixed culture motility test which showed motile rods i.e. E.coli.
The final organism was identified from the nutrient agar plate containing the mixed culture, and from the mixed culture motility and gram stain tests. The colonies on the agar plate were small, white and mucoid, identical to those of the pure culture Pseudomonas. The motility test showed the presence of a highly motile rod shaped organism (i.e. again suggesting Pseudomonas) and the gram stain confirmed this by showing gram-negative rods.
Therefore in conclusion the mixed culture contained the following organisms, Bacillus pumilis, Flavobacterium aquatile, E.coli and Pseudomonas.
Obtaining data to show the growth kinetics of an organism can provide important information that can be used to identify the processes occurring within a culture at any given time. By using the obtained data to plot a growth curve the replication cycle of an organism can be split into phases, hence allowing further study and understanding of the processes involved.
Microbiological practices such as gram stains, agar plating and motility tests are very useful in the identification of unknown organisms. The information they give as a group can be used to further prove and therefore aid identification as ideas are backed up with increasing evidence.