Descartes brings up a paradox when he introduces the dualism of the mind and body. Essentially, one must understand the two distinct approaches to the material Descartes focusing. First of all Descartes argues that the mind and body are two distinct things, depending on the cogito ergo sum only. I know I exist because I think I exist, as long as I'm thinking I'm certain that I exist. Therefore, my mind is simply a thinking thing, and this I can clearly and distinctly understand to be true. However, Descartes has negated the existence of all the other substances, he is still not sure of the existence of material things like our body. The existence of our body and any external material to our minds is still open to doubt in meditation six. One thing we are completely sure of is that we, as an intellectual thinking thing exist and our existence as an intellectual being is independent of other external things, as our minds can continue to exist without any other bodily objects and does not depend on other things, like our body. Therefore, the fact that I can clearly and distinctly understand one thing (our mind) apart from another (our body) with the assumption of the benevolent God, proves in Descartes' theory, that it's enough evidence to understand two things as distinct and separable. Subsequently, Descartes goes on to explain what we understand the object what we call our body by using the Cartesian dualism and the absolute benevolence and perfectionism of God. Depending on the benevolence of God theory, Descartes proves the existence of material things, and eventually of our body. He proves that in theory, in other words, we can clearly and distinctly understand our body and mind apart from each other as they are two different "substances", however, Descartes also knows and agrees that the mind and the body make a unit. To prove this argument he uses the benevolence and the utopian feature of God. However, as Descartes firstly clearly argues the mind and body to be distinct, at the end of meditation six, he also "proves" that mind and body make a unit. As a result, brings about a paradox, if mind and body are two distinct things (substances) then how come they make a unit?
This essay will firstly focus on the definition of mind and body in terms of Descartes Theory. Descartes refers to the mind and body, as substances. The mind is an intellectual, thinking thing which is not extended in space and is indivisible. As Descartes proves in meditation 2, our mind is the only thing that we are certain of and is the only thing that assures our existence, depending on the cogito ergo sum argument. However, we can not be certain of the substance what we perceive to be our body. To prove the existence of our body, Descartes first has to prove the argument of an ultimate supreme God in meditation three. For now, in this essay I'm going to assume the benevolent God argument to be true, in order to understand Descartes theories. The body exists because we seem to have sensory perception relating to our body and only our body. "For I could never be separated from it, as I could from some other bodies; and I felt all my appetites and emotions in, and on account of, this body; and finally, I was aware of pain and pleasurable ticklings in parts of this body, but not in other bodies external to it."(Descartes, page 53). Therefore as we seem to have sensory perception which clearly could not have come within oneself (one's own mind) as it does not require any intellectual act. Therefore, these ideas of sensory perceptions could only have originated from my body or God. However, it could not have originated from God as Descartes have previously proved that God could not be a deceiver, therefore he wouldn't give me these sensory perception ideas that were false. Therefore, it follows that corporeal things exists and they merely are extended and divisible substances which are comprised within the subject mater of pure mathematics. Given the benevolent God argument to be true, Descartes has a logical argument so far.
However, the problem arises when Descartes suggests that body and mind are distinct from each other because of the fact that he "can clearly and distinctly understand one thing apart from the another"(page 54) is enough to make him certain that these two things are distinct. As far as I'm concerned I can not see the logic of this argument. Just because one can understand one thing apart from the other does not mean that they are separated. They might as well be extensions of one another. For example, I can understand that I have a body and I can understand that I have a hand. This does not mean that my body and my hand are two distinct things. It just means that I can understand my body and my hand distinctly, separately. I think this is what Leibniz is also trying to suggest when he says "Thought cannot originate from that substance (Body). And so we know this at least, that thought is not a mode of extension, but we do not know whether it cannot be a mode of substance, of which extension itself is a mode" (Leibniz, 1677). What Leibniz is trying to mean here is that thought is a substance and not an extension, and we do not know whether our body and our minds are interlinked together, that our minds can be a mode of substance of which our bodies itself is a mode. While for Descartes, mind and body are two distinct modes of substances that are clearly distinct from each other because one can clearly and distinctly minds without any other substances involved, therefore he follows that these two things must be distinct from each other. I think Descartes develops this idea to suggest that the mind can exist without the body, which will be discussed more in detail later in this essay. However, I do not agree with Descartes that its enough evidence that distinguishing one thing apart from the other means that these two things are separate. It just means that we can understand two things distinctly, but they do not have to be distinct from each other. For example we can understand that mind is an intellectual thinking, non-extended substance and the body is a non-thinking, extended, and divisible substances. In this I can suggest that the mind and the body are quite distinct from one another but only in my understanding of the two, meaning that they both have different characteristics and in fact some what opposite characteristics, and I can separately understand body without thinking about mind and mind without thinking of body. Therefore, I completely agree with Strawson's description of mind and body - "When we speak of a person, we are really referring to one or both of two distinct substances, two substances of different types, each of which has its own appropriate types of states and properties; and none of the properties or states of either can be a property of state of the other." (Strawson)
Moreover, Descartes argues that mind and body are two distinct things and that they can exist without one another, and the whole essence of our existence is because of the fact that we are thinking. This follows, that if we were not thinking than we wouldn't be existing, as Descartes says "I find in myself faculties for certain special modes of thinking, namely imagination and sensory perception. Now I can clearly and distinctly understand myself as a whole without these faculties; but I cannot, conversely, understand these faculties without me, that is, without an intellectual substance to inhere in" (Descartes, p54). Therefore, he suggests that one can exist without a body as long as he is still thinking, but one can not exist without thinking and just having a body. As a result, he suggests that he(as a mind) is distinct from his body, because he can exist without it (Descartes, p.54). Again, I don't quite agree with Descartes, because I'm not so sure whether we as a person can exist without either our body or our mind. Descartes judgment here is that he understands body as having a divisible character and this character shows to Descartes that if one part of a body was cut off, I would still be existing because I would still be thinking. However, when we think about body and existence, we have to think about the whole body's existence because if a body exists, as it has a divisible character, it will not stop existing if one or two parts (imagination and sensory perception) of it was missing, it will stop existing if it was damaged as a whole (imagination, sensory perception, mechanical properties and etc.) or by one of the two most important organs (heart, and brain) in our bodies stopped functioning properly. Nevertheless, Descartes does not completely denies the relationship between mind and body as he suggests that our minds can exist without our mind - "My next observation is that the mind is not immediately affected by all parts of the body, but only by the brain, or perhaps just by one small part of the brain, namely which is said to contain the 'common' sense".(Descartes, p59) What Descartes sees as 'common sense' is the faculty that integrates the data from the sensory perceptions. In contrast, I think that the mind is effected by two parts of the body, the brain (not just the common sense part of the brain) and the heart. For if any one of these organs malfunctions, we seem to loose consciousness in which case we can not understand whether we are still capable thinking or not. Moreover, if any one of these two organs would fail we would loose our certainty about our existence because we wouldn't know whether we are thinking or not, therefore this argument concludes that we can not exist without our body (or rather with the certain characteristics of our body). Likewise, if we were to loose our characteristic of thinking (like in a coma) but our body (including both brain and heart) was still functioning fine, there would be a high doubts about our existence because we are not in control of our thinking.
The Paradox appears when Descartes agrees with these ideas that we are a unit of mind and body, in which sense he seems to contradict his Cartesian Dualism - "I am very closely joined and, as it were, intermingled with it, so that I and the body form a unit. If this was not so, I, who am nothing but a thinking thing, would not feel pain when the body was hurt, but would perceive the damage purely by the intellect, just as a sailor perceives by sight if anything in his ship is broken."(Descartes, p56) Descartes's this idea of mind and body intermingled with each other as a unit is further enhanced, in the objections and replies, in which I couldn't agree more with one of the objections about this idea about mind an body, "When we think of both of them we do not see how one can exist apart from the other (even though we may be able to understand one without thinking of the other)" (Descartes, p.115). However this statement he contradicts Descartes Cartesian Dualism - "I deny that it is intelligible to suppose that there is a real distinction between them, at least as far as the divine essence is concerned, although such a distinction may be admitted as far as their mutual relationship is concerned."(p. 115) With this argument I think what he is trying to say is that we can clearly and distinctly understand mind and body but we can not grasp the idea of existence without both of them functioning together. For Descartes, the mind and the body are two distinct substances, however they can be intermingled with each other, whereas I think that the mind and the body can be understood distinctly apart from each other, however, one might be directly linked to another to form a whole unit which yields the whole description of myself.