The brief for Introductory Programming Practical 8 was to design, build and test a program to calculate the GCD (Greatest Common Devisor) and LCM (Least Common Multiple) of two inputs, A and B, and return the results in G and L. This practical task was intended to demonstrate the correct use of procedures and parameters in Delphi, and, as such, must include both of these within the program code
A suitable user interface was required of the finished article which would facilitate access to the full set of operations of the program.
The procedure to be used in the program, GCDandLCM, as well as a full and more detailed brief are to be found on the attached pink practical sheet.
Designing the program to meet the criteria of the brief stipulated, to fulfil the needs of the program whilst at all times considering the essential integration of the provided procedure was the first task in the Design and Development phase of the project.
The design of the form was the first consideration, and in my design plan I decided that the best way for the user to input the two values, A and B, required by the program would be to include two edit boxes on the form with suitable layers and comments to provide ease of use to the user. A single button with suitable label would be needed to execute the procedure GCDandLCM when clicked by the user. And a Message Box (dialog box) with information added in code and the output variables G and L would be the best way of communicating the output to the user.
Below is a Data Flow diagram that graphically illustrates the flow of data through the system, beginning with a "black box" outside overview of the Input-Process-Output functions of the program in the LEVEL 1 diagram, followed by a more detailed "white box" examination of the internal processes in the LEVEL 2 diagram.
After adding a suitable title, colour scheme and fonts and sizing the form to an adequate portion of an average display, I added the following components (and customised their captions):
Secondly, I would need to examine the mathematical procedures and Pascal coding necessary to implement the required procedure. The design brief stipulates that the provided procedure,
procedure GCDandLCM (const a,b:Integer; var G,L:Integer); should be used, as well as the Euclidean Algorithm to calculate the GCD (and the subsequent mathematics to determine the LCM. I bore this in mind through the entirety of the Design & Development phase.
After examining the available information and analysing the practical sheet given I decided that I would need code to replicate the function of the Euclidean Algorithm to perform the calculation necessary to obtain the GCD from the input values A and B. This I would implement using the * (multiplication), div and abs functions (built-in to Delphi), as the first part of the GCDandLCM function.
Below the implementation of this code, I would use a ShowMessage command to provide the output to the user, displaying the user the calculated results for the GCD and LCM. In order for this output to be useful data (information) I must put it in context, as such I would use quotes (' ') to enclose descriptive text in the message box with the integer values.
Finally, below this, I would use a separate function which contains and implementation of Delphi's while loop to calculate the value of the LCM from the output generated by the Euclidean algorithm in the previous statement, and pass this output back to the CaculateGCDLCMButtonClick event handler to be displayed in the ShowMessage output.
A try statement, shown below, would be added to the beginning of the event handler procedure to provide data validation and prompt the user when invalid inputs are entered. In order that variables did not carry over values from a previous execution of code, both were reset to a value of 1 before continuing, as both the GCD and LCM of 1 are equal to 1.
All of this code would be contained within the event handler procedure for the user's clicking of the form's only button;
The full source code for my solution can be found in the Unit Listing below.
The only problem encountered after the implementation of the solution was that the program was crashing whenever an unexpected value was entered into the edit boxes (an exception), unexpected being out the expected integer values (being a floating point, negative or character value).
After attempting to find the root of the problem, I discovered that the fault did not occur when the compiled, finished .exe of the program was executed outside of Delphi. The problem was being caused by Delphi's integrated error handling stepping in to report the problem before the try statement implemented in code could handle the exception. This therefore was not a problem as the finished program would function as intended.
For each planned test value, I ran through the input and recorded the output.
My testing provided the expected results as outlined at the end of the Design and Development phase on page 4, proving within reasonable bounds that my program works as specified and intended.
The brief on the attached Practical Sheet 8 has been fulfilled in full with each of the criteria specified in the Task section being met.
Correct values for GCD and LCM are produced for integers A and B entered into edit boxes by the user
A suitable error message is displayed for invalid input
The provided procedure, GCDandLCM, was implemented in the program as required
The Euclidean algorithm was adapted and implemented as required
A suitable user interface for this procedure was designed and implemented as stipulated by the design brief
Furthermore, during the stages of the completion of this assignment and this associated report I have learnt about procedures and parameters, as per the intended goal of the set assignment.
Procedures were used in the form of the GCDandLCM procedure provided, and in my design of procedure GCDLCMButtonClick to handle the event of the user clicking the calculate button
Parameters were used in the defining and subsequent calling of constants A and B and variables G and L as formal parameters within the procedure GCDandLCM