Through this essay I am going to discuss how Thucydides depicted the causes and cures of the Athenian plague, and the ways in which it relates to the Hippocratic theories. Page argues that 'it is highly probable that he was familiar with the writings of the contemporary Hippocratic school' and Longrigg backed this claim by stating 'Thucydides' rational, careful and detailed description...[is rare] outside the writings of the Hippocratic corpus'. I aim to show how Thucydides was influenced by the Hippocratic ideas but that there were differences within the texts.
In regards to Thucydides explanation of what caused the plague, there are elements to show how he was influenced by Hippocratic theories. He states that the plague appeared 'in the first days of the summer'. The Hippocratics placed a lot of importance on the seasons and weather that occurred at the onset of a disease, as it could affect the balance of a person's humours. In the Epidemics the writer states that 'in the autumn, when the rains came, the disease was more fatal and the majority of those that took it died." Yet Thucydides does not make a direct link between the weather and the illness, and it may have been a means of setting the scene for his audience. Thucydides does set out to 'explain the symptoms by which perhaps it may be recognised by the student, if it should ever break out again." The inclusion of the season may have been in the hope a 'student' could analyse the disease in a more efficient way. Yet if this were Thucydides' aim I think he would have given a more in depth account of the weather experienced. 'The north and south winds in particular are often represented as being especially influential' as the 'south winds cause deafness, misty vision, headache...and the north wind brings coughs, sore throats, constipation, retention of urine." Thucydides is far too vague in his description to assist the doctors in a diagnosis, unless the weather was as normal and he felt there was nothing of interest to report.
In his recording of the symptoms Thucydides has been influenced by the Hippocratics, as his remarks reflect how the latter used bedside observations to record the effects of an illness. Cochrane argues that his 'temperament, the keenness with which he observed concrete facts, the cold detachment with which he reported the symptoms...constitutes the most intimate link between Thucydides and Hippocrates." Thucydides writes that 'these symptoms were followed by sneezing and hoarseness, after which the pain soon reached the chest and produced a hard cough." This parallels the writer of the Epidemics, who states that 'in the majority of cases the course of the disease was as follows. There was fever, attended by shivering, of continuous, severe and usually non-remittent type." Thucydides also remarks on how the body felt when touched and Hippocratic doctors often used their senses to examine a patient. The patients themselves are also noted for wanting to return their bodies to a balanced situation, and to achieve this they want to 'throw themselves into cold water'.
Thucydides shows knowledge of the humours when he notes how the symptoms included 'discharges of bile of every kind', and bile is one of the elements identified by the Hippocratics that could affect the balance of the body, making a person sick. Page states that this passage shows how Thucydides was 'familiar with those names' used by the Hippocratics. He also argues that 'the great majority of the nouns, adjectives, and verbs in chapter 49 recur as standard terms...in medical writing of the fifth and fourth centuries BC'. Although this was attested by Parry, Morgan re-examined the texts and found that 'Page was in almost all respects correct. There are at least five terms in Thucydides' description that only occur in the Hippocratic corpus." Although this evidence is useful in showing how Thucydides was aware of the Hippocratic writings it does not show whether he related his theories to them. He may have used the same terminology but that does not suggest he held the same beliefs in regards to the cause or cure of a disease.
There are a number of sections that show Thucydides differed from Hippocratic writers. He states that 'all speculation as to its origin and its causes, if causes can be found adequate... I leave to other writers'. Longrigg believed this was in 'precisely the same spirit' as the Hippocratics, stating they also observed the symptoms and nature of a disease. Although this was the way in which the Hippocratics commented on a disease, they also aimed to find a cause, believing it was the result of 'some sort of imbalance in, in disturbance of, the natural state of the body." Page argued that this was like the Hippocratic writer or the Progosticon, who stated 'the value of his treatment depends on his ability to foretell the future from the present symptoms." Although prophesies were important in gaining trust, this does not mean the Hippocratics were not looking for a cause. I therefore believe that Thucydides does differ to the Hippocratics in this respect.
Thucydides also differs in his opinion on doctors. The Hippocratics did not trust those who had not been trained by a recognised Hippocratic, believing them to be 'witch-doctors, faith healers, quacks and charlatans." Thucydides on the other hand states that 'I leave to other writers, whether lay or professional'. Although Thucydides seems to have been aware of the Hippocratic corpus, it appears they have not influenced him into believing they are superior in the medical profession to other healers. This once again shows how the styles may be similar but the theoretical thought by Thucydides' work does not always reflect the ideas of the Hippocratics.
The text shows a number of ways in which Thucydides did not regard Hippocratic causes for disease when writing his description. The Hippocratics believed that an epidemic was caused by the miasma theory, as 'when a large number of people all catch the same disease at the same time, the cause must be ascribed to something common to all...what they all breathe." In contrast, Thucydides implies knowledge of contagion, stating that 'the physicians...died themselves the most thickly, as they visited the sick most often." Crawfurd believed he 'was the first of extant writers to enunciate clearly the doctrine of contagion'. I argue that Thucydides was not truly aware of contagion and Longrigg supports this idea, stating an 'observation of the phenomena of contagion is very different from comprehension of it." Holladay and Poole argue that Thucydides did have a clear understanding as 'he recorded enough to show that his ideas about how the disease spread were not a lucky guess...but a sound deduction from observed facts." However, Thucydides comments in (2.47.4) and where he states people 'were afraid to visit each other' do not directly explain germ theory. He may have believed that people died from being in contact with the sick because they breathed in contaminated air. If this were the case it would show how Thucydides was influenced by Hippocratic theories. The only part of his theory that shows the act of 'touch' was where he states that
Yet Thucydides is not discussing humans but animals, and it is not clear whether he realised it was dangerous for people to touch those infected with the disease. If he had I believe Thucydides would have stated it, and warned people that if a plague occurred in the future, to abstain from being in contact with those that were ill. His aim in writing was so that it may be recognised in the future and if he was aware of a means to stop the spread of the disease, he would have stated it. I think that scholars have wanted to interpret the passages as evidence of Thucydides awareness of the contagion phenomenon because we know it to be true, and wish to believe that the ancients had been aware of something that 'is too obvious a fact of life to have been overlooked even in the most primitive cultures." It was the advancement in technology that enabled us to understand and prove 'germ theory' and the process of contagion. Only with this knowledge are we able to assume that this is what Thucydides was implying. I therefore have to disagree with Holladay and Poole when they write how 'it is most unfortunate that the Hippocratic writers and their successors took no notice of Thucydides." Without later findings it would have been impossible for later doctors and scientists to assume contagion was the process Thucydides was describing.
In the Epidemics a writer explains that the sufferers of another disease 'were youths, young men in their prime, usually those who frequented the wrestling school and gymnasia." This could reveal how the Hippocratics were aware of contagion, as it is noted that the men catch the disease after being in contact with each other. Holladay and Poole state that 'there is no evidence that the Hippocratic writer comprehended this' whereas Longrigg argues that 'it is very hard to believe that there is not...an implicit recognition here of the fact of contagion." I agree with Holladay and Poole and believe that the writer was implying the men had developed this illness by having too much exercise, as he uses the term 'frequented'. He also states that 'few women were attacked' so it is likely he believed the disease was due to the men's lifestyle. The Hippocratics viewed men and women as different because the 'woman's body has more fluid than that of a man'. Thucydides does not treat the women as a separate entity, which also separates him from the Hippocratic texts. However, this could again be seen as a literary device to emphasise how no one could escape from the disease.
In regards to finding a cure, Thucydides did not believe the gods could provide one. He stated that 'supplications in the temples, divinations and so forth were found equally futile." He did not believe this was due to the Athenians displeasing the gods but that a cure could be found by another means. This could, however, be evidence of a literary technique to emphasise to his audience the devastating effects of the plague, and how it was so powerful that even the gods could not cure it. Thucydides also agreed with the Hippocratics that a cure was available, even if the physicians were 'ignorant' at the present time on what it was. The Hippocratics expressed that 'so long as it has not become inveterate and too powerful for the drugs which are given' a cure could be provided. To enable a physician to know whether a patient could be saved, Hippocrates and Thucydides both commented on the importance of the days. It is likely that they would have set out to do this for different reasons. The Hippocratics would need to know how likely it was for a patient to survive, as they would not have wanted to given any drugs if the patient then died, as the doctor could have been held responsible. Thucydides was not concerned with this element as he was not a physician and so the factor of blame would not have been assessed in his writings. He included the days to assess how the disease developed, so a physician could recognise the disease and develop a cure. In the same way as the Hippocratics, Thucydides highlighted a critical period. Cochrane observed that 'there is no feature of Hippocratic theory more striking than this notion that every malady tends to run a normal course up to a crisis, which once surmounted, the patient normally recovers." Thucydides remarked that 'on the seventh or eighth day to the internal inflammation, they still had some strength in them. But if they passed this stage...[it] was generally fatal." It is likely that Thucydides had been influenced by the Hippocratic writer that stated;
Thucydides also agrees with the Hippocratic idea that different people required different cures. Thucydides stated that 'no remedy was found that could be used as a specific, for what did one good in one case, did harm in another." The Epidemics highlight this ideology when they observe how physicians 'must consider the nature of a man in general and of each individual and the characteristics of each disease...the patient's customs, mode of life, pursuits and age.'
The main area in which Thucydides differed from the Hippocratics is on his views on immunisation. Thucydides observed that 'it was those who had recovered from the disease that the sick and dying found most compassion...for the same man was never attacked twice." The Hippocratics do not suggest knowledge in this area. Thucydides also resists Hippocratic ideas when he dismisses a change in a person's regimen as being a possible cure, as 'people in good health were all of a sudden attacked' and 'strong and weak constitutions proved equally incapable of resistance...although dieted within the utmost precaution." It could be argued, however, that by observing these things Thucydides was influenced by the Hippocratics and aware of the remedies they prescribed.
In conclusion Thucydides provided a clear, systematic and detailed account of the symptoms of the plague, which reflects the writing in the Epidemics. Although it is clear that Thucydides style reflects the Hippocratic corpus and he was aware of these texts, his beliefs on the causes and cures of the plague often differed.