Apollodorus in his speech against Neaira stated 'we have hetairai for pleasure, and pallakai for the daily service of our bodies, but wives for the production of legitimate offspring and to have reliable guardian of our household property." This has given rise to the idea that prostitutes in ancient Greece could be distinguished from each other, and could be clearly identified from legitimate wives. I believe it is possible to identify six types of prostitute, which I deem to have been easily identified in antiquity. One of the challenges in trying to prove the different statuses is that even though it may have been obvious at the time, it does not necessarily mean the primary source material will state it, for people do not tend to divulge information they assume their readers will already know. Two other difficulties are that there are no accounts written by the prostitutes themselves, and the secondary sources have never been consistent in the titles they have given prostitutes. Throughout translations and discussions hetairai and pallake, as well as the other terms including porne and aultrides, have often been used to refer to all types of prostitutes, so I have had to examine each text to try and define the true meaning, and then apply the correct terminology.
In my argument the six types of prostitutes are pornai, aultrides, hetairai, pallakai, temple and males. I will not be analysing temple or males through my discussion. This is because it is unclear whether temple prostitutes truly existed, and if they did, it is likely they occurred outside of Greece. McClure states that the arguments for them 'at Corinth have largely relied on Athenaeus' misreading of classical sources, particularly Pindar'. The males can not be distinguished from the Athenian citizen in the same way as the females, so I would therefore have needed to treat both these types as different entities, which is outside the scope of the project.
To determine the different roles I will assess the experience the four prostitutes had in relation to their origins, living conditions, working conditions, welfare, relationships with men and education. To evaluate these areas I will discuss the primary source material including plays, oratory and laws, as well as secondary criticism on these matters.
Before discussing the varying roles I will point out the basic arguments for and against classifying prostitutes into different status groups. Hamel argued prostitutes 'came in a variety of types, not neatly demarcated from one another'. A number of scholars argue the only variant is legitimate 'Wives and the Rest' and Davidson encapsulates this stance:
The issue should not be avoided purely on the basis that it is difficult and I feel connotations of prostitution have meant scholars have avoided discussing it in depth. Despite the nature of the prostitution profession, it should be researched to enable us to have a true sense of what life in ancient Greece was like. 'Prostitutes were taxed by the state in Athens, so...buying sex from prostitutes, then, was sanctioned by law', and all men would have had paid for sexual relations at some time. The relationship would have differed depending on whether the female was hired for one sexual encounter or a long-term relationship where sex was provided, but was not all that was desired.
Scholars continue to argue against the view that prostitutes differed in antiquity and believe the speech of Apollodorus was 'no more than a rhetorical flourish', and that too much emphasis has been placed on the differences. This would lead to the similarities being overlooked. All prostitutes would have been expected to have sex with whoever paid them, were available for 'temporary hire or straightforward seduction', the law forbade them from having legitimate children and all were looked down upon. Prostitution was legal, even when the men were married. There was criticism shown towards a man who 'visited prostitutes too frequently and squandered his inheritance on his pursuit of physical pleasures [and] might be despised for his lack of self-control'. This could lead scholars to believe it is not necessary to separate the different types, because they all performed the same activities and were regarded in the same manner; as objects of desire for men to enjoy but without the status of the legitimate wife.
I do not feel this is a strong enough argument to rule out the different types. All women, whether they were legitimate wives, slaves or prostitutes were second class citizens to men but this did not mean they were the same. In agreement Davidson notes it would be 'as absurd to generalise about them as it is to about their clients'. The men are all clients of prostitutes but this does not mean that their statuses were all the same.
Another reason that I believe the pallake had a greater status than the other prostitutes is that there are a few examples of a porne becoming a hetaira, and a hetaira becoming a pallake but the reverse never occurred. Neaira was a porne and became a hetaira and 'Aristophanes...reminds Myrtilus that old age frequently reduces once elusive, beautiful courtesans, such as Lais II, to the status of a brothel slave'. The female in On the Stepmother was so desperate to remain a pallake that she poisoned her partner, believing it to be a love potion. The status of the hetaira and pallake, therefore, had to be greater than that of the porne.
The origins of the prostitutes, which can be shown through their appearance and place within society, can reveal their status, particularly when contrasted to the legitimate wife.
To analyse the living conditions I have decided to look at the following three areas; money, housing arrangements and the dress of the prostitutes
The working conditions of the pornai appear to be difficult and, as already mentioned, they had a number of clients, for whom they would have had to provide a quick service. There are images to suggest when a pornai, working in a brothel, was not providing sexual gratification; they would be required to spin wool. There are different opinions on this matter; Keuls feels the spindles could have been a prop for an exotic fetish, so the pornai could appear to be like legitimate wives. In an establishment such as Nikarete's (although Apollodorus does not imply this was the case) this could have made sense as it would have backed up the charade the girls were free born daughters, doing domestic chores in their home. Other scholars feel this was the type of women men were trying to escape from. I do not agree with either view. The girls are not trying to mimic wives but are being made to work whilst they are not occupied with a man; 'a greedy slave-owner did not need to let his slaves sit idle while they waited for night to fall." This is best shown through the quote of a tired porne who complains 'but I have had it up three times already in this short time', although it could also be a pun regarding being with a client, and may not reflect wool work. I do not believe men were trying to escape from legitimate wives, prostitutes were an ideal choice as to bed another man's wife could result in death, and men were only supposed to have sexual intercourse with their wives for the procreation of children. As prostitutes were an accepted part of ancient Greek culture, they were an added feature to the marriage, not necessarily a replacement. Ischomachus believed the wives were preferable for sexual stimulation, because 'the wife gratifies her husband voluntarily, but the slave girl is forced to acquiesce." The prostitute, especially the porne owned by a pornoboskos, had no choice, like the slave.
The aultrides at symposiums entertained with instruments and/or dancing. The two elements were so interlinked that Kilmer believed the 'flute-girl has a reputation as a sexual as well as a musical entertainer'. The aultrides needed to be excellent entertainers, as Xenophon suggests; 'a good aulos player, and a dancing girl who was one of the top stunte-artistes' appeared at the Symposia.
The high earning hetaira, as already discussed, did not have the stability of a pallake or wife. Like Theodote, they had to play different lovers against each other. This may have been a difficult working condition as they had to be constantly pleasing, and Theodote was putting on a show, trying to be desirable to all men, which could be seen as a difficult aspect to uphold. In Athinas it is clear a 'hetaira [is] better-natured than a wife? Certainly, and fittingly so, because a wife, with the laws protection, stays haughtily at home, but a hetaira knows that she obtains her lover with a nice manner, or else she must go find another'.
If Apollodorus were to be believed, which is something I would be sceptical about, in becoming Stephanos' pallake Neaira was expected to be his mistress, as well as being desirable to other men, so she could provide an income. A hetaira may never have had the opportunity to just be with one man, as a wife or pallake could be.
The pallakai, like the pornai, were required to perform domestic chores and still expected to take on feminine roles. Aspasia had to entertain and teach a number of people, as 'Socrates, in fact, came to see her with his disciples, and his friends brought their wives to hear her'. She was never able to stop working, and had to be available for men and women to discuss matters with.
The welfare reveals how the prostitutes were protected by laws and their clients, and the security they had within society.
The prostitutes relationships with males had an effect on their status. The pornai had a number of clients with a purely sexual relationship, with no intimate bond. Sutton believes this because 'red figure paintings preferred to show rear-entry positions in which there is an emotional distance between lovers'. It is difficult to assess reality on vase paintings as they can not attest to how people really felt. I do believe that of all the prostitutes, the porne do appear to be the ones that are viewed as objects. The way clients picked them, with the porne stood in a semi circle, standing naked and for a small fee, may have had an affect on the way men viewed them. They were cheap, readily available and I believe this lowered their status. Habroton was treated in this manner, as Charisos saw her as a 'thing' to use whilst his fianc was away; no affection was felt. Fantham agrees the character shows how the relationship with slave prostitutes was 'casual and anonymous'. The pornoboskos would have ensured a porne did not develop an intimate relationship, as they would charge the man who wished to have sex with the female and not allow them to have exclusive rights over the girl. The porne may have wanted to keep their relationships with men brief, as this meant they could have more men and therefore receive more money. Clepsydra, the water clock, 'got her name because she timed her favours by water-clock, stopping when it emptied'. This transformed her into the position of power and dominance over the man, as she decided when the sessions were over and he would have had to pay to continue.
The aultrides spent a similar amount of time with clients as the porne. At the end of a symposium, the girls could have been auctioned off late in the evening to the highest bidder. This could have meant a more affectionate relationship developed, and if the aultrides were not owned by a pornoboskos, they could have had the opportunity to become a hetaira. Aristophanes' Wasps suggests this would not have happened, as he derives humour from the 'breaking of social conventions'. The play ends with the old man kidnapping the aultris and using her for his private enjoyment. As this is seen as an unlikely event, perhaps an auletris was not given the social means to be a hetaira. Aristophanes also makes the argument through Right Logic that it is ideal 'not to dart into the house of a dancing-woman' but to show indifference to aultrides. Theopompus, however, catalogued priceless ancient treasures made to lovers, some of which were aultrides.
The relationships men had with hetairai could be complex. Metaneira and Lysias appear to have been extremely close and in paying for her to be initiated; he revealed he was not in the relationship for his own gain. He was her client so she had to respond to him and be attentive, yet he went further to ensure she gained as well. It was an act of generosity to his hetaira, revealing the affection he felt towards her.
This leads me to believe that males did not want the hetaira only for sex, and after further examination it is shown that Henry agrees with this view stating 'male characters delight in courtesans' services. There is more than an appreciation of their sexual services; rather, the men seem to value the women's companionship and skills. The hetaira, and in some cases, pallake, were the only women who could be involved in the male world. The aultrides appeared at symposia but they were sent away when converse began. The hetaira remained throughout and could learn a great deal. Their relationship was far more intimate and this had great implications on their status.
The pallakai were meant to have exclusive relationships with their partners. One of Plautus' plays includes a contract between Diabolus and Clearata, for the services of the latter's daughter. Diabolus requires the girl to spend all her time with him for a year, and must adhere to paranoid sub clauses such as not looking at other men and only swearing to female deities. As a satire, it exaggerates reality, but it does share some formulaic clauses with actual contracts. Similarly Demeas finds it unacceptable that Chrysis has been with another man. The relationship the pallake had with men is the biggest piece of evidence to show how their status was greater than the other prostitutes. Demeas threatens Chrysis with the idea of being an aultris, as stated previously. This suggests that even though pornai and aultrides would become pallakai, it was not desirable to return to such a position once you had changed roles. This is because the status of the pallake was so much greater and Henry remarks this status would have been noted by everyone; 'for the slaves and the cook consider her [Chrysis] and Demeas mistress and master." Aspasia appears to have had an exclusive sexual relationship with Pericles, but entertained a number of the leading, most powerful men at her symposia. Pericles gained as much from the relationship as Aspasia; she was his intellectual superior. She appears to have been treated equally and had access to the greatest philosophers of Athens. She was able to express her views and be taken seriously. Henry believes 'Pericles made political capital off his ex-wife's marriage...it is not unreasonable to suspect that his association with Aspasia brought with it some political advantage as well'.
The prostitute's education can reveal the amount of time they spent with their clients, which affected their status. I will look at the teachings they had in regards to philosophical thought, sexual development and converse.
I believe that there were different types of prostitutes in antiquity and these could have been identified by the ancient Greeks. There are constant problems related to this issue, mainly because of the difficulties in regards to the terminology. Scholars have not been consistent when using the terminology and this has led to confusion. Through looking at the original texts, I believe a stronger argument can be made to show that there were different statuses, and the terms were not just a variety of names applied to the same sort of females. That is not to say it was always clear, as Neaira showed; when living with Nikarete and Timanoridas and Eucrates arguments could have been made for her being a porne or hetaira. If the terminology is set aside, it can always been shown that the prostitutes tried to increase their status to that of the hetaira or pallake and so this was clearly preferable to the position of auletris or porne.
.