In this essay I am going to discuss how different Spartan women were in comparison to their Greek counterparts. There are no writings from Spartan men or women, so it is difficult to know what Spartan life was really like. The sources provide an understanding of how non-Spartans viewed Spartan women, so my investigation will focus on the 'Spartan mirage', not the reality. Alcman is the only Spartan source but it is unclear whether he was a Spartan, or was a foreigner living in Sparta. If the latter is the case, he, like Xenophon, would be comparing Spartan women to those from his previous community. To assess the differences I will look at the lifestyles, personalities and relationships of the women.
In regards to the females' lifestyles, it must be emphasised that this is how the non-Spartans depicted the women. It is not a reflection of reality and the way it opposes other Greek ideals could reflect how the men have created this idea, to enable them to safely examine what it would be like if females did appear differently. Their lifestyles include appearance, exercise, and domestic chores. Spartan women were 'deprived of make-up'. This may have been preferable as it made them appear more masculine, in the same way their strong, well exercised, healthy bodies did. A masculine appearance may have been sought after as males were accustomed to homosexual relationships, so it would have eased their transition from sex with males to females. Pomeroy believed Spartans banned cosmetics as exercise gave the women a healthy glow. It could be argued this glow also made them more masculine, as it emphasised that they had been outside. This contrasted with the white lead used by Athenians, emphasising their sheltered lifestyles and separation from men. Although Athenian women were permitted to wear make-up, Ischomachus preferred his wife not to, believing it was an act of deception.
Spartan women appeared nude to give 'a taste of masculine gallantry', which was absurd to other Greeks who 'reserved [nudity] for women of low social status'. Powell believed the nudity encouraged men to marry but there may not have been a reason behind it. Spartan men, unlike other Greeks, may not have found it necessary to create a division between the genders and it may have been natural for them to have appeared naked together.
Exercise of women was not usually encouraged, and they were not permitted to enter events such as the Olympics. Spartan women were instructed on how to 'wrestle and throw the discus and javelin' and took part in competitions. Lycurgus ensured they were well exercised so that they coped with childbirth and had healthy offspring. Xenophon and Plutarch may have rationalised exercise in Spartan society by applying qualities perceived necessary in their own society, a point backed up by Powell. However, there is no proof females were trained for military purposes, so it is likely exercise was to ensure the production of healthy offspring. I believe if Spartan men had felt exercise was not beneficial in childbirth, the females, like their Greek counterparts could not have participated. No women, therefore, controlled their livelihoods. This could be emphasised further if women had no choice in whether they exercised, revealing their lack of control over the life they led.
Athenian women were epitomised by their skill in domestic chores and for remaining indoors. Lycurgus 'did away with prudery, sheltered upbringing and effeminacy of any kind' and slaves did domestic chores. The sources may have stated this 'to contrast Sparta with their own societies' and their imaginations let them down, preventing them from thinking up a female that was different, rather than the opposite to what they knew. This view affected how the sources perceived the way women viewed their successes, for 'when an Ionian woman was priding herself on one of her tapestries...a Spartan woman showed off her four most beautiful sons'. Pomeroy believed they 'could weave and supervise their slaves work...[but] their reputation' did not depend upon it. Spartan women were feminised by their sons', and their sons' honour, not due to wool-work. Other Greek women were characterised on giving birth but this was not the only element that epitomised them. I believe once a son had grown up, their character had little effect on the way their mother was viewed, as their upbringing and education was provided by paterfamilias. In Sparta, even though mothers had no role in their sons' education, they were gendered by their achievements. When men were dishonoured at war, their mothers would disown them, and say 'you were not mine'. If they no longer believed they had children, they could view themselves as unfeminine and not a proper woman.
Pomeroy believed Spartan women were almost equal to men. They exercised, controlled the household and had a say in state matters. Yet 'the real significance of this education...[was in] preparing them for their subordinate role as wives and...mothers'. Their exercise and intellect ensured their offspring were strong and they were left in charge due to necessity, as their husbands were away at war. Yet women could be seen as more equal than males, as Cartledge argues all female babies would have been reared, and Powell feels less discrimination would have been shown towards girls. I believe most girls would have been reared, except for those that were weak and sickly, so perceived as unfit mothers. Sparta would have been the 'antithesis of Athens', as more girls were reared than boys, which 'would have been extraordinary...in terms of general Greek practice at all periods'. Pomeroy also felt the decision to rear a girl was left to the mother, giving her a power 'usually reserved for men in the Greco-Roman world.
In regards to giving birth, Greek women were seen as the garden for men to grow their seed but had no other role in the creation of children. Men felt it was the woman who caused weakness in babies, and if, like Zeus, they could have children on their own, they would be strong, brave and intelligent. Spartan women were given more credibility in the process and when asked how Spartan women could rule men, they replied 'because we are the only ones who give birth to men." The writer of The Seed however, shows that women were given a larger role in the creation of offspring outside of Sparta. He states that 'both what is provided by the man and...woman is mixed together' and the sex is determined by the strength of the sperm. This belief did not mean women had power over men but explained the sex of the child and how characteristics were inherited.
Spartan women were regarded as being brave. Agesistrata could have avoided death by agreeing her son's beliefs were incorrect, yet spoke out on how others were in the wrong, and when given the noose stated 'may this only be of service to Sparta'. She died as a Spartan man hoped to; for the state. Another woman, on being sold as a slave, refused 'to perform certain services unfitting for a free woman', and committed suicide. Plutarch describes a girl that brought on a miscarriage, as she had lost her virginity in secret. Plutarch states she 'exercised such self control - letting out not a single cry - that neither her father not her neighbours besides were aware of her delivery'. I do not trust this story, because if the girl had successfully kept the miscarriage a secret, Plutarch should not have been aware of it, unless the foetus had been found at a later date, enabling the story to be told, or if he was the father of the unwanted child. It does, however, show that Spartan women were perceived as strong, and brave. Other women were perceived as being weak and unable to exercise self control. They stereotypically used substances such as poison, a devious and cowardly way to murder a person.
The conversations Athenian wives had with other women are not mentioned, which could show Athenian men did not believe they were capable of discussing matters of importance. Socrates, on hearing that Ischomachus' wife was able to manage the household suitably remarked, 'your wife has a man's intelligence." It was clearly not a given that females could discuss and understand matters, even when they regarded the household and their domestic chores. Leonidas' daughter, however, stood up to her father in regards to her husband's execution and was successful in changing his mind. She explained she had to leave with Cleombrotus, arguing she could not stay and freely converse with other women, as she had been ignored by both her husband and father in the past. It was important for Spartan women to converse with female and males, and to be unsuccessful would reveal a weakness of character. Yet for Athenian women it was remarkable for women to effectively discuss matters, and they were rarely given the opportunity.
Although Spartan women resided with their parents till marriage, the relationships they had, except for those in the royal household, differed to other Greek women. It was acceptable for married Athenian men to groom young boys, but their wives were not permitted to have homosexual affairs. 'Respectable [Spartan] women would...have love affairs with unmarried girls." Cartledge believed this occurred because the female resided with her mother. I agree, although feel the emphasis should be placed on the fact the males were absent for a large percentage of the daughter's lives, rather than the fact the girls cohabited with their mothers. Athenian girls spent most of their time with their mothers but did not develop homoerotic relations with older women, as they had a male role model.
The conducting of marriages and the role of wives within the marriage also differed. Athenian girls were required to remain virgins until their wedding night, whereas Spartan girls would be visited in secret by the man that wished to marry them, and they would have sexual intercourse over a period of time. The woman appears to have had no choice over her partner, although Pomeroy feels she could have struggled if she objected. I feel this is unlikely as the woman, as in Athens, women had to follow the city's customs.
The woman would be dressed as a man, have her head shaven and neither were permitted to look at each other. The bride was required to devise schemes so she could visit the man without being caught, something other Greek men would have been horrified by. This seems unrealistic as the father would have realised their daughter's head was shaved. It may have been a fantasy of Plutarch's, as it once again opposes the Athenian norms. I, however, believe the marriage ceremony was not kept secret but acted as a customary 'trial' to ensure the wife was able to conceive or safely give birth. If this were case, the head shaving may have been a symbolic act to show that the virgin has now become a woman, a warning to other men that she was married, or eased the transition for males that had been used to homosexual relations. This was an aid to males, and reveals how Spartan wives were not considered during marriage or sex. Cartledge notes they would have been shocked by the 'violation of an older man', and I feel this parallels Athenian girls that were uprooted from their homes and forced to have sex with an older man. Lycurgus believed it stopped the newly 'wed' couple from having intercourse too much, and ensured they practiced restraint, therefore producing healthy babies, whereas other Greek men believed unlimited intercourse ensured offspring.
The custom was to have an older wife than those desired by other Greek males, as Spartans were to have a females that was not 'slight or immature, but when they were in their prime and ripe for it'. This, as in Athens, was due to a male preference. It is difficult to know when Spartan girls were regarded as being in their prime. Pomeroy states eighteen but Cartledge adds it is more difficult to assess, as the girls may have reached puberty earlier than other Greeks due to their diet, or later because of their exercise. Pomeroy argues this would not have happened as they would not have exercised as vigorously as modern athletes, yet she offers no evidence to attest this claim. I believe it would have been later than other girls, making them more suitable for childbirth, as their bodies would have developed and they would have had a longer period to achieve a strong body.
Once married, Lycurgus encouraged older men to let 'well-bred young men' to have intercourse with their young wives 'so as to fill her with noble sperm." He also allowed men to sleep with other men's wives, as long as they gained the husbands approval first. This would have been absurd to Athenian men, who were allowed to murder any man that had intercourse with their wives. It should be noted Spartan women were not given the power to have sex with another woman's husband. They were only permitted to have sex with other men when their husbands agreed to it, although Pomeroy felt the wife could have influenced her husband. I disagree, and think husbands would not have allowed their wives to go with another man, as Charillus noted wives wore veils in public as they 'must stick to their own husbands." It was not different for Spartans and other Greeks; it was the husbands that were allowed to be promiscuous, and Spartan men were unlikely to allow their wives to go with someone they perceived to be a threat. Macdowell, however, believes that if a man was not producing any children, he would come under strong moral pressure to allow another access to his wife. Leonidas allowed his wife to have sex with others but was going to war and as king, may have said this to set an example to his countrymen. Yet this source also contradicts reality, as King's had to ensure the heir was legitimate, so their wives needed to be chaste. Plutarch could therefore have invented or misinterpreted these stories to enhance his view that Spartan life opposed what he witnessed in other Greek states.
The relationship between mother and son differed, as mothers had a war based mentality towards their sons. Honour was gained by being victorious or by dying in battle. For those that fled, their mother's killed or disowned them. The mother was not blamed but admired as the epigram of Damatria, who murdered her son, shows;
When Medea murdered her sons, the Athenians viewed it as an inconceivable act. She was viewed as masculine as she pushed her maternal instincts aside in order to commit a fowl act. Mothers were not pleased to see their sons return if they were not honoured, and when their children left for war, their words of encouragement were 'either with this or on this'. For those that were honoured, the mothers did not grieve as they felt 'weeping [was for] cowards; but you child, without a tear do I bury'.
Spartan women were characterised as being intelligent and brave. Like other Greeks, they were educated by their mothers but Athenians were not permitted to access the intellectual world. Athenian men were willing to converse with their hetaira on matters of philosophy and converse at the symposia but most would not have regarded their wives as suitable for discussions.
In conclusion it is clear that the sources believed that Spartan women differed to their Greek counterparts, but it is impossible to judge whether this was the reality. The sources also show that the differences only occurred because men wanted them to. Spartan women exercised and entered intellectual conversations to produce healthy offspring, they appeared masculine to ease men into heterosexual relationships and governed the household when the men required them to, as they were on campaign. There is an underlying feeling that if Spartan men's attitudes or needs changed, then Spartan women would have lost their privileges. Yet this could also be a 'mirage' created by other Greek males that found it difficult to cope with the differences they discovered.