Fellini's Satyricon is different to many films in the way in which it explores antiquity. I am going to assess how Fellini addresses cinema's relationship with antiquity by looking at the visual elements and the topics on spectacle, gender relations, imperialism and religion. I will evaluate the value of cinema in reconstructing and consuming ancient Rome through seeing how the film explains the past and present.
The visual elements of the film enable us to see antiquity as something we are detached from and can not fully understand. This is achieved through the camera angles and the appearance that the scenes are a depiction of art. The camera angles have an impact on the way the audience view Encolpio and Giton when they make their way through the brothel;
This distances the audience from the characters, making it difficult for a relationship to be formed. Fellini wanted this to occur so that we would realise how little we actually know about antiquity. His purpose was to "restore the image of a vanishing world without completing it" (Fellini 1978:18), therefore making it a far more realistic interpretation than that of Ben Hur and Gladiator, which have applied modern values to a historical setting.
As the characters are never fully understood it is difficult for the audience to develop empathy for them. I believe this enhances the idea that we have no true understanding of the ancient world, its values or customs. Rosenthal (1976:82) argues that during the Minotaur scene we are able to develop a bond with Encolpio. He states that "we become personally involved in Encolpio's predicament; for the first time we understand what the 'student' is experiencing". I do not fully agree with Rosenthal. I feel that we never come to understand Encolpio and although we may pity him for the circumstances he is placed in, an attachment is not formed. I believe the audience would feel embarrassed for him when he is unable to perform with the prostitute, especially as she ridicules him in front of the mass audience who are viewing the spectacle but there remains, through this scene and all the others, a detached sympathy.
The camera angles also give us an insight into how history can be explored through the art that is found. I believe this is best shown in the gallery scene with Encolpio and Eumolpo, as the actors often stop moving for a few seconds so it appears that the images are taken from a portrait. As the characters are surrounded by art we are also reminded of what has been discovered from the past, and how it is in a fragmentary form so that we cannot understand it fully. Fellini is unusual in the sense that he was "discarding what has been written and sticking to what has been painted" (Moravia 1978:164). The art is how Fellini sees antiquity and addresses this point throughout the film. He spoke of how he was "influenced by the frescoes. At the end, these people, whose lives once were so real to them, are now only crumbling frescoes" (Fellini cited in Chandler 1995:174). It is an interesting way to assess history and enables people to see that we can not know everything of the past but by piecing sections together, we can begin to create a good basis upon which to set out our arguments.
The spectacle of the film is very different to that of Ben Hur, Spartacus and Cleopatra. Traditionally films based on antiquity have tried to achieve the greatest spectacle through lavish costumes, extraordinary set designs and a large number of extras. Satyricon has none of these elements and the focus is not on the spectacle of the buildings or props, but rather that of the people of the time. The crazy, loud and mad people are the centre of attention rather then the extravagant elements of the society. Betsy Langman (cited in Baxter 1993:249) stated that
Nothing was meant to appear realistic or accurate, it was meant to make the audience feel that they had been transported to a new world that they could not understand and knew little about. It also wanted to show elements of antiquity that had been concealed by previous films. Ben Hur, Spartacus and Cleopatra wanted to encapsulate the beauty and splendour of Rome. In all the films we see glorious buildings and are given a glimpse of what the Romans had been able to achieve. Satyricon shows us another part of Rome, the darker elements of the society. Encolpio wears a toga that is too short for him, perhaps revealing his poverty, the brothel is dark, gloomy and grey and is seen falling down upon its poor inhabitants. Moravia (1978:166) notes how there is
This is a new Rome that we are being transported to, one that refuses to delight in just what the rich could afford and enjoy. It shows not just the slaves but what the poorest members of the society had to experience and live through. Fellini reveals that the Rome that has fascinated people for generations is not that of the true Rome, but the Rome lived in by the elites.
Fellini also uses visual elements to put across the idea that every human has to fight for life. Snyder reveals how this is especially shown in the scene with the Widow. She is captured crying over her dead husband, and is dressed in dark clothes. A soldier comes in and she chooses him, even agreeing to give up the body of her husband so that the soldier will not be killed for allowing a prisoner's body to have escaped. This is a key moment of the film, and clearly marks the need for people to embrace life over death. This is shown when the Widow leaves the corpse as "her transition is marked by a process of pigmentation. The significance of this process lies in its relationship to the story of Encolpio" (Snyder 1978:168), as both of the characters have to make a choice; life being the right one for it is coupled with colour and fulfilment. Encolpio, upon abandoning the old men eating the corpse of Eumolpo, gains colour on the fresco of the wall. He is complete, even though the other elements are not. This contrasts to the beginning scene where Encolpio is set against a plain wall, and for a period of time the only element we have of him is his voice. Even when he comes into view he is clearly a tormented person who is constantly in search of something. By the end of the film he has found peace by embracing life, even though he does not have his beloved Giton or companion Ascilto. Perhaps Fellini is trying to make his audience understand the value of life, and how it does not matter if we are unable to achieve or gain all we desire, for life is a wonderful thing that we should embrace and take pleasure in for its own sake. It can also be a warning, as Fellini is trying to show his audience that one day they will be part of the frescoes, lost and forgotten. He therefore urges the people watching the movie to make the most of their lives before it is taken from them.
Religion is not an area which Fellini explores to a great extent. Ben Hur and Quo Vadis contrast the brutal Romans to the saintly Christians but Satyricon avoids such matters. Even though the film is set around the period of Nero, the Christian matter is never addressed. It could be argued that Eumolpo in the gallery scene is a saintly figure. He wears a simple toga that resembles that of a priest and he preaches of how to lead a better life. He guides others to be humble, to ignore the temptations of wealth and sex and develop our skills in the arts. He does not, however, advise us on faith but on the philosophical and artistic elements. He argues against those who have ignored poetic thought and discussions in favour for less intellectual elements. In this sense, he appears to resemble a Greek philosopher rather than a Christian priest.
Male relationships are a clear focus within the film. In Spartacus a homosexual relationship was hinted at in the 'oysters and snails' scene. In contrast to this Satyrcon embraces homosexual relationships fully and does not try to hide it behind the dialogue. Unlike Spartacus, it is not just the bad characters that are involved in sexually deviant relationships, but the majority of the cast. Encolpio and Ascilto may not be viewed as the typical male, but they are not cruel or nasty. They engage in the same sort of homosexual relationships as the undesirable Lichas. Homosexuality is not used to characterise or define a character, it is merely their preference. This is a better depiction of the past then that shown by previous films. It can be argued that the Greeks and Romans had no definition for homosexuality, so did not feel that it existed. It is likely that they viewed bisexuality as the norm, and I feel that this can be shown by Suetonius who commented on how Claudius did not like to go with men. Such a comment would assume it was unusual at the time not to have same-sex relations. If this is the case then Satryicon is clearly a more accurate reflection of the sexual relationships that occurred in antiquity. Baxter (1993:243) encapsulates this idea when he writes that "it is a film about homosexuality, but with no feeling of sin or shame".
The masculinity of the male is another focal point in the film. In contrast to the leads in Spartacus and Gladiator, Encolpio, Ascilto and Giton are feminine males, sporting none of the traditional Roman characteristics of a muscular body, chiselled bone structure and deep voice. All three wear revealing togas and are the opposite of what is typically desired. Whereas Maximus encapsulated the strong warrior, Encolpio is unable to fight the Minotaur and fails sexually as well. The closest he comes to being a traditional male is in his relationship with Giton, as when they are together Encolpio is the master and Giton lays on him, as a female would in most love scenes. Giton was apparently chosen for the role due to the fact he was "small, pale, pouting and androgenous" (Baxter 1993:243).
The idea of the male body being on show is also developed through the film. This is like most films set in antiquity where the focus is on the naked elements of the male body, and how it is on display for the audience to enjoy. The scene where Lichas and Encolpio wrestle can be contrasted to the gladiatorial fight in Spartacus. In both there is a battle between two scantily dressed males, and they are watched not only by those in the film but also by the audience. There are a number of clear differences that reveal how Fellini attempts to show a difference in the way antiquity can be viewed. In Spartacus the men are muscular and the women prey over them, using them for their own sexual enjoyment. The gladiators do not want to fight but have to in order to live. Draba goes against the system and chooses death. In contrast Lichas wants to fight Encolpio, who at the beginning resists him but eventually gives in and kisses his component after a short moment of resistance. Lichas is an undesirable male with a false eye and flabby old body, whereas Encolpio is a feminine male that opposes the ideal, sexy gladiator. The spectacle of the male, therefore, is completely different. In Spartacus the bodies of the men is primarily for the gaze of the female audience, in Satyricon it is again aimed at a male audience and only Encolpio is desired.
To enhance the view of the male body, Fellini only includes the female when it is necessary. To exaggerate the sexuality of the leading males, the women are rarely shown to be attractive when they are naked. The Widow and the woman that commits suicide are both pretty but fully dressed, and neither are involved in erotic scenes. The prostitutes in the brothels and the females in the banquet scene are depicted as garish tramps and it is impossible to find them attractive. Baxter (1993:247) shows this clearly when he states that
The women are not the beautiful, desirable females that we are used to. They immediately contrast to the women that we are used to viewing on the screen such as Cleopatra, whose power is created by her beauty and sexual appeal. The women in Satyricon have no right of their own and hold no power over the men; they are merely tools used by the males in order for them to fulfil their goals. This can be best shown in the scene where Encolpio visits the group of women to cure himself from his impotence. These moderately attractive women fail and the woman that returns his sexual ability is the opposite to what men typically desire; the Earth goddess is large, middle aged and with sagging breasts. She is the only woman with power in the film and goes against all that we usually associate with the strong and powerful female of antiquity. This again highlights Fellini's point that our views may not be consistent that of the Romans, as the desirable woman of today may differ substantially to the type of woman sought after in antiquity.
Imperialism is also touched upon. Lichas is the embodiment of Rome, as he is 'a roaming imperial pimp and homosexual pirate who enjoys wrestling his captives to death' (Baxter 1993:247). He, like Rome, destroys every community he meets and ensures that they bow down to his desires, as Encolpio is shown doing after they wrestle. Like Rome, he removes their ideals in place of what the empire wants and kills all those who fight against it. The film does not go out to reject imperialism as other films have, but there is an underlying thought that the empire is not an ideal concept. Fellini (1978:16) wrote of the similarities that are shown in the film with an imperialistic nation;
Satyricon is a unique film in the way that it explores antiquity and evaluates the values of that and the society of 1969. Fellini shows how we cannot expect to fully understand the past, and to appreciate how we put our own values and beliefs onto the cultures that we look at. Although I do not feel antiquity was as absurd as the dream like state encapsulated by Fellini, I think he has allowed us to question the elements we are taught and given us the means to try and reconstruct ancient Rome in a different way. He allows us to accept that we will never have all the answers and even if we did, we may not understand all aspects of the society.