Horticultural production has changed since the time that the main scope was quantity. The last decades consumers demand products of reasonable price and high quality. A great concern of consumers is impact of modern ways of cultivation to environment. The climate change and problems of pollution of water, air and soil are partly connected to agricultural activities. After the development of quality management systems and their use in agriculture, it became clear that not only high quality products are desirable, but also it is important to minimize the impact of farming to the environment. Many quality standards exist and all of them have environmental guidelines. Some environmental and quality systems are ISO series, Environmental Management and Audit Scheme (EMAS) and of course organic standards of soil association have particular references to environmental protection. There are numerous management systems for horticulture which may vary to different countries, but if someone could summarize the most important principles of them, could come to a conclusion that reuse and recycling, energy efficiency, prevention of pollution and sustaining of fauna and flora are the main axes.(Piper L., Ryding S.V. and Henricson C. 2003). The environmental management systems examine each stage of the production procedure by the environmental aspect, the environmental impact and the environmental effect. By the view of environmental aspects, activities are recorded by the possible impact that can have. Impacts record the changes that occur because of a certain activity, positive or negative, and the environmental effects record the results of the environmental impacts.(Piperal. 2003)
Scientists connect modern agriculture methods to global and local pollution issues. The public demand for environmental protection is a fact that could not be ignored. Governments around the world, take certain measures to assure the sustainability of agriculture. In U.K. environmental agency and Linking Environment and Farming organization (LEAF) address to several environmental issues connected to agriculture. There are also many schemes like assured produce that set environmental standards. Many retailers like TESCO, create logos as the "nature's choice" for products under environmental standards in order to meet consumers demands and add value to their products.
Pepper is a very popular horticultural product, it is consumed almost all over the world. Because of its popularity it is cultivated in many places under protection. In order to have great production and higher quality products a lot of inputs are required. Fertilizers, pesticides, fungicides, herbicides and other chemical compounds could be possible pollutants. In order to prevent pollution special treatment is necessary. Pollution may come from emission of gasses or use of material that can not be recycled. Also the excess of waste may be a problem for a horticultural enterprise. In order to provide a certification to a farmer who is cultivating peppers under protection certain criteria should be accomplished.
First of all, auditing schemes will record the energy efficiency of the pepper greenhouse. The consumption of fuels for heating the greenhouse, use of the machinery, vehicles and other equipment is a crucial factor. The quality and the quantity of fuels used per kilogram of product is a very useful factor for testing the environmental performance of the horticultural enterprise. All fuels release carbon dioxide which is the main gas that affects the global climatic change due to the glasshouse effect. So, the choice of an environmental way of heating, like LPG, natural gas or even green waste, can have significant affect to the reduction of global pollution gasses. Also, the reduction of vehicle movement could be beneficial in terms of pollution prevention and could save money for the owner. Energy also could be consumed for artificial lighting. Consumption of electricity is also a very significant factor, because emission of carbon dioxide per KWh is quite high. A useful indicator for testing the environmental efficiency of the greenhouse could be the measurement of energy consumed per kilogram of product. A grower could improve the energy consumption indicator not only by minimizing the energy needs of the greenhouse, but also by increasing its productivity.
In order to have better quality and higher production of peppers amounts of fertilizers will be used. All environmental and quality schemes require that the use of fertilizers will not be in excess amounts. Phosphoric and nitrogen fertilizers can contaminate the surface and ground water of an area. In places that many agricultural enterprises exist water pollution by fertilizers may be a major local issue. People can not drink water because of the high amount of nitrates and fauna of lakes can be affected due to water eutrophy. The environmental management systems could use several indicators in order to evaluate the affect of fertilizers, as the concentration of water pollutants in the ground water or in the soil.(Piper at al. 2003)3. Soil analyses in order to identify the true demands of the plants are required. A qualified agronomist could give useful advises about the application of fertilizers. The knowledge of the area is also very important. if there are Nitrate Vulnerable Zones( NVZ) then the grower should be aware of it and be more careful. (The environment agency 2006). If the pepper production is soiless then it would be extremely beneficial for the environment, if recirculation of elements and water took place.
The peppers protection of pests and diseases is very important. Below there are some main pests and diseases and some of the biocides that are commonly used and have the approval of the British Crop Protection Council in 1998.
The table can give a general idea of the many different substances that can be used for crop protection. Some quality standards permit the use of only a number of substances. For example organic standards permit only the use of inorganic compounds (soil association 2005). The pollution of pesticides is mainly a local problem, but if the compounds are not easily disposed can cause problems to larger areas. All the environmental standards require certain measures in order to avoid environmental pollution. Special places should exist in the horticultural enterprise where the biocides are kept. The use of an external layer in order to avoid contamination of water and soil may be necessary. Pesticides that are selective should be preferred in order to avoid harmful effects to wild life. Also the air pollution should be prevented by the use of appropriate spraying methods. Certain precautions should be taken in order to avoid accidental use of dangerous chemical compounds. Training of the personnel is necessary so as everyone knows how and when to use the pesticides. Extremely important is the labeling of the toxic substances. Standardized procedures are very crucial so as to minimize the possibility of false application, also they are very important in case of an accident so as everyone knows how to act. Most schemes promote the use of biological control for reduction of pest populations. Biological control is a method which is not harmful for the environment and therefore farmers should prefer to use it instead of pesticides.
Waste management is extremely significant for all environmental management systems. Like every horticultural enterprise, the pepper green house produces various types of waste quantities that have to be managed. Waste could be: used packages, pesticides containers, manures, fertilizers packages, green residues, vehicle wastes and various others. An easy solution for many farmers was to burn all these wastes, or just drop them to a dump place. Environmental management schemes require from the farmers to recycle as many waste as possible. There are several options like give the waste to recycle companies, store them for a maximum of 12 months, obtain a Prevention Pollution Control (PPL) or a Waste Management License (WML) and take the waste to a recovery or disposal site. (Environmental agency 2006)6. The way of managing wastes is mainly a local issue, but it is very important in terms of environmental protection. Waste management can be beneficial both for environment and growers, because they could save a lot of money and be more competitive. An indicator that many environmental standards use is the reuse of material. The reuse of material is a very affective way to reduce waste quantities and cost of the pepper greenhouse. If the peppers are cultivated with hydroponic way it is very affective to use a recirculation system in order to reuse minerals and water.
It is also very important that many materials that will be used, to be provided by suppliers that have similar environmental standards. A pepper greenhouse uses a lot of plastic, mainly for packaging purposes. Plastic may also be needed for the roof and the walls of the green house since modern horticultural plastics have better characteristics for plant growth than glass. It is very possible that the peppers will need a special substrate for their development. The main material that substrates consist of, is peat, but, peat extraction is harmful for the environment. Most of the places that peat is extracted are natural habitats for many species. The government is planning a gradually reduction of pat use. Many studies take place around the world in order to find peat alternative substrates. Materials as green wastes, furniture and wood residues can be used. Horticultural industry could absorb many wastes of other sources, so the environmental performance of the pepper greenhouse could be improved if recycled materials were used.
There are several issues that affect the local environment, the wild fauna and flora and the local population that environmental management standards address. Apart from the application of fertilizers, biocides and waste production, the noise and light levels could affect wild life and the people that may live near the green house. Machinery of the enterprise could be a great nuisance both for human and animals. Artificial light also may be a problem. All these factors should be under serious consideration in order to minimize the impact of agricultural enterprise to the local environmental.
The measures that are taken in order to increase the environmental efficiency of the green house should be documented. Documentation is very important because, it has to summarize all the actions taken by sector and date. The audits should be able to examine by documents if the goals that were set, have been accomplished. Training of the personnel, establishing of routines and emergency procedures also have to be described by documents. All the actions should be harmonious to the legal requirements. Documentation should be recorded and include the results of audits, checking and correction actions. (Piperal. 2003).
Due to increased concern about the global and local pollution issues and the climatic change environmental management will more and more important. Environmental management standards meet consumers expectations. Protect public health and prevent potential environmental negative impact from human activities, by assisting the improving and maintenance of the environment. Producers are able to enter new more demanding markets and increase their profit by adding value to their product. Consumers feel safer about the quality of products and producers can decrease the functional cost of their enterprise in long term. In the past producers and consumers had the "us and them" culture and unnecessary antagonism was developed. Environmental and quality standards tend to minimize this kind of antagonism by providing insurance at a reasonable cost, so they help to maintain good public and community relations.( Sayre D. 1996).