During the last decades people started to realize that environmental pollution is a major problem that affects their lives. Also, many food crises created great concern to the consumers about the quality of food. People started to become more interested about nutritional and environmental issues. The answer to consumers demand for safer and healthier food production may be organic agriculture. According to Lampkin(1990) an organic agriculture system is" a system which seeks to avoid direct and /or indirect routine use of readily soluble chemicals and all biocides whether naturally occurring, or not. Where it is necessary to use such materials, then the least environmentally disruptive at both micro and macro levels are used". There are many other definitions of organic farming, but most of them are focused on the fact that organic agriculture is a way of production which tries to cause less harm to the environment. A basic principle of organic agriculture is health for human, soil, fauna, flora and planet. Some other principle of organic production is: ecology, fairness and care for future generations and the environment. (I.F.O.A.M. 2005).
According to data in U.K. only a small part of agricultural land is cultivated under organic standards. Scotland's organic land is 6.5% of the total agricultural area, Wales come second with 3.5%, England third with 2.5% and N. Ireland last with 0.6%. Organic food production has increased the last years in U.K. but the native production covers only 35% of the British demand for organic products.(defra 2005). Consumers buy organic food for several reasons, some may believe that they avoid potential hazards and buy more healthy and high quality food, others belief is that organic agriculture practices do not damage the soil and are less polluting for water. People may prefer organic products instead of conventional because they think that organic agriculture is more energy efficient.(Lampkin, N. 1990). Apart from these reasons consumers could buy organic because they taste better and organic farming does not harm the environment.(whyorganic.org 1/2/2006).
Many consumers may believe that organic farming has several benefits for health, wildlife and environment, in many cases science confirms the benefits of organic agriculture, although not all studies sow a clear ascendancy of organic agriculture in comparison to conventional ways of growing plants.(Lampkin 1990).
One of the main advantages of organic agriculture is that there is little or no use of biocides, therefore there are fewer residues in products. Several studies show that organic products have almost no residues, the same time some conventional farming products have residues above permitted level. (Lampkkin 1990). Many studies around the world relate the use of pesticides to many different diseases, such as leukemia, brain, kidney pancreatic and prostate cancer and show that especially children are in greater risk (Ontario college of family physicians 2004).
Organic farmers prefer to use methods environmental friendly for preventing pests and diseases. The use of natural enemies and rotation are practices with great importance for a successful organic cultivation.(Newton, J.1995). Biological control has selective way of action. Most predators attack to a specific pray, and cause no harm to other organisms like wide range pesticides do. Furthermore the fauna is not in danger due to uncontrollably use of biocides. So, a real important characteristic of biological control is that it is a selective method of fighting off pests and there are no side effects. Only the pest-target is affected and there is no harm for other species of wild life (Orr, D., Bambara, S., Baker, J. 1/2/2006). Experiments that took place in Bangladesh in grown spring barley have sown higher fauna diversity in organic fields. Furthermore more plant species existed in organic fields and despite of higher diversity the harmful species of panzer and zett were less abundant in organic cultivation.(Andersen, A., Sujursen, H., Rafoss, T. 2004).
Some studies indicate lower level of nitrates in organic vegetables. Nitrates could produce nitrosamines which are carcinogenetic substances. 70% of average person intakes are from vegetables and 20% from water. (Lampkin 1990). Organic agriculture practices prevent accumulation of nitrates in ground water. Nitrogen from legume helps farmers to decrease losses of nitrate to water. There are also evidence that maximization of green cover periods, lower stocking densities and use of straw-based manure minimize lose of nitrate. (Shepherd, M., Pearce, B.,Cornack, B.,Philips, L., Cuttle, S., Bhogal, A., Costigan, P., Unwin, R., 2003).
According to some studies organic products have higher nutrition value. Observations on a twelve year experiment of growing vegetables with composted manures compared with mineral fertilizers showed that there were differences in nutrients. Vegetables grown with composted manures had higher percentage of dry matter, protein, vitamin c, total sugar, methionine, iron, potassium, calcium and phosphorus there were also less sodium, nitrates and free amino acids. Even though, there are studies that show no difference in nutritional value between organic and conventional agriculture products.(Lampkin 1990).
Quality of livestock organic products may be better. In many cases conventional farmers use antibiotics in order to maintain their animals healthy, this fact can cause problems to human health. If antibiotics are consumed from human then their effectiveness is lost and people are vulnerable to viruses. Organic farmers do not use antibiotics and try to maintain livestock health by providing to livestock better conditions. Furthermore, organic animal food is forage-based. Studies show that forage-based cattle diets help to maintain saturated fats low an increase the omega-3 concentration in beef. (soil association 2005).
Organic agriculture practices could have different results for soil condition. An experiment which took place in England pointed that fields of organic agriculture had deeper plough horizons, higher percentage of organic matter, total nitrogen and available phosphorus. Conventional topsoil had lower shear strength and available K.(Munro, L.,Cook, H.F.,Lee,H.C. 2002). Another experiment in Bangladesh also indicated that there were significantly lower bulk densities in organic farms than in conventional. There were also higher levels of exchangeable calcium and in one organic field the exchange capacity and organic matter fractions were greater.(Hossain, M.Z.,ChoudhuryM.F., Hossain, M. F., Alam, Q.K. 2002). There are also studies that connect organic farming to lower parasitic nematodes level and higher biomass. Some other studies have connected organic farming to lower risk of erosion, but these are under criticism. (defra 2/02/2006).
Organic farming may prevent the environmental pollution. It is estimated that modern agriculture is one of the major pollutant factors of water. Pesticide and fertilizer residues declass the quality of ground and surface water. (Thomas Harter 2005). It is estimated that British pay about 120million for removing chemicals from drinking water, mainly as a result of the pesticides used in farming, so there are no hidden cost in organic production. Furthermore emitions of carbon dioxide, the main global warming gas, are eliminated. (whyorganic.org 2/02/2005). Organic agriculture is also beneficial for the environment, because of recycling. Application of animal and plant residues is taking place in order to improve soil fertility. There are also less packaging materials from agrochemicals, which need to be disposed and of course, less pesticide washings. So, someone could conclude that there are fewer wastes from an organic farm when compared to a conventional farm. (defra 2005).
Organic agriculture may have beneficial impacts for wildlife. Organic farming ethos is to sustain all fauna and flora species in order to have an ecological balance. It is not necessary to eliminate pests and weeds, but it is more appropriate to control them in a way that the economical damage is acceptable. Several studies indicate that biodiversity of species is increased in organic farms. In some organic rice fields in Bangladesh population of arthropods was greater than to conventional fields. Hossain, et al. 2002). A comparison between conventional and organic potato to Ireland, pointed that there were greater numbers of ground beetle communities in organic cultivated potatoes. Apart from ground beetles there were eleven more weed species in organic fields and the Berger-parker diversity index was 3.4 for organic cultivation and 2.2 for conventional.(O Salivan, C.M and Gormally M.J. 2002). There is a lot of evidence that appear organic agriculture more friendly for fauna and flora. There principles and practice of organic farming require an environment where all organisms have their role and the farmer use the nature in order to produce a high quality food in sufficient quantity(ifoam 2005).
Various studies indicate some problem that could occur from organic agriculture. Phosphorus leaching is more likely to happen in deep soils with high percentage of organic matter. These soils have little capacity of phosphorus absorption. (defra 2005). There are cases that organic food considered to be responsible for poisoning, because of fungicides absence E. coli, was observed in lettuce. There were also facts of high aflatoxin levels in organic products.( Lampkin 1990).24. Although, other observations point that risk of caolin in apples pointed no appearance of E.coli.(Friedrich,H., Delate, K., Domoto, P., Nonnecke, G. and Wilson, L. 2002). The main disadvantages of organic farming are high prices and reduction of yield. Consumers in most cases need to pay extra for buying organic food.(soil association 2005). According to a twelve tear experiment that took place in Germany, there was a total of 25% less yield in organic products compared to conventional agriculture products.(Lampkin 1990). Some argue that organic agriculture is not able to cover the demands of world for food and that if this model of agriculture was practiced worldwide then the problem of malnutrition would be greater.(soil association 2005). Although, no one can ignore the fact that overproduction of agricultural products in the developed part of the world has not solve malnutrition problem in undeveloped countries. Another problem of organic production is that in most cases further effort is required in order to produce and the total cost per unit is increased.
It is obvious that there can not be a completely clear conclusion in some cases whether organic agriculture mainly has more beneficial impact for human, environment and wild life, than conventional agriculture. Different studies provide contradictable results and probably create confusion. Probably further detailed research could provide more certain proofs for the impact of organic farming. In a modern market which is more consumer-led than product-led, organic production may be a solution for farmers in the high competitive environment of modern globalized agriculture. Several food crises over the last years and the continuous environmental pollution created great concern. Organic agriculture can provide food with less environmental impact. E.U. promotes organic agriculture since certain motives are given to organic farmers. Modern agriculture requires not only sufficient quantities, but higher quality products. Overproduction and overuse of planet sources are some problems that modern agriculturalists have to solve. Organic farming is a way of production with respect to environment, fauna and flora. Maybe it is not easy to be applied in every part of the world and for every crop, but in some cases could be a very affective and sustainable way of cultivation.