Two farmers cultivate tomatoes using different methods. A two year experiment shows that different yield is caused by use of supplementary heating and the most profitable treatment is one with supplementary heating and standard lighting.
Farmers Adams and Bloggs grow tomato in glass house. Bloggs has higher production than Adams. The two farmers use different methods of cultivation. Adams is using standard heating, standard lighting and the tomato variety Coward. Bloggs is using supplementary heating and lighting and the tomato variety Dogger.
The first objective of the experiment is to investigate which factors are responsible for the higher production. The second objective is to define the most economically affective treatment. The two different varieties have the same cost. The supplementary lighting costs extra 400 pounds and the supplementary heating costs extra 500 pounds. If production is increased by one unit the income of the farmers is increased by 200 pounds.
The experiment took place in a green house with 12 plots. Six of them were facing north and the other six were facing south. From previous experiments it is known that the aspect of the plots has an effect on production.
The experimental greenhouse consists of six north facing and six south facing plots. The factors that examined in the two year experiment were heat, variety and lighting. Standard lighting is symbolized L-, supplementary lighting is symbolized L+, standard heating is symbolized H- and supplementary heating is symbolized H+. The varieties were Coward and Dogger. The data will be analyzed by Genstat software.
The different treatments were:
The treatments were 8 and the available plots were 6 for each aspect of the greenhouse.
For the first year the treatments were allocated from T1 to T8 starting from plot 1 of the North and ending to plot 6 of the South. The treatment allocation is shown on the table 1.
The results of the first year were:
To sum up the most economical way of maximizing the yield of tomatoes is by using supplementary heating without supplementary lighting. Not only is by far the most beneficial, but there is a great possibility for the grower to increase the income comparing to other treatments. The use of both supplementary heating and lighting brings less profit or loss to the grower. The next table depicts exactly the most economical way of cultivation.