Breast cancer is the most common form of cancer found in women; it is on the increase and is therefore a serious concern. The lifetime risk of developing breast cancer is 1:11 for women and 1:1000 for men. Tumors mainly develop in ductal endothelial cells (80%) but can also develop in lobular epithelium (20%). But what causes breast cancer and what are the underlying molecular mechanisms that lead to a tumor? Cancer is a collection of diseases with the common features of uncontrolled cell growth followed by metastasis to surrounding tissues. It is this metastasis of the cancer to sensitive areas, such as the lymph nodes, that makes breast cancer lethal, as a tumor in the breast is not lethal in itself. Other areas breast cancers can metastasise to include the bone marrow and locally to other areas of the breast.
The formation of a cancer is not triggered by any single event; cancers are the result of an accumulation of errors in vital regulatory pathways. (It is thought that between 4 and 7 pathways have to be disrupted for a cancer to develop in humans.) Gene changes play a major role in disruption of cell signaling pathways and fall into two groups; inherited and sporadic.
Inherited gene changes leading to breast cancer account for 5 to 10 % of all breast cancer cases. However, it is important to note that expressing an inherited defective gene will not cause a tumor to develop in itself, but people with these mutated genes will have an increased susceptibility to developing cancer in their breast tissue. The three main mutated genes that are inherited through the germline are BRCA 1, BRCA 2 and p53. They are all tumor suppressor genes.
Mutated forms of the BRCA 1 gene (BReast CAncer 1) are found in half of the familial breast cancer cases and 80% of early onset breast cancer cases. Women who possess mutated alleles of BRCA 1 have a 60% possibility of developing breast cancer, compared to just 2 % in women with wild-type BRCA 1 (1). It is located in the "q" arm of chromosome 17 and the protein product is 1,863 amino acids in length. Under normal circumstance this protein that BRCA 1 codes for is an accessory protein for Rad51 (2). Rad51 is one of seven homologes of the Rec A protein, its function, which is dependent on BRCA 1, involves the repair of replication forks accidentally damaged during the S Phase of the cell cycle. The removal of the Rad51 protein results in cell death whereas the removal or disruption of BRCA 1 leads to the accumulation of DNA damage. There are 31 positions along the BRCA 1 gene that are known to have mutated (3). It is clear to see that any of these mutations, which affect the efficiency of BRCA 1, can lead to the development of breast cancer.
Another important gene that is commonly mutated in breast cancer is BRCA 2 (found on the "q" arm of chromosome 13). This is another tumor suppressor gene the protein product of which functions in much the same way as BRCA 1, ensuring the DNA repair protein Rad51 functions properly. Mutations in BRCA 2 account for almost as much inherited susceptibility to early onset breast cancer as mutations in BRCA 1.
A third gene involved in breast cancer is the p53 gene. This is another tumor suppressor gene and is found to be mutated in at least 50% of all cancer cases. It is found in all cells in the body and has 3 main roles; controlling the cell cycle, triggering apoptosis and ensuring genetic stability. A cell with either a mutated form of p53, or with the p53 protein absent altogether, will grow uncontrollably.
Wild type p53 is activated when there is damage to the DNA of a cell. The effect p53 has on the cell depends on its current position in the cell cycle. If the DNA damage is detected during the G1 phase then p53 prevents further progress until the DNA has been repaired. If the DNA damage is detected during the G2 phase then p53 triggers apoptosis (programmed cell death) (4). P53 exert this effect on the cell cycle in an indirect way. It first binds to damaged DNA, through a non-sequence specific binding site, which activates the p53. A second binding domain on the protein then binds to a pallindromic 10 base pair sequence on the DNA that activates either cell cycle inhibitors or repair proteins. Two important genes that are regulated by p53 in this way (i.e. who have this 10 base pair sequence in their promoter region) are p21 and GADD45. p21 is a cdk protein (cyclin dependent kinase) that inhibits the cell cycle and GADD45 is a DNA repair protein (4).
It is easy to see, therefore, that loss of p53 function in a cell gives it a growth advantage over other cells. Mutations in p53, as well as the BRCA genes, encourage cancers by inhibiting DNA repair and by allowing cells with mutated DNA to proliferate. These are major problems but, as has been mentioned, will not alone cause a cancer to grow. People without these genetic mutations will be just as vulnerable to carcinogens and mutagens as people with these mutations, but will be far more able to repair the damage these carcinogens are capable of doing, and therefore be at much less risk of developing breast cancer.
Sporadic gene changes account for the remaining 90 to 95% of breast cancer cases and include changes in the EGF receptor family (epidermal growth factor), changes in the oestrogen receptor (ER) and changes in the cyclin D gene.
The cyclin D gene has been found to be amplified in 15 to 20% of breast cancer cases (5). The relevance of this protein in breast cancer comes from the role cyclin D plays in regulation of the cell cycle. Cyclin D phosphorylates the protein Rb. Rb is a tumor suppressor gene, the protein product of which regulates whether a cell should enter the cell division cycle or not, (i.e. it inhibits entry of a cell into the S phase). This inhibition is relieved by phosphorylation of Rb, a reaction undertaken by cyclin D (other kinases are also able to phosphorylate Rb) (2).
Mutations in the EGF receptor can promote cancer by being inappropriately active, this means certain cells are receiving a signal to grow and proliferate even when they are not required. This results in inappropriate DNA replication, cell growth and cell division (2). It has also been found that 25% of breast cancers express high levels of the Her2 protein, a tyrosine kinase receptor similar to the EGF receptor, which plays a part in the normal development of the mammary epithelium (6).
The oestrogen receptor plays a major role in breast cancer as most breast cancers are oestrogen dependent (ER+). This means that the cancerous cells rely on oestrogen to grow and proliferate. Therefore changes in the oestrogen receptor (ER), and chemicals that mimic oestrogen (oestrogenic chemicals), are a concern. If oestrogenic chemicals, such as parabens and polychlorinated biphenyls, find their way into the adipose tissue of the breast then they may have the effect of stimulating cells to grow and proliferate at a faster rate. These oestrogenic chemicals therefore have the ability to promote the growth of cells in a tumor.
Due to the majority of breast tumors being ER+ most of the treatments available aim to either block the oestrogen receptor or to reduce the concentration of oestrogen in or around the cancerous cells. A group of drugs used, called anti-oestrogens, act as oestrogen antagonists, and include drugs such as Tamoxifen and Raloxifen (7).Tamoxifen binds to the ER and disrupts its function. It does not completely inhibit the ER and is therefore considered a partial anti-oestrogen (5).
A group of drugs that are widely used are the aromatase inhibitors (AIs). These drugs aim to reduce the concentration of oestrogen in cancerous cells. Their mechanism involves the blocking of the aromatase enzyme that is responsible for converting androgens to oestrogens. AIs are traditionally used to treat breast cancer in premenopausal women, as oestrogen activity is restricted to the breast and ovaries during this time, but trials are currently underway to investigate the effectiveness of using AIs on postmenopausal women. AIs are not prescribed to postmenopausal women due to the wide distribution of oestrogen throughout the body during this time.
Herceptin, a relatively new anti-cancer drug, works by binding to a growth factor receptor, reducing the stimulus for the cancer cells to proliferate (8).
These treatments are effective, but only if the tumor remains oestrogen dependent. Most breast tumors develop oestrogen resistance though, making endocrine treatment useless and therefore relying on the more traditional methods, such as radiotherapy and possibly surgery.
So it can be seen that for a tumor to develop in breast tissue there has to be a series of errors, involving damage to DNA, damage to genes controlling aspects of the cell (such as DNA repair and replication) and an increased stimulus for cells to proliferate. These errors can culminate in a tumor that has the ability to metastasise to other areas of the body with possibly lethal consequences. Therefore, oestrogenic chemicals in our environment, which have the potential to encourage the growth of breast tumors, need to be identified and assessed for the potential threat they present.