Unemployment rate is the total amount of people who are able to work and willing to work but doesn't have a job. Unemployment is an economic market failure that has been claimed to be effected by many different factors. Some of them include, greater monopoly power among firms, high labor taxes, union structure (labor unions, union membership, labor union coverage), high levels of unemployment benefits and its duration (how many months can an unemployed claim benefits),a large proportion of long-term unemployed, substantial regional variations in unemployment, labor mobility, demand shocks (i.e. real interest rate), employment protection laws, active labor market policies, and coordinated wage bargaining. European Unemployment since 1980 has been relatively high compared to other countries. In the 1980's European unemployment has increased, however today the main reason why average European unemployment is too high is because the unemployment rates of the 'Big Four', France, Italy, Germany and Spain, are too high. Most other European countries have been able to recover from the 1980's unemployment crises but mainly the 'Big Four' has failed to do so. Following arguments will explain some of the reasons why the 'Big Four' was not able to recover from 1980's unemployment disaster.
An increase in unemployment might have been caused by greater monopoly power between firms and workers. Greater monopoly power of employers, firms, will tend to increase prices, decrease output and set a lower employment with low wages. When unions have little power and there is high level of unemployment, the unions accept low real wages at any real wage rate. Therefore, less competitive product markets lead to higher unemployment (See Figure 1.1).
However there are some markets where the wages are determined between employers and trade unions, as a result firms and unions can determine an equilibrium real wage level. The overall wage depends on the strength of the trade unions; wage bargains, union coverage and the degree of co-ordination of wage bargains. Normally, the greater union power and coverage, the higher their wage demands will be (See Figure 1.2 and Figure 1.3). However, this also leads to higher unemployment.
There are strong unions because of several different reasons. One reason is because of the number of membership and strong union rights that pressure the institutions, industries and firms that put high real wages.
The government also effects the monopoly of labor unions with the laws and benefits they provide to the unemployed. The unemployment benefit is a very important factor which effects unemployment. When the unemployment benefits are high, their coverage are high and due long periods of times, which decreases the opportunity cost of not having a job. In other words, there is a lower possibility of an unemployed to fill vacancies in a market. The unemployed will look for a suitable job for himself until he finds one whereas if the unemployment benefits weren't so high, the unemployed would be willing to accept any job at any real wage rate. This might be one of the reasons why although the level of vacancy in Europe in the 1990's was high and yet the unemployment doubled in the last two decades (See Table 1.1). Whereas usually when there are high numbers of vacancies one would expect unemployment to be decreasing like it happened in Denmark, Netherlands and the UK.
However in France and Germany although vacancies have been relatively high, unemployment still persisted to be just as high.
As it can be noted from Table 1.1, Germany and France, vacancies were high but this had no big effect on the unemployment of these countries. Table 1.2 shows that in European countries like Denmark and Netherlands,unemployment rose significantly between 1970's and 1980's. However in 1990's there has been a fall in the level of unemployment, one of the reason for this effect might be high number of vacancies in those countries.
Along with unemployment benefits, the proportion of long-term unemployed also effects the rate of unemployment. In this case, the greater the period of unemployed, the greater the unemployed losses it's labor skills, and the lower competition it will create in
the market. Lower competition within the unemployed will in effect create a market monopoly for the employers, where the employers will gain a monopoly power in the market, and put an upward pressure to unemployment. Figure 2.1 reflects the proportion of long-term unemployed among OECD economies 1998. It can be noticed that especially the 'Big Four' has very high rates of long-term unemployment compared to other countries around the world. Keeping in mind that 'Big Four' also has high levels of unemployment. This provides evidence that high long-term unemployment does indeed have a negative effect on employment.
Another factor reflecting unemployment is labor mobility. When a part of a country is economically doing better than other regions it's going to demand workers, but if there is low labor mobility, there will be a weaker competition in the booming economy, and firms will have more power over the market which will create unemployment. Figure 2.2 shows the percent of the population who change regions per year, 1980-1987. Figure 2.2 portrays
that the Big Four has low levels of labor mobility. This is bad for the unemployment rate in their economy because it shows that the unemployed workers are less willing to change their habitat for better job opportunities. Therefore, this also means that there will be less competition between workers to fill a vacancy, which as mentioned above, creates more unemployment.
Taxes also have a big influence on the level of unemployment. Mainly, three tax rates influence the gap between the producer and consumer real wage: payroll taxes(taxes that either the employer or employee pay and that are normally related to social security contributions), income taxes and consumer price taxes  In Figure 1.2 These tax wedges (the gap between what the sellers receive for supplying goods and services and the prices buyers buy) shifts the wage setting curve further to the right and thus increase the natural rate of unemployment. The reason why the wage setting curve shifts right is because the higher the taxes are, the greater the unions seek to provide a given real standard of living for their members and increase real wages. Tax wedges are also sought as a reason to understand some of the reasons for higher unemployment during the 1960-1985 period. All countries, including the Big Four portray an increase in tax wedge, during the 1960's to 1990's. In contrast with the Big Four, countries such as Netherlands and UK has shown significant attempts to reduce labor taxes in recent years. However, most European countries, including the Big Four haven't put enough measures to decrease tax rates.
In Table 2.1, the variation of tax rates between countries reflect the different levels of fiscal policy used by governments to ensure and provide health, higher education, and pensions.
Another factor which effects the unemployment rate are the demand shocks. The level of unemployment can be determined by the aggregate demand. Much of the initial increase in the 1970's in Europe are said to caused by demand shocks (See Figure 3.1).
A decrease in aggregate demand causes the AD curve to shift leftwards, decreasing output, and increasing unemployment. Monetary policy has a significant impact on the aggregate demand. If there is a recession in an economy, with high unemployment, and low aggregate demand, the monetary policy can be loosened in order for recovery and decrease unemployment. However, this might result in labor shortages, and inflationary pressure in the economy. In the 1980's the tight monetary policy led to a prolonged period of high interest rates, and therefore an increase in the cost of capital. As Figure 3.2 demonstrates, this led to low capital of capital and thus lower output and employment and thus higher unemployment.
However, there are some problems with analyzing the unemployment rate in relevance to aggregate demand. Europe still faces high unemployment rates, this requires either very long lasting effects of shocks or a sequence of new demand shocks.
There is one factor which does not seem to correlate much with the rate of unemployment but still is a factor worth considering. They are the employment protection legislation (EPL) that the governments take to protect those in employment, e.g. formal dismissal practices, severance pay, formal notice periods of dismissal, the number of warning firms have to give a worker before he or she can be fired and so on.
Figure 4.1 shows the overall employment protection legislation strictness (June 1999). Note that the 'Big Four' have one of the highest EPL strictness among the countries in the chart. This implies in the 'Big Four' it is harder for a person to get unemployed than in countries like UK and New Zealand. Therefore, it might be that countries with strong EPL have low employment rates, cause increased hiring costs reduces the demand for workers. Countries with strong EPL have greater job security and thus EPL benefits those workers who are currently employed, but don't have much benefit on the unemployed. This might explain the reason why in countries with strong EPL part-time jobs and female workers are less attractive. So, firms will be more vigilant about the skills of their employees and the number of skilled employees. This will decrease their likeliness of firing them, which might be a facto that prevents more job losses.
However there are ways in which unemployment isn't only prevented but decreased. Wage determination and active labour spending are some of the many ways that can be used to tackle unemployment. As it has been noted previously, both market monopoly or union monopoly is not very good for an economy as both firms and unions will demand higher wages which will cause higher unemployment. However if the monopoly is reduced or if firms and workers realize that exploiting their monopoly power will only produce unemployment and so persuade them to wages and prices in a way that will cause an equilibrium in the economy, in effect help the economy by decreasing the unemployment rate.
Another way in which unemployment problem can be tackled is by active labor spending. These refers to a range of policies that the governments uses to boost employment and reduce unemployment. There are a number of way in which the governments tries, such as helping unemployed's job search, improving information flows about job availabilities, helping individuals with application forms and interview techniques, offering retraining, offer loans to individuals who want to start their own businesses, subsidize firms that hire those who have been unemployed for a long time and so on.
In conclusion, reasons for unemployment include, greater monopoly power among firms, high labor taxes, union structure (labor unions, union membership, labor union coverage), high levels of unemployment benefits and its duration (how many months can an unemployed claim benefits), a large proportion of long-term unemployed, substantial regional variations in unemployment, labor mobility, demand shocks (i.e. real interest rate), employment protection laws, absence of active labor market policies and coordinated wage bargaining. European Unemployment since 1980 has been relatively high compared to other countries. Mainly, the 'Big Four' countries still face high unemployment is because they have failed to tackle unemployment, and they still exhibit the factors which cause unemployment, like high unemployment benefits, barriers to labor mobility and etc. Whereas most other economies in Europe has recovered from the 1980's unemployment crises. In order for the 'Big Four' to decrease it's unemployment level, it needs to re-establish those factors which effect unemployment.