The Protein Data Bank (Berman et al., 2000) stores structural files and information on almost 35 000 macromolecules (Proteins and nucleic acids). The RCSB server (a member of the wwPDB) provides useful browsing and search options which allows easy access to the database, (found at ).
For this project, the PDB file for Major Urinary Protein was investigated. PDB ID: 1MUP (Bocskei et al., 1992). This murine protein functions as a pheromone binding protein and is present in the urine of mice. The bound pheromone is released as the urine dries and affects the sexual behaviour of female mice. The 1MUP PDB stucture includes bound pheromone.
Figure 1 shows a simple ribbon diagram of the Major Urinary protein, which gives an overall impression of tertiary structure. Arrows represent  sheets and coils represent  helices. The four dark spheres represent four cadmium atoms that bind to the protein, and the substrate, the pheromone (TZL), can be seen as a ball-and-stick structure bound to a site towards the centre of the protein.
Figure 2 shows a two dimensional analysis of the secondary strcuture of 1MUP. This highlights all of the  helices (and helix type) and  strands that are present in the structure. This protein appears to be composed mainly of  sheets, few residues are involved in  helical structures. It also shows the presence of one disulphide bond, between C68 and C161.
Figure 3 shows a Ramachandran Plot of the majory urinary protein. This plots the psi angle of the protein (defining the bond; NCCN) against the phi angle (defining the bond; CNCC). Residues that can be found within the region of the map labelled 'A' are involved in  helices, and residues that can be found within region 'B' are involved in  sheets. This map was produced by the PROCHECK program (Laskowski et al., 2005).
Figure 4 shows the ligand, TZL, that binds majory urinary protein. The left image is a ball-and-stick structure, the right image shows the same structure in skeletal form. Black = carbon, blue = nitrogen and yellow = sulphur. Hydrogen atoms are not shown.
This figure indicates the residues that are involved in binding the TZL ligand. Residue Y124 is hydrogen bonded to the ligand. Figure 6 summarises information about this bond, the atoms involved in the bond are the hydroxyl group of Y124 and the Nitrogen (N3) of the ligand. The bond length is 4.2 Angstroms, a relatively long and therefore weak bond.
Available at, .
This image, obtained from the Webmol program, shows the ligand, TZL, bound to residue Y124 of the protein. The Hydrogen bond involved is shown as a green dashed line and the bond length is labelled (4.15 Angstroms). CD = cadmium atoms.
Figure 8 represents an  helix that is formed between residues 131-146, (refer to figure 2 for a two dimensional representation).The hydrogen bonds that occur between residue n and residue n+4 have been labelled. For example, 'A' shows that the Hydrogen bond between 132S and 136E is 2.78 Angstroms in length, a reasonable length for such a bond and the appropritate number of residues are involved.
This figure shows the backbone of the same  helical region of the protein. Three pairs of torsion angles have been labelled (table below). Comparison of these angles to the Ramachandran Plot shows that they are indeed located within allowed regions for  helices (Figure 10).
Figure 11 represents an anti-parallel  sheet located between residues 54 and 77. Hydrogen bonds between carbonyl groups and N-H groups are labelled, as are several bond lengths.
Figure 12 shows the same region of the protein (residues 54-77). Three pairs of backbone torsion angles have been labelled. By comparing these angles to the Ramachandran Plot (figure 13) it can be shown that they are within allowed regions of the Plot for  sheet residues.