Biological control is an alternative solution to widespread usage of chemicals, which has caused a great deal of concern in recent years. Although it is not a new method, as it is probably as old as the history of agriculture, biological control has many advantages as a pest control method. It is defined as:
Since, nowadays, there is enormous use of agrochemicals in modern agriculture, the use of environmentally friendly alternatives to chemical pesticides are absolutely required. Furthermore, it is a global consumer requirement for chemical reduction in agriculture (van Emden, 2004). Biological control is an attractive alternative to agrochemicals, although it is generally impossible to affect one part of the ecosystem without having indirect ecological effects (Goettel and Hajek, 2001).
Widespread usage of chemicals involves problems of undesirable ecological side effects. Agrochemicals cause many environmental hazards, i.e. some chemical pesticides contaminate groundwater. Some chemical pesticides also enter food-chains and consequently threat human health and a wide range of organisms. Moreover, pesticides are not safe for the user spraying the chemical. Chemical treatment eventually is not always efficient, as well as it is a significant part of agricultural enterprise cost (Butt, 2001 and Strickland, 1960).
It is obviously difficult or rather impossible to eradicate chemicals from pest management, but "pest mortality following the use of chemicals should be additive rather than substitutive in relation to natural causes of death. It is here that the importance of natural enemies becomes clear, because the destruction of a parasite could lead to enormous increase in pest numbers." (Strickland, 1960:11)
Nowadays, the increasingly concern of pesticide use has resulted in a more environmental friendly and sustainable agriculture. There are also globally acceptable regulations of chemical restrictions or bans, especially in the developed nations, as for example is methyl bromide ban. It is very encouraging that natural products that come from organic agriculture are becoming more and more desirable in the modern horticultural market. And the most encouraging is that these products are able to obtain better prices on market. This hopefully creates favourable conditions for the development of biological control methods (Whipps and Lumsden, 2001).
Biological control has many advantages as a pest control method, particularly when compared with insecticides. One of the most important benefits is that biological control is an environmental friendly method and does not introduce pollutants into the environment. As Kok (1999) points out, biological control should be implemented whenever possible because it does not pollute the environment. We mentioned earlier several problems which are caused by insecticides and are related with environment pollution.
The great advantage of this method is its selectivity. By this way, there is a restricted danger of damage to non target plant species. Weeden and Shelton (2005) underline that biological control does not create new problems, like conventional pesticides. According to van Emden (2004:149) "this does not mean that side effects can be totally excluded, although they have been very rare in the history of biological control". Selectivity is the most important factor regarding the balance of agricultural ecosystems because a great damage to non target species can lead to the restriction of natural enemies' populations. This can cause increased pest populations as mentioned earlier. How successfully a Biological control agent (BCA) can be deployed in an agricultural ecosystem, so as not to damage non target pests, depends on appropriate host specificity tests which determine the potential host range (Kok, 1999).
The ability to self-perpetuate is an extremely interesting advantage of biological control method. According to Kok (1999), BCAs will increase in number and spread. Because BCAs are self-propagating and dispersing, pest control is self-perpetuating too. This is quite important regarding the economic feasibility of biological control (Reichelderfer, 1981).
Another advantage of biological control method, which is a proof of environmental safety of BCAs, is that the pest is unable (or very slow) to develop resistance (Weeden and Shelton, 2005). It is probably possible a target pest to develop mechanisms of defence against attack by a natural enemy. For example, we could imagine that an effective control of a pest by a natural enemy could cause strong selection on the pest so as to develop mechanisms of escape or tolerance to attacks by the control agent, breaking down biocontrol system (Holt and Hochberg, 2005). Some examples of defence mechanisms that could develop by pests are escape behaviour and repellent chemicals. However, as Van Emden (2004) mentions, "we know of no cases where previously successful biological control has failed because of selection for resistance".
Biological control can be cost effective. Its effectiveness is based on self-perpetuation and self-propagation as we mentioned earlier. Therefore, if we establish a control agent in a specific area, it will reduce the target pest in an acceptable threshold for quite long time (Kok, 1999). A small number of biocontrol agents can grow to very high densities and provide continuous control of a pest over a large area. When the cost of deployment of BCAs is considered in contrast to pesticide applications, biological control is generally less expensive than chemical control (Agriculture, Food and Rural Development of Canada, 2000). The financial benefit of biological control is greatest in cases when there is no other option. For example, biological control is very effective in inaccessible areas. Another interesting point regarding the cost efficiency of this method is that the yield benefit of biological control is probably less than yield achieved by agrochemicals, but the primary cost of BCA is generally lower than chemical pesticides (Reichelderfer, 1981).
However, there are also serious disadvantages that eliminate its popularity to growers and promote the development of agrochemical use. The most important disadvantage of this method is the risk related with the income stability. According to Reichelderfer (1981), BCAs are more susceptible to environmental conditions than chemical control. This consequently causes fluctuations to pest populations. It obviously reflects to the product quality, to the crop yield and of course to the price of product on market. Moreover, if the annual harvest of a crop is not stable, it will affect grower's income stability.
Incompatibility with conventional pesticides is also a major problem. As Van Emden (2004) mentions, biological control limits the subsequent use of pesticides, "where biological control agents are being used against one pest, it is clearly difficult to continue using insecticides against other pests on the same crop or other disease vectors in the same area. This may make the use of biological control impossible". Undoubtedly the big advantage of chemical control is the quick fix of pest population and because growers are characterized by lack of patience, it is difficult to prefer BCAs instead of potent pesticides (Kok, 1999).
In account of the above biological control has slow action. "It lacks the immediacy of chemical control" (Kok, 1999). That means that during the period required until natural enemies control pest population, the pests may be present in intolerable populations. And unfortunately pesticides can not be used because they will damage the biological control system. "The need for a difficult transition period from insecticides to biological control may make the introduction of biological control unattractive for a grower" (van Emden, 2004: 151)
Biological control is sometimes unpredictable. Its unpredictability lies mostly in the fact that natural enemies are significantly dependent on environmental conditions. "In the biological control of whitefly in glasshouses, a sudden change in weather or a period of extreme hot or cold can cause a breakdown of the system" (van Emden, 2004: 152). The deployment of BCAs in a new environment requires a lot of research in order to succeed the desirable results because of climatic constraints.
A quite debatable characteristic of biological control is that it does not exterminate the pest. If it is viewed by self-perpetuation scope, this is another advantage, because the continued presence of the prey ensures the presence of the biocontrol agent and pest control system consequently is more effective. So and so, the extermination of pests is not included in the aims of biological control. As Weeden and Shelton (2005) point out: "in general, it is accepted that the aim is to depress the pest population below the Economic Injury Level (EIL): That is where the costs of the control measures start to exceed those of the extra revenue.
However, if BCA is used to control pests in fresh fruits and vegetable, where certain quality standards are demanded by consumers, the incomplete pest control is extremely undesirable. In this case, a minimum damage of product appearance is unacceptable by growers (Reichelderfer, 1981).
Selectivity was mentioned earlier as advantage, but it could also be possibly a disadvantage. Since BCA is specific enemy to a single species, the unaffected pests could cause damage, so that the benefit of biocontrol technique could be extremely eliminated. When several insect species of the same general type are potential pests of the crop, the economic efficiency of biological control technique is extremely restricted (Reichelderfer, 1981).
As Butt (2001) mentions absence of the infrastructure which facilitates transfer of new technologies and research knowledge to the end-user (i.e. grower) is a major inhibitor factor to the commercial perspective of BCAs. It is difficult and some times expensive to develop biological control in field because it requires high qualified scientific staff (Weeden and Shelton, 2005). On the other hand, growers are used to easy applications of pesticides. There is also relatively less investment in biological control research in compare with chemical pesticides. Chemical industry finally advocates to the extensive use of pesticides. (Butt, 2001).
Variability in production batches is also a significant problem. "The variation and changes in behaviour of natural enemies that can be caused by rearing conditions are manifold" (Lenteren, 2003:12). This variation often leads to inconsistent results in biological control. Moreover, lack of appropriate rearing procedures, during mass rearing of BCAs, results to variability in production batches. This happens because the application of appropriate rearing procedures and the production of high quality BCAs increase the cost production of natural enemies. For this reason quality measures in mass rearing are often not applied by companies and consequently production of good quality natural enemies may be difficult (Lenteren, 2003).
As earlier mentioned, biological control method is environmentally safe. This mostly emerged by the fact that this method provides less risk of residues in food chain. However, are there any risks associated with imports and releases of exotic natural enemies? As Kok (1999) points out, "biological control is most suited for exotic pest that are not closely related to indigenous beneficial species". By this aspect, the natural enemies have to be exotic species too. According to Lenteren (2003) few negative effects have occurred due to natural enemies' imports, although hundreds of species of exotic natural enemies have been used for biological control purposes. Nevertheless, nowadays an increasing number of countries deal with risk issues concerning a release of a new natural enemy (Lenteren, 2003). Strong and Pemberton (2001) underline that: although indirect effects of non-target attacks in biological control are not extensively studied, there are seriously potential risks on native species by exotic BCAs imports. It is also known that emphasis on non-target effects of biocontrol agents has been given only the last 20 years, while biological control has been practised for more than 100 years.
None of biological and chemical control provides alone a completely satisfactory solution to crop pest control problem (Strickland, 1960). However, nowadays there are many environmental concerns because of pest outbreaks, development of resistance to crop pests, hazards for human health and threats for wildlife, so that pesticide alternative methods have to be considered. Additionally, the significant pressure from consumers and the growing organic market requirements for biological control, provide favourable conditions for further development of BCAs in agriculture.