With the increased demand for quality in everything that we do or produce nowadays we need to have some rules in order to obtain a guaranteed production. Quality procedures and guarantees were therefore required in case of commercial horticulture. Thus, these processes, procedures and criteria can be applied to any horticultural enterprise, no matter its size, and ensure that this enterprise has the ability to provide satisfactory goods.
On the other hand, quality must be pursued concurrently with safety. As a result, we need a management system that provides prevention of injuries and minimization of health damage. Consequently, the implementation of an integrated approach to managing safety and quality in a horticultural enterprise is absolutely necessary. The scope of this research is to explore the potential benefits and pitfalls of linking safety management with quality management in a tomato nursery.
Quality and risk assessment are the most important processes in managing quality and safety at workplace. Quality and risk assessment should be undertaken regularly and the enterprise should keep records of the assessment. It should be undertaken whenever new work practices are introduced, when new technology is installed and when the work environment is significantly modified. The auditors conduct a standard operating procedure for each work practice in the enterprise and look at each procedural step of work practice, identifying areas of risk. Auditing also covers document control, inspection of hazards (substances, condition of equipment, workplace design) and workers' safety training. When safety risks are identified, auditing results should be used to develop remedies and should be communicated to employees and visitors (Mol, 2003 and Tricker, 2001).
An important part of the quality and safety process is the communication of potential risks to visitors. Visitors include students on work experience programs, family members of workers, children who are in the workplace for educational reasons, clients and customers. Having people in nursery who have limited knowledge of the risks and usually lack any kind of safety training, the probability of an accident is increased. In this case, restriction of visitors from high-risk areas must be imposed. During the busiest times of years, such as spring and summer, it may be needed to impose a tight regulation of arrivals and departures of visitors, according a strict timetable. Furthermore, they should be required to sign-in before their entry into the nursery and be supervised by nursery's staff until departure. Finally, visitors must be provided with safety instructions during their visit, because it lifts the level of safety consciousness. If visitors are at the nursery for a number of weeks or months, i.e. work experience students, they must be treated like employees and put under safety training. If visitors are not treated properly, they can have serious impacts on production causing upset and annoyance (Mol, 2003).
An enterprise has to comply with national legal obligations and concurrently has to attain quality production. For this reason, it needs to take a holistic approach of quality that integrates product quality through the maintenance of safety at workplace. Human resources, technology and work environment are essential elements of a safety management system. The management of these factors results to improvements in safety, performance and quality of the enterprise.