Growing herbs are innovative products in salads sector. Developing the market for these products we need to apply the principles of marketing mix which consists of the product itself, price, place (distribution) and promotion. "What we must offer is the right products, at the right price, available through the right distribution channels and presented in the right way" (Stanley and Toogood, 1981:395). Failure of marketing will result to eliminate the importance of efforts for producing a quality product. Thus, even a high quality product needs effective promotion to be established on market.
Developmental process of a new product is carried out by some very carefully designed steps (fig.1). In order to develop a new product on market we need firstly to gather as many ideas as possible from as many as possible sources in order to confirm that the product is viable on market. "The first step in marketing is to produce what people want to buy and not to sell what we like to produce" (Stanley and Toogood, 1981:394). The following step is to estimate consumer reactions to this new product before affording much money to it. Then we need to make financial evaluation. The objective of this financial evaluation is to know the investment cost needed, the return on our investment and the payback period. The next stage is the technical development. Technical stuff needs to carry out trials on the varieties we intend to promote on market in order to confirm that they provide the necessary quality characteristics. Afterwards, we apply market testing so as to obtain a final feedback by consumers before the launch of product and finally proceed to commercial launch (Crawford, 1997 and Seymour, 2004). "Although, the more obvious steps of marketing begin at harvest time, marketing actually begins with the planning of the crop before the first seed is planted" (Nelson, 1998:563)
The product is the most important part of the marketing mix. The type and the quality of the product must satisfy consumer needs and attract his interest. Therefore, we need to ensure that we produce the correct herb varieties, at the correct size, with the correct flavor (Nelson, 1998). Growing herbs are mostly grown for culinary purposes, so flavor is the most desirable characteristic. For this reason preferred varieties for pot herbs must be slow to flowering, otherwise fragrance deteriorates in leaves (which are the added parts of the plant in food and salads). Compact herb varieties with dwarf growing habit, short stems and petioles are extremely desirable for pot herbs because they have better shelf life due to reduced evapotranspiration. They also have increased leaf mass within customer height specifications (short plants are preferable) and fit better on super market shelves. Unfortunately, the majority of new herb varieties have been breed for growing in the field because of their origin from warmer climates (Mediterranean zone). For these reason, many trials need to be undertaken by the grower in order to find the optimum characteristics for pot herbs (Seymour, 2004).
Crop production is very important for the development of growing herbs on market. Cultural schedules for pot herbs develop to supply market all year around. If these schedules fail to be accurate, the reliability of the grower towards the retailer is harmed. An important advantage of growing herbs against cheap cut herbs imported from Mediterranean countries is that they lack seasonality. Therefore, the grower must be able to cover market demands all year around with the proper volume of products resulting to best profits both for retailer and himself (Nelson, 1998). The canopy uniformity (fig.2) of the same species pot herbs is also very essential for the marketability of the product because it is a basic requirement of consumers and retailers. The most essential problem for grower so as to obtain uniform products is to control germination by using proper crop production techniques (fig.3).
Undoubtedly, the quality of the product to some extent depends on sanitary conditions. Rots, diseases, yellowing of leaves, insects are extremely undesirable for consumers. "The consumers relate plant failure to the grower or to themselves, so the main effect is the erosion of the desire to make a subsequent purchase" (Nelson, 1998:575). Since, growing herbs are promoted for their healthy features, the extensive use of chemicals and pesticides for the management of pests and diseases would be extremely contradictory. Therefore, biological control alternatives and proper crop production techniques for pest management should be extensively used (fig4-5).
Cost production finally should be considered so that growing herbs to be competitive on market against imported cheap cut herbs. Since glasshouses are expensive constructions, we should find the optimum crop production techniques to produce high quality products with the lowest cost. It would also be very essential to consider carefully the growing time of herbs from seed to harvest since longer growing times result to higher production cost. On the other hand, longer growing times provide potentially stronger flavor which is an extremely desirable qualitative characteristic. We finally need to find a balance between them (Seymour, 2004).
Packaging is a very important part of product promotion. Pot herbs are placed in plastic sleeves at grower's place straightforward after the end of the growing days because packaging protects the plant from damage during handling and prolongs shelf time of product. The plastic sleeve consists of clear plastic, so that consumers can view the product through packaging and it also permits the transmission of light for photosynthesis (fig.6). The sleeve constricts the foliage of plant reducing the volume of shipment during transportation and allowing more products to be displayed on retailers' shelves (fig.7). Distinctive color of packaging is used for different species of herbs because it can help in the positioning of the product on super market shelves and its differentiation from pot herbs of competitors. There are also recipes printed on sleeves providing ideas for cooking because growing herbs are innovative products on market and consumers are inexperienced to use them. It is generally not enough for buyers to know only the name of plant, but they also need to know how to use the herb in the kitchen. For example it is not broadly known that herbs must be added in the food in the end of cooking to give the best flavor and retain a fresh color, otherwise the volatile oils of herbs are lost from food (Crawford, 1997 and Nelson, 1998).
Advertisement is a necessary part of promotion, especially for innovative products. Advertisements through mass media such as television, radio, newspapers and magazines are a very common way to inform consumers about the product. Display of product on exhibitions and food shows is also an effective way to persuade consumers for the qualities of herbs. Advertising healthy properties of herbs, such as antibacterial and digestion properties, it was not permitted in the past because of UK regulations (since there was no scientific proof for these properties). Nowadays, these properties are broadly recognized, while on contrary there are progressively more public concerns about the unhealthy features of saturated fats of meat. So, herb growers invest a lot of money on advertising the healthy properties of herbs. For instance chive (fig.8), coriander and parsley (fig.9) are promoted for their digestive properties, while basil is advertised for reducing blood sugar levels and as a treatment of some types of diabetes. The key advantageous point for pot herbs is that the harvest of leaves becomes just before cooking. Therefore, fragrance and vitamins are at the best level when we want to add them in salad or food compared with cut or dried herbs and they also have more delicate and soft leaf texture (Crawford, 1997, Seymour, 2004 and Humbervhb, 2005).
Market research is also a significant part of marketing so that grower can define buyer behavior. The grower, defining buyer behavior, can make adjustments in his product in order to meet consumer demands. Buyer behavior is influenced by his social level and by his cultural status. For example upper middle class persons are expected to be interested in consuming more healthy products, because they can afford more money to buy them and they also are more concerned about healthy characteristics of food. On the other hand, persons of the same cultural status are expected to have similar styles of living. For example some herbs are extensively used by some traditional cuisines. The grower can develop a more effective marketing strategy understanding the behavior of the above categories (Crawford, 1997).
Marketing cost has to be considered in conjunction with crop production cost in order to ensure that the financial input outweigh financial output. Transportation and distribution cost is significantly reduced in relation to imported cut herbs grown in Mediterranean countries, but transportation and post-harvest handling of pot herbs are more expensive due to cool chain techniques that need to be applied in this case. In general "the more perishable the product the greater the marketing costs" (Crawford, 1997:262). Packaging is also frequently considered by growers and by consumers as an unnecessary expense and finally both growers and consumers have to pay for it. However, we have to remember that without packaging we have more product losses due to handling, less shelf time of product, the product is less attractive to consumers and the transportation cost is significantly increased. Advertisement also is an important part of marketing cost and as mass media advertising is generally expensive, the immediate effects of this promotion technique may do not outweigh the cost. However, "the total effects of advertising are realized in longer term" (Crawford, 1997:216). We finally have to find a balance between cost and benefit in terms of the extent of marketing that will be involved in our enterprise.
There is much science involved in herb production, but there is also much science involved after harvest. Both parts (crop production and marketing) are of same importance for the development of product on market. Growers very often are concentrated on maximizing production forgetting market demands. However, if they fail to promote their products properly, their efforts for best production will be worthless.