Conventional agriculture does not necessarily take into account of its effects on the environment (except as forced by law) and the conservation of natural resources for the future generations. Soil erosion, loss of biodiversity, groundwater pollution and human health problems are some of the effects caused by conventional methods of agricultural production. The severity of the problems requires an alternative perspective. Organic farming is an alternative way for agriculture. However, although the elimination of agrochemicals would presumably satisfy most concern about pollution and human health, the production potential of organic farming is still a debatable issue.
The Codex Alimentarius Commission of FAO defines organic farming as "a holistic production management system which promotes and enhances agro-ecosystem health, including biodiversity, biological cycles, and soil biological activity. It emphasises the use of management practices in preference to the minimum use of off-farm inputs, taking into account that regional conditions require locally adapted systems. This is accomplished by using, where possible, agronomic, biological, and mechanical methods, as opposed to using synthetic materials, to fulfil any specific function within the system" (FAO, 2004).
According to FAO definition, organic farming not only promotes the avoidance of chemical fertilizers and pesticides, but it also promotes alternative agronomic, biological and mechanical methods in order to ensure the health of agro-ecosystems. Thus, in contrary to its popular image, organic farming is not "just throwing a bunch of seeds on a field and coming back later in the year to harvest what's left" (Wolf, 1977: 2). Organic farmers in addition to strict avoidance of using agrochemicals because they can cause damage to humans, wildlife and soil, they adopt many other techniques to obtain a highly productive system, such as the prevention of erosion, the adding of humus and other organic matter to soil, rotation systems and biological control techniques.
Organic products are perfectly sanitary and do not contain pesticides residues. On the other hand, as Vine and Bateman (1981:134) point out, "pesticides are by design biologically active and hence hazardous chemicals". Therefore, there is the possibility of unforeseen effects although there is no still scientific proof that pesticide residues in foods have caused such health problems as cancer, miscarriages, birth deformities or nerve disorders. Moreover, according to Standing Committee on Environment and Sustainable Development of Canada (2002), it is impossible to demonstrate what effects pesticides have on human beings (since there is a limited evidence and lack of epidemiological data). For this reason, the experts use their findings from animal toxicity data to extrapolate potential effects of pesticides on human health. Despite the confounding factors of these studies, the experts believe that the potential for serious impact on human health is cause for concern. It is also worth mentioning that "scientific and medical journals increasingly report the risks posed to human health by pesticides, including links between pesticides and diseases such as breast cancer and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma" (Standing Committee on Environment and Sustainable Development of Canada, 2002). According to Windham (2001) also, farmers who spray agricultural insecticides are extremely susceptible to toxic effects of agrochemicals. A research by federal government scientists of U.S.A. has shown that farmers who used agricultural insecticides experienced increased symptoms of nervous system disorders (Windham, 2001).
Plants or fruits produced with organic farming are nutritionally balanced and therefore are better food source for humans than conventional products. On contrary, as Wolf (1977) points out, conventional agricultural products contain mineral imbalances and deficiencies. Roots of plants grown with conventional methods lose their ability to forage for nutrients as zinc, calcium, selenium, and others, due to high amounts of fertilizers incorporated in soil. As a result, plants create a lush growth with lower nutritional value for humans, especially for some important trace elements. On the other hand this is still a debatable issue, since there is no evidence for nutritional superiority of foods from organic farms in relation to foods from conventional farms (Bateman and Vine, 1981).
The health and the comfort of livestock is one of the most important objectives of organic farmers. The significant difference between organic and conventional farming in terms of livestock management is that as much as possible of the feed is organically grown. Considerable care also is put in reducing stress and making the animals comfortable. For example various measures to avoid stressful living conditions such as adaptation to local climatic stresses, dry shelters, avoidance of mineral deficiencies, appropriate veterinary measures, preventative rather than curative measures against diseases and prevention of parasites. These practices according to Vine and Bateman, (1981) provide a premium quality of livestock products (meat, milk, eggs), which lack hazardous residues for human health such as hormones and antibiotics. This in turn serves in a healthier way of life for humans choosing organic animal products for their diet (Bateman and Vine, 1981).
When nitrate is in excess in the soil, it is not fully converted to protein, and may accumulate in plants. It has been observed that some leafy vegetable crops such as lettuce, kale, turnips, spinach and beets easily accumulate high concentrations of nitrates, especially in shady conditions. The accumulation of high nitrate concentrations is a recognized danger of conventional agriculture, because nitrate concentrations are rapidly increased in the soil by synthetic fertilizers. In some cases nitrates are converted to nitrites in human body that react to hemoglobin in the blood to inhibit oxygen transport. Unfortunately, infants under four months of age are quite susceptible to high levels of nitrites. In many cases also ground water is polluted by nitrates due to leaching of nitrogen from the soil. The leaching of nitrogen is accelerated by chemical fertilizers because of their high solubility. The runoff from nitrogen fertilizers finally results to high nitrate concentrations of our drinking water, which are harmful to human health (Oelhaf, 1978).
Conventional agriculture had inevitably a negative impact on wildlife. Over last century, the agricultural development led to the simplification of agro-ecosystems and to the monoculture production systems. The anticipated result of such change was the homogeneity of agricultural landscapes and the removal of non crop vegetation from the farm unit. Consequently, hedgerows, shelter belts and field margins removed from intensive agricultural units resulting to reduced capacity of agricultural areas to serve as habitat for wild species. According to Scialabba and Williamson (2004), this has resulted to high rates of wildlife mortality, reduced reproductive success of many species and inevitably to the broad decline of many taxonomic groups of wildlife.
Synthetic fertilizers, particularly nitrogen and phosphorus, pose serious risks for wildlife population. The extensive eutrophication of freshwater and marine ecosystems in many areas where agriculture is concentrated have negative impact on aquatic populations as well as the habitat quality of some bird species. As a result, the extensive use of chemical fertilizers has led to indirect mortality and extinction of many species, due to reduced capacity of lakes and marine ecosystems to serve as wildlife habitats (Scialabba and Williamson, 2004).
The use of pesticides has many detrimental effects on wildlife biodiversity of agricultural and surrounding ecosystems.
On the other hand, "organic agriculture aims to be in harmony rather than in conflict with natural systems" (Blake, 1994). Organic farming emphasizes on the sustainability of the agro-ecosystems by adopting a set of alternatives practices such as biological control, integrated pest management, no-till agriculture, multi-cropping, intercropping, strip-cropping and crop rotation. This environmental friendly approach results to the avoidance of pesticide use, reducing dangers associated with wild species mortality. The International Federation of Organic Agriculture Movements (IFOAM) also, in recognition of the need to establish conservation in organic agriculture, recommends some practices as certification standards for organic farmers. These standards require the prohibition on clearing of primary ecosystems as well as the maintenance of an appropriate portion of the farm as wildlife habitat. General recommendations are made also on the establishment: "of hedges, hedgerows and ecologically diversified field margins as well as areas with wildlife corridors that provide linkages and connectivity to native habitats" (Scialabba and Williamson, 2004). These high quality habitats (hedges and field margins free of chemicals) will serve as shelters for wildlife, enhancing biodiversity conservation.
Cover cropping also is an important technique adopted by organic growers in terms of biodiversity enhancement. Cover cropping is a type of non-crop cover grown specifically for soil improvement purposes and the prevention of soil erosion, and is very well fitted in perennial crops like orchards and vineyards. Cover crops may provide a physical temporary habitat for many different species of ground-nesting birds and small mammals (Scialabba and Williamson, 2004).
Nitrogen is the major cause of pollution from agricultural lands. The high solubility of nitrogen fertilizers results to quick leaching from the soil and finally to the pollution of underground water. Thus, the large increase that has occurred due to synthetic nitrogen fertilizers is the major cause of the rising nitrate levels that are observed in many water supply sources. Furthermore, chemical fertilizers do not supply humus, so the nutrient and water-holding capacity of the soil may be less than with organic fertilizers. This lower capacity leads to faster leaching of nutrients from the soil (Bateman and Vine, 1981).
On the other hand, organic farming adopts a set of measures against nutrient leaching. The maintenance of soil organic matter levels and the adoption of soil improvement practices, such as the incorporation of crop residues and cover cropping, are conducive to the increase rate of nutrient recycling and the reduction of nutrient leaching. Although reduced tillage also is not a required practice in certified organic agriculture, it is a practice that is adopted by organic growers because no-till systems provide improved nutrient and water holding capacities, resulting to reduced nutrient losses (Scialabba and Williamson, 2004). Organic farmers also avoid the use of synthetic phosphate fertilizers (phosphorus in conjunction with nitrogen poses risks for the eutrophication of waters) using naturally occurring mineral soil amendments (e.g. rock phosphate). According to Oelhaf, (1978), the use of rock phosphate, instead of synthetic phosphate, results in less nutrient losses due to the gradual release of nutrients.
It is worth mentioning that the cost of chemical fertilizers to environment includes not only the pollution caused by the fertilizer leaching, but also the pollution caused by the waste products which are not recycled. The handling and the disposal of organic wastes is an international problem and big volumes of potential humus create severe environmental problems. Unlike to conventional farmers, organic farmers replace fertilizers with human, animal and food processing wastes reducing indirectly the pollution of underground water by reducing the volume of wastes which are not recycled and buried in the soil. Consequently, both the organic wastes recycling and the reduction of the synthetic fertilizer leaching are major environmental benefits of organic farming (Oelhaf 1978 and Wolf, 1997).
The main side effects of nitrogen fertilizers stem from the use of energy, which is needed for fertilizer manufacture. Nitrogen fertilizer requires a lot of energy to produce. Furthermore, chemical fertilizers, as well as chemical pesticides, are either synthesized from oil or require large amounts of oil to extract and process them. As mentioned earlier also, organic farmers adopt reduced tillage practices, reducing the required amount of crop production energy. Therefore, organic farming has fewer impacts on oil sources than conventional farming, minimizing the use of non-renewable forms of energy. Consequently, organic may be a less productive system than conventional farming, but more importantly, it is also an optimum input system (Oelhaf, 1978).
Conventional agriculture tends to use broad spectrum chemicals as quick solutions to disease and pest problems. However, this method prevents a desirable biological balance because it simplifies the biological community and makes it more unstable. Additionally, pests are able to gain resistance against chemicals. This biological imbalance promotes the more extensive use of chemicals and serves to the exposure of pesticide toxic effects to the agricultural and surrounding ecosystems. On the other hand, pest management in organic systems is achieved by adopting preventive rather than curative measures. Organic pest management primarily relies on developing biological diversity in the field to disrupt habitat for pest organisms. The use of crop rotation and polycultures, such as intercropping and strip-cropping, are characteristic examples of discouraging favorable habitats for the development of high pest populations. Organic farming also emphasizes the prevention of pest damage by manipulation of plant growth. For example, proper fertilization promotes capacity of crop to resist pests. A primary strategy of organic farming is that improved physical, chemical and biological properties of soils lead to optimum conditions for plant growth, promoting plant resistance to pests. Organic farming also promotes the prevention of pest damage by choice of resistant varieties and adoption of biological control methods (Scialabba and Williamson, 2004 and Wolf, 1997).
Humans, nowadays, are very much concerned about the environmental impacts of conventional agriculture. The side effects of the modern agriculture raise serious questions about the overall benefits of agriculture. Organic farming seems to be an alternative way, although it is undoubtedly a less productive system.