The Bohr model of the atom was proposed by Niels Bohr, a Jewish-Danish born physicist who during his lifetime made many important contributions to physics. The Nobel Prize winner made contributions in quantum mechanics, the principle of complementarity and of course perhaps his most famous work on atomic physics. After receiving his doctorate in Copenhagen, he moved to the UK in 1911 initially to work with J.J. Thomson at the Cavendish in Cambridge; however it is speculated that Thomson and Bohr never agreed on certain points and so in March 1912 Bohr went to work under Ernest Rutherford in Manchester where he began to study atomic structures. In 1913 Bohr published his model of the atom, the model which although totally flawed is still a success today some ninety years on.
The Bohr atom itself had been developed by using a mixture of ideas, something that Bohr was known for. Initially when thinking of idea's he was quite happy to mix and match many models into one, taking already accepted ideas, modifying them and adding parts which he had himself observed to make a model that at least agreed with most observations. In this slow process he was however working his way towards a new model of the atom, ever changing things to get a more accurate picture. After some time Bohr became relatively happy with his model and imagined it to look something like a solar system (Fig 1), with electrons moving in orbits adhering to classical mechanics and electromagnetism laws. The stable orbits of the electrons can be justified using classical mechanics laws whereas quantum ideas where needed to describe the fact that electrons are in shells of energy levels and thus can only emit a whole amount of quanta. This means that there is no such thing as a stable orbit anywhere in between the fixed energy levels, quanta only comes in whole packets and not partial amounts making it impossible.
Key to the development of the Bohr atom was the Balmer series. It was not until a colleague of Bohr suggested he may wish to look at it that he even considered it part of the atomic puzzle. Balmer was a Swiss schoolteacher who in 1885 published a formula to describe the frequencies of spectral lines of the hydrogen atom. The series predicted where spectral lines would be found in a hydrogen atom. Balmer was able to predict the first four lines in the visible spectrum, and later with technological advances further lines could be seen in the infra-red part of the spectrum. The Balmer series obviously held some information about the structure of the hydrogen atom and Bohr was going to use this in order to aid his development of the atom. By 1913 when Bohr was working on the puzzle he was sure that the newly discovered Plank's constant had something to do with it. The introduction of Plank's constant was allowing the atom to have some form of dimension and this is why he felt it important to include it. Of course, now including it Bohr was puzzled as to why spectral lines could be found? It was known that energy was related to frequency by Plank's constant (E=h) and for Bohr it seemed obvious therefore that if an atom emitted an energy h that the change in the energy of the atom must be exactly equal to E. After discussing his ideas with Rutherford, Bohr in 1913 published his model of the atom.
Bohr made a number of postulates with his theory of the atom. Bohr said that the electrons in orbits had discrete quantum energies meaning that only certain orbits would be allowed at certain energy levels. Bohr said that the laws of classical mechanics did not apply when electrons jumped from one orbit to another, infact once again the electrons followed a quantum theory. Bohr said that when electron changes energy levels that the energy released or absorbed is equal to that of the difference of that of the two energy levels. Bohr's final postulate about the atom was that the allowed orbits depended on quantum values of angular momentum (and was related to Plank's constant.) In June 1922, some nine years after his first papers on the structure of the atom Bohr gave some lectures at the University of Gttingen in Germany (interesting to note it was one of the first after the war). In these lectures, after first setting the scene on the development of the atomic model and explaining the reasons why he needed to mix both classical physics with quantum Bohr went on to introduce his idea of the periodic table of elements. Bohr described the theory which in essence we still use to this day, discussing the shells as the different energy levels are talking about the properties that elements had. Bohr was able to work out through all the different electron shells using evidence that had been collected by means of spectroscopy. With the elements arranged on the table, there were gaps that Bohr told his audience were just elements that had not been discovered yet. The prediction was confirmed in less that one year after giving the speech with one of the elements being discovered. The element had exactly the spectral lines that would be predicted by Bohr and this really was a high point for Bohr.
Until this point, the Bohr atom has been a great success. It has followed the Balmer and Paschen series for hydrogen, and also was able to account for new series in the UV and IR spectrum as developments in technology came along. The atom also accounted for the Pickering series and attributes related to the ionization of He (Helium). However the Bohr atom has really got a number of fundamental flaws in it. The model really lacks any solid basis; it had been "patched up" from a number of different ideas and models without being fully explained in both a physical or mathematical sense. We are also going to see that the model will fail for other atoms. Although a lot of work went into trying to prove the model for other atoms is was a disaster.
The Bohr model was wonderful, it had rocked the scientific community but it was not long before cracks started to show in the model and failures were beginning to appear. A pattern started to emerge, and it seemed that the Bohr model of the atom only worked for one element, hydrogen. In general it is a failure and far from the truth for atoms with the exception of low energy spectra of Alkali metals to which it can be slightly modified to give a good representation. Something that is especially unique about hydrogen, it only has one shell and that shell only has one electron orbiting in it. As for the other alkali metals, well they share a somewhat similar idea the fact that although they have more shells, the outermost one only has one electron orbiting in it. A partial success of the Bohr model could be accounted for by the outer most electron sees the rest of the atom as a single charge at the nucleus, and by leaving the outer most electron thus behaving very similarly to hydrogen with its single electron. However the biggest failure of the atom was to come from idea's brought around with the advance on quantum mechanics.
The idea of the Bohr atom not succeeding was for the scientific community as a whole a real struggle. The model seemed right but obviously there was still a misunderstanding of the microscopic atom. Extra spectral lines were being detected in even in a simple atom like hydrogen and seemed obvious therefore that there must be more structure in the atom that first thought. There seemed to be more allowed states for the electron than Bohr's model was able to predict, perhaps even more than just simple circular orbits of fixed quanta. Scientists like Arnold Sommerfield, a renowned theoretician from Munich tried to extend the idea's of Bohr to elliptical orbits in order to explain the newly found effects. Similar to Bohr, only certain shapes and energy levels were allowed. This in itself was not going to be enough and more radical ideas were needed in order to solve the problem of the atom. The ideas that were to be used were based upon newly discovered evidence of wave and particle duality.
Between June 1925 and June 1926 Werner Heisenberg, Erwin Schrdinger and Paul Dirac came up with a prediction which at least in theory seemed to accurately describe the behaviour of atoms. Heisenberg started by looking at the largest orbit, and then looking in from that to try and extrapolate some kind of answer. He said that momentum (p) and displacement from an origin (q) when multiplied pq is not equal to qp. This is a radical idea and would defiantly not be true is classical mechanics. So pq-qp0 but infact pq-qp=2i, and therefore Heisenberg could show that energy states were quantized and thus stationary. Matrix mechanics is born and Heisenberg's principles are transferred to a systematic matrix form which is easier to understand. Something had happened here very much different to the Bohr atom. While Bohr tried to produce a picture of what the atom did, Heisenberg did not do this. This was a pure theory that had no visual aids, no model and nothing to imagine. However hard therefore it might be for people to see a picture of what was going on, that was not important because the matrices were giving the write answers. Meanwhile Schrdinger was concerned more with the ideas of De Broglie and the idea of matter waves. Schrdinger had an equation which linked, position, wave function, Plank's constant, the mass, energy and potential energy all together. The wave function of the series could be replaced with a Fourier series which would show natural harmonic wave functions of each individual state, thus showing that frequency was related to the ratio of integers. Visualising Schrdinger work was difficult, and maybe in some sense it would have been easier to take the approach of Heisenberg and not have any visualisation. Trying to visualise 3D vibration systems is a difficult idea, especially in the times of Schrdinger where computer simulations were not available. Paul Dirac, an English mathematician had seen both versions of the quantum ideas and being a mathematician was puzzled by the ideas of Heisenberg. Naturally in mathematics the usual outcome of AB would be BA. He thought that this may be the key to approach he should take and so quickly found a relation to classical mechanics and used the idea of AB BA to form a theory. In less than two months, Dirac prepared a thirty or so page paper and sent it to Heisenberg to review. Heisenberg was impressed, and claimed that there was no doubt that the results were correct. Dirac was able to complete an important paper, known as transformation theory which showed both Heisenberg and Schrdinger's ideas could be seen as a more generalised formula as they are equivalent. Dirac was able to calculate spin, and thus his argument of the atom conformed also to Einstein's theory of relativity.
The Bohr model of the atom at this stage had all but been disproved. It seemed at this stage the model could only really be generalised for hydrogen. One of the biggest flaws of the model is that it could be generalised beyond hydrogen. The model was made in an ad-hoc way and made assumptions and carefully selected the rules about the atom. With the quantum ideas of the atom there no longer needed to be specially chosen ideas and all ideas could be brought into the model. The Bohr model is known to give incorrect values for the ground state of orbitals. In a true ground state the value is 0 however the Bohr model still seems to make a prediction of some small angular momentum. The model fails to describe the spectrum of larger atoms accurately, merely being able to make weak predictions of certain emission spectrum of atoms only with a single outer shell electron (namely the Alkali metals). Linked to the spectrum is the Zeeman Effect which is the split of the spectral lines due to magnetic fields. The Bohr model is not able to predict the spectral lines splitting up into several components. Although the Bohr atom was along the same lines as the Rydberg formula, in that the spectral lines shown confirmed this equation it would appear that this only works in the case of hydrogen once again. The Bohr atom only worked for the simplest of atoms.
Bohr's model of the atom turned out to be wrong is just about every possible aspect, however still to this day it can be found in textbooks for students from GCSE right through degree levels. Why should such a flawed model, which is so untrue, be taught to people? Bohr's efforts were invaluable to the development of the atomic theories, including that of the quantum atom however why is it continued to be taught? From a conceptual point of view it is a very easy model to teach people and perhaps this is the main reason that it has survived. Exploring the path of quantum ideas around the atom is something that I would defiantly have not understood when I first heard about the Bohr Atom during my study of GCSE chemistry. The simple diagram in figure 6 shows how I understood the atom at school level, the simple shells can be seen and the red dots represent the electrons on their circular orbits. These days the flaws of the Bohr model are known in much greater detail and yet we still continue to teach is to student of all levels. A quote from an academic says, "I think they'd be a lot better off learning the Bohr model of the atom in its entirety, including its popular extension into multi-electron atoms that makes my rigorous side cringe."1 This statement in itself shows the knowledge of the atom being incorrect at least in the teaching community, and perhaps more surprising the fact that they still are happy to teach this model of the atom. The fact it makes the author "cringe" however he somehow feels compelled to teach this model shows them just being sympathetic towards the students. I do not this it would be fair to expect what can be best described as "youthful scientists" to understand for many years yet the ideas behind the true atom, after all these new ideas on the atom take the idea into a dimension which is far away from physical reality and for the best of scientists hard to understand fully.
Strictly speaking the model fails for all atoms apart from hydrogen. It was able to successfully predict the spectral lines of hydrogen and for that reason initially appeared to be correct. The theory still holds to this day and however for a somewhat different reason. The model today is used more as a teaching aid in an attempt to try and get people to understand the principle of electron orbits. The model has been a success of its own simplicity and the ability for people of all ages to easily understand and relate to it rather than a success for the science behind it.