Before looking in any great detail about possible solutions for turbulence, it is important that we define the term itself. This in itself alike turbulence is also rather complex due to the variety of interested parties and the relevance it has for them. For meteorologists, it could be said that turbulence is "irregular, quasi-random, nonlinear variations or gusts, with durations of seconds to minutes" (i), with the obvious relation here to the changing wind, however for engineers the problem of turbulence could be said to be far more important with the effects of turbulence on drag such that there is "rapid variation of pressure and velocity in space and time" (ii). In physics we generally try and encompass both these aspects and describe it as an "unstable flow of liquid or gas, or instability in the atmosphere" (iii). Examples of turbulent flow can be seen in the physical world around us, simply by looking as water flowing from a tap. At certain flows the water appears smooth, and is said to be laminar however upon increasing the flow from the tap and one will see a rather more rough, or turbulent flow. The turbulent motion only occurs when the speed of the liquid exceeds a certain limit, below which forces in the liquid are able to overcome the turbulence (Figure 1).
Until the invent of the supercomputer dealing with fluid dynamics mathematically had always been a problem, not least due to it's tedious nature. The equation used for dealing with fluid dynamics was discovered by two individuals, working separately known as Navier in France and Stokes in England. Although Navier's hypothesis was never formally accepted his name has been joined with Stokes to form the Navier-Stokes equations (Figure 2), which can be derived from Newton's laws of motions. These differential equations are simply the rules governing the motion of a fluid. The equations show "for any point in space near an object, the velocity and pressure of the fluid flowing around that object" (iv). When supercomputers were given such formulas to solve they were able to relatively fast in comparison to humans and had the added benefit that the computer was also it infallible, such that it only ever solved what it had been asked to do. With this small amount of processing power becoming available in the 1960's, the study of computational fluid dynamics (CFD) was born and simple models could be simulated. It will be many years yet before the processing power necessary to solve complex models will become available, such that studying the airflow over a car in real time would be possible.
In order to study turbulence in greater detail and find possible ways of solving it as physicists we would like to create a model to study. Current research at Stanford University's own turbulence research centre is focused upon model simulations of large eddy and turbulent flows. This research is focused upon looking at both ways to solve turbulence in situations where it is undesirable, such as an aircraft in flight (boundary layer turbulence close to the aircraft surfaces, not the bumpiness experienced in rough weather) but is also looking at situations where we can use turbulence to our advantage such as increasing efficiency in combustion chambers. Conclusions drawn from the research allow us now to create turbulent flows where necessary; however have been quite inconclusive in ways of solving it. Research has shown however there is a strong link between turbulence and a Reynolds number. The Reynolds number, named after the British engineer shows "the relative importance of a flows inertial forces compared to its viscous ones" (v). Large inertial forces seem to tend toward a turbulent flow being present in comparison to a high viscosity which oppositely tends to create a rather more laminar flow. Drag on a golf ball can be significantly reduced by dimples on the ball. When looking at this in comparison to the Reynolds number from the graph on Figure 3 we can see that the drag coefficient is substantially lower on a dimpled ball.
The renowned Noble prize winning physicist Richard Feynman described turbulence as "the most important unsolved problem of classical physics" and to this day it remains just that. Despite modern technological advances including the development of supercomputer, we have yet to create a working fully model for solving turbulence and hence a formula for it. With the ever increase power of the supercomputer for both creating and analysing data from simulations, and also the formulas available for studying flow behaviour, I believe it is now only a matter of time before equations can start being formulated from dedicated research centres and our understanding of this phenomena progressing.