Solar flares (Figure 1) are large explosions that occur in the sun's atmosphere where an extremely large amount of energy is released. Naturally with large amounts of energy being released relatively close to the Earth it is going to have some kind of effect on earth itself.
Solar flares were first observed in 1859 by a British astronomer named Carrington. He observed "two patches of intensely bright and white light" (i) on a plate which he used to view the sun. At first he was sure that something had gone on the telescope lens, however over a period of seven years he recorded a number of such events convincing him something else was happening. We know that what was being seen were solar flares. Solar flares occur in the solar corona and chromosphere providing energy that is used to heat plasma to many millions of degrees Kelvin. This heat provides enough energy to cause electrons, protons and ions to accelerate to the speed of light, and hence causing electromagnetic radiation from across the entire electromagnetic spectrum to be released. Although it may take some time for the flare to build up, the energy is released in a matter of minutes.
Charged particles released from the flare have effects on the earth. The earth has a natural magnetic field and atmosphere which protect us from the majority of these particles at ground level, however new technologies find us not restricting our movements to the earth surface anymore. It is worth noting that the magnetic field around the poles is different to that at other places around the earth. The auroras (Figure 2) are formed as charged particles are accelerated along the earth's magnetic field lines, only beginning to glow when they collide with particles in the earth's atmosphere. The energy released from the sun reaches the earth at the same time we can visibly detect it, around eight minutes after the event however it is not until sometime later than the particles engulf the atmosphere of our planet. As airline pilots and cabin crew work at high altitudes in the atmosphere on a daily basis they are more subjected to harmful radiation and charged particles. The radiation released with the most energy is x-rays and gamma rays which can cause cancerous growths on humans.
One of the main problems linked to solar flares is issues with communications and radio transmissions. Such events were being detected as early as 1881. Predicted by William Ellis in 1879 and ignored by the scientific community, when the solar activity peaked in 1881 the London to Boston communication lines began to surge. As the particles released from the sun enter the earth's atmosphere they cause a ring current to form around the earth. With a flow of charged particles around the poles, a fluctuating magnetic field is induced which extends to ground level and hence induces another flow of current in wires. Such events still continue to this day, recent events include a 1940 solar storm which 2600 volts passed though Atlantic cables, and in 1958 such a similar event occurred which interfered with Western Union and telecommunication systems. Obviously it can also be a problem in electrical infrastructures as was shown a number of times but most noticeably and most recently in 1989. The problems that occurred were for the same reason there were telecommunications problems however this time blackouts occurred, possibly meaning the effects were more noticeable to everyone. Large areas of Quebec were subjected to blackouts and a similar situation was happening across the entire north-eastern USA where up to 60% of transformers were reported to fail. Although only a relatively small amount of damage were done, around $100 had the blackout been more widespread its estimated that it could have cost more than $6 billion in damages and lost business. A little less known property of an induced current from a magnetic field is that it can flow on gas and oil pipes aiding the rate at which they corrode. An occurrence of a solar storm in 1989 had a catastrophic effect on a gas line near the Trans-Siberian Railroad causing two trains to burst into flames. Corrosion on the pipes had caused a small leak to develop and it has been said that passing trains caused the ignition of the gas and the explosion that followed.
At the present time the sun is at a low in terms of solar activity however in September this year there were reports of electrical problems, mobile communication issues and loss of navigation systems such as GPS shortly after NOAA reported that solar activity was at "very high levels". Even after knowing the effects of such storms for over two centuries, it seems we still have yet still to develop some immunity to them.