First of all I am going to analyse the problem I have been set and note down some key points I should remember when writing the program.
The problem I have been asked to solve is Stokes Drift which is the average effect of the wave driven transport in the ocean (Stokes Drift).
Parcel Motion in the x direction is given by
The velocity field u can be written down as
amplitude of wind driven component,  amplitude of wave driven component, c=phase speed, k=horizontal wavenumber and  is the velocity field due to the waves.
To solve this problem numerically I am going to have to have to write a computer program that will solve the equations above for a parcel that is being released. I am going to use an explicit (or Euler) method to solve this problem.
Now I have a formula to find  I can write a computer program to solve the problem for a parcel released from  The computer program is going to solve the equation for some future point in time, say when the parcel is at n+1.
After writing the code I ran the program with the initial variables stated in the problem. MATLAB produced the graph (Figure 1) shown on the left. The graph shows how the displacement of the parcel varies with time in the x direction. You can see the parcel becomes displaced from the origin but then proceeds to move in a non-linear motion. I would expect this type of motion as the drift takes an average of the motion of wind driven component added to the motion due to waves (which have peaks and troughs).
From the wind driven part  alone I would expect the gradient of the graph to be 1. After 50mins it is obvious to see that  should give a displacement of 50 when the initial condition for  Comparing this to the actual drift of the particle, I can see from the graph the drift will be just over 50m and hence the gradient will be larger than 1. From the output of xarr the last value is 52.0026m, which when divided by the time of 50mins gives a gradient of 1.040052. As expected this value is slightly larger than that of the wind driven part alone.
I am now going to run the program again but this time with c=0. My final value of taken from xarr is 47.5722 which now gives a gradient of 0.951444 which is less than the effect of the wind driven part  alone. The graph left (Figure 2) shows what is produced graphically by MATLAB. By setting c=0 I am infact solving  which could be written in my loop program as x0=xarr(i)+u0*dt+u1*dt*cos(k*(xarr(i))).
I am going to revert the phase speed back to c=2.0 and am going to vary the initial condition  and see how changing the initial amplitude of the wave driven component effects our results. For this experiment I am also going to use a larger integration interval and set of n=5000, which will give me a t value t=500. By increasing the number of steps I should get a better estimate of the drift.
From my results in table 1 you can see that as you increase , the initial amplitude of the wave driven component that the displacement from the origin becomes larger. This is what I would expect to happen because the waves are having an effect on the transport of water as well as the wind driven component.
Figure 3 and 4 show the difference in the graphs that were outputted by MATLAB when I varied  . Figure 3 shows that when  , the graph is linear with a gradient of 1 as calculated in table 1. Because there is no wave driven component similarly to a previous example the displacement varies only as  . In figure 3  , and therefore I now need to consider a wave driven component. Note that the axis have changed slightly between figure 3 and figure 4 and you can see that the average gradient of figure 4 is greater than that of figure 3 as calculated in table 1. Figure 4 has an average gradient of 1.561136 which is 56% greater than that of figure 3. I would expect the average gradient of figure 4 to be greater anyhow because I am now considering the wave and wind driven components. Although it may not be clear above, figure 4 has a result which oscillates either side of an average gradient.
It has been postulated that for small values of  an approximate solution of Stokes drift is given by
I am now going to see if my computer model would agree with the following. I am going to say small values of  would be values smaller than 0.90. I will use my results from table 1 to see if they agree, with c=2.0 and
Looking at my results they seem to be consistent with the theory. At very small values of  the results are accurate to two decimal places and when  to one decimal place. This means as the amplitude of the waves tends toward 0 that the approximate solution for stokes drift is correct. If I were to repeat the experiment now with a value of  as 2.0 then I get somewhat spurious results and nothing like the approximation.
If I remind myself of what I am actually looking at and draw a diagram of the ocean it may help in trying to explain why waves in this model contribute to the total drift of parcels. If I visualise parcels moving along the ocean without the effect of waves (Figure 5) they would move at a speed of u 0 driven only by the wind component. They move at a constant speed and hence the rate at which become displaced from an origin will be linear providing u 0 is always constant. If I now consider that there is waves in the ocean (Figure 6) it is clear to see that the speed of parcels will no longer be constant. At some points in the wave, u 0 will be larger than others. At peaks in the wave the speed will be >u 0 and in troughs <u 0. Because of the variation this will cause the parcels to move away non-linearly from the origin. Although we can approximate a linear solution based upon the average value of u 0 this is not ideal.
The velocity field is given by  which suggests the velocity at any given point is affected by both the amplitude of the wind driven component plus the amplitude of the wave driven component multiplied by a factor between 1 and -1 (due to the cosine component). [k(x-ct)] has fixed values of k and c for any given model whereas x and t are variables depending on displacement from the origin and the time respectively. As x and t increase, the value of  varies between  and . If you look at figure 6, you can see the value of the velocity field varying between the positive and negative side of the axis and this is what is expected looking at the equation analytically. This is how I would expect the wave to behave and so it stands that the waves in the model affect the wave by assisting displacement of the parcel. Providing u 0>1 the wave will always cause the parcel to drift further than just having a wind driven component.
Looking at the computer model I wrote, .In this model, the effect of the waves can be easily seen. The main effect from the waves come from the term u1*dt*cos(k*(xarr(i)-(c*i*dt))). In this you can see an equation of a wave, looking something like a cosine graph. Cosine graphs vary between maximum values of 1 and -1. In my model the waves multiply the horizontal wave number with the value of x from the current time step minused from the speed of the wave multiplied by the value of i and the time step. Depending of the value of x from the xarr and what value of i you are at will alter how the wave behaves. k, c and dt are all constant throughout the loop and so have similar effects on the wave at each time step.
In the approximate model for Stokes drift, the effect of the waves is a little more subtle. u 1 is the amplitude of the of the wave driven component. By squaring u 1 it makes it positive and smaller than it would originally be. This is then divided by twice the difference between the phase speed minus the wind driven component. The approximate equation takes into account the phase speed of the wave, which is the rate at which the wave propagates in the ocean and this is how the waves in the model contribute to the total drift. u 1 simply specifies the amplitude of the wave and u 0 is fixed as the wind component.