Do you believe that the sun will rise tomorrow? Most of us hold a belief that it will. However, skeptics question why we hold beliefs on cases that we can't prove to they will have the same causations in the future as they did in the past. Why do we believe that the sun will rise tomorrow? Because the sun has always risen up until now. And so we assume that the sun will rise tomorrow as well. This is an inductive argument. However this argument is not valid. A valid argument holds that given the premises are true, it's impossible the conclusion to be false. Hume was the first one to bring up the problem of induction. Even up until now there has not been a solution to solve the problem of induction. While many philosophers developed different methods to tackle the problem of induction. Some philosophers like Hume and Reichenbach suggests that the problem of induction can not be solved and thus, the best next alternative of dealing with this problem is suggested. While other philosophers such as Strawson and Popper claim that there is no problem of induction to be solved.
Induction posses that in investigating the world we move from samples to wholes. However, we can never observe all instances of a phenomenon, which leads to infinity. Nevertheless, we need inductive reasoning (Hume called it reasoning about matters of fact) for empirical investigations. For example, given that the sun has risen many times before, and the past resembles future, it must be the case that the sun will probably rise tomorrow. A sceptic would further question how we can justify that the future will resemble the past? Because it has done so many others times. This in Hume's view is just 'begging the question', it's like saying "Induction works because induction works", which creates a circular model. Hume, suggests that attempts to answer the probability of induction cannot succeed. However, Hume also suggests that we cannot stop ourselves from reasoning inductively. First of all, it would be ludicrous to live with inductive skepticism as we would not be able to predict anything about future. After all if induction is irrational, so is all science. For example, I might as well jump off a roof instead of taking the elevator as I don't have a justified true belief about how the elevator is going to transport me. Therefore, in order to continue our daily lives we have to ignore the problem with induction and make our best bets to the best of our abilities.
Reichenbach agrees with Hume that no evidence can be given that inductive inference is valid. However, he thinks that a justified belief can be found to use induction in science. He points out that the real question should be; is induction useful when trying to decide how to act? Rather than is inductive inference is justified. Furthermore, he stresses that induction is the best guide to action, even if it is not a rational or a good one. He exemplifies this by saying, imagine a patient is seriously ill. The doctor is considering an operation. The doctor has no idea whether the operation will save the patient but she knows that if anything will the operation will save the patient. In this case the operation will be justified. Similarly, Reichenbach introduces the 'straight rule'. The straight rule states that as the number of evidences approaches infinity, the probability of the event occurring will converge to it's limit. We do not know the exact value of the limit because no probability of a certain set of evidences is any better than the other. This is because we cannot reach infinity and we do not know how many evidences will lead to the true value of the probability. However, the probability will always converge to it's limit. The limit might not exist in reality, and it might not be stable, but it is most likely lead to a probability of chances of some event occurring closest to the actual reality. Finally, Reichenbach states that if there is a limit, the inductive method will converge to it. Thus, the method is justified. For Reichenbach there are two possibilities, either 1) the world is uniform, and ordered or 2) the world is not ordered and uniform. If the world is not ordered and uniform then no assumption about the future can be made. So using induction is no better u also no worse than anything else. If anything will, induction will work. Therefore, it is justified.
On the other hand, Strawson have claimed that there is no problem of induction. He argues that we should not turn to some kind of uniformity principle to try to gurantee induction to be successful, as a gurantee of this sort is only applicable to deduction. What is to proved isn't that induction is going to work all the time but induction is successful most of the time. This is the attribute of induction and that's all there is to concern about. Furthermore, what makes induction a rational method is not it's reliability but that it forms an important method of reasoning (especially for science). For Strawson, to ask whether "induction is rational?" is like asking "is the law legal?". One cannot justify the legality of a law as there is no super law (a greater law than law itself) to justify this. Similarly, to pose such question of induction is not appropriate.
Popper is another philosopher who urges to ignore inductive inference. For Popper the problem of induction need not be solved because the only means of gaining knowledge can be found by deduction, not induction. He argues that it is irrelevant to try to solve the problem of induction as induction and scientific method are not compatible. Popper claims that science proceeds by the method of 'conjectures and refutations'. Theories are derived not from induction but by making bold conjectures. In this case, the role of an experiment is to try to refute the conclusion, if the conclusion is not refuted the theory must hold. Therefore, the only way to achieve scientific method is to do as many experiments and derive as many theory as possible, refute the false and arrive to the right conclusion. For example;
Another example would be, all swans are white, if a black swan is found than the theory is refuted and a new theory is formed. As long as the theory is not refuted the theory holds, if the theory is refuted, then the theory is abandoned and a whole new theory is attempted to explored. However, there is a problem with falsification as well. Poppers deduction theory could go on to infinity without deriving a solid conclusion.
In conclusion, there are several theories that different philosophers put forward in order to tackle the problem of induction or rather argue that the problem of induction should be ignored. Hume and Reichenbach agree that the problem of induction does not have a solution. The predicament appears as- either have a formally correct solution (to the induction problem) but practically useless one, or have a formally incorrect solution(can't solve the problem of induction) but practically useful one (in which past experiences are considered to predict future causations) Reichenbach further emphasizes that induction can pragmatically be justifiable. It might not be a good method but it seems to him that it's the best method to tackle inductive problem. Whereas, Strawson rejects that there is a problem of induction at all, and that there should be a question as "do we need to solve the problem of induction?" because to ask whether induction is justifiable is irrational in the first place. Popper on the other hand, has a clear no to the latter question, because he argues that we need to use deductive logic rather than inductive one.