Holly Green Farm is a specialised dairy farm of 400 cows covering 220ha (fertile land). The system is typically intensive, as are the majority of dairy farms today. Previously arable crops were grown for sale, but today, all crops that are grown, are for the sole intention of being combined within the TMR (Total Mixed Ration), and for young stock. The TMR aids higher feed efficiency and reduces time and physical labour required for feeding. The list below shows the land use for this year:
The cows are split into high and low yielding, with the low yielding and dry cows being grazed. 200 cows are housed all year round. The herd in general are very high yielding; producing 9000/cow, higher than the UK average milk yield, for very high yielding (8550/cow - Nix 2006).
The dairy enterprise is not the sole income of the farm, the Single Farm Payment (payment still to come), and agri-environment schemes (will) contribute significantly in terms of capital, and labour requirements. The Countryside Stewardship Scheme is the key agri-environment scheme that the farm is currently involved in, in terms of labour and skill. 'The Countryside Stewardship Scheme was introduced by the Countryside Commission in 1991.'(Ravenscroft 1995). Both capital grants, and annual payments, are offered as incentives to improve diversity in the countryside, and to improve access to the public. Agreements, in the form of contracts are for a fixed period of ten years. Mr Dyson was accepted into CS in 2000, and will continue to receive payments until the contract is completed in 2009, despite the fact that the scheme is now 'closed', with no new entrants allowed. This is due to the introduction of 'new' agri-environment schemes. The list below shows the current agri-environment schemes, and the schemes that have been replaced.
Holly Green Farm was accepted into CS, despite not being in one of the targeted landscape areas (due to being on Oxford series clay soils), e.g. chalk and limestone grassland, lowland heath, upland. In 2000, more money became available to farmers in Mr Dyson situatuin, very keen to follow CS. This enabled Mr Dyson to take full advantage of the grants and payments available for the restoration of field boundaries, e.g. hedgerows, ditches (Capital improvements - capital payment) and the arable field margins (annual payment).
On joining CS, Mr Dyson declared a ten year action plan, outlining his intentions throughout the contract. This plan must be stuck to, to be awarded payment. 'Those participating in the Countryside Stewardship Scheme have changed their hedgerow management strategies on at least some of their farm hedges, implementing hedge planting, laying and/or coppicing, and reducing the frequency of cutting.' (Renner 2001). Throughout the ten years, Mr Dyson intends to have improved 3km of hedgerows. Improvements not outlined above that are being done include gapping up, cutting down and maintenance. For planting, and filling in hedge gaps, in 2004 Mr Dyson received 3/metre. Different hedges are improved each year, to create diversity within the farm between ages and therefore species of hedge, attracting a more diverse wildlife population. Holly Green Farm is highly suitable for the hedgerow management option, due to the large number of boundaries within the 220ha. In total, there are 44 fields on the farm, with an average size of 5ha. It is highly likely that over time many of the hedges surrounding these fields will have been removed, or damaged, making this option particularly suitable for gaining points for CS.
Integrating the management of these hedgerows in to the farm business has in fact worked considerably well, but has proved to be more costly than one may think. Labour is the main limitting factor for many farmers who are in most agri-environment schemes, or are complying with the cross compliance regulations. Mr Dyson is fortunate that his employee, that specialises in arable, tends to have quiet periods over the winter months, and completes many of the necessary tasks outlined in the plan in this time. However, labour is expensive, and more so is skilled labour for tree surgery etc. The cost of labour is barely covered by the capital payments, and where hedgerow management is concerned, CS does not pay once the hedge is improved. Previous studies have found that 'it is apparent that the majority of farmers are gaining a net increase in income as a result of entering CSS' (Ravenscroft 1995). However, this does not appear to apply to those undertaking hedgerow management, mainly due to the cost of labour.
Another major impact of the hedgerow improvements upon the running of the farm, is the regulations related to hedge maintenance. Prior to joining CS, the hedgerows were cut back, if needed once a year. However, since joining CS, Mr Dyson has been restricted to cutting back the hedges twice in every five years. This obviously results in a saving to Mr Dyson, of 19.50/hour (Nix 2006) for hedgecutting. This time and labour saving is essential for the farmer to try to minimise costs. There is also a strict window in which the hedges can be cut, being mainly between January and February, however in times where the weather and soil (clay) do not permit this, trimming is allowed in August. Between 1 st March and 31 st July, no cutting is allowed on any hedges in the rotation to ensure that there is enough feed in the form of seeds and berries when the wildlife populations are high. The main concerns to the farmer of having to cut within these particular time limitations are, that cutting between January and February is likely to churn up the land and leave ruts close to the hedge, and drains and ditches may become more easily blocked in times of leaf fall. August is the other option for trimming back, during the peak harvest period. Labour is at its shortest at this time, however the land may be in a suitable condition (if clear) and dry for machines to cross.
Hedges are linked, being a variety of ages, to form wildlife corridors. Not only is there a time period restriction in which trimming can take place,but a restriction upon machinery that can be used may cause implications to the farmer. He may use a contractor that does not use a chain hedge cutter, or purchase a hedgecutter that is suitable, and train staff to use it.
Arable field margins make up the remainder of tasks that need to be completed in order to receive payments. Holly Green Farm has in total 16km of 6metre field margins, and 2.7km of 2metre field margins. In total, the farm receives 3,770 anually for the field margins, with the payment being based upon income foregone. The margins consist of various grass varieties, mainly being tussocky grasses including Timothy, and are cut once a year. The field margins do not involve a great deal of input, once first established. Not all margins are cut each year, so as different environments are created.
Field margins have become a key element of cross-compliance. Payment of the single farm payment 'is conditionnal upon certain agricultural and environmental prescriptions being observed by the claimant' (Wooldridge 2004) - cross compliance. The two elements of the SFP are Statutory Managemet Requirements (SMR's), and maintaining farmed land in Good Agricultural and Environmental Condition. Under SMR Mr Dyson must comply with existing EU regulations, and in order to comply with GAEC, must meet seventeen standards and requirements. Of these seventeen standards and requirements, the following apply to Holly Green Farm;
Protection of Hedgerows and Watercourses - buffer zones (2m margin) - Little affect upon farm management, as is quite likely to be keeping from these anyway. Mr Dyson prefers 6m margins over 2m, as he then does not have to stick to the same small area for hedgecutting etc.
Restricted period of times in which hedges can be cut - already being done, so no changes to management.
Protection and maintenance of soil to minimise erosion and run-off - may affect choice of crops, and ploughing times.
Management of stock levels to avoid overgrazing - dry cows graze, and half of the herd are not turned out in the summer, so there are little risks of overstocking, and therefore few changes to current management. However, poaching of the ground must be kept to a minimum, so dry cow grazing should be managed. The critical stocking-rate is 2.5 cows/ha, and this has implications upon the disposal of slurry.
Maintenance of permanent pastures (in grass for 5 years) - This may affect the cycle of re-sowing grass leys.
Protection of landscape features - This is mainly concerned with ridge and furrow grassland, which can not be ploughed up. As the cows are high yielding (9,000 /cow), efficient grassland management is essential. This often results in high yielding grass varieties (e.g. Italian Ryegrass) being sown in place of lower yielding varieties. This cannot be done.
This shows, that whilst all farmers have to comply with these regulation in order to receive payment, regulations such as the restricted time period in which hedges can be cut, is already being followed by Mr Dyson, and therefore poses no great changes to the management.
Arable margins are also considered as a boundary feature for Entry Level Scheme, to which Holly Green Farm is contracted to for five years. However, as Mr Dyson is receiving a payment for these margins through CS, he can not receive an additional payment from the ELS. However, as through CS no payments are offered for the management and maintenance of hedges, Mr Dyson can receive a payment for this.
ELS is an agri-environment scheme aimed at any farmer in England. To receive the payment, the farmer must reach the required points set by farm size,
Mr Dyson appears to have reached this target relatively easily, but despite this is unsure that ELS is viable, considering that it only provides 1% of the farm turnover. ELS is a 5 year agreement, started in 2004. Mr Dyson's commitment to this scheme is set to finish in 2009, the same year as his commitment to CS. After this point, he expects that he will apply to enter the Higher Level Scheme, which is more similar to CS, and is likely to generate a higher payment.
Agri-environment schemes are the more recent methods that concern of the environmental impact of agriculture, have taken shape. It was not until the 1970's that 'changes in agriculture could comprehensively alter the landscape rather than just individual features of it' (Whitby 1994), was recognised. Countryside Stewardship was one of the first agri-environment schemes available to the majority of farmers to join. It was not until a later date, when the scheme became more popular that Mr Dyson joined it.
Hedgerow management and field margins were the two actions that were undertaken in order to receive the payment. These actions on a whole integrated very easily into the system, with the availability of labour (and not having to pay part time employees), making the transition comfortable.
Since the success that the farm has had in incorporating the environment into the farm, it has progressed by entering ELS, and will further into HLS when the contracts are completed. Mr Dyson realises the importance of incorporating these into his business, even if they do not generate a high level of return. It is due to his genuine interest that has helped the success.
Mr Dyson was quick to understand that some of the practices that he was already doing (partially), including care of hedgerows, could earn him payments. 'Nevertheless some farm families that do not participate in the Scheme continue to plant and lay hedges without external funding'(Renner 2001). They have therefore not taken full advantage of the financial help available to them, and cannot use the capital elsewhere in the farm business.
Educational visits are a more recent way of making 1000/year, and many farmers should follow in the footsteps of Mr Dyson, to improve the opinion of the public of agriculture and the environment. 'Agri-environmental policies are an important part of an emerging vision for a sustainable countryside' (Fish). Farmers must integrate them into their farm business to improve public perception.
There are of course some improvements that Mr Dyson can make to his farm, that do not generate payments. Including, increasing land area to allow slurry cover. Currently there is not enough land on which to spread slurry, and the environmental implications of too high N inputs may cause him to disobey the rules of being in a Nitrate Vulnerable Zone. He may also consider introducing sheep into the grazing system as a method of improving pasture. Sheep are likely to clear up any grasses that the cows do not favour, preventing the un-favoured grasses becoming more densely populated in the field, thus improving pasture quality. This may be essential for the permanent pastures. Sheep may also clear up worm burden.
It is important to note, that agri-environment schemes are voluntary, but cross compliance is compulsory. Every farmer will have to integrate agriculture into the farm business, and this would have been made easier and more rewarding for those farmers already taking part in one of these schemes.