In the UK egg production can be simply classified as being intensive, semi-intensive and extensive. The farm visited, practised all three types of egg production, battery, barn and free - range. Each system produced eggs for different markets
Wall-Hanger employs a resident farm manager and assistant, four fulltime stockmen and six part time egg collectors.
The farm has six flocks of birds, all housed separately, producing eggs for different markets.
In the UK farms with 20 000 or more laying birds, represent 78.5% of the UK laying flock (Agric Notebook 2003). The hens lay brown eggs.
Chicks arrive onto the farm at a day old from hatcheries. At day-old the chicks cost 50p each. The breed of chick, and the method of rearing depends upon the system that they are intended for.
Chicks are reared on a separate farm to the laying farm. At point of lay the pullets are worth 2.30. On the rearing farm birds go through a vigorous vaccination programme. To be able to sell their eggs under the British Egg Industry Lion Code, Salmonella Enteriditis has to be controlled and inhibited (a food-bourne zoonose which has caused a decline in demand in the past). Vaccination is a regulation.
Beak trimming costs 3p per bird. It is done to protect the birds, as through boredom and being aggressive the birds will peck tails etc. It prevents cannibalism. The hook on the end of the beak is removed, giving the beak a rounded end. Caged birds have their beaks trimmed at day old, whereas barn and free-range tend to be done between 7-10 days. This is more permanent and more of the beak is removed. 10 days is the legal limit.
The same materials are fed to each flock of birds, but in different concentrations. The diets consist of;
Wheat is the main constituent of the diet (around 60%), the other materials make up the rest of the diet. A pre-laying ration would be high in coarse grist to encourage eating and high in protein and energy. Free-range and barn system birds would be given a high energy diet than a caged bird as they exert more energy, moving around etc. All of the hens laying eggs have a diet containing 4% calcium in order to produce strong shells. Older birds are fed a more powder like ration to reduce their food intake as they require less energy. It is aimed for an intake of 120-125g food/bird/day. Food is ad-lib.
The daily routine consists of the feed, water and general health of flock being checked, repairs, control of rodents and egg collection.
Houses are monitored for high temperatures and power failure, as significant alterations in these could result in the birds panicking, smothering and suffocating each other. This can result in tens of thousands of birds dieing. The farm has a back up generator and a one-day back up for water. The temperature for the birds (battery) is maintained at around about 19.5C.
All the birds entering any of the three systems go through a specific laying programme.
At 16 weeks of age the birds are moved from the rearing farm to the laying farm
At around 18 weeks the hens begin to lay eggs
The farm aims to reach a target of eggs layed per bird in its productive life
At 72 weeks the birds are removed and slaughtered (pies etc). At 72 weeks the birds are expected to be at a level of 60% production. The farm currently has to pay 16p per bird to have it slaughtered (in comparison to the 50p that they were paid ten years ago). This is due to the broiler market being worth very little.
- The laying program involves many factors being managed, including space, temperature, feeding, water and lighting.
The onset of egg production is stimulated by many factors including body weight and an increasing number of daylight hours. As a result, the poultry industry has developed lighting programs to maximise egg numbers, egg size and therefore the return on each bird. When the birds reach point of lay and are moved to the laying barns, the daylight hours are increased to 14 hours, with the bird thinking it is spring time, it begins to lay. For the next 54 weeks daylight is maintained for this length, encouraging it to lay. The chickens lay their eggs in clutches, e.g. they will lay 12 eggs in a short time space, but then won't lay any for a while. The company aims to maintain production at a level of 90% for 15 weeks.
Egg collection is automated (on a conveyor belt) or manual, and are taken to the packing room where any eggs not up to standard (seconds - cracked, misshaped, coloured, dirty) are removed (generally 25% of all eggs). The eggs are then taken to the Deans Foods Ltd packaging centre Standlake, (Oxon) where they are graded, weight selected and then packaged. Egg collection is daily and takes seven hours.
As mentioned the farm is sells its eggs under the Lion Code, and as a result has to abide by many rules and regulations. With laying birds many rules apply, related to the buying in of pullets, hygiene, housekeeping, laying flock monitoring, the environment (e.g. lights, protection against the elements and predators), feed and water, and staff (competence and training).
Wall-Hanger produces on average 900,000 eggs per week.
The cost of production varies between each system, with it costing on average:
Currently there is an over-supply in the egg market as the Dutch have recovered from avian flu, supplying more eggs to the market. This has caused the price for eggs to drop. The farm currently sells its eggs at
The prices fluctuate by a few pence every week, depending upon the market. Seconds eggs sell for about 20p per dozen.
Mortalities in a system can cause great financial losses for a farmer. Wall-Hanger loses 0.1% of its flock per week. It loses a great number of birds in the free-range system (11% by the end of the flock). By the end of the 72 weeks it will have lost 8% of its barn flock and 5% of the battery flock. Reasons for losses must be researched and controlled.
After each batch of birds the drinkers etc are dismantled and the shed is washed and disinfected to prevent an outbreak of disease.
The diagram below briefly illustrates the egg production chain.
The battery system of egg farming is known as 'factory farming' and is the most intensive and common method of conventional egg production. It is a production driven system. Public perception of factory farming is negative, but none-the-less battery layed eggs account for approximately 80% of eggs sold in the UK on the high street (Agric Notebook 2003). 90% of eggs used for processing are battery eggs.
This farm uses Hy-line Brown chickens. Chicks are reared in cages so as not to cause any added stress to them when they are moved to the laying house.
Barn production is often referred to as the semi-intensive/extensive system of egg production. It is also known as 'perchery eggs' Barn eggs account for 6% of egg sales in the UK high street.
This farm rears Goldline chickens for barn production on litter (not in cages). The building that is used was built to the farms own design, but complies with EU legislation. The building has a slatted floor (allows muck to drop into a pit).
The maximum stocking density is 11.7 birds/m, and no flock can be greater than 32,000 birds. Flocks must be divided into colonies of no more than 4,000 birds. Rules also indicate that there needs to be one drinking nipple per ten birds, and 10cm feed space per bird. There also needs to be 15cm perching space per bird. There must be 1.2m of nestbox floor space per 100 birds. This barn unit uses a system that pushes birds out of the box after a certain length of time. This prevents the bird from becoming broody and the nest box from getting dirty due to birds sleeping in them. Lighting is used to encourage birds to roost.
The welfare of the birds in this system is of a better standard than those in cages, and this is recognised by the RSPCA. These eggs are sold as RSPCA Freedom Foods, encouraging the consumer to buy more welfare friendly produced food.
The future for barn egg production is likely to be relatively uncertain also, as demand is relatively low in comparison to the other systems, and more farms are likely to convert their battery buildings into barn systems. If there is a surplus to demand, prices will decrease and price premiums may be lost.
This is considered as the extensive method of egg production, with all of the five freedoms being satisfied ((1) Freedom from thirst, hunger or malnutrition;(2) appropriate comfort and shelter;(3)prevention or rapid diagnosis and treatment of injury and disease;(4)freedom to display most normal patterns of behaviour;(5)freedom from fear - Agric Notebook 2003). Free-range eggs account for about 15% of eggs sold in the UK, and the market for free-range eggs is expected to grow, as the public continue to become more aware of welfare issues, ethics and health.
Free-range hens must have continuous daylight access to runs (predominantly covered in vegetation), with a maximum of 1000 birds/ha. The same regulations as with the barn system apply with this system.
The houses have pop-holes in the walls allowing the birds to access the runs. Land is a limiting factor for the farm that was visited, having only 6.5ha, so only being able to stock 6500 birds. The farm complies with regulations needed to sell its eggs under the Lion Code, and Freedom Foods. Foxes are not a problem to this system (electric fence). Buzzards are not common to the area either.
Currently the UK laying flock is declining, and is expected to do so whilst ther eis such uncertainty with its future. It can probably be expected that the farms consisting of smaller flocks (under 5000 birds) may be unable to change and keep its costs low enough to remain profitable. There is no future for battery production in the UK past 2012, and farms need to be able to change in order to keep competitive and continue producing. Enriched cages are an alternative method, but legislation is unclear. There is the opportunity to convert to barn or free-range, but demand may not meet supply. Wall hanger farm has the problem that it does not have enough land to increase its free-range so will have to be carefull with the path that it chooses to take.
Demand in the UK is high, but there is an oversupply. The UK was 91% self sufficient (1999), but the value of egg output in the UK has declined. Imports of eggs and products (EU and South America (WTO)) is likely to cause a further decline in the value of UK egg output.
Birds are becoming more productive as knowledge and technology continues to improve, and will be needed in the future as the world populationcontinues to grow. Wealth improvements in the Less Economically Developed World will result diets changing from being cereal based to having animal products included. Eggs are cheap and easy to produce and could be of great benefit in the future.
The table on the following page shows the advantages and disadvantages of each system in terms of productivity, bird welfare etc. it indicates that barn production is probably the best in terms of production costs, having a future, but demand needs to increase. Free-range has benefits in terms of welfare and achievable prices, but is an expensive method of production. Battery production is the best in terms of costs, but is not able to be practiced in the future.
Both barn and free-range systems are very productive, producing a higher percentage of larger eggs than the caged system, producing less seconds. The only fall back is that the birds tend to start laying at a later age and have to intake an energy rich diet as they exert more energy during exercise.
Egg production in the UK is uncertain
The laying flock is in decline
Cheap imports could destroy the home market
Battery production will be banned in 2012, but enriched cages will be introduced
As the demand for free-range eggs is expected to grow in the future, and with more producers likely to convert to this system, the future looks more certain.