Pregnancy toxaemia, or twin lamb disease, is 'an acute metabolic disorder occurring in the last few weeks of pregnancy' (Boden 2005). Of the metabolic disorders that may affect the pregnant ewe, pregnancy toxaemia is the most common to affect her during gestation, (Hypomagnesaemia and hypocalcaemia usually occur either just before, during or after parturition). As the name suggests, pregnancy toxaemia is caused by the 'presence of toxins in the bloodstream' (Boden 2005). The presence of these toxins (ketones) arises due to the ewe being undernourished and utilising her body reserves as an energy source for maintenance and for her growing foetus.
It generally occurs in the last four weeks of pregnancy, (never after parturition) and is more appropriately considered as a disorder (as opposed to a disease), as the symptoms, are not caused by pathogenic organisms. It is non-infectious, however, if ewes within a flock are of a similar body condition, and all have a similar inadequate diet, causing malnutrition, a large number of ewes in the group are likely to be affected. The disorder may affect any age or breed of ewe, but it is more susceptible in the following ewes:
There are recognisable symptoms of toxaemic ewes, separation from the flock and depression being the first obvious signs, to which the shepherd should react. However, by the time the illness has progressed to a stage in which the ewe appears blind, hangs her head in an unnatural manner and suffers from tremors and spasms, there is little hope of survival. 'Upto 90% of ewes left untreated may die' (Hay et al 1991), between 1 and 6 days of the disorder being recognised. Ewes should be treated straight away (with a caesarean/induced parturition, or a glycerol/propylene oral dose), and severe cases destroyed. If the ewe is treated successfully, her lamb may have a low birth weight, and her colostrum and milk quality and quantity may be low. However, 'foetal death in utero is common and may result in some improvement of the ewe's condition' (VEERU 2000).
Generally, pregnancy toxaemia results from a shortage of nutritional energy, at a time when energy demands of the ewe are increasing. Her energy demands will increase due to the following;
1. The developing foetus
In the last eight weeks of gestation (late pregnancy), 85% of foetal growth will occur (MVF 2006) (see figure 1). This growing foetus requires high levels of energy, more than 40% of the total liver glucose output (Lindsay et al 1985). So, the glucose requirement of the ewe, and her foetus actually exceeds that can be produced. 'The high priority of the foetus for nutrients may mean that the mother is more severely affected by dietary deficiencies' (McDonald et al 2002). The ewe will lose body condition in order to supplement her foetus.
Maintenance of the ewe. The ewe will continue to require a sufficient level of energy for her own maintenance. A drop in temperature, e.g. in adverse weather conditions will result in her energy requirements increasing, with her body reserves being the most important source of this energy.
Development of secretory tissue in the ewe's udder occurs in the last six weeks of pregnancy. In order to achieve high yields of high quality milk (and colostrum), the ewe will require a high protein diet in these last few weeks.
When the three key energy requirements of the gestating ewe, outlined above are not fulfilled from dietary sources, then the ewes own energy reserves will be mobilised and used. These reserves are in the form of glycogen, and fat. When these reserves are utilised (to a greater extent than normal), the two metabolic disorders that cause pregnancy toxaemia occur.
Glycogen stored in the liver and muscles, is broken down to glucose and can be utilised as an energy source throughout the body. However, when the requirements of the ewe and foetus exceed the level of glucose production (from glycogen), hypoglycaemia is likely to occur. An insufficient glucose supply will cause the ewes blood sugar level to fall significantly, affecting many of the nerve tissues dependent upon glucose (causing some common symptoms of pregnancy toxaemia). Endocrinal changes, such as higher circulating levels of somatotrophin, progesterone and prolactin, (due to pregnancy) can encourage the onset of this condition. Hypoglycaemia generally means a deficiency of blood sugar.
When the glycogen stores are 'used up', fat stored throughout the body is mobilised, and broken down in the liver, into fatty acids. The fatty acids are then broken down further, producing ATP.
Without sufficient levels of glucose, the tricarboxylic acid cycle (or Krebs cycle) is unable to function correctly. Acetyl-CoA, 'which is derived from fats... through rumen fermentation' (McDonald et al 2002) is unable to enter the tricarboxylic acid cycle, and follows an alternative pathway of metabolism. This results in the formation of the ketones; -hydroxybutyrate, acetoacetate and acetone (see figure 2). Acetoacetate and -hydroxybutyrate, can be successfully metabolised for energy production, but, if the synthesis of any of these ketones exceeds the rate at which they are broken down, excessive levels of ketones accumulate in the blood stream, causing hyperketonaemia. Elevated levels of these toxins cause many of the symptoms outlined before, including the ewe blundering into objects, and apparent blindness.
These metabolic disorders are bought on buy an inadequate diet. Dietary energy may be insufficient due to a food shortage, in which the weather, (e.g. insufficient food due to droughts (in Australia)), or the shepherd are likely to blame (not supplying additional feed, or supplying inappropriate feed). However pregnancy may actually limit the available diet:
- An increasing foetus size (and further development of tissues and organs) and a developing placenta will cause the uterus to increase in size during late pregnancy, taking up a significant space within the ewes abdomen. The stomach of a ruminant normally occupies three quarters of the abdominal cavity. However, when the enlarged uterus takes up this space, the size to which the stomach can expand is limited, physically restricting the feed intake of the ewe. 'Appetite can be expected to decline in the last two to three weeks of pregnancy, particularly with ewes carrying multiple foetuses' (Croston et al 1994). This is undoubtedly linked to pregnancy toxaemia occurring in the last four weeks of pregnancy (Eales et al 2004).
With the ewe having a higher energy demand, and a restricted intake, the shepherd must be certain to provide the ewe with a nutrient dense feed, and keep her on an ascending plane of nutrition.
Ewes carrying two or more lambs are much more likely to be affected by feed restriction due to a greater uterus growth, than those carrying single lambs. The uterus and placenta would be larger (even if both foetuses are particularly small) in comparison to ewe's carrying single lambs. The energy demands of the ewe carrying a heavier weight, and due to her multiple foetuses would be greater.
As mentioned before, ewes carrying twin lambs are not the only group of ewes likely to suffer from pregnancy toxaemia, overweight ewes are also very likely to suffer from the condition. Ewes of a condition score of 4, at lambing, are prone to having lambing difficulties (particularly prolapsing). If an attempt to slim the ewe is at a too later stage of her pregnancy (mid to late pregnancy), the ewe will draw on her own reserves, and may encourage the onset of pregnancy toxaemia. Another factor to be wary of with fat ewes is that they are likely to have a substantial intraabdominal fat content. The fat ewe will not only have an enlarging uterus, but also a smaller abdominal cavity. This may significantly supress her appetite at a time her energy demands are increasing.
Thin ewes on the other hand, simply do not have enough energy reserves to withstand the 0.5 - 0.75 condition loss (NADIS 2002), expected to occur during pregnancy. If her diet is amended to improve her condition, at a late stage of pregnancy, it should be expected that most of this feed would be passed directly to the foetus, increasing its size, creating considerable problems for the ewe at parturition.
The susceptibility of under and overweight ewes can be reduced, by making any modifications to the ewe's condition, by changing the diet, either between weaning and before tupping, or in early pregnancy. As the pregnancy progresses, changes should be avoided, and those ewes considered being susceptible monitored carefully. By condition scoring the flock at key stages ('at weaning, tupping, mid-pregnancy and late-pregnancy' (MAFF 1996)), ewes not at a condition score of 3 can be improved or monitored, depending upon their stage in pregnancy. Feet, teeth and worm burden should also be checked at this time, and action taken upon results. Any mouth or feet problems may well impair the ewe's intake ability, particularly if out at grass.
Increased stress to the gestating ewe at a late stage of pregnancy, is likely to encourage the onset of the disorder, but will not cause it. The stress may be caused by adverse weather conditions (food shortages), housing (changing her diet and environment), handling and hard driving. These causes of stress may result in increased energy expenditure and a decrease in food consumption. Housing stress is the easiest stress for the shepherd to avoid, and can be done so by housing ewes before the late pregnancy period.
Treatment of pregnancy toxaemia is generally unsatisfactory, unless the ewe is near to lambing. Treatment must be administered at once, in the form of a glucose precursor, either orally or intravenously. However, due to treatment being relatively unsuccessful, avoidance is the best method to keep the flock free of the disorder. It is most essential that an appropriate diet be provided to the ewe, with the energy content of the feed increasing throughout gestation (see figure 3).
When looking at this able though, it is important to realise that in late pregnancy, and in particular the last three weeks, the ewe's appetite may be suppressed. We can see she has a higher demand for energy, but a lower ability to take it in. The feed must be highly palatable and of good quality. It is often suggested to (gradually, to avoid acidosis), provide concentrates later in pregnancy. Indoor ewes are advised to be provided with ad-lib forage, and concentrates in the last 4 weeks of pregnancy. Outdoor ewes on the other hand should be supplied with ad-lib forage, and concentrates in the last 8 weeks. Grass quality and availability should be monitored for outdoor lambers, and additional forage provided where necessary. High energy feed blocks (containing molasses) may be provided to ewes, but should not be seen as an alternative, due to the variable intakes of ewes.
For the first three months of gestation, it is suggested that ewes are kept at a body condition score of 3. This allows for 0.5 - 0.75 condition to be lost during pregnancy, without affecting the lamb or ewe.
By providing a balanced diet, of forages and concentrates, pregnancy toxaemia can generally be avoided, however, other preventative methods may be taken, including separating shy feeding ewes from bullies. 'This ensures that shy ewes get enough feed and that the bullies do not get too much' (Eales et al 2004). Ewes known to be greedy trough feeders, and that do not eat enough roughage, will have an unbalanced diet, and may suffer from pregnancy toxaemia.
Another planning method that the shepherd can undertake, to avoid pregnancy toxaemia, is to scan ewes 60-80 days into pregnancy. This allows barren ewes to be removed, considerably saving upon feed costs and improving the flock. This also allows for the flock to be separated into groups according to the number of lambs expected. This aids lambing and the after care of ewes and lambs, but also enables preferential feeding of ewes carrying multiple lambs.
Pregnancy toxaemia is avoidable, but generally not treatable (due to its unsuccessfulness). Preventative methods, such as a balanced diet and preferential feeding for those ewes most at risk, could keep a flock free of the hypoglycaemia and hyperketonaemia, the two metabolic disorders that cause pregnancy toxaemia. A good shepherd would be able to recognise if the flock is likely to be affected, with condition scoring and careful monitoring being essential. Prevention of the disorder will result in healthy ewes, producing vigorous lambs, and producing high yields of quality milk.
To avoid onset of the disorder, an adequate diet must be provided (her energy balance should not be disturbed), and ewes should be in an optimum condition (2.5-3), and are not put under any unnecessary stress.