Nitrogen is the most important nutrient influencing grass production, and its supply is largely under the farmer's control (Frame 2000). Naturally there are not enough nitrates in the soil to optimise plant growth, resulting in nitrates being applied to grasslands to achieve higher yields. The health concerns that have been linked with nitrates being leached from agricultural land in the last 30years have forced the Government and farmers to reduce nitrate leaching where possible.
Nitrate ions are the soluble form of nitrogen that is necessary for photosynthesis and protein development in the grass plant.
Nitrates (NO
) are negatively charged, and therefore cannot be absorbed by the negatively charged colloids found in most soils. Water percolating down through the soil easily removes nitrate ions, leaching them from the soil.
The diagram to the right represents the mass balance of nitrogen leaching from the soil. It shows that nitrogen leaching is not the only 'inefficiency' of this system.
Most nitrates are in the top 20cm of the soil (2.41kg
), so that they are more easily accessible by the plant. However, being close to the surface makes it easier for the nutrients to be washed down the soil profile.
The loss of nitrates through the soil is a concern for two main reasons:
The productivity of the grassland will suffer, firstly because of the loss of nitrogen, but also because the leaching of nitrogen from acidic sources (acid rain) accelerates the loss of important nutrient cations. There is a considerable cost of replacing the lost nitrates and nutrients. The main grass-growing period is between spring and early autumn (April to September), and it is essential that nitrates are available for this time, to enable the plant to grow, (produce a high yield). The nitrate is converted into ammonium ions in the plant, which combine with carbohydrate to synthesize amino acids, used to form proteins. Proteins are needed for growth.
The environmental problems caused by nitrate leaching concern everybody, not just the farmer. Among the problems are:
Issues that result from it entering groundwater - Agricultural land is responsible for 70% of nitrates in water supplies (DEFRA 04)
Drinking water - there are significant problems that can arise when nitrates drain into water supplies and contaminate water intended for drinking. There is a cost to limit the affect of nitrates (cancers, 'blue baby syndrome'). The 1980 Drinking Water Directive sets a limit of 50 mg/l for nitrate in public water supplies. (DEFRA 03).
Eutrophication - this occurs in surface waters (lakes, streams etc), and is damaging to ecosystems.
The farmer must try to prevent nitrates leaching through the soil, to limit the economic and environmental costs that this would generate.
The main sources of inputs/sources of soil nitrates are:
The grass plant is extremely efficient in taking up N from the soil, provided that there is sufficient moisture, and the temperature is suited for growth (Brockman). It is due to the inefficiency of the animal at grass that causes a poor distribution of N, and makes the N most at risk of being lost. Grassland soils typically have high contents of organic matter, resulting in a substantial supply of N by mineralization. (Brockman). However, it must be noted that an input of nitrogen in excess of the plants requirement is likely to be leached. Due to this, it may be suggested that reducing the nitrogen input to the soil to a level slightly below the level needed to give the optimum yield, will ensure that there is less loss to the soil.
Rainfall, over application of nitrogen and livestock are the key contributors to leaching from grassland, but careful management can reduce the effect.
It must be realised that downward leaching is not the only method by which nitrates are lost from the soil. Nitrates are also lost:
Intensively grazed grassland is at the highest risk of losing nitrate, having the highest input of nitrogen, and generally in being in areas of England with a higher rainfall.
Fertilisers (organic/inorganic) should only be applied to the grass when it can make best use of the nitrates. In a grassland system this would mean not applying any between 15 th September and 1 st February. From the mid season onwards, the amount of fertiliser applied should be reduced, as the grass will not grow as much. Application of a fertiliser should only be done if the growth of the grass will actually be used fully.