Break crops have been, and are again an essential component of crop rotations, generally aiming to improve the husbandry of following crops. Advances in agricultural chemistry caused many farmers to simplify their rotations, due to the range of chemicals available to control pests, diseases and weeds. However, due to the cost (financially and environmentally), the risks associated with resistance, and the incentives with diversifying from cereals (subsidies), many farmers use break crops in their rotation. Break crops tend to have a 'function apart from their product value, namely providing a change from a long sequence of corn crops' (Spedding 1983). In many cases, break crops act as restorative crop, improving soil structure, soil fertility (residues from pulses) and interrupt the lifecycle of crop specific pests and diseases.
The white lupin is one of four species of lupins grown in temperate agriculture, the others being blue lupins (L. angustifolius), yellow lupins (L. luteus) and variable lupins, (L. mutablis). They typically have white flowers, being a larger plant than the other lupin varieties mentioned above. Lupins are a member of the pulse family (see Table 1), and produce a fruit, the legume, in the form of a pod. Of the four, white lupins have a higher protein content and the potential for the highest yields in ideal conditions.
Lupins are considered as a relatively new crop to the UK, having been grown relatively unsuccessfully in the past. However the development of sweet varieties, with a low alkaloid content in the seed (developed from semi-domesticated 'bitter lupins'), encouraged wider cultivation throughout Europe. Alkaloids are 'organic compounds containing nitrogen... and have poisonous properties' (Hale et al 1988). Lupanine is the alkaloid present in the seed of white lupins, but at much lower concentrations in the sweet varieties. Now the lupin plant is able to utilise the nitrogen that it would have otherwise stored in its seed, to increase biomass. These newer varieties, known as determinate and semi-determinate varieties are better adapted for cultivation in the UK, resulting in the area in which lupins have been grown has increased significantly since 2001, by more than 4,000ha (Nix 2005).
White lupins can be grown in the UK as either a winter or spring sown crop. Of the two, winter varieties are known to generate highest yields and benefits in Europe, however in the UK as yet this has not been so. Winter varieties tend to suffer from pests and diseases more so than spring varieties, resulting in spring lupins being grown over a larger area.
Due to the adaptations of the white lupin (with typical root nodules of a legume), it is quite capable of growing upon infertile soils, however a more alkaline pH 5-7.5 (PGRO 2005), free draining soil is preferred.
Winter and spring varieties make good potential break crops for a number of reasons. These include that the crop can be grown for a variety of purposes, including:
As a whole crop silage, - Lupins could be an alternative to maize in areas it does not grow favourably (too cold). Spring varieties, (harvested earlier than winter varieties) are used, July to August is the main ensiling dates. This is due to the low dry matter content and difficulties in wilting that would occur if using a winter variety. If silaged in July, it is likely to be just before the main machinery and labour requirements of the cereal harvest. Lupin silage is of higher energy and quality than grass silage, saving the grower cost of additives.
As a concentrate - 'Lupins have the highest protein content of any grain legume (35-40%) and as such provide a valuable food source for humans and animals' (Robson et al). When milled, flour similar to faba bean flour is produced, being of higher quality ('40 - 50% higher in protein than peas and beans' (Nix 05)). White Lupin also compares very favourably to soybean meal, potentially being of a higher protein concentration than soybean, and still significantly high oil content in comparison with other pulses (see table 2).
As a grain crop for human consumption - 'Lupin flour has been used in bread, biscuits, etc' (Robson et al). White lupins harvested for grain tend to be grown in Southern and Eastern England.
As a green manure - Lupins can be sown after an autumn harvest, and ploughed in, adding to the soil organic matter. Lupins, have the common legume ability to grow upon soils limited with nitrates, due to 'rhizobium lupini'(Robson et al), bacteria occupying root nodules, 'utilising atmospheric nitrogen in the synthesis of amino acids' (Hale 1988). This nitrogen fixation enables the crop to utilise nitrogen available to it naturally, and therefore less nitrogen needs to be applied in the form of organic and inorganic fertilisers, saving the grower considerable costs, and reducing N losses to the environment and subsequent groundwater contamination. 150 - 350kg N/ha/yr (Robson et al) is fixed by lupins, upto 79% of the crops requirement. When the crop is not harvested, and is inverted with the soil, the entire nitrate that has been fixed is available for the following crop. This is likely to result in a soil nitrate positive balance.
As a cover crop - winter varieties of lupin would offer the benefit of limiting soil erosion. This does not necessarily apply to the UK.
The grower has the option of using the whole crop or grain as a homegrown concentrate or feed, or to trade the grain.
Another benefit of growing white lupins is its ability to fit into rotations. Spring varieties require similar seedbed preparation to peas, with land ploughed in autumn to provide a naturally weathered tilth come sowing. Seeds are sown as early as conditions allow, with the optimum time being mid March. Spring varieties are harvested from mid August onwards, allowing a first crop winter wheat to follow. Significant improvements in wheat yields have been recognised following a legume crop, with McEwen et al explaining in 1989 the ability of unfertilised lupins to increase wheat yields between 1.1 and 4.6 t ha-I (Robson et al).
Lupins also have the ability to germinate evenly, and 'asynchronous ripening of impermeable seeds' (Summerfield et al 1985). In comparison to other break crops, pods do not shatter, and seeds are retained. Lupins are a very competitive crop, are able to suppress weeds and are tolerant to most diseases affecting cereals. However, in the UK it is seen, that spring white lupins grown to date, rely upon pre-emergence herbicides. White lupins are a very sensitive crop, and currently, few herbicides are seen as crop safe. The reliance upon herbicides contradicts with other texts stating the ability of the crop to suppress all weeds, due to its canopy. The farmer tends to view the break crop as being a low cost, and maybe as a low yield crop. If he considers that a high cost upon chemicals needs to be paid, this could deter them from choosing the crop.
Another cost concern, is that both Phosphate and Potassium are likely to be a limiting factor, and will need to be added, for the following crop, (P and K at 50-55kg should be replaced later' (Nix 05)). Seed may be costly, as not only does it (or the soil) need to be inoculated to develop the bacterial population, but also the seed will need to be treated with fungicides, to avoid anthracnose (colltotrichum acutatum). Anthracnose is the most serious disease of white lupins in France, and is a threat to the UK. Lupins can be affected by many of the common pulse diseases and pests, and for this reason should not be grown within four years of another break crop. Among the diseases are leaf spot, powdery mildew and Botrytis. These diseases would be costly to control, but rotation and optimum weather conditions will prevent them.
Some texts also indicate that white lupins need to be desiccated before harvest. This enables the crop to mature evenly, though it is stated in other texts that it does ripen evenly, without the time and expense spent upon a desiccant.
When deciding if white lupins are a potential break crop in the UK, the market in which they should enter must be realised. Currently, 30,000 tonnes of lupin products are imported into the UK, from Australia each year, and 2 million tonnes of Soya (Nix 05). UK white lupins could replace both imports. There may also be the opportunity to export the grain to North Africa and the Middle East.
White Lupins may have the potential to be grown in the place of beans and peas because:
In the past, the growth of white lupins has been limited due to its unsuitability to the UK. However, modifications, and its ability to be grown in on a wider range of soils, have increased the area grown to around 4,000 ha in 2004 (55% of all lupins). The 'interest in the growth of lupins on British farms has increased in recent years as a part of the quest for reliable sources of home grown proteins to substitute for meat and bone meal and for expensive imported Soya, largely from GM sources.' (Lane). This is of particular interest to organic farmers. Lupins 'fit well into a cereal rotation as they can be drilled, harvested, dried and stored with only minor modifications to existing equipment' (Robson et al). Within time, we are likely to see white lupin become a more widely grown break crop in the UK.