A variety of agents contribute to the understanding of the Roman economy, two of such are samian ware and shipwrecks. Both reveal great deals of useful information, however there are remaining unanswered questions and limitations to deal with. The study of the Roman economy is necessary as it can explain many social aspects such as urbanisation, agriculture, technological advances and so on (Greene 1992: 13). Investigation has resulted in two main schools of thought concerning the state of the economy. One group, including the historian Rostovtzeff, claim the economy was actually much like that experienced in the Western world today. The second, led by Finley and Jones, suggests that it was much more humble. Agriculture was at its centre and towns never developed into large-scale industrial areas financed by trade (Greene 1992: 14).
Firstly considering samian ware, for a long time it appears that because of the general abundance of pottery, the area seems to have been disregarded compared to others linked to economic factors. However pottery does allow "a unique opportunity to apply archaeology" to the field of economics (Greene 1992: 156), especially through the study of samian as much more is known about it than other, perhaps hand-made ceramic items (Peacock 1982: 75). There are several areas that samian can provide information about. Firstly, the development of the industry. To answer economic questions, typology and growth and decline over the period must be understood if the tableware is to act as an indicator. Forms of samian were standardised, therefore a typology can be allotted. However variations were made at different places and times (Greene 1992: 157-158). This allows for conclusions of how much was produced, how much was traded and where it was traded to. Samian was found to have moved long distances having originated from only a few production centres (Peacock 1982: 161). Simplification of samian in the later Roman periods appears to suggest that speed of production had become the most important factor (Greene 1978: 57). Indeed by the fourth century it is noted that quality and care, especially in the native regions had declined (Fulford 1978: 59).
Scale of production is a further important economic feature that needs to be examined. Investigations into how many workshops there were and their size, established "by the number of slave names associated with a single owner" (Greene 1992: 158), can lead to figures of production, therefore can gauge the significance of samian ware to the Roman economy. Kilns can also provide numerical knowledge to aid estimates of levels of production (Peacock 1982: 123). It is known through the study of samian found, how the industry moved its way through Western Europe. Originally Arretine ware was produced in Arezzo, Italy. It is thought potters from here established the first kiln sites in southern Gaul. Later sites began in central Gaul followed by smaller ones in eastern Gaul. A pottery kiln has been discovered in Britain at Colchester but it was making a much more primitive style of samian (Hartley 1969: 236-239). A general observation made, is that the further away the production moved away from Italy the larger the decline in quality (Greene 1992: 160). However, increasingly the industry did get taken away from Italy by its provinces as ironically products from Gaul were most sought after (Greene 1992: 161). This shows that not all samian ware workshops were economically linked, perhaps in the beginning but not as the competition for the market grew (Peacock 1982: 127). The growth in the number of sites does not necessarily mean a parallel growth in demand. The pottery at Colchester especially, could have signified difficulties in trade or transportation of ceramics from the continent (Hull 1963: 57). Perhaps the cost of samian became too much and so to make it cheaper, rather than import it they began to make it locally. This however did not seem to apply in Italy, as people appear to have been willing to pay more for the imported product (Pucci 1983: 110). This is highlighted in a discovery from Pompeii. A case of samian ware from Gaul was found freshly delivered (Potter 1987: 169).
Samian can highlight other important issues surrounding trade and transportation including the extent of it. In most cases pottery did not comprise much of the cargo however; the economic value must have been of some importance for samian ware to have travelled such large distances (Pucci 1983: 111-112). Wheeler claims the distribution of tableware travelled as far as, and in-between, Britain and India (Wheeler: 1946: 116). An argument against the economic value of ceramics suggests that pottery from the La Graufesenque kiln site only accomplished as much as it did because of the metal trade from the region (Middleton 1980: 163). The quantities traded are however extraordinary. In Romano-British settlements for example, with few exceptions, examples have been found of samian from central Gaul (Greene 1992: 167). Why was samian ware traded such distances? It is possible that Romans who colonised other areas of the Empire, when leaving the army for example, still enjoyed 'home comforts'. In support of this is a statement that suggests it was not only colonists who were provided for but also the people on new military bases in the provinces (Potter 1987: 163). Despite all of this evidence samian ware does have limitations, as pottery can only offer a "restricted range of information" (Pucci 1983: 107). The economic importance of tableware has been debated and is thought not to be an overly significant part of the ancient economy (Pucci 1983: 109). However one area of economic importance that the study of samian does play an important role in is its use, to an extent, to measure Romanisation (Hartley 1969: 235). Also investigation into the extent and quantity of trade can be used to suggest times of political and/or economic crisis in Rome, as turbulent times appear to have affected samian potteries and industry (Greene 1978: 57).
The second area to be discussed, shipwrecks can of course be linked to samian ware as the preferred method of transportation was by sea. There is the famous samian wreck in the Thames estuary at Pudding Pan Rock (Smith 1907: 158) and another at Riou that indeed carried more pottery than other goods (Pucci 1983: 111). Shipwrecks have also proved a valuable source of information concerning the understanding of the Roman economy. Especially as some reveal parts of the cargo that otherwise might not have survived if on land (Fulford 1978: 59). Again many aspects concerning shipping need to be investigated because its cost, type and speed are essential influences on any economy (Greene 1992: 17). Firstly shipwrecks can obviously reveal the type of cargo often on board merchant ships. Complete cargoes can be found as ships can be preserved wholly if in water-logged conditions (Greene 1992: 18). Trade of food stuffs, wine, oil, metal and pottery can be measured by the surviving ceramics, amphorae and ingots (Greene 1993: 18). Evidence for the type of cargo has also been suggested through pictorial depictions on a tombstone found in Mainz. Barrels, presumably for wine from the Germanic regions and sacks for grain have been found in the iconography (Ellmers 1978: 12). It is mostly amphorae that survive in wrecks however compared to barrels and sacks and so evidence could be considered biased (Parker 1980: 50).
The quantity of goods that could be transported is another obvious question. There has been a range in the size of ships either found wrecked or in historic descriptions. The majority it is estimated could carry between one hundred and one hundred and fifty tons. The largest, the Isis, is said to have held up to one thousand two hundred tons (Greene 1992: 24-25). It has been termed a "super-freighter" (White 1984: 212). These capacity estimates are made possible through the improvements in underwater archaeology (White 1984: 145). It is not only capacity that can be estimated through wreckages but also the ancient trade routes can be established. Sea trade appears to have flourished under the reign of Augustus as demand for foreign goods grew and land transportation was expensive and dangerous (Parker 1980: 54). The study and charter of dates of wrecks can help establish how and when trade grew in size and destination (Parker 1980: 50). Many wrecks lie within the Mediterranean (Greene 1992: 18) with many on traditional Eastern routes (Throckmorton 1972: 75).
There are many well known case studies that illustrate all of the aforementioned aspects. The shipwreck at Madrague de Giens in Southern France was excavated by Tchernia. Much of the cargo had survived and the bulk was found to be Dressel 1B amphorae (Greene 1992: 26), known for carrying Italian wine (Potter 1987: 155). There was also fine and coarse ceramics (Greene 1992: 26) as well as grapes (Potter 1987: 157). The vessel and cargo remained largely intact therefore estimates of capacity were possible (Greene 1992: 25). A trade route was established as many of the wine vessels bore the stamp P. VEVEIVS PAPVS. His kiln site is known to have been south of Rome in Terracina (Parker 1980: 53-54). A nearby port is therefore the most likely place that the ship last docked before setting out for its next destination (Tchernia et.al. 1978: 26). A further wreckage example was investigated by Nino Lamboglia. It sunk close to Albenga. Again the cargo was mostly amphorae and the estimated capacity revealed a modest vessel that could carry up to four hundred and fifty tons (Potter 1987: 155). Shipwrecks however do have limitations concerning how much economic information they can reveal. There is biased evidence as mostly cargoes of liquids leave their presence on the archaeological record (Casson 1971: 211). Also concentrations of wrecks found might not necessarily mean more trade along that route than any other. It could have been a more treacherous part of the sea but also there could have been "more intensive diving" due to easier conditions, for example off the south of France (Parker 1980: 50). However the expansion of underwater archaeology has lead to a much greater knowledge then was previously held and so findings can be relatively conclusive.
In conclusion the Finley/Jones model of the Roman economy does appear to fit better than the 'modernising' theory through the two aspects studied. Modern economic theories can not easily, or without problems, be applied to the ancient world (Potter 1987: 171). Finley goes as far as to say the Romans had no concept of economy, therefore did not possess the "conceptual elements" which make one (Finley 1992: 21). However the more open version of the Finely/Jones model offered by Hopkins is probably, overall the best to apply. It allows manoeuvrability and therefore the aspects discovered that could possibly suggest a lean more towards the modernising model can be explained (Greene 1992: 14). However to get a full idea of the economy, more than just two elements need to be investigated. Therefore areas such as coinage and amphorae should be considered simultaneously with those already looked at. Even then only cautious conclusions can be made due to the erratic nature of the evidence (Potter 1987: 171).