Traditionally the disciplines of Science and Egyptology only met when the Egyptologist had exhausted all of the sources at their disposal and in order to answer further questions, turned to the natural scientist (Germer 1986: 521). Findings from the scientific investigation of mummies, in many cases should not be generalisations as the quantity of cadaver found has provided ample examples for study (David 1999: 372). Therefore consequent studies of Egyptian mummies have revealed many aspects both to do with the life style and beliefs of this ancient culture.
Concerning life style, the corpses can relate to us what every day life was like for the ancient Egyptians, what they ate, and their health, how far they traded for example. It is known from the study of teeth that the preliminary diet of almost all people was very coarse. Much food was likely to have contained a degree of sand, a natural hazard of the location (Puech 1986: 239). It is not only teeth that can show what the Egyptians ate. The contents in the digestive system of a naturally mummified body were found and examined (Sandison 1986: 1). There is evidence that Egyptians ate meat occasionally, as tapeworm eggs have been found inside ROM I, suggesting that undercooked meat was eaten at some point. The implication of meat eating in another individual has been found as well (Millet, Hart, Reyman, Zimmerman, Lewin 1980: 79). Teeth however, predominately show that the Egyptian diet was mainly vegetarian (Puech 1986: 240). Dental studies can reveal other things such as "pathological and non-pathological dental abnormalities" (Leek 1986: 35). This is because unlike when studying other ancient corpses, mummification has preserved the soft tissue surrounding the teeth as well. The coarse diet had a significant effect on the wear of teeth. Many people, rich and poor were found likely to have been inflicted with infections and abscesses in the mouth as the enamel was worn away (Harris and Ponitz 1980: 45). Decay and cavities however were rarely found. This suggests that the Egyptians generally had very little sugar in their diet (Harris and Ponitz 1980: 46).
The body can reveal further health related issues. According to Steven Snape, compared to many other ancient cultures, we know far more about the health of the Egyptians due to their preservation techniques (Snape 1998: 186). Examination of the bones can reveal how well nourished people of the time were. 'Harris's lines', found on the tibia, are said to be an indication of periods of poor health and have been found in many cases (Gray 1967: 30). However the most common bone affliction to be found was arthritis (Sandison 1980: 36). Concerning disease, evidence of tuberculosis are said to have been discovered (Morse 1964 and Morse et.al. 1964: 31). Also the face of Rameses V is said to show evidence of smallpox (Sandison 1980: 33). Leprosy has been widely investigated in mummies from ancient Egypt however, it has been determined through the lack of clear evidence that it was an uncommon disease (Mller-Christensen 1967: 31). A further hazard of living in desert found through scientific investigation is sand-pneumoconiosis. The lungs become scarred from the inhalation of sand (Snape 1998: 187).
Linked to life style is the actual embalmment itself. It is said the inspiration came from an everyday occurrence, such as the drying of meat and fish (Peck 1980: 14). Another view is that discoveries of naturally mummified cadaver by the ancient Egyptians may have helped to develop the method (Snape 1998: 182). The process however was obviously not fully understood in the beginning because although because the Egyptians 'protected' the body with linen and a sarcophagus, they took away the crucial element of the natural desiccating sand (Snape 1998: 182). Generally the increase in use and perfection of mummies followed a chronological order; however the trial and error process "took a considerable time" (Peck 1980: 18-19). There is evidence for mummification in the Early Dynastic Period however by the Middle Kingdom there was still little complete preservation (David 1999: 173). The exterior wrappings had progressed significantly however little was done to dry out the body on the inside therefore still allowing decomposition (Callender 2003: 170). During the New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period mummification reached its height with many surviving well to this day (David 1999: 173). There is evidence of packing the body to make it appear more life like and placing artificial eyes in the orbits (Sandison 1973: 3). However through the Late, Ptolemaic and Roman Periods there was a significant decline in the detail paid to preservation as people appeared to have become preoccupied with the outward decoration and features (David 1999: 174). It was not only during the later periods when Egyptian mummification suffered a lapse. During the First and Second Intermediate Periods far fewer mummies have survived, if there were as many made as during other times. One explanation offered for this is the political turmoil during these periods (Aufderheide 2003: 227/230)
All of the advancements made in mummification would not have been possible if it was not for the gradual increase in trade, especially during the New Kingdom. Major developments were made because of a wider range of embalming materials available to the ancient Egyptians (Chamberlain and Parker-Pearson 2004: 106). There is also however proof that goods were traded before this. The components of the resin used for PUM II were not local (Cockburn and Barraco 1980: 62). Also, bodies dating from the Second Dynasty have been found in resin soaked bandages. This suggests contact with the "Lebanese region". (Bard 2003: 81). Trade in other goods, such as more sugary substances during the Graeco-Roman era seems to account for the apparent decline in dental health with more cavities occurring than at any other time (Leek 1986: 41). Trade can also link into a cultures ability to open itself to others. There appears to be evidence suggesting that the Egyptian culture was in fact relatively open. Egyptian attitudes seem to have changed or adapted at certain points of time under foreign influence (Taylor 2003: 358). This seems especially eminent during the later Roman rule over Egypt. Roman style appears to have highly influenced some individuals, fashioning "themselves as Romanised" through the portraiture on sarcophaguses (Walker 1997: 2). This influence was reciprocated as some Romans opted for an Egyptian type of burial (Montserrat 1997: 33). Could this have been the beginnings of an 'Egyptian death industry'? It is not an unfeasible notion as in the later periods there was obviously enough labour for craftsmen to branch out into "non-functional products" (Seidlmayer 2003: 114). These products being masks and decorations for the mummy and its sarcophagus. It does appear that during the Ptolemaic and certainly Roman era mummification had much less to do with religion and had developed into quite a commercial manufacture. It was another way for the rich and powerful to show their wealth, even post mortem (David 1999: 374).
Closely related of course to the development of embalming is why the Egyptians chose to mummify their dead in the first place. Life style and beliefs are not two separate topics. Egyptians were very conscious of religion and the dead in their everyday lives. Some have asked "Were the ancient Egyptians obsessed with death?" (Corcoran 1997: 45) This is a valid question as it seems the elite especially, spent a good proportion of their lives preparing for their deaths. For example, Pharaoh's tombs were often begun not long after they were instated. One explanation given for why the Egyptians disposed of their dead through mummification is the ka, a part of the deceased personality or spirit that lingered on earth (Snape 1998: 182). Therefore the body was still needed and had to be in the best state possible (Dzierzykray-Rogalski 1986: 101). A further possibility suggests a more religious purpose, in remembrance of the god Osiris who was dismembered and bandaged back together (Sandison 1986: 1). Another aspect of Egyptian religious devotion has been found on many males examined. Circumcision appears to have been regularly practice throughout the ages until the Christian era began (Sandison 1980: 42).
It is not only circumcision that illustrates the apparent importance of tradition to the Egyptians. The funerary rituals were rarely changed throughout the years, only added to (Sandison 1986: 1). Superstition and tradition seem to intertwine as part of the funerary process involved appeasing the dead through gifts (Cockburn 1980: 7). Concerning theory of why the heart was one of the main organs left in place during mummification, it has been suggested that the Egyptians saw it as the "centre of life" (Sandison 1986: 2). On a similar principle is the theory that the Egyptians perhaps thought that the heart was where thinking occurred, thus explaining why they were happy to remove the brain (Peck 1980: 21).
One of the most important beliefs that seem to have been held, especially by the wealthy, was that people were not equal in death. This is apparent not only in the type of grave or grave goods found but also through scientific study. It is noted that few mummies from the Old Kingdom have survived to the present day. However, this is not only because of the embalming techniques employed but also because fewer people were able to or allowed to be mummified (Snape 1998: 184). It was a privilege reserved for the wealthy and powerful. Even later when the poorer were given the right to be mummified the process was not exactly the same. A smaller budget was used and the rich still found more elaborate ways of differentiating themselves. Examples of modest mummifications were found when the bodies of PUM III and IV were studied (Reyman and Peck 1980: 85). Dating of naturally desiccated corpses reveals that most of the population continued to be buried unprepared in the desert which holds irony as in many cases especially until the New Kingdom, preservation would probably have been best occurring in its natural environment (Grimal 2005: 130).
The evidence presented shows that scientific study of mummies can bring fruitful results. However there are areas that can not be explained by science. For example during the earlier periods when only the elite of ancient Egypt were mummified, is it not possible that a lack of mummification evidence could also suggest that not everyone who did have the opportunity decided to take it? If this was the case, science can not explain why people made that decision or chart why the process became more popular, only when. There can also sometimes be problems with scientific methods that have to be overcome. There can be difficulties with radiocarbon dating, blood group analysis in lineage projects and handling and labelling of mummies by later peoples (Germer 1986: 522)
In conclusion collaboration of Egyptology and Science is not always easy but can bring rewards to both fields (Germer 1986: 525). However the development of new disciplines and incorporation of older ones has created a multidisciplinary area where many previously unanswered questions can be resolved (David 1999: 372). Therefore the scientific study of mummies has, in many cases, revealed to us a lot about the beliefs and life style of the ancient Egyptians.