Octavian needed to use imagery and mythology to legitimise his seizure of power because his position at the time was unstable. He had a tenuous link to the former ruler, Julius Caesar and if his predecessor had not favoured him and therefore adopted him, many of the images and myths he used in his later propaganda would have been invalid. How important and influencing the official images given to the public were will be discussed throughout. Overall it appears Augustus aim was to adapt his image during his time in power from that of "ferocious tyrant to...pater patriae.".
Firstly, how did Augustus utilise imagery and mythology well? He did use the full range of genres at his disposal. He used media that the whole population would understand. Sculptures, statues and buildings, such as the Ara Pacis Augustae symbolise the morals and values promoted at the time (Wallace-Hadrill 2004: 74). In fact the whole city of Rome was propaganda; Augustus used it as a model for the entire empire (Shotter 2005: 52). For the literate population Augustus made use of the poets Livy Horace and Virgil especially, however Propertius also wrote some lines about him in the first poem of his second book (Griffin 2002: 206), as did Ovid. Virgil's Aenied carried through many of the virtues Augustus claimed to have himself, such as piety (Shotter 2005: 49). Augustus used the theme of the divine in a slightly different way constantly throughout his rule, this will be discussed later. A book like Virgil's' Aenied shows clearly contemporary counterparts that the audience in Augustan Rome would have been able to recognise and were meant to. Such as Augustus and Aeneas, Dido, the foreign queen and Cleopatra. (Griffin 2002: 210). Griffin argues that the overall tone of passages from the poet's works gives little indication that they were forced to write positively, which therefore suggests that Augustus' tactics in other areas must have had some effect .
He used this great variety of media, to be popular with as many as possible, something which is apparent as one of his possible priorities. Augustus tried to appear as "champion of the people". He used tribuncian power to become closer to the lower classes (Yavetz 2002: 11) while also pleasing the aristocracy through his rejection of the more powerful positions (Carter 1970: 171). By gaining the trust and control of either group Augustus automatically had some leverage over the other. The elite held influence over the plebs, however the elite also relied on the poor to remain popular, therefore themselves were forced at times to listen to popular opinion (Yavetz 2002: 11). With all this attention Augustus ensured that he was never out of the public eye, allowing everyone to celebrate his victories and providing for the people with war booty (Shotter 2005: 33).
The divine aspect mentioned earlier in Augustus' piety, reveals another form in many images portrayed by him for his personal propaganda. That Augustus was the adopted son of Julius Caesar, connected him to the gods. Not only the divine Julius, but also Venus through the Julius family descended from the great Iulus. Who was more suitable to rule the Romans than the descendant of a god, and more specifically the ancestor to the founders of Rome? Augustus claimed the protection of and others likened him to further gods of the Pantheon. In images of him, he retains the youthfulness of an Apollo like figure (Pollini 1993: 335), he claimed to be under the protection of this god also (Shotter 2005: 62). In Virgil's Aenied a connection between the Neptune who calms the ocean and the young Octavian calming the strife of civil war, "The mob of cloud dispersed and the sun restored... ", has been made (Wallace-Hadrill 2004: 87). Assimilation to the gods was dangerous. Many would not have agreed with Augustus' almost claiming to be one of them. Only after his death was he officially declared a god, however during his life time he remained careful not to offend anyone. Pollini declares that in private matters were different. The official image of a 'modest' Augustus is replaced by a more risqu link to the gods as shown in the Gemma Augustae . Augustus however preferred to promote his piety in public, therefore showing himself rather as a "mediator between gods and man..." (Pollini 1993: 337). Concerning mythology Augustus appears to have drawn on the past through stories such as the Aenied but also contemporary mythology. He created his own through myths of his adoptive father, Julius Caesar, but also through the Battle of Actium (Wallace-Hadrill 2004: 1). The Roman 'habit' of creating modern myths would haunt later Emperors as tales of the feats of Augustus continued to grow and weakened the triumphs of others. The Res Gestae left a lasting image of a saviour of the people "... I successfully championed the liberty of the republic when it was oppressed by the tyranny of a faction."
There were however areas in Augustus' self promotion that had weaknesses. Firstly he appears to try to please everyone. Although Suetonius tells of his more humble backgrounds he is keen to be accepted by the aristocracy and presents the image that he is one of them. This is 'sealed' in his marriage to Livia (Carter 1970: 172). The fact that Suetonious and the men in the passages concerned know of the "ignobility of his family..." suggests that Augustus was not as successful in 'covering up' all aspects of his life. Indeed the portraiture that we see of Augustus is some what tainted by Suetonius' account of the 'real' Augustus. "...his teeth were wide apart, small, and ill-kept...his eyebrows met... his nose...bent slightly inward...he was short of stature." (Suetonius, Life of Augustus LXXIX). Also Antony, in Plutarchs' Life of Antony, suggests that "..he possessed few influential friends and little experience of the world..." (16).
Concerning propaganda there are dramatic shifts in his rule. At first it appears he may have been overly confident. It is claimed that Octavian perhaps had begun to believe his own propaganda when he built his mausoleum (Yavetz 2002:6). The colossal size was much larger than ordinary and much more on the scale of a god rather than man. Shotter suggests that "he basked in the public adulation that was focused upon him as the victor of Actium...".. Not un-rightly so, however the impression this gave was not one he later wanted continued. A further image of Augustus, then Octavian, arose from Actium that he was hasty to dismiss. Yavetz claims that the brutality of civil war linked Octavian to the reputation of "a cruel, vengeful, selfish and treacherous youth...". However, as has been explored in previous paragraphs this image is not the one Augustus left on his death, therefore in the intermediate years the positive propaganda must have worked, at least to some degree. Either this or evidence is biased because many negative sources have not survived? His Res Gestae promoted what he wanted to be remembered for, however this self-praise is disregarded as untrustworthy for exactly that reason (Yavetz 2002: 22). No one knows for sure the degree of exaggeration or modesty used at the time it was produced.
In conclusion it appears the wide media exploited by Augustus to promote his image and mythology was successful. Although there is evidence for negative comments and actions the positive image appears to have sustained this, and is today what he is remembered foremost for. Augustus wanted to be remembered for his achievements, and accomplished this through a combination of a relatively elaborate building programme, a variety of texts and portraiture in statues and on coins.