Extraordinary births were reserved for extraordinary people or beings. A variety of miraculous births were presented to the Greek audience, most frequently of immortals but special humans showed their almost divine like status through their beginnings. The births make a statement about the person or parents and differ them from the majority who go through the 'normal' birthing procedure.
Firstly discussing immortals, there is a wide range of models of birth. Before the established Olympian generation there were others, the Titans, Cyclopes and Hekatonchires (Morford and Lenardon 2003: 54). They themselves had a relatively extraordinary birth, for they were actually born 'twice'. Hesiod describes how this was made possible by their father Ouranos. "...he would hide them every one in a covert of Earth and allow them not to rise up into the light... Earth was straightened, and groaned within her..." (Theogony 156 - 159). Gaia (Earth) wanted her children to be released from inside her and so formulated a plan with them. She created a sickle and instructed Kronos what he should do with it. "Then from his ambush his son reached forth his left hand...and speedily he shore away his own father's privy parts and cast them into the winds behind him." (Hesiod, Theogony 177- 182). This extreme birth was caused by the fathers will not to be surpassed by any of his children. This "ruthless struggle for power, a complete absence of moral standards and lawlessness..." is a popular reoccurring theme in myth as male gods especially, try to control and manipulate birth. Like his father Ouranos, Kronos is also incapable of controlling this force of nature forever. However before that is discussed, Hesiod adds another miraculous birth to the escape of the children from Gaia. "And even as at first he cut of the privy parts with the adamant, and hurled them...into the foaming sea...therein a maiden grew... And she came forth as a reverend goddess beautiful... Her do gods and men call Aphrodite..."(Theogony 188-98). She is therefore the daughter of Ouranos alone. The theme of asexual reproduction is also reciprocated by the later 'generations' and will be discussed in further detail later.
The Olympians were born of Kronos and Rhea. Kronos is also concerned about being overthrown by his children. However he did not keep the children inside their mother. "And these [children] did mighty Kronos swallow, even as each came forth from the holy womb...with this design, that none other of the glorious sons of Heaven should hold the kingly honour among the immortals." (Hesiod, Theogony 453-56). However when Zeus was born he was saved from this fate and hidden. Kronos later is forced to vomit up the stone that Zeus was replaced with, plus all of the other gods (Morford and Lenardon 2003: 76). Kronos is not the last however to be told that he could be usurped by a younger god. Zeus is warned by Gaia and Ouranos. They tell him that a child of Metis will have the wisdom to do so. Therefore when Metis was pregnant he deceived her and so swallowed her. However the growing 'child' was now inside Zeus. "From his august head, cunning Zeus himself gave birth to her (Athena), born in warlike armour of gleaming gold" The prophecy of a new leader could no longer come true, as this child was not born from Metis but from Zeus 'alone'. Therefore Zeus was the only leader of the immortals not to be overthrown. Again also the theme of single parenthood arises. It is something only the gods can do. The previous two cases have been of males taking over the birthing process to an extent; it was not of Ouranos's free will that Aphrodite was born. Perhaps this is another reason why the gods should be revered. They could give birth without the need of the female. This was somewhat a universal wish of men, to be able to have children without the need for the trouble and toil a wife can bring. It is perhaps possible that these myths existed then so that men could live out this 'fantasy'?
There is however another example of asexual reproduction that appears to relate a very different message. Hera herself gave birth to Hephaestus without the 'help' of a male (Morford and Lenardon 2003:249). However he was born a lame god and therefore does not appear to have been one of the most popular. The 'moral' sent out in this tale suggests that women are inferior and rely on the male to produce 'quality' children with them, although if the male could reproduce solely the children would be much stronger, like Athena was. The last god with an interesting mode of birth is Dionysus. Although technically born from Zeus, he was first born of a mortal woman, "My mother was Semele, Cadmus' daughter. From her womb the fire of lightning-flash delivered me." (Euripides, Bacchae 1-3). Semele was killed by 'the sight of Zeus' in a cruel trick devised by Hera in jealousy of the love affair (Morford and Lenardon 2003: 274). When Semele was dead "Zeus the son of Cronos ensconced him (Dionysus) instantly in a secret womb chambered within his thigh, and with golden pins closed him from Hera's sight." There are discrepancies about where the 'second birth' of Dionysus takes place. In the Homeric Hymn to the god the audience is told that he was delivered in Arabia at Mt Nysa. This supports the promoted idea that Dionysus was a god from the East. Why is this important? This version may have been created because the Greeks did not want what he stood for to be Greek. The god of intoxication and wine did not promote the diplomatic, cultured atmosphere that Greece was perhaps trying to radiate at the time?
Immortals such as the Olympian generation are not autochthonous. Therefore Dowden argues that the myths were created out of the need for cults to have some foundation or beginnings. Maybe this is true also, to some extent, of mortals with interesting births. Ericthonios, the founder of Athens, although born of immortals, is not himself one. This fact may appear confusing but the analysis of the myth will show the alternative motive. He was "...born of his mother earth..." (Euripides, Ion 20) after Hephaestus's attempt to seduce Athena failed and the sperm that landed on her thigh was wiped off and thrown to the ground (Morford and Lenardon 2003: 548). The story was adopted/made to fit/invented by the Athenians as their foundation myth. The way of his birth allows justification for exclusion from citizenship of the female population (Loreaux 1993: 10). Firstly, the 'first citizen' was male but also he is born from the female refusal of "sexual union". Therefore perhaps making women seem unnecessary. The myth also supports the popular claim that Athenians were the people of the earth of Athens, they had always been there. This myth clearly has political connotaions as there is another foundation myth for Athens. This alternative does not mention birth but is rather a contest between Athena and Poseidon. Athena 'wins' therefore the city is devoted to her and takes her name (Parker 1987: 199-200). There are mortals who are born from the union of a god/goddess and a man/woman. There are other interesting births however most of these are not new or different models. Birth during stories where metamorphoses has occurred, for example in Prometheus Bound, the child arrives while the female is still in her altered state; in this case Io was transformed into a cow. Also in the myth of Callisto, she gives birth to Arcas while at the time she is a bear. There is no clear explanation as to why these relatively strange births occur that is not part of the context of the myth; usually the transformation is a punishment or revenge for being seduced by a god.
In conclusion there are many themes surrounding the many different models of birth, most of which intertwine and connect together, often in a very confusing way. Most appear to simply establish a beginning on which the Greeks could make rituals and perform ceremonies for the Gods. Concerning Ericthonios his myth gave the Athenians an origin for their people, city and name. This is a very broad topic and more investigation into the role of mortals in different models of birth is perhaps needed.