For Descartes the intellect is simply an un-extended, thinking thing, ideas and the process of thought formation being the only thing that certified our existence. For the Aristotelians, the active intellect was a separate immaterial, immortal faculty necessary for the formation of concepts. While, Locke's theory of understanding of concepts are brought about by the continuum of past experiences perceived by the senses. In other words, for Locke, all our ideas of knowledge are brought about through sensory perception. In order to understand Locke's account of sense perception, one needs comprehend the way Locke defines perception and ideas. For Locke, Perception is the only way of being capable of acquiring ideas about objects through our senses. Through sensory perception the mind derives its ideas and these ideas are only the ideas of its own intellect. These ideas can be constructed through two forms of thinking- reflections and/or abstraction. Anyone who thinks of a notion must have perceived it (experienced), and anyone who lacks perception can't have an idea of the notion, therefore lacks the reflection or abstraction of the notion. The sensory ideas are caused by external objects as their perception is caused involuntarily and independently of our intellect (Representative theory of perception). However, there are cases in which these simple ideas resemble their qualities that give rise to them and other cases when they don't. That is to say that these ideas have qualities which make them distinct from one another which may or may not resemble the true attributes of the object but they are still ideas constructed within us without our appeal. The three basic qualities are primary, secondary and "the power that is in any body" (Locke, pp140). One final point on sensory perception is it's interaction with judgment. Locke's empirical account of sense perception, requires a thorough understanding of ideas, perception and qualities.
In Contrast to many of its contemporaries, Locke argued that the mind is a hollow void, that it contains no ideas, until it experiences, as he states, "when a man begins to have any ideas? I think, the true answer is, when he first has any sensation. (Locke, pp 120) Locke's empiricist argument is quite different than Descartes. As Descartes argued that the mind, the part of the soul that thinks is nothing unless it thinks. This is one of the explicit differences between Descartes and Locke. Locke argues that we acquire everything from experience through our senses. Through sensory perception we receive ideas of the external world. To have an idea of the external world, one needs to experience, to experience anything one needs its senses and sensory perception. Skeptically thinking, I wonder whether it is really not possible to have an idea of something without experiencing it. For example, to have an idea of the lack of gravity in space, do I need to travel to space? However, notice that when Locke talks about experience he precisely relates experience to sense perception. Clearly it is not possible to experience every single possible thing on earth and thus acquire an idea of it. However it's possible to experience ideas about things that we personally did not experience, by our senses. The primary concept in Locke's argument is sensory perception, whatever we know we get them through the channels of senses. Later on, forms of thinking we acquire an idea of the notion, as Locke argues, "These two, I say, viz. external material things, as the objects of sensation; and the operations of our minds within, as the objects of reflection , are to me, the only originals, from whence all our ideas take their beginnings."(Locke, pp110) Thus, first through sensory perception and then through reflection we construct ideas. Locke refers to reflection as simple thinking, when anything is perceived. Accordingly, perception is the first faculty of the mind in the process of receiving idea, which the simplest idea is constructed with the cooperation of reflection (Locke, pp142). Significantly, Locke points out a difference between perception and reflection. The difference is that during perception the mind is for the most part is passive, while when the intellect is reflecting, the mind is active. Thus this gives way to our next discussion of perception which is representative theory of perception.
Basically, in perception the mind is passive which means that what the mind perceives has no control of perceiving it the way it does. It just perceives it, and cannot avoid perceiving.
I agree with Locke's theory of perception because truly we can think and we can control our process of thinking but we intellectually don't have much power over our perception. For example, I can decide on thinking about a principle of a triangle, that all of its three sides equal to 180 degrees. I can decide when I should think and when not to. However, when I look at the piece of paper which has a triangle drawn on it, I can't help but perceive a triangle whenever I look at it. Even if I wanted to perceive a square or a circle, I would still see a triangle on that same piece of paper. Furthermore, in my mind I can think of a square or a circle but my eyes would still perceive a triangle when it looked at that piece of paper. Moreover, there is another point implied by Locke which is that we only have the idea of what we perceive directly through our senses. There are often cases that our perception and idea of an external object might be deficient or incomplete because of the way we perceived it. For example, the idea that I have of the object might be a false or deceitful idea of the object caused by optical illusions.
According to Locke, in order to think of a notion one must have perceived (experienced) it, and to understand the notion one must think of it and have an idea of it. "Whoever reflects on what passes in his own mind, cannot miss it (perception): and if he does not reflect, all the words in the world, cannot make him have any notion of it." (Locke, pp142) Here Locke argues that the mind can only perceive its own ideas and no matter how much it is intended to explain the notion by others ideas, the person will never get the same idea of the notion as he would when he perceived the notion and acquired the idea of the notion himself. For example, one might try to explain to a blinded person who has been blind at birth what the color red is like, but he will never have the idea of the color red as he would when he perceived by his sighted eyes. Likewise, bats have an advanced sonor system, or that dolphins have a magnetic communication system, that we are not capable of perceiving or sensing, therefore we do not have the idea of what it is like to have those kinds of systems. We can only relate to those systems by 'abstraction'. Furthermore, Locke emphasizes on ideas by arguing that ideas of external objects has qualities. These are mainly divided into primary qualities and secondary qualities.
Primary qualities are those which produce simple ideas in us like solidity, extension, figure, motion, or rest and number. Those qualities are considered as inseparable from the body no matter how much force is exerted to the particles of the matter, these qualities are inseparable from every particle of matter. Following Locke's example, if a grain of wheat is taken and divided into two parts, each and every part would still retain its solidity, extension, figure and mobility, divide it again, and it retains the same qualities. Furthermore, those qualities that have powers to produce sensations in us through their primary qualities, such as colors, sounds, tastes, etc. are called secondary qualities. "Colors and smells, may be understood also of tastes, and sounds, and other the like sensible qualities.; which, whatever reality we by mistake, attribute to them, are in truth nothing than the objects themselves, but powers to produce various sensations in us, and depend on those primary qualities"(Locke, pp136). Here, Locke argues that secondary qualities are those qualities that have no exact resemblance of them. Their validity are open to doubt. The bulk, number, figure, and motion of parts of a chair, or a glass are in them whether anyone perceives them or not, they according to Locke really exist in them. However, the color, heat, or texture are not really in them. Because if you were to take away the sensations of them, let the eyes be blinded, and deprive tactile sensations, those particular ideas would vanish and would be reduced to their primary qualities, bulk, figure and motion of parts. However, there is one important point that I would like to make which is that, when Locke accounts for primary and secondary qualities it seems as if he refers to primary qualities as those ideas that can be perceived by more than one sense, and secondary qualities as those ideas that can be perceived by only one sense. So it seems as though one of the main difference between primary and secondary qualities is there character that secondary qualities are only perceived by one single sense therefore, the absence of that organ cancels out its resemblance of the external object, as it can not rely on any other sense to be perceived. Finally, Locke also states that there is a third form of quality, which is "the power that is in any body, by reason of the particular constitution of its primary qualities, to make such a change in the bulk, figure, texture, and motion of another body, as to make it operate on our sense, differently from what it did before. Thus the Sun has a power to make wax white, and fire to make lead fluid."(Locke, page 140) These qualities are usually regarded as powers by Locke.
Final discussion on sense perception of Locke is the interrelation of sensory perception and judgment. Judgment in many ways effects the way we perceive ideas by sensation. Often, the perceptions of the ideas that we are more interested in at some moment in time subjugates other perceptions of ideas received by sensation. This is caused because of our judgment of ideas. For example, a man who reads a book with attention and care, takes little notice of the characters, or sounds around him and takes more notice in the ideas that he receives from the book. Likewise, there are some other actions in us that we take little notice of, like habits. Very rarely we realize that we cover our eyes with out eye-lids, without being aware or realizing that we are in the dark (Locke, pp145). The way I see it is that these habits happen to us so many times before in the past that we gain kind of an immunity towards them, therefore, we seem to ignore their perception unless we precisely reflect on them. We perceive them but we are not totally aware of their perception because its perception is suppressed by the other perception that are more recent to our knowledge. Wallace H.Provost explains referring to Locke's concept of perception, "it is an immediate connection between sensation and a pre-established judgment. The judgment must already exist, having been developed through previous experience. Then and only then can the mind arrive at the perception. This makes sense if you consider that the first time you experience something it takes a period of time before you realize exactly what it is you have perceived."(Provost) Here Provost means that we first experience and acquire sensory perception and only then through reflection the mind arrive at the 'perception' and thus, makes a judgment about the idea.
As a whole, Locke points out that to have an idea it is absolutely necessary to have experienced some kind of notion of it. Moreover, he argues that it is only possible to have ideas about external objects and we can not be absolutely certain of the existence of material, external objects. Therefore, we only acquire ideas and act upon ideas in our minds. More precisely, we first perceive an idea, through sensations, and then reflect upon them. Moreover, Locke identifies two main types of qualities of ideas, primary qualities and secondary qualities. One main difference I find between primary qualities and secondary qualities is that primary qualities can be sensed through more than one sense therefore, it seems as though the validity of these primary qualities are more reliable than the validity of secondary qualities. Another theory Locke points out is that by judgment, we give priority to some ideas that we perceive, while others are pushed to the sidelines in our ignorance.