Virginity obviously held meaning for the ancient Greeks, considering the amount of material that reflects the topic and it still has cultural and social relevance today. Most evidence comes from male writers as shown by Doherty. Should this effect the analysis of such sources, as it is a potential bias? When looking at law opposed to 'entertainment', virginity has important connotations concerning marriagabilty, the reputation and retribution for the girl and consequences for the father who may have wanted to arrange a marriage to improve his connections (Sissa (b) 1990: 87-88). To discuss virginities importance in myth it will be necessary to investigate areas where virginity as a topic is underplayed or surpassed by another issue as well as why there is such a frequent occurrence of young virgins in mythology.
Considering firstly, possible explanations for the extent of represented virginity in myth, one could be that the myths served to educate young people. What happens to girls who lose their virginity before marriage but also what happens if you reject marriage and therefore try to remain in the virginal state. An example of the latter is Hippolytus. He wishes to remain loyal to the goddess Artemis, therefore incurring the anger of Aphrodite. "... I destroy all those who with arrogant pride appose me." (Euripides, Hippolytus 6). Not only is he killed but also his step-mother commits suicide and his father is ruined. It is a strong image and it seems hard to believe this is what people actually thought could happen. The genre of theatre can not be accepted as universal truth, as plays have a purpose and that is to entertain. However it is known from medical sources that it was not only society that pushed for the convention of marriage. Marriage and therefore sex was suggested by doctors as a cure for some maladies at the time (Lefkowitz 1981: 13-15). Myths concerning girls who stray from what is expected of them, appear to preach that parthenoi who move out of male control also place "...themselves beyond male protection..." (Deacy 1997: 44). Therefore they encourage pursuit from gods and the like. This reflects the view some people have about rape in society today; the person might have brought it on themselves somehow. This more subliminal message is much easier to believe that this is how the ancient Greeks could have thought, as from what we know of society, women were often kept indoors to avoid "seduction or rape" (Deacy 1997:49). Mythology of young women who have been led astray always end in misery for the girl involved (Sissa (b) 1990: 358); there is no happy ending for girls who do not follow convention. Overall the myths seem to promote 'normal' marriages as the best option for happiness and health. Therefore young girls especially, know from an early age that marriage is their target (Dowden 1989: 144). It is an essential part of their transition into womanhood.
Virginity also appears to have an important role in ritual and tradition. There were three virgin goddesses, therefore the likelihood of virgins playing a role in the religion at the time appears high. Athena, Hestia and Artemis are outlined in the Homeric Hymns, each hymn not failing to mention this unique characteristic. Apollo was also linked to virginity in a way, as his priestess at Delphi was a virgin. She was linked to the god like a husband, therefore as in the case before marriage she had to be a virgin and once united remain loyal in the union (Sissa (b) 1990: 345). Concerning human sacrifice in myth it is almost always a females (Doherty 2001: 79) such as Iphigenia or Polyxena. Euripides Hecabe tells the story of what happens to the women of Troy's royal household. Polyxena is sentenced to be sacrificed, this will be discussed in more detail later on. A tradition for Athenian girls before marriage involved being part of a Bear ritual in Brauron (Dowden 1989: 21). Herodotus writes about another ritual involving maidens in Libya. In honour of Athena, girls were grouped and then fought each other. True virgins were easily picked out, as to bleed, or to die from bleeding is impossible for a virgin (Herodotus 4.180). Other tests to judge virginity have also been noted. One such example is that of trial by the Styx. The river would engulf the lie and the liar if they entered the water with a false testament around their neck (Sissa (a) 1990: 345). A further explanation of why virginity appears such an important theme is perhaps the Greeks found the virginal state intriguing? There seems to be been a fair amount written about virgin suicide, all later linked medically to the way the female anatomy works. Hanging is agreed upon as a 'suitable' death for a virgin (King 1993: 119). Those who did not bleed in life choose not to in death. Hanging therefore has several connotations and is used effectively by Phaedra in Euripides Hippolytus to falsely convict him of rape, as hanging is also an excepted response to "unwanted sex". Medical practitioners of the time thought that the state that led to suicide, hysteria, was brought about by excess blood in the body but also by movement of the womb (King 1998: 47). The cure, as previously mentioned, practices a social response. The best way to get rid of the excess blood is to 'bleed', to bleed you need to have sex and to do that you should be married (Lefkowitz 1981: 13-15).
To investigate from the alternative perspective, that virginity perhaps was not as important as it might seem in mythology, firstly a theory that maybe the myths were more about transition and initiation than virginity? Were the tales told to outline the differences expected of males and females (Doherty 2001: 78)? Although 'acting the bear' at Brauron or Mounchia may not seem appropriate for women, let alone young girls, the process was to drive the madness and energy out before settling down (Dowden 1998: 102-103). Xenophon agreed girls needed to be tamed before becoming women (Oeconomicus, 7.10). Virginity is itself a transitional stage but what proportion of mythology concerning virgins is about a change they go through rather than the importance of the purified state and the social stigma attached to early defloration? In Aeschylus's Prometheus Bound, Io goes through a dramatic transition from human to cow. Lefkowitz agrees that "The myth - and ritual - express the mysterious change of status that occurs at puberty."
It is also possible that mythology containing young women uses them rather to show social status and hierarchy rather than prove or explain points about virginity. For example the Homeric Hymn to Demeter (2), shows that even on Olympus goddesses such as Persephone are controlled, 'protected', by their male superiors. She is given away with no choice to unite with Hades, an arranged marriage. Human sacrifices are of young unmarried girls "...rather than a mature, married and child bearing gyn
..." This suggests that parthenoi are the lowest among free people. This can be proven in the case of Polyxena. She claims her life is "nothing now but shame and misery..." (Euripides, Hecabe 211). Her previous status of princess of Troy relied solely upon the male guardians in her family (Lefkowitz 1981: 8). She is no one now they are dead is happier to die than remain in that limbo. Iphigenia also puts little value on her life. She willingly goes to sacrifice because she will spare the lives of many 'infinitely' more valuable men. (Lefkowitz 1981: 10). Lefkowitz goes on to say that "Marriage is death [for a woman, in myth] either literally, or figuratively." This would maybe suggest that girls did in fact have more of an identity than married women. However this could also be interpreted to mean that what little feeling of self females had when they were girls was completely removed by the presence of a husband.
Lastly is it not possible that any myth involving a young unmarried woman might stray across the topic of virginity? When looking more closely at the Hymn to Demeter (2) the 'rape of Persephone' is more of a base setting for the explanation of the Eleusinian Mysteries (Doherty 2001: 21). Perhaps virgins are so involved in myth because that was the only universal way of showing that the character was a young woman? If for some particular reason a single female was needed to illustrate a part in drama for example, a virgin was used as "...spinsterhood....has no role in Greek mythology and ideals." (Dowden 1989: 115). Concerning the afore mentioned ritual 'trial' of virginity in the Styx, people were also trialled for other 'crimes'. It was not only maidens tested by the waters of the river (Sissa (a) 1990:345) it perhaps is coincidence then that stories surviving of parthenoi tried this way is when they are being judged for virginity?
In conclusion what the Greeks thought about virginity in everyday life is unclear, however myths have survived well and tentative analysis can and has been drawn from them. (Doherty 2001: 78). Evidence from the ancient world concerning women often conflicts. Legal and literary evidence suggest that women led different lives. Evidence from the arts however is unlikely to represent the whole female population and instead focuses on particularly "...strong, dominant women [or large]...invisible groups" Myths can not reveal whether the rite came first and the myth built up around it or if the rite grew out of an original myth (Dowden 1998: 105). Overall although it appears mythology can not by itself show why virginity was such an important theme, the sheer amount of it and when analysed with other sources can give some indication of the beliefs of the ancient Greeks.