See attached.
The linear part of the standard curve can be identified with a concentration range of 10-20 g/ml, with consideration for the accuracy of the following calculations.
The dilutions that appeared to give the most accurate values were plate 3 (x2 dilution), plate 4 (x4 dilution) and plate 5 (x8 dilution).
Results from unknown 1.
Results from unknown 2
The difference in concentration between the averages of unknown 1 and unknown 2 is , therefore it has approximately a 25 fold difference.
The competitive nature of the antibody and the enzyme will cause the experiment to continue progressively over time. If the reaction time is allowed to differ in each well, the results would be inaccurate and therefore comparing concentrations be invalid.
The ELISA has the advantage of being able to detect the antigen and the quantities of it in an unknown, but simple solution, whereas Western blots are only good for detecting small amounts of protein in a complex sample, which is not as useful a method for quantifying.
In order to determine whether or not the monoclonal antibodies recognise Protein X in its pure and denatured forms, an ELISA would have to be set up, similar to the one carried out in this practical. The antibodies would be diluted along the rows, with a duplicate row to improve accuracy. So in total, four rows of wells will be used with two different experiments being carried out. The wells would then be combined with the two variants of protein X and the level of agglutination would be measured. This would allow a comparison to be measured between the reaction with the pure and denatured forms of Protein X, and show whether the antibodies recognise both forms. The predicted result would be that only one form of the protein X would be recognised as monoclonal antibodies can only recognise one part of the protein, and therefore cannot differentiate between the two.
It is a good idea to test the serum of an animal for antibodies against a protein of interest before injecting it with the antigen, as once it has been injected it could cause the antibodies to agglutinate in the blood in the presence of the antigen.
The production of polyclonal antibodies usually requires a large amount of pure protein, whereas monoclonal antibodies require smaller amounts of impure protein. This is due to the fact that polyclonal antibodies are produced by many different B lymphocytes, and polyclonal preparations contain a mixture of antibodies that recognise different parts of the protein. This means that more amounts of pure protein will be needed in order to segregate the specific polyclonal antibody needed. In contrast, monoclonal antibodies are synthesized by identical B cells grown in cell culture, of which all recognise the same part of the protein. Therefore the same amount of antibodies would be produced, regardless of the volume or purity of the protein used for production.