Joseph Lister was born in Upton, Essex, on April 5 th, 1827, and is considered to be the inventor of antiseptic surgery. He started his career studying medicine at the University College, which allowed him to work as a clinical surgeon in Glasgow, 1860.
His work brought him into regular contact with people with serious afflictions at the infirmary, where amputations had no more than a 60% survival rate. Operations to the abdomen and cranium were not even attempted because of the enormous risk of infection. Lister tended to experiment with his new techniques on compound fracture victims, due to high mortality rates, and the frequency in an industrial city such as Glasgow, made repeated experiments possible.
At this moment in time, Pasteur destroyed the theory that infection was due to oxidation of the wound, or the 'spontaneous generation' of pathogens. Influenced by Pasteur, Lister then began to experiment with chemical methods of preventing the infection of wounds by airborne microorganisms. His early experiments involved coating of wounds with carbolic acid (phenol, a coal tar derivative), which would form antiseptic crusts of coagulated blood on wounds. The beginning attempts at this procedure were unsuccessful, but success rates continued to increase. His method was also applied to tuberculosis of wrist joints, which saved many lives, and also hands from amputation. The problem with using carbolic acid however was the fact that it was toxic and the damage caused by the acid treatment could also damage the body's repair mechanisms.
This led to the development of a number of antiseptic wound dressings that were designed to provide a disinfectant barrier between the wound and the surrounding air, whilst allowing a minimal amount of the acid to enter the damaged tissue. One of the dressings used was made of shellac (plaster) mixed with 25% carbolic acid, spread on calico and coated with gutta-percha dissolved in benzene. This allowed the carbolic acid to prevent bacteria from entering the dressing, and the gutta-percha prevented the carbolic acid from entering the wound. Lister also introduced the sterilisation of surgical instruments with heat and carbolic acid and the frequent cleaning of the surgeon's hands during an operation with a mild antiseptic solution. A carbolic acid spray for use in the operating theatre was tried, but abandoned because of the dangerous side effects (carbolic acid inhalation).
Lister also improved ligatures, which could be fully embedded in the wound without having to worry about infection. He also introduced the first drainage tubes to Britain, which he used in an operation on the Queen Victoria, as he was chief surgeon to the monarch.
Although he received much criticism and hostility from the scientific community, it was mostly aimed towards his 'germ theory' rather than carbolic treatment itself. However, his academic achievements were recognised and he became the president of the Royal Society (1895-1900) and the British Association for the Advancement of Science (1896), as well as being a founding member of the British Institute of Preventative Medicine.