Human African Trypanosomiasis (HAT), also known as sleeping sickness, is caused by protozoan parasites of the genus 'Trypanosoma' and is a major cause of human ill health and mortality. The World Health Organisation (WHO) have placed HAT within the ten major health problems facing mankind, alongside malaria, cancer, and heart disease (W.E Kershaw,1970).
The disease itself is caused by two subspecies of the hemoflagellates (blood- motile) trypanosomes, the East African variant caused by Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense and the West African variant caused by Trypanosoma brucei gambiense.
HAT can be found in 36 countries in sub- Saharan Africa, which shows its importance as a human pathogen. During one year around 300 - 500,000 people develop the disease, there are 50,000 deaths, and 60 million people are at risk from the disease (WHO, 1986). The disease affects people living in about one third of Africa, being prevalent in areas between latitudes 14 N and 29 S of the equator. The disease affected a smaller percentage of people between 1949 and 1965, but has since increased in recorded cases. There are many possible reasons for such an increase, such as the breakdown of disease surveillance when public health systems are disrupted, for example, changes in climate and vegetation, migration of infected cattle, and increases in host susceptibility (Kuzoe, 1993). The inadequate financial allocation by the local governments has also played a large factor.
The disease is contracted via the bite of the blood-sucking tsetse fly of the glossina species which remains infective for life. The tsetse fly contracts the parasite via infected animals such as cattle, and then acts as a vector in which T.b.rhodiense and T.b.gambiense can develop before being transferred to the blood system in humans. The lifecycle of the parasite is as described in the following diagram.
A factor which may be important in determining whether or not the disease develops after the tsetse fly bite occurs is the number of metacyclic forms that are sinjected by the insect vector. Fairbairn & Burt (1946) concluded that the minimum infective dose for man was 300-450 metacyclic trypanosomes.
Infection occurs in three stages, the first being the initial tsetse bite.When the tsetse probes the subcutaneous tissues, trypanosomes become lodged and create a 'trypanosomal chancre'. It takes between five to fifteen days for a hard, painful, red nodule to appear on the skin, with heat and swelling that spread to the surrounding tissues. The second stage is referred to as the haemolymphatic stage, in which the parasites multiply in the individual's bloodstream and are then carried to the lymph nodes and other organs such as the spleen, liver, heart and endocrine system. Symptoms for this stage are fever, lymphadenopathy, and pruritus. After a few weeks, the parasites cross the blood brain barrier (BBB) to invade the CNS, known as the meningoencephalitic stage. The distinction between the haemolytic and meningoencephalitic stages is not always clear, especially in T. b. rodesiense infection where one stage may run into the next (Atouguia and Kennedy, 2000 and Kennedy, 2005).
When the late stage is reached most regions of the CNS begin to malfunction. Once this occurs, the individual may experience mental and psychiatric symptoms such as anxiety, irritability and hallucinations and delirium, a wide range of motor symptoms such as tremors, muscle twitching and abnormal movements, painful peripheral sensory disturbances, visual problems such as optic neuritis, double vision and papilloedema and the characteristic sleep disturbances that originally gave the disease its other name, 'African Sleeping Sickness'. The later symptoms are generally an uncontrollable urge to sleep, with nocturnal insomnia and daytime somnolence. If untreated the individual will progressively deteriorate and develop seizures, coma and incontinence, cerebral oedema and finally die (Kennedy,2006).
The first indication on whether a person has contracted HAT is the geographical location that they live in, and whether the disease is endemic or epidemic. Because the early symptoms are quite non-specific, other causes of disease must be excluded. Malaria and HAT can co-infect, treating a fever with anti-malarials could be wrongly interpreted as successfully treating a person who has HAT. Other diseases that have to be excluded are leishmaniasis, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, toxoplasmosis, tuberculosis and typhoid fever (Atouguia and Kennedy, 2000).
The diagnosis relies upon demonstrating the presence of trypanosomes by microscopic examination of chancre fluid, lymph node aspirates, blood, bone marrow, or, in the late stages of infection, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). For blood samples, these include centrifugation followed by examination of the buffy coat; mini anion-exchange/centrifugation; and the Quantitative Buffy Coat (QBC) technique.
Spinal fluid concentration techniques include centrifugation followed by examination of the sediment.
Taking the above into consideration, the most efficient way of determining whether a person has HAT is by identifying the trypanosomes in the peripheral blood or lymph node aspirates (if the lymph nodes are clinically enlarged) using light microscopy. In T. b. rhodesiense disease it is quite easily done due to the persistent parasitaemia, but not so easily in T. b. gambiense where the parasitaemia is cyclical. When this method can't be applied, serological testing is carried out using the card agglutination trypanosomiasis test (CATT) (Truc et al., 2002).
The correct stage diagnosis of HAT is critical for the treatment of the disease, however there is no solid definition. The WHO criteria for diagnosing the late stages of disease require the presence of trypanosomes in the CSF and/or a white blood cell (WBC) count in the CSF of >5/l (WHO, 1998). However, researchers in West Africa with T. b. gambiense disease have chosen to use a figure of >20/l in the CSF (Lejon et al., 2003). Raised intrathecal IgM levels in the CSF have also been identified in HAT patients with late stage disease and suggests the possibility of CSF invasion (Lejon et al., 2003). Therefore a latex agglutination test for IgM amounts has been successfully carried out in field conditions and has the potential both for detecting and monitoring HAT.
Currently, there are no vaccines or drugs available to prevent infection of HAT. There are however, drugs available for treating it, but they are scarce, difficult to administer, and sometimes dangerous. One of the original drugs developed to combat sleeping sickness, atoxyl, contained arsenic and caused blindness in hundreds of patients in 1932. A drug called melarsoprol was developed to prevent these side effects, and is currently the drug of choice for the final stage of the disease. Suramin, pentamidine, and berenil have been used to treat, and sometimes cure, within the haemolymphatic stages of the infection.
The drug trybizine has tested successfully for East African sleeping sickness in research animals. Research and development of drugs could be considered minimal as they are intended to treat people in under-developed countries, and would not be considered to be a profitable venture by many pharmaceutical companies. Eflornithine, an anti-trypanosomal drug has been observed to be effective in treating late-stage  T.b.gambiense infection. The drug is considered to be expensive and therefore not widely available to areas where HAT is endemic. However, in March 2001, the World Health Organization reached an agreement with Bristol-Myers-Squibb, Dow Chemical, Akorn Manufacturing, and the French-German company Aventis to produce and donate 60,000 doses of eflornithine to help with efforts to combat HAT.
Due to the long symptom-free periods following infection, periodic screening would be a good way to go about detecting HAT and establish reliable estimates of incidence. Currently, screening is more focused on high-risk areas. As a result, reported cases under-represent the actual level of incidence. As screening and treatment are decreased or stopped in certain areas, the disease intensifies. In 1999, 40,000-45,000 cases were reported, and only three to four million people were screened out of an estimated 60 million at risk. ().
Economic and social factors make effective vector-control strategies difficult. There are successful vector control programs, but exist in less than 2% of the areas where the disease is endemic (). Ground spraying of insecticides, aerial spraying, the use of cloth baits (cloth sprayed with insecticide), and the use of live baits (cattle sprayed with insecticide) have shown some success. Transegenic techniques, such as introducing into tsetse flies foreign genes that will restrict the tsetse flies ability to survive, reproduce, or transmit pathogens, appear to be a promising area in research for the near future