Spoken discourse analysis is a complex area of linguistic study, which considers a wide variety of features and characteristics of spoken language. For the purposes of this assignment, two pieces of spoken discourse have been analysed to look at the differences between them. The contexts of the two extracts are completely diverse; the first is an extract from a relaxed but informal conversation for the purposes of an assignment between a group of five friends. The other is a formal political radio interview between the Prime Minister Tony Blair and the interviewer John Humphreys.
One of the main considerations that has to be immediately taken into account is the issue of sociolect, which is important when analysing the speech features of different people. This is principally the style of speech that individuals adopt during a certain situation. In the group interaction, the members are fairly good friends but the style of speech that they use with each other is likely to be different to that of which they use with their close friends. Similarly, the speech style that Tony Blair adopts in his interview with John Humphreys is likely to be extremely different to that which he would use with his family. This therefore emphasises the fact that people often change their speech style and lexis to suit certain situations.
There are many different approaches applied to the linguistic study of speech. Ethnography of speaking is very influential in the analysis of spoken data and focuses on language using as a cultural practise. Hymes was involved with this analysis and proposed three rules of speaking:
Hymes also developed the 'SPEAKING grid', which is a general framework for analysing different varieties of speech situations, for example where the situation took place, who took part and the overall purpose of the speech event. This analysis can immediately be applied to the group interaction. This took place in the living room of one of the participant's houses and the members of the group sat in a relaxed structure, either on the floor or on the sofa, surrounding the table upon which the tape recorder was positioned. The extract of speech was taken approximately five minutes into the recording and therefore the participants had become more relaxed with the overall situation and the flow of speech had become fairly consistent. However, each individual was still aware of the presence of the tape throughout the recording and therefore there was the constant influence of the observer's paradox in that the speech was less natural than in a normal conversation the participants would have with each other. There was therefore a greater awareness of trying to avoid using swear words and slang. In comparison, nothing to this level of detail is known about the political interview. It is not known, for example, where in relation to each other the two participants were sitting and therefore whether they were able to form regular eye contact. Consequently, it is much harder to analyse this interaction, as unlike the other, there is no scope for connecting the speech features and characteristics to the context and situation of the interaction. Ethnography is also concerned with other features such as the genre of the speech event and rules of interaction, which are discussed further on in other types of analysis.
Another approach is conversation analysis, which ignores where the data was collected and is therefore seen as a micro-analytic approach. Most advances in conversation analysis were made by Sacks, Schegloff and Jefferson who saw this approach as a first step towards achieving a 'naturalistic observational discipline to deal with details of social interaction in a rigorous, empirical and formal way' (Coulthard, 1985:59) Conversation analysis looks at such linguistic features as turn-taking, whereby people negotiate who speaks when. Turn-taking in the group interaction was fairly disjointed in that all of the members of the group had an opinion on most of the topics raised, leading to a large quantity of overlaps and interruptions. In some situations, these features can be seen as disturbing the flow of conversation but in this particular exchange, they often helped to create good conversational cohesion as people were continually taking over the turn of speech. Consequently, there were few pauses, indicating a continuous flow of dialogue throughout the exercise. Many of the interruptions in this interaction were in fact as a result of large amounts of laughter from the whole group, which at various points caused breaks in speech of up to three seconds. This laughter showed the relaxed atmosphere of the interaction and was often influential in encouraging the flow of speech as it motivated speakers to continue as people were obviously interested in what was being said. In some instances, the interruptions to speech actually changed the whole direction of the conversational topic, for example when J responds to a previous utterance by stating 'I know, when I was 18...', N interrupts by stating 'that mum...' and the conversation then flows on from this point. The linguists Zimmerman and West have the opinion that interruptions are a violation of turn-taking, as well as being 'a hostile act designed to deny the current speaker their legitimate right to the floor' (Cameron, 2001:92) This may apply to some speech extracts, but in the case of the group interaction, it is unlikely that the interruptions were an act of hostility but in fact just a large group of people all trying to get their point across and keep the conversation flowing for the purposes of the assignment. The political interview however, was entirely different as a result of a completely different conversational goal. Politicians are constantly aware that interviewers are most likely trying to obtain damaging admissions from them which will cause media interest and create friction between the different governmental parties and the public as a whole. (Cameron, 2001) This can be seen as the interviewer John Humphreys consistently interrupts Tony Blair mid-speech, preventing the Prime Minister from concluding his statements and answering the questions. By doing this, the interviewer is working to antagonise the interviewee to such an extent that they give away some element of detail that should not be exposed. This interview therefore closely relates to the opinion of Zimmerman and West in that these interruptions are rude and discourteous, as can be seen from the example below;
Overlaps are not seen to be present in the political interview, where as they are found consistently throughout the group interaction. These occur when the new speaker comes in where they think the other speaker is about to finish. This is therefore an unintended error but in most cases is unavoidable, mainly due to a miscalculation of timing, for example;
In this instance, it is obvious that N felt that M had finished her turn at the point of saying 'cat' and therefore took over the turn, unaware that M was still to say 'though'. This can instantly be seen as an unintended timing error, with no rude intent. Similarly, at various points in the interaction, there are complete overlaps of speech whereby almost everyone is speaking about a different topic or are referring back to something previously mentioned, for example;
This shows the difficulty with having such a large number of people involved in an interaction as here, M is talking about one topic where as N and D are talking about something completely different at exactly the same time. The speech of all three is consequently interwoven due to constant interruptions and therefore the discussion is completely disjointed.
Adjacency pairs are another prominent feature of the conversation analysis approach and are concerned with how participants of the conversation position themselves socially in relation to their interlocutors (McCarthy, 1998.) The political speech involves long sections of speech from the Prime Minister, mainly followed by a question from the interviewer. In the majority of cases, the adjacency pairs are either an accusation or opinion from the interviewer followed by a denial or agreement from the PM. The group extract consisted of a large number of adjacency pairs, although these mainly involved opinions and subsequent agreements, for example;
The above extract shows a consistent flow of adjacency pairs where the participants are continually expressing opinions, which are then responded to by other members of the group, showing a high level of conversational cohesion.
Speaker selection is important in this approach although with there only being two participants in the political exchange, it was always the other participant who took over the turn. In the group interaction, it was mainly self-selection as when a question was asked or an opinion was expressed, it was spoken to the group as a whole, not individual people and therefore it was up to anybody to take over the turn.
Another approach to the analysis of spoken discourse is interactional sociolinguistics, which focuses on looking at the speech features people use when interacting with each other. Turn-taking (as previously covered with conversation analysis) as well as the use of immediate responses and minimal responses are a large part of this approach. In the group exchange, these minimal responses or back-channels were usually made by two or more people simultaneously as a reaction to a previous statement, for example the use of 'yeah':
Throughout the group interaction, it is clear that each member was pursuing the same conversational goal for the purpose of the assignment and the use of these minimal responses are a clear indication of cooperation between the group members. They are used to motivate the speaker to continue by showing understanding and interest in what they are saying, without the listener wishing to take over the speaking turn. (McCarthy, 1998) There is no evidence of this in the political speech however, as the goal of the interviewer is to extract as much information as possible from the Prime Minister. Therefore the interviewer has no interest in showing agreement and understanding to the Prime Minister; rather he aims to be abrupt and argumentative in order to provoke a reaction which could cause controversy and debate.
Tag questions are another feature of this approach but were not seen to be present in much quantity in either of the two contrasting speech extracts. In the group exchange, only one tag question was asked when M enquires, 'no wasn't actually his baby, was it?' but even this comes across as being more of a statement than actually requiring a response. This lack of tag questions highlights the confidence that people had in what they were saying. Similarly, the political exchange did not contain any tag questions, possibly as the Prime Minister cannot be seen to be unsure about what he is saying and the use of a tag question would give the interviewer ammunition to think just that. Hedges are another feature of interactional sociolinguistics and are used frequently by the Prime Minister as the majority of his responses to the interviewee's questions begin with 'Well,...' This gives him the scope to explain both sides of his argument without having to offer a direct answer. Tony Blair's avoidance of answering many questions with a yes or no is known as the art of evasion, which many politicians use in order to distance themselves from making any concrete claims which could be controversial. Even when the interviewer asks, 'So was that a yes or no then?' Tony Blair still avoids being direct and answers 'Of course, I have already said to you ...' Hedges were used in the group interaction although were primarily in the form of the word 'like' for example when N states, 'it's crazy how many people are still in it (1) like considering I didn't used to watch it for like 6 or 7 years'.
The relaxed nature of the group interaction led to a large use of what is generally considered as colloquial lexis, for example 'where the hell'. Similarly, the use of contractions such as 'Harold 's great' and 'We 've converted you...' are seen constantly throughout the group interaction, as are such examples as 'I wanna be...', 'she's gonna be...' and the conjunction 'cos'. Due to the more formal nature of the political interview, the use of contractions are proportionally used far less. Nevertheless, they are still present in the speech of the Prime Minister but are mainly used in general explanation where as the expanded forms, for example 'we said we would cut... ' are used in cases where more emphasis is required to make a valid statement.
In such an informal setting, there is less pressure on the group participants to speak in the correct standard way and therefore some of the utterances have an incorrect word order. For example, 'that is yeah I think a crap storyline', which should be constructed as 'yeah, I think that is a crap storyline' to make complete grammatical sense. However, due to the relaxed nature of the interaction, the utterance still made sense to the remaining members of the group and the conversation continued regardless. Throughout the group interaction there was generally a fair use of conjunctions in order to link sentences together, although there was usually only one conjunction in each utterance. In the case for example, of 'I think you should get back into it so you can join our conversations'. The use of conjunctions in the political interview are found in greater quantity than in the group interaction and are often used to link ideas together, for example, 'I think most people believe that their policies are uncosted and unspecific and on those issues I feel we are very strong.' This is one of the shortest examples but in come cases over three or four conjunctions are used to form one long sentence and therefore create a high level of cohesive speech.
Ellipsis is found in all types of interaction, where mainly the personal subject is omitted, as the meaning can be easily reconstructed from the original context. Once again, as a result of the more informal nature of the group interaction, ellipsis was commonplace. In one instance, for example, M states 'bit of affection' as a single utterance, which refers back to a previous statement and therefore maintains understanding throughout the group. The Prime Minister in his responses to his interviewer however, generally avoid any instances of ellipsis as he has to ensure that he makes his constructions as complete as possible to avoid any potential misunderstanding.
John Humphreys has the task of trying to extract as much information as possible from the Prime Minister and uses certain techniques to his advantage to do just this. One of the most noticeable is his utilisation of repetition, which he uses to hit home his points, for example 'You had said we have no plans to increase taxes at all. You had said our proposals do not include raising taxes. You had said...'
There is also the approach of pragmatics, which concerns itself with 'how language can be used to do things and mean things in real-world situations' (Cameron, 2001:68) It looks at how language users get from what is said to what is meant, as in many cases, the meaning of an utterance can change depending on the circumstance. Pragmatics is not concerned therefore with the literal meaning but what the speaker actually intends to do with their words (Cook, 2003) Involved are such features as illocutionary acts, which are the act in saying something, for example whether what you say is meant as an accusation, request, warning etc. In the group discussion, the majority of illocutionary acts were claims and acknowledgements, for example;
(claim)
(acknowledgement)
In this case, if the second part of the interaction was taken literally, people would presume that Dylan was actually 'hot' where as the speaker intends that he looked very good looking in what he was wearing.
The political exchange was very different in comparison, however, in that the interviewer John Humphreys generally accuses Tony Blair of having said something, to which the Prime Minister often has to defend or deny the claims and then put across his own point of view.
In conclusion, it can be seen that these two extracts of speech are completely different, starting with the obvious macro difference of the context of the situations and then looking deeper into the micro differences such as overlapping and use of adjacency pairs. One of the main considerations that has to be taken into account is the fact that Tony Blair has a large amount of experience of interviews and public speaking. Therefore, as seen throughout this analysis, his speech was extremely competent and proficient and lacking in many linguistic errors. The group activity, however, is unlikely to have been carried out by any of the participants before and therefore they are unlikely to have had any experience of this type of exchange. Even though the two situations were extremely different, however, there were still slight similarities between the two in some cases. The main similarity was the use of contractions, as surprisingly the Prime Minister used a huge amount throughout his speech, such as 'we've' and 'shouldn't' and only used the expanded versions in order to strongly emphasise his point of view. All of the different concepts and approaches to spoken discourse were looked at in order to gain a wide perspective of the diversity of the two extracts. The main problem encountered with the analysis was the fact that, due to personal involvement in the group interaction, more information was known about the context of the situation and therefore more linkages could be made between this and the features of speech. It was therefore harder to accurately analyse the political interview, as less background information was known. The limitation in only being able to analyse short extracts meant that there was little scope to look for different patterns in the speech. Interactional sociolinguistics, for example, is highly concerned with the differences between the use of features by males and females. Lakoff claimed that females use more tag questions and hedges than men because they are more tentative in their speech and that they use minimal responses to support and encourage where as males use them mainly to agree to a statement or admission. Due to the limited data available, there is little evidence of this from these two extracts but analysis of longer extracts may prove otherwise. However, all in all, many general comparisons and contrasts were able to be made between the two extracts.