In order to fulfil the criteria of the assignment, a suitable question was devised so as to set out the aims of the study.
I believed it would be interesting to look at gender differences in this area of corpus linguistics and so chose an aspect of language which I felt had not been investigated to the same degree as some other features, to therefore try and distinguish any patterns or disparities in use. Originally, the question began as:
"How does the use of indefinite pronouns differ between males and females?"
However, I then decided that to further my study, it would be appropriate to extend the comparison to include age differences and so my final question was finalised as:
"How does the use of indefinite pronouns differ between two separate age categories of males and females?"
My main aim was to look at the core differences between the use of indefinite pronouns between males and females. Carrying out further searches would then enable me to extend this comparison by splitting the female and male categories into two separate age classes, 15-24 and 35-44 and compare any evident variations. Although these two age categories look fairly unsystematic, they were chosen for a specific purpose in that I wanted look at the use of indefinite pronouns by comparing young adults/ teenagers with the middle aged. I did not feel that the 0-14 category would provide much comparison as at the younger level of this category, the majority of children would not yet have acquired the use of pronouns and the 45-59 category contained a wider range of ages which would therefore not remain consistent with the two chosen categories, as there were more individuals in the group.
To carry out this investigation, I decided to use Sketch Engine (and therefore the British National Corpus), as I found that this was the most appropriate software to use for the purposes of this particular assignment.
The theme of this investigation was primarily chosen due to a large interest in gender differences in language analysis. Much research has been carried out on the different characteristics found in both the speech of males and females and one of the most influential linguists to have looked into this area of study was the American linguist Robin Lakoff. Lakoff did not carry out actual research but made basic assumptions and predictions and claimed that certain characteristics were abundant in women's language, to reflect their subordinate position in society. She identified "a number of linguistic features which were unified by their function of expressing a lack of confidence" (Holmes: 2001:287) Lakoff felt that these characteristics, including such features as hedges, tag questions and 'superpolite' forms, all conveyed the impression of uncertainty and tentativeness. Indefinite pronouns seem to be a similar feature to those which Lakoff describes as they are those words which replace nouns without identifying exactly which nouns they are taking the place of. They generally refer to an unknown or undetermined person, place or thing and consequently, they are not gender specific. (Grammar Glossary, 1997)
Many researchers who collected actual data, however, found that in some cases, the exact opposite to Lakoff's claims were true, for example in the case of tag questions. Lakoff maintained that women used more tag questions than men as a syntactic device to express uncertainty and to seek assurance. However, some researchers carried out investigations that proved that men used more tag questions than women where as others found that even though women did use more, they were using them for different linguistic purposes; women for politeness and affectiveness where as men for the expression of uncertainty. With all of these opposing theories existing, it felt appropriate to research the related language feature of indefinite pronouns in order to look myself into this controversial area of linguistic study.
McCarthy (1998) is one of very few researchers who has actually looked into the specific area of indefinite pronouns and from his work gives the impression of a completely different view point to that which Lakoff would likely have. He feels that the uses of such indefinite pronouns as 'something' or 'anything' are simply a form of vague language. He feels that in certain situations when people are interacting with each other, there are often instances where it would not be appropriate to be precise as it can sound overly authoritative, patronising and assertive, especially in informal contexts. Therefore, in order to avoid this perception about themselves, people often use vague language as a softening device. However, people often form the misconception that this use of lexis is a sign of careless thinking leading to a use of thoughtless expressions. (McCarthy, 1998)
To increase the depth of my study, I then felt it appropriate to look at whether age makes any difference as to the use of indefinite pronouns. There is a general agreement amongst linguists that middle aged people are more assertive and confident in their speech as they are at an age which is under pressure to conform to social norms and therefore are more likely to speak the standard form of the language. Consequently, they are generally more precise and informative with their language and therefore I felt it would be interesting to assess how their use of indefinite pronouns compared to the younger age category.
To begin the investigation, the first task was to locate the Sketch Engine website ().
The first search to be carried out was in order to investigate the use of indefinite pronouns by women and so the query was entered into the CQL box:
Once this query had been carried out, the view options were changed so that over 200 lines were displayed at the same time, therefore giving the opportunity to gain a wider perspective of the results obtained.
The frequency section of the page was then immediately located in order to be able to determine exactly which indefinite pronouns were the most frequently used by women. From this, the results were recorded so that they could be easily used for comparison during later investigations.
The exact same procedure was then repeated, although in this instance, the subject of the search was changed for the purpose of looking at the use of indefinite pronouns by males:
Following this enquiry, it was then appropriate to carry out the extension to the investigation by looking at the different age categories for both females and males:
Once all of these searches had been carried out, it then became appropriate to analyse and compare the data so as to observe any patterns or disparities relating to the frequency and context in which the indefinite pronouns were used.
Immediately after carrying out the searches, it was appropriate to compare the numerical differences between the male and female categories. The instantly noticeable difference between the use of indefinite pronouns was the fact that the overall search found 21,589 hits for the females and only 14,371 for the males. This therefore shows that from the corpus data, the females used over a third more indefinite pronouns that the males; a considerable difference.
'One' was the most frequently apparent indefinite pronoun to appear in each circumstance and was used in 8,749 concordance lines for the females, amounting to over one third of their total use of indefinite pronouns. When comparing the frequency lists, the first three pronouns were listed in exactly the same order, although in each case, the females used comparatively more. The fourth most common indefinite pronoun to occur in the female list was 'nothing' which appeared 1,123 times but this only appeared in fifth place in the males list, with far fewer appearances at 688. The pronoun 'somebody' appeared as the fourth most frequently used pronoun by males and was seen to appear 739 times but this was only the sixth most frequent pronoun in the female list, although was still found at a greater frequency of 893.
When looking at the context in which the indefinite pronouns were incorporated, large variations were noted. Tag questions were frequently apparent in the spoken data of the females, often following an indefinite pronoun, for example in the cases of;
The use of indefinite pronouns immediately indicates indecisiveness, in that the speaker is not completely sure of the context of the discussion and therefore uses such words as 'someone' or 'anything' in order to avoid talking about a person or situation directly. From many of the examples, however, these indefinite pronouns are also used in the same sentence as a tag question, increasingly showing the need for support and reassurance and therefore supporting Lakoff's claims concerning female's use of certain speech features to show hesitancy and lack of confidence in what they are saying. (Holmes, 2001) Although there is no obvious written evidence that the use of indefinite pronouns is a feature commonly used more frequently by women, I felt that from viewing many of the sample concordance lines, there were definite characteristic signs of being used as a source of uncertainty and indecision.
In complete comparison, question marks were not seen to be present in any of the initial sample concordance lines for the males and in fact it took 66 utterances before one was used in the same sentence as an indefinite pronoun. This therefore indicated that males seem more confident in their speech and possibly use indefinite pronouns as a form of laziness, therefore enabling them to avoid detailed descriptions. An example of this is in the case of 'but it's like everything else', where the use of 'everything' encompasses the whole variety of events or situations (depending on the context of the sentence), enabling the male speaker to avoid describing each one individually. Although there is evidence that suggests women also use indefinite pronouns as a relaxed way of describing something, it seems from this data that males are far more likely to do so, where as females use them in an uncertain or question situation where they are unsure of certain aspects of the context of the discussion. There is also a common link with McCarthy's theory as he feels that people use indirect pronouns in order to distance themselves from acting overly authoritative or assertive. As women are seen as more tentative speakers, it would seem therefore that they use more indefinite pronouns in order to do just that.
As the search was extended to look at the difference of uses between the age categories, there were some very interesting findings. In the 15-24 category, the number of hits for the females was 4,593 compared to 1361 for the males. In the 35-44 category, the females still displayed a large frequency of uses at a total of 4,379, although the difference between this and the male number of hits was comparatively smaller than seen at the previous age group, as their total was 3,026.
It was immediately noticed that the two female groups possessed extremely similar total hits, with the 15-24 group comprising of 4,593 and the 35-44 of 4,379. It was the male groupings which were seen to contain the greatest disparities in that the 15-24 group showed only 1,361 hits where as the 35-44 group had 3,026. As before, the three most frequent indefinite pronouns were in exactly the same order; first 'one', then 'something' and finally 'anything'. It was after this point, however, where the order and therefore use of the different words began to show variations.
When comparing the two male age categories, the fourth most frequently used indefinite pronoun for the 15-24 age group was 'nothing' with 64 hits but this was only the sixth most frequent in the 35-44 category but with 151 hits. 'Everything' was seen to be only the eighth most frequent indefinite pronoun for the 15-24 males yet was fifth frequent for the 35-44 category, appearing in 127 more cases than the opposing male group. All of the indefinite pronouns found in the top eight of both of the male age categories, although differently ordered, were exactly the same.
In the two female categories, however, there were huge disparities. The pronoun 'someone', for example, appeared as the fifth most frequent pronoun to be used by the 15-24 year old category with 194 hits yet in the 35-44 category it was only the tenth most frequently used, with only 71 hits. The most surprising discovery in this analysis, however, was the appearance of 'summat', which curiously appeared as the seventh most frequently used indefinite pronoun by the female 35-44 category, showing an occurrence of 108 hits. In the female 15-24 category, this only appeared 16 times and in the male 15-24 and 35-44 groups appeared in only 26 th and 16 th places respectively.
The female categories showed extremely alike frequencies indicating they constantly use indefinite pronouns for similar purposes. The male results were the complete reverse of what was expected, however, as they showed that the older male category of 35-44 used far greater quantities of indefinite pronouns than the younger group, even though it was previously thought they would use less at this age as they are more confident and assertive in their speech. A logical explanation for this could be that males at a younger age are often still in full time education or just beginning their working life and therefore have to make more effort with their language by avoiding more relaxed expressions and consequently use less indefinite pronouns. Older males, on the other hand, are often far more comfortable with their speech and feel able to use more relaxed expressions, without worrying to use full descriptions of the exact person or situation.
In corpus linguistics it is never possible to study all of the texts in existence and therefore only a suitable sample of the discourse can be used in analysis. Consequently, it can never be guaranteed that the information assembled will give us the full picture. Doubtless it gives us a good idea of the research we are trying to find but often, the samples concordances are full of inconsistencies and subsequently there may be disagreements. (Halliday/Teubert/Yallop/Cermakova, 2004)
Language in society is continually changing and it is seen by many that our language faculty empowers us to produce an infinite number of utterances. "All the time, things are being said that have not been said before. Corpus research will only tell us what people have said so far. It will not tell us what people are going to say tomorrow." (Halliday/Teubert/Yallop/Cermakova, 2004:104) This statement seems very appropriate, not just to this particular investigation but linguistics as a whole. It is seeking to make people realise that our language is continually changing and that lexis and expressions that are commonplace today may not be so in the future. One of the main reasons for this is involved with gender. Many linguists, including Lakoff, feel that women use language to suit their subordinate position in society. Times, however, are constantly changing as nowadays, women are becoming socially more and more equal to men, therefore indicating that their use of language may become far more comparable to that of males.
In this assignment it is clear that females use a far greater quantity of indefinite pronouns and in the majority of cases these are seen to be used as a device to distance themselves from making direct claims. They are mainly used as a result of a lack of confidence and awareness that they do not want to be seen as overly self-assured and therefore females are often presumed to be unconfident, hesitant speakers. Males on the other hand, are seen to use less indefinite pronouns, indicating the confidence in their speech in that they are more able to talk directly about matters. However, as women become more socially equal to men, their patterns of lexical use are likely to change and therefore it is debateable that these features will be used in such great quantity in the future.
The issue of the use of indefinite pronouns with regard to the different age groups, however, is a more complex matter in that there does not seem to be a distinct pattern of usage. As only two age categories were investigated, there is not a huge area for comparison. However, both of the female age groups tended to use very similar quantities of indefinite pronouns, indicating the possibility that females use large quantities of these features at any age. The situation for males, however, is very different in that the results were completely unlike what was expected and there was a huge range between the two age groups. Extended research into the use of indefinite pronouns, however, will likely result in a more decisive conclusion in order to make more definite assumptions about this particular aspect of language.