For the purposes of this assignment, I decided that I would look at a specific aspect of language and compare its use in both tabloid and broadsheet newspapers. In order to make the most accurate comparisons, equivalent stories from the newspapers had to be collected and so I decided to look at the recent events surrounding the former Liberal Democrat leader, Charles Kennedy. It then had to be decided which aspect of language to investigate. Initially, I decided to look at adjectives but this seemed too broad an area and so it was narrowed down to look at the use of superlative adjectives. In order to be able to carry out a full investigation, it was appropriate to choose just two newspapers to compare. The main consideration which had to be taken into account when choosing these newspapers was how well their stories are represented by their online websites. The Guardian website is notoriously good for their online representation of news articles and therefore I decided this would be a suitably appropriate broadsheet newspaper to use for this purpose. The search for the right tabloid newspaper, however, was more complicated as very few had good representations of the articles but ultimately it was decided that The Mirror gave the best online demonstrations.
Eventually it was therefore decided that my final research question would be:
'How does the use of superlative adjectives differ between the broadsheet newspaper The Guardian and the tabloid newspaper The Mirror?'
The first stage of the method was the collection of the data, which was achieved by locating the two suitable websites; 
 and 
. The articles applicable to the recent events surrounding Charles Kennedy were then viewed as a printable version and saved as a text file. A word count was then performed on each of the corpuses to establish the total number of words in each. Since there was a slightly uneven number in each, the necessary quantities of words were deleted, leaving the total number of words in each corpus as 5756.
To carry out the appropriate study of the relevant material, it was decided that the analytical software 'AntConc 3.1.1' was to be used, which was located by the website,
The set of data from The Guardian was then opened in the programme and the query was entered into the search box, as shown below;
The search button was then pressed in order to begin exploring the use of superlative adjectives in this corpus data.
Superlative adjectives are generally characterised due to their 'est' endings. However, there are four exceptions to this; best, worst, most and least. Therefore, the search query had to be entered as '*st' in order to incorporate all possible occurrences. Consequently, not all of the lexical items in the list were superlative adjectives, such as in the cases of 'first' or 'against', which meant that the appropriate words had to be sought out of the total hits.
The same process was then carried out on the corpus data from The Mirror and once this had been completed, the results were compared.
It then seemed appropriate to look at the general use of superlative adjectives in the BNC and so the website was located:
The frequency list of adjectives only displayed the base form of verbs such as 'close' and 'big' and so the relevant words were located using the Alphabetical frequency list of the whole corpus. However, the data shown was a representation of both spoken and written data together and therefore as this particular investigation focuses on the written form, it was unsuitable to make large comparisons.
The analytical software programme, Concapp, was then used in order to look at the percentage frequency of each of the superlative adjectives. This was carried out by going to Statistics, then Unique words and then comparing the adjectives found in AntConc with the equivalent percentages in Concapp. This was therefore able to display how influential in terms of frequency, superlative adjectives were in each of the two corpuses.
Superlative adjectives are used when something is unique because it is either the most or least or a specific quality. An 'est' is added to shorter adjectives or when they are longer, 'most' or 'least' precede them. (English Club Group, 1997) It should also be noted that there are two exceptions, as in the cases of 'best' and 'worst' as a result of their stems (good and bad) being inflectionally irregular. (Collins & Hollo, 2000) "The" always comes before a superlative adjective as a result of them describing something individual.
Once the superlative adjectives had been extracted from the results of the search, it was seen that there were huge comparisons between the two sets of newspaper data.
The Guardian corpus found 30 instances of superlative adjectives throughout the text where as The Mirror's corpus contained less than half of his amount at 13.
Superlative adjectives are generally used when making a statement about something and therefore, as seen by the evidence from The Guardian, they tend to be used when the author is completely certain about the subject they are writing about, for example; 'his relationship with his most senior parliamentary colleagues...'. By using far fewer superlative adjectives in the text of The Mirror, it tends to portray the view that they are far more unsure about what they are writing about. Tabloid newspapers are generally associated far more with writing about sport and entertainment news, where as broadsheets are more well known for politics, business and economics. Therefore, The Mirror's information about the particular story may not be completely precise and therefore they may feel unable to be completely certain about the statements or allegations they are making. By using less superlative adjectives, therefore, they are making less definite claims in their articles and consequently are able to avoid any negative comebacks if the claims turn out to be untrue.
It was also interesting to look at which of the superlative adjectives were used most frequently by each paper and whether they appeared in the same order in each case. As is seen from Fig 3, the most frequent superlative adjective used in The Guardian was 'most', which preceded fourteen adjectives but this appeared only once throughout the whole of the data extracted from The Mirror. On the other hand however, 'best' was the most frequent superlative adjective used in The Mirror, appearing seven times but this only occurred three times in The Guardian. 'Least' occurred four times in The Guardian but only once in The Mirror and 'closest' appeared three times in The Guardian but was not present at all in The Mirror. These frequency disparities are the main feature of the analysis but there are also some similarities, as in the case of biggest, youngest and largest which each appeared just once in the data for both The Guardian and The Mirror.
When looking at the use of superlative adjectives in the whole of the BNC, the dominance of the word 'most' is greatly apparent as a result of their being 565 appearances. This consequently forms a strong link with The Guardian, as 'most' was the most frequent superlative adjective to appear in the corpus data. As previously mentioned, however, it was not appropriate to fully compare the newspaper data with the data from the BNC, as this investigation focuses primarily on written data alone where as the BNC incorporated both spoken and written varieties.
By then using Concapp, it was possible to look at the percentage frequency of these superlative adjectives in each of the corpuses. As seen in Fig.3, 'most' accounted for 0.24% of the whole of The Guardian corpus where as in The Mirror, the single appearance of 'most' only accounted for 0.02%. However, in The Mirror, 'best' occupied 0.12% of the total frequency of words where as in The Guardian, this only accounted for 0.05%. Consequently, it was then possible to determine that superlative adjectives take up 0.53% of the total use of words throughout The Guardian, where as in The Mirror, they only account for 0.24% of the total word use.
In conclusion, it is clear from the data that the use of superlative adjectives varies dramatically between the two newspapers.
The far greater use of superlative adjectives in The Guardian seems to suggest utmost confidence of the content of their articles in order that they feel able to use lexis such as 'most' and 'closest' to make a definite and absolute statement for instance in the case of 'once the closest of allies to Mr Kennedy'. In The Mirror, however, the lesser use of these superlative adjectives tends to signify a lack of assurance, possibly as they may not be confident that the information they have is completely factual and therefore do not feel able to make definite statements.
The two sets of corpus data only consisted of just less than 6,000 words each, which is not particularly large and therefore is unlikely to be able to give a true comparison of the use of these superlative adjectives in the two newspapers. There is also the issue of the subject matter of the articles. The Guardian, along with most other broadsheet newspapers, is well known for its portrayal of political and current affairs stories and consequently, their representation of the Charles Kennedy situation is likely to be far more informative and precise. The Mirror, on the other hand, along with many tabloid newspapers of its kind, is more connected with lightweight news stories, especially sport and entertainment. Consequently, for further investigation, it would be interesting to explore whether The Mirror uses more superlative adjectives in their entertainment stories than The Guardian does, as they are more distinguished in this topical area.