Research has been carried out for many years by a variety of different researchers in connection with the differences between the speech of males and females and why these differences, if any, exist. The English language has been found to consist of a number of varying gender differences, although it is languages of other cultures which are seen to consist of the greatest differences, even to the extreme extent of women and men using completely different lexis to talk about the same thing. In Japanese, for example, the word for 'eat' is pronounced as 'taberu' by women and 'kuu' by men. (Trask, 1999) Although this essay will primarily focus on the gender differences in speech in Britain, it should be appreciated that differences exist in countries all over the world and as shown above, often by far more extreme linguistic features than are found here in Britain.
There are three main theories associated with the issue of language and gender. The first, developed by Lakoff, was called the deficiency theory and stated that females speak an inferior version of language compared to men, reflecting the lower status they hold in western society. The second theory is the dominance theory which looks at the idea that the speech differences between males and females exist as a result of male dominance over women. Women therefore use different speech features in order to keep subordinated to men and maintain a more submissive and supportive speaking role. The notion that the language system is man-made and was therefore constructed with a male bias is connected to this theory and was developed by Dale Spender. Spender believed that the language system was constructed specifically for men and therefore women had to try and accommodate their language to the male language system. Similarly, many linguists feel that researchers often begin with the initial bias that there is something wrong with women's language, due to the stereotype of their subordinate position in society. Consequently, researchers tend to concentrate on the irregularities of women's speech and therefore prior to even collecting any data, they have already formed the biased view that women's language is inferior. The third theory is the difference theory, which mainly focuses on the reality that males and females have different conversational goals and therefore have varied styles of speech. Males are more competitive, for example and are more conscious about promoting their masculinity. Their speech often reflects this by being more direct and forceful than females, who tend to speak more cooperatively in order to show compassion and support. The main point which should be taken from this theory, however, is that regardless of the differences in language styles between males and females, neither are superior and both should be regarded as equal in all situations.
In 1972, Robin Lakoff published an article entitled 'Language and Woman's Place', arguing the case that women speak differently than men, using features which suggest their subordinate position in society. (Eckert & McConnell-Ginet, 2003) Lakoff takes the male use of language as being the norm and then compares women's language against it, whereby any differences between the two are seen as deviations on the part of the females. (Spender, 1980) Lakoff claimed that the application of features such as mitigations and inessential qualifiers by women caused their speech to be perceived as tentative and powerless, consequently making it unrealistic for them to have any influence or authority with their use of language. She suggested that women's speech was characterised by a whole range of other features including tag questions, hedges, rising intonation and intensifiers. Lakoff's claims however, were not based on research but on her own intuitions and observations. This created huge interest and generated an outbreak of research as people felt that her claims, although detailed, would be extremely easy to investigate.
William O'Barr and Kim Atkins (1980) carried out research at a courtroom testimony in order to investigate the claim Lakoff had made about there being an individual 'woman's' language. They observed, however, that it was more likely a case of simply powerless language, which was not necessarily connected to gender, as the differences they found tended to have a greater connection with the social status of the speaker and how comfortable and familiar they felt in the courtroom environment.
Betty Lou Dubois and Isabel Crouch (1975) also set out to investigate Lakoff's claims, in this instance concerning the use of tag questions by males and females. In their research, they looked at the speech of people at an academic conference and immediately were able to contradict Lakoff's claim with their evidence, as they found that it was in fact males who used a greater quantity of tags than women. (Eckert & McConnell-Ginet, 2003) Many studies of a similar nature were carried out by a variety of different researchers and the results often indicated an array of findings. Sometimes the women were found to be the dominant users of tags where as in other cases it was the males who tended to use more. This led to the notion that tags were not just used as a device to express uncertainty but were also used in different contexts to facilitate, soften and challenge in conversation. Although in time many of Lakoff's claims were disputed by a number of researchers who collected information in proof, she was extremely influential in drawing attention to this particular area of linguistic study.
As previously mentioned, Dale Spender worked on the basis that she saw the world as being male dominated. She held the strong opinion that 'Everything in language is presumed to be male unless otherwise marked or stated'. There are four linguistic features which are used to demonstrate this theory, two of which are subsequently described. The first is the notion of linguistic marking, where terms to denote females are marked, for example 'lion' is seen to be the neutral term but it becomes obvious that it is also the male term as the female equivalent has to be marked as 'lioness'. Similarly, a 'manager' is the neutral or male term, where as the female equivalent has to be marked to produce 'manageress'. The second theory is the idea of semantic derogation, whereby female forms of words are considered inferior or of a lower status that the male version. For instance, in the case of describing an unmarried person, males are described as 'bachelors' and females are called 'spinsters'. The word bachelor stereotypically is regarded in society as a young, strong and independent individual where as a spinster, the supposed equivalent, carries negative connotations in that they are thought of as lonely, unattractive old women.
Spender also felt that women were unfairly treated as regards to their use of language, for example in the case of tag questions. When it was presumed that females used more tags, they were seen as being characteristic of hesitancy and tentativeness, yet when findings found that in fact men used more, the theory of hesitancy was never applied to males.
The linguist Hartman claimed that females use more qualifiers in their speech where as men use more absolutes. Spender immediately disputed this claim, however, as she felt that, for example, when women use 'perhaps' or 'maybe' they are interpreted as being qualifiers where as if men use the same words, they would be labelled as absolutes. Spender qualifies her opinion with the idea 'the determining factor is more often the sex of the speaker, rather than the speech' (Spender, 1980:35).
It is the stereotypical view in society that women talk more than men and they are often labelled as being tenacious speakers and gossips. However, in reality, there has never been any evidence to prove this where as several investigations have confirmed the exact opposite; that men talk more than women. Zimmerman and West are just two researchers who have found this to be the case in their studies, as they found that it is often the males who choose the topic of conversation, either interrupting or talking over women in order to be the centre of attention. The negative connotation of constant talking is still labelled to women, however, regardless of the countless amounts of data evidence which prove otherwise. Consequently and possibly rightly so, Spender holds the belief that women are not respected in society in that their language is 'devalued to such an extent that they are required to be silent' (Spender, 1980:42). Spender is therefore of the opinion that women are judged not as to whether they talk more than men, but whether they talk more than silent women.
Spender feels that the majority of research carried out about male and female talk is mainly in favour of males and therefore that the male way is considered the right way in society. She believes that feminist research however, has made huge advances in beginning to close the gap between how female's language is perceived in relation to males, as much more attention is now focused on a greater variety of features and has consequently opened up whole new areas of investigation.
Linking to the notion that men talk more than women, it has been discovered that it is predominantly men who interrupt more than women in mixed sex conversations. There are claims that women are far more likely to leave sentences incomplete and Haas (1979) suggested that this is due to the fact that men often interrupt women, therefore robbing them of the opportunity to finish their flow of speech. Men are also seen to be the dominant users of commands. When women do use commands, they generally tend to apply them interrogatively by using such utterances as 'Would you mind..?', indicating a high level of politeness even though a command is intended to be direct and persuasive. The use of politeness markers such as 'please and 'thank you' are used far more frequently by women, as are hedges and super-polite forms, which are seen as indications of tentativeness and insecurity. For example 'I was wondering if you could possibly just do me a small favour if you wouldn't mind.' (Poynton, 1989:71) Women also tend to provide far more encouragement in conversation, especially positive feedback such as 'mm' or 'yeah', which supports and gives confidence to their conversation partner. In one New Zealand study, for instance, it was found that women gave over four times as much encouraging feedback than men did. (Holmes, 2001)
Males and females use different fields of discourse and therefore as their topics of conversation are different, they use distinct lexis and language styles to suit the situation. Key female topics of conversation, for example, are focused around domestic and personal issues such as relationships and therefore they use appropriate lexis to suit these issues. For instance, women use more evaluative adjectives such as 'gorgeous' and 'wonderful', which emphasises that women function more in terms of feelings and emotion. Males however, find this type of talk trivial and subjective and on this basis, often refuse to even partake in the conversation, especially about more emotive subjects which require an expression of feelings. This can often been seen to devalue women's speech. It is claimed that women's speech is in fact cooperative as opposed to men's speech which is described as being competitive. That is, women use language to support, encourage and appreciate what is being said by their conversation partner. Males, however, tend to use different language features such as boasting and using forms of verbal aggression in order to gain admiration and outdo what has been said by the other person in the conversation. The use of swearing and slang is also used more frequently by men as it is symptomatic of bonding and solidarity as well as aiming to demonstrate authoritative and self-confident attitudes. The claim that female language is cooperative where as males is competitive was investigated by the use of research interviews, in which participants were interviewed by a range of different speakers. Throughout the process, it became obvious that the female's speech patterns and behaviour shifted dramatically depending on who they were talking to, in order to accommodate to the interviewers style of speech. The male interviewees, however, very rarely changed their speech styles at all. (Holmes, 2001)
One large investigation looking at gender differences was carried out by Fisherman in 1980, where she placed tape recorders in the homes of three couples and asked them to leave the tapes running, with the intention of analysing the speech interaction between the couples. The main difference Fisherman found was that women asked a vast majority of the questions in conversation, in order to draw attention to what they were saying. In contrast, men used very few actual questions but used over twice as many statements, confident in the knowledge that the women would respond, even though statements often do not require a response. It also became apparent that women were the initiators of the vast majority of topics of conversation. In the entire data collection, 73 topics were introduced, of which women introduced 45 and men introduced 28. However, of the women's 45, only 17 were successfully introduced where as all of the 28 introduced by the men were successful. This therefore indicated that it is mainly conversational support work which is carried out by women. (Fasold, 1990)
One of the most noticeable language differences between males and females is the greater use of the vernacular form by men. This is seen to be a reliable claim in every social class, highlighting such features as male's greater pronunciation of [in] instead of [i] in such words as 'talking'. (Holmes, 2001) Fischer carried out research in respect of this claim in 1958 in a New England school and found the above to be true. Similar studies carried out by Labov in 1966 and Trudgill in 1974 also validated this claim. It has also been found that men are more likely than women to use glottal stops, in words such as 'butter' and 'but' for instance. (Trudgill, 2000) There is also the greater use by males of multiple negation in their speech, such as 'I don't know nothing...' and similarly consonant cluster reduction, for example in the case of 'last', by pronouncing the word as [las]. The vernacular use of the language is seen by many as being popular with males in that it is closely connected with working class speech, which in turn is often associated with toughness and masculinity, two desirable male characteristics.
Overt and covert prestige are two other apparent gender speech differences. On the whole, it has been found that females generally use overt prestige as they tend to use more standard forms of the language but claim to use even more than they actually do. It is thought that the main reason for this is that females are more conscious about their social position in society and how they are regarded by others and therefore aim to use more standard and prestige forms of speech in order that they are perceived as being higher in society than they may actually be. On the other hand, it is usual for males to use covert prestige whereby, although they tend to use fewer standard forms than women, they claim to use even less than they actually do. This is for a similar reason as to why they use vernacular forms; they feel more masculine by ignoring the pressure that society puts on people to speak in certain ways and defy the pressure by using fewer standard forms. They do not like to feel influenced or intimidated by people and therefore by claiming to speak in a way which goes against the standard form, they are rebelling against what is expected.
There are still expectations in society today that women should have a higher adherence to social norms and this is connected to the social roles that they are expected to fulfil. However, due to the ever closing gap between society's expectations of people's social roles, speech patterns are also becoming ever similar. Females now fulfil a wide variety of jobs which were previously thought of as male exclusive and undertake formerly male dominated sports such as rugby and boxing. Correspondingly, men are also embarking on roles in society which were previously thought of as female dominated, for example there are far more househusbands and professions such as hairdressing are becoming more readily acceptable for males to undertake. These changes have led to decreasing differences between the lifestyles of males and females and in some cases these differences and expected social roles have diminished beyond recognition.
In conclusion it can therefore be seen that there are many different issues to be addressed in this area of linguistic study and although research has led to the suggestion of individual variations between the speech of males and females, there are no straight forward suppositions that can be clearly defined.
In many cases, evidence collected by one researcher has been completely opposed by the investigations of another and therefore there is constant debate as to which specific linguistic features are commonly related to which gender. Matters are made more complicated by the fact that social roles are repeatedly changing in our society. It is not known whether or not females will ever be regarded as completely equal to males in all aspects of society but what can be realised is that the gap is continually closing and as the jobs and activities undertaken by both sexes become more and more similar, it is likely that the speech patterns will do exactly the same.
What can be identified from much of the research collected, however, is that women tend to use a more standard form of speech than men, drawing on a variety of characteristics which tend to offer support and show greater politeness. On the other hand, males tend to use more features which are associated with masculinity and power and are considered to be by far the more dominant speakers in the event of mixed sex conversations. It should be taken into consideration, however, that these findings are of males and females in general. There is no suggestion that every male and every female conforms to the exact same speech features.