Having spent 10 half days and 3 full weeks at King Henry V111 school in Coventry I feel I can appreciate more what being a teacher is like, the challenges and every day tasks they face and how relevant some of the aspects of learning that we had studied were to the way the pupils there learnt. I spent a lot of my time observing teachers but also did some teaching myself which included taking over a year 7 class for a period of lessons. The first section of this essay is about some of the many different lessons I observed, and the second is about my experiences of teaching.
One of the best lessons I observed was a first lesson on probability taught to a year 7 class. The teacher copied a picture of a horse onto the interactive whiteboard and then told the children to imagine a horse race. There are 12 horses and which horse moves is determined by the roll of two dice i.e. if someone rolls a 2 and a 1 horse number three moves. The teacher passed the dice around the class and got each child to shake them. Whatever score they got the teacher would put a cross on the board next to that horse. A horse needed 8 crosses to win. Some children immediately noticed that 1 could not win. After about six throws he asked them to 'bet' on what horse they think will win. Quite a few went for 7 but 10 was doing equally as well at the time which encouraged some to go for that but at least one person went for everything. This caused much excitement with people cheering for their number. I now realise that in this lesson the teacher is following the constructivism model of learning. [1] says that methods likely to feature heavily in the constructivist teaching approach are "practical work, structural apparatus, 'discovery learning' and investigative methods". This activity encapsulated many of these. It turned out that 6 won but as expected the results formed a standard normal curve. In the last 10 minutes he asked for the classes mathematical thoughts on the results. He listened to them all and although he corrected them on some of the language used he did not correct wrong hypotheses to start with. This is an example of a "high degree of interaction between pupils and teacher" [2] which is seen as a very positive thing. There was more of this at the end when after drawing a sample space diagram on the board and getting them to fill in the rows he asked them for their thoughts. He finished by asking them what they thought the probability of getting a 7, even number, and number greater than 10 was when two dice are thrown. The lesson also links to Bruner's learning theory 'instruction'. He talks of this having 4 main features and this lesson certainly included 3 of them. [3] describes them as "activation which means that tasks need to be sufficiently open as to arouse curiosity, but not so open as to arouse confusion", maintenance which means that the pursuit of alternatives is considered useful and worthwhile, and direction which means keeping in mind a view of the whole problem". This activity was certainly open enough to arouse a lot of curiosity and was not confusing because to start with the pupils saw it as a game rather than the beginning of probability, the pursuit of alternative ideas was encouraged when he asked them for their hypotheses and the teacher always had in mind that by the end of the lesson he wanted them to have some understanding of sample space diagrams and their link to working out probabilities.
Another lesson I observed that I thought was good was a year 10 lesson and involved an investigation. The class had just had lots of revision lessons and the teacher wanted to give them a break from that. He handed them each a sheet which explained the 'tangled triangles' investigation to them. The premise of the investigation is that students are trying to find the biggest value of the ratio of area/perimeter for some triangles. One student indicates that this was done with measurements of 40, 60 and 80 but forgets to say what units are used and whether they are angles or sides. The class then had to find whether the information refers to angles or sides. The reaction of the class to this task was interesting. Some of them were pleased to be doing something different and some clearly viewed it as a lesson they could relax in. Others were very keen to find the answer to the investigation and got started straight away and others were very reluctant to get started. A lack of confidence in themselves was quite clear even amongst the ones I knew to be strong students. The teacher was keen to point out that there was going to be no formal marking of their findings and encouraged them to try out their ideas. He kept going round asking how they were doing and for their initial hypotheses. He encouraged them to discuss their ideas together but wanted them to write something individually in their books. The constructivist approach encourages this - "constructivism emphasizes the value of social interaction and communication" [1]. The teacher encouraged them to discuss their ideas and again [1] advocates this - "The quality of pupils' mathematical thinking as well as their ability to express themselves are considerably enhanced by discussion".
My experiences of teaching were mainly centred on a year 7 class that I took over for a number of lessons. I found that the most difficult aspect of teaching was differentiating. With a class of 26 pupils it was hard to know whether every individual understood what they were doing and even when I knew that certain pupils were struggling, it was hard to devote my time to them when the rest of the class also needed attention for other reasons. It must be one of the toughest tasks facing teachers - they have to move on when the majority of the class is ready to but they also have to be aware of struggling pupils and somehow find time to help them one to one. Also even spotting that one pupil in a class of 26 needs help is difficult. I tried to get round to each person during the lesson but some are reluctant to ask for help and you sometimes would not notice they are struggling until you actually mark their books. After teaching them for 4 lessons I set a homework and then took their books in. I found what they had done very interesting. The amount of common mistakes was fascinating aswell as misconceptions that individuals had. The first part of the homework was giving approximate answers to expressions like 43684. Nearly all of them made it harder for themselves than it actually was by first working it out using long multiplication and then rounding the answer up or down to the nearest hundred or thousand. The point of these questions was to get them to instantly write that 43684 approximately equals 40080 or 400100 which is much easier to work out. Two things occurred to me here. I could not mark wrong what they had done because in a sense they had approximated the expressions so the question in the text book was ambiguous. Secondly, they obviously had not got the message that approximation is supposed to make life easier. The second question involved approximating things like 7.835. Here many of them assumed they could not use a calculator even though they could and did long division. With this question the idea was to work out the answers first on a calculator and then approximate which I can now see must have been a bit confusing considering the previous question was non calculator and they were supposed to approximate the numbers first. Many pupils thought that because the question was given in pounds that they could not round the answer on their calculator to the nearest penny - many converted the initial number into pennies first. Many of them that got an answer of say 1.53 would put that the answer was 2 to the nearest penny. Others when they got a long decimal answer did not realise that to get the nearest penny they had to round to 2 decimal places. The third question asked them to round certain numbers to 1 and then 2 decimal places and this was done very well which pleased me because I had spent quite a lot of time explaining how to do this. The last question was about indicating on a number line the highest and lowest possible value of a number that has say been rounded to 1 decimal place. Even though an example of how this should be indicated on a number line was done in the book I got many different interpretations not all of which were wrong answers to the question. I think this is the trickiest part of this topic. I had tried to get them to write answers to this sort of question using inequality signs and many pupils ignored drawing a number line and wrote their answers in this form so I could not tell them they were wrong for this. Many pupils asked why a number like 11 could be as low as 10.5 but could not be 11.5 and all I could say was that it was convention that we round up when it is .5. Some wanted to put that it could be in the range 10.5 to 11.4 so I then had to say what about 11.49. Using the strictly less than sign with 11.5 gets around this. I therefore found marking some of the books difficult in that although some had not got the same answer as the textbook they were essentially right, and also marking the books of the few people in the class that had completely misunderstood it all was difficult. I had to cross nearly every answer but did not think it would be helpful to put a really low grade at the end. I agree with the points made in [4] that "there is no point in labelling children, progress, teacher or school as 'unsatisfactory' unless this goes hand in hand with the means to bring about improvement" and "the labelling of some learners and teachers as 'unsatisfactory' is likely to lead to poor motivation". I put an encouraging comment at the end and aswell as just crossing every answer I wrote down what they should have done and spoke to them individually at the start of the next lesson. I am aware that a full time teacher would probably not spend that long on a book but I felt I could as it was a one off.
This taught me that especially when they are at this age, homework's set from a textbook can certainly be misinterpreted however well a topic has been taught. Perhaps textbooks need to make themselves clearer and also teachers really have to make it clear exactly what is required of pupils with homework at this age. Because I had spent a lot of time with this class, I already had an idea of their abilities and I noticed that the same people always put their hands up. Naturally many of these are the most able, but some are just the most confident and of course many of the most able may not ever put their hand up. I began to think of ways of teaching that might help particular individuals but surely a teacher always has to think of the whole class when devising teaching methods. There has been a lot written about learning theories and about what type of learner a person is such as a 'visual' or 'auditory learner' but I read an article in which the author has some doubt about "the vogue for pigeonholing students by learning style" [5]. It says that research has shown that "labelling a pupil as, say, a 'visual' learner may do them more harm than good" [5]. It goes on to say that "the tools used to split learners into different categories are so unreliable, most such labels seem to be of dubious value". The professor expresses concern that giving someone a particular learning style can have a negative impact - "one danger of an unthinking use of learning styles is that teachers view a student as being a certain type of learner incapable of learning via another mode" [5]. He is also concerned that students themselves might start to believe this. The crux of the article is that "all learners need a wide repertoire of learning strategies and need to know when to use each" [5]. I think it is important to bear this in mind before being too quick to judge a pupils best 'learning style' and it highlights the need for a teacher to vary his teaching strategies.
Overall actually teaching a class and setting and marking their work really taught me a lot about being a teacher and observing many lessons gave me many ideas for future teaching. I realise that this was a particularly good school with very good teachers and that experiences in another school could have shown me other sides of teaching and given me other ideas.