The theories of structure and agency have been spearheaded by Anthony Giddens, a British social scientist and Pierre Bourdieu, a French anthropologist. Giddens and Bourdieu's theories have greatly affected the field of Archaeology, although Dobres and Robb call their writings "ambiguous, often incomprehensible and incontrovertibly high-brow", their theories enable us to ask questions about the evidence of the past. Bourdieu is one of the key architects of the theories of structure and agency which are called "inseparable"; his theory of habitus is what Jay MacLeod calls "a regulator between individuals and their external world, between human agency and social structure". Giddens' Structuration Theory "challenges the way culture is portrayed in archaeology and attempts to change the analytical focus of archaeology separating will or agency from social structures". However, MacLeod uses another line of argument; he argues that in contrast to Johnson's argument "structural determination is inscribed in the very core of human agency". Their ideas have given a useful insight into past societies social cohesion, archaeologists have stressed the importance of individual agency in the past, in reaction to other approaches such as culture history or environmental determinism, in which individuals and communities are sidelined.
In terms of Archaeology perhaps Marx puts it best when relating agency to archaeology "men make their own history, but they do not make it just as they please, they do not make it under circumstances chosen by themselves, but under circumstances directly encountered, given and transmitted from the past", in effect Marx is saying that an individuals actions are not always intentional but can also come as a result of external factors, for example in terms of archaeology a Roman carrying a pot might trip and break the pot rather than purposely dropping it with the intention of breaking it, the broken pot is then evident in the archaeological record.
Bourdieu's builds on this with his theory of habitus, which Dobres and Robb put simply as "the taken-for-granted routines of daily life", and MacLeod calls the "attitudes, beliefs and experiences of those inhabiting one's social world". This is key to the work of archaeologists; once we gain an understanding of what an individual's role in a past society was, be they a peasant or a king, we can begin to understand why an event or even a deposition occurred, from the disposal of a pot to why a country was invaded. Dobres and Robb went on to explain that once we understand habitus we can understand why "people create and become structures and become structured by institutions and beliefs beyond their conscious awareness or direct control". What Dobres and Robb are trying to explain is that once we have understood these "structures" we can understand why the individual performed actions which are evident in the archaeological record.
Bourdieu's view is that society, contrary to traditional Marxism, cannot be analyzed simply in terms of economic classes and ideologies. Much of his work concerns the independent role of educational and cultural factors. Instead of analyzing past societies in terms of classes, we can use Bourdieu's concept of field: a social arena in which people manoeuvre and struggle in pursuit of desirable resources. A field is a system of social positions, structured internally in terms of power relationships. Different fields can be quite autonomous and more complex past societies clearly would have more fields.
However, this is not to say that Bourdieu has gone uncriticised in his approaches to the subject, Lane questions the anthropologist's "perceived determinism and consequent inability to account for significant historical change", if this is true then we must seriously question Bourdieu's relevance to historical analysis, Bridget Fowler goes on to add that "Bourdieu has never undertaken any protracted discussion of transformation in the social, cultural, or political spheres". In my opinion this is unfair, Boudieu's theory of habitus enables us to pose key questions when assessing social stratification in the past.
Bourdieu and Giddens both agree that practice theory is a "theory of the continuous and historically contingent enactments or embodiments of people's ethos, attitudes, agendas and dispostitions", when applying this theory to archaeology we can attempt to understand a past society's motivations and beliefs through the archaeological record, we can see their attitudes to religion for example by evidence of sacrifice and then deduce their religious beliefs in different periods of time.
Giddens writes "human history is created by intentional activities but is not an intended project." This echoes Marx in his belief that "men make their own history...but they do not make it under circumstances chosen by themselves" which, in principle, is key to an archaeologists understanding of the past. An individual's actions and the traces of actions that they leave in the archaeological record are not necessarily done on purpose so we, as archaeologists must ask why did they do it?
Giddens' Structuration Theory poses many questions for archaeologists, the Structuration Theory describes how social agents i.e. humans relate to social structures, how they are constrained by their social environments but pursue active strategies, the clash with agency then produces change in social structures. A Roman floor provides a suitable example of Giddens' theory in practice, linking both structure and agency. The traditional view of an archaeologist when analysing a Roman floor would be to class it as an object and then try and fit it into a typology of some sort, placed into patterns of material culture representative with a certain society and determining its status within a society. Applying Giddens' Structuration Theory we would look at the floor, and then ask questions in relation to how the floor may have interacted with a human agent. Then discuss the fact that someone had walked on the floor, the fact conversations were held in the room or even the possibility an event such as a murder may have occurred there. It would then be possible to suggest the status of the floor in the society by relating them to a general structure of society. We can apply this to past societies, in an attempt to see how and why a society changed and what actions forced it to change.
This elaborated on Bourdieu's questioning of social practice how "people become structured by instituitions and beliefs beyond their control", further to this people are not "omniscient, practical, free-willed economizers but rather are socially embedded, imperfect and often impractical" resulting in the final part of Giddens' Structuration Theory i.e. a clash with agency producing change in social structure.
This is not to say that there are no differences in opinion between Giddens and Bourdieu, in Giddens case he attempts to combine both agency and structure while still acknowledging the fact that the two aspects are on there own where as Bourdieu's focus is on the actions of the individual, the agent or actor and then he attempts to compare these actions back to the way that the social structure has built up. Unlike Bourdieu, Giddens ignores the 'body' of the agent, something that Bourdieu stresses throughout his theory of habitus where he implies that we manipulate and change society through our actions; Giddens does not acknowledge Bourdieu's belief in the importance of the actions of individuals. Bourdieu challenges the rigid aspects of structuralism expressing his belief that Habitus can only be realised with human action; inferring that we make, change and reshape our society around us as individual agents.
We can therefore see that although Giddens and Bourdieu's theories echo each other in many ways and share certain aspects, they also have their differences. Both Giddens and Bourdieu's theories have contributed greatly to the field of archaeology. When applying their theories of Structuration and Habitus respectively to a past society, we have the ability to gain a greater understanding of that society's social structure, we can place greater importance on the role of the individual in shaping history through their actions and the evidence they leave in the archaeological record.