Since the World War II, organochlorine pesticides have made continuous major improvements to the quality of life experienced by millions of people worldwide. One of the first mass-produced, highly effective family of pesticides, organochlorines were an incredible chemical breakthrough - easy to manufacture, highly efficient and cheap. They are certainly one of the most historically significant. The persistence of organochlorines was initially thought of as a huge advantage to the family, remaining in the area for often years keeping it free from pests, however once the implications where realized the associated problems began to be appreciated. It was found that certain organochlorines where effectively inert in the environment, which led to huge bioaccumulation and the poisoning of thousands of birds, amongst other problems including mutagenic and teragenic effects on people. This chronic toxicity associated becomes apparent only after many years later and so affected creatures cannot be rapidly diagnosed. In search for their replacement, alternatives with much shorter degradation half-lives where found, one such replacement being the organophosphates.
Organophosphates (OP's) are a group of chemicals developed for use as vector-control insecticides during the 1930's. Vector control techniques are employed for the containment of epidemicological outbreaks that are relayed by a carrier. For example, mosquitoes carry malaria and it is easier to eradicate the transmission vector than it is the disease.
Generally speaking, this class of insecticides is considered safe due to the short half-lives which limits the risk of bioaccumulation. Several quick degradation mechanisms exist for organophosphates in-nature; including biodegradation, basic chemical hydrolysis and photolysis which operate leaving only harmless alcohols, phosphoric acid and derived ions. However, despite rapid degradation, the mode of action of these OP's is very dangerous and rapidly fatal to humans. This acute toxicity has resulted in The World Heath Organisation (WHO) classifying the toxic effects of different organophosphates from class Ia (extremely hazardous) to class III (slightly hazardous), leading to the banning and strict control in the regulated western world 1.
Structurally, organophosphates are the bis(alkoxy) phospho-esters of an organic functionality. The nature of this functionality actually plays no deciding role in the toxicity of the insecticide, but modifies the absorbtivity, specificity and stability of the agent. They are subject to transesterifcation as phosphorous due to the strong dipole, stability of leaving groups and the strength of the new bond. This feature leads to the mode of action and acute physiological danger associated with organophosphate poisoning.
Identified in 1914 by the English neuroscientist, Sir Henry Hallet Dale, Acetylcholine was found to be an intrinsic neurotransmitter involved in the contraction of animal muscles. Acetylcholine works to transfer the nerve impulse across a synapse between neurons through diffusion to a receptor.
The break-down of Acetylcholine is important because the nerve impulse being a transitory event must be quelled quickly - when this decomposition is slowed, the nerve junction stays in a continued state of excitation, causing constant muscle contraction. This breakdown occurs at the post-synaptic cleft, and is brought about by the enzyme acetylcholine esterase which acts by hydolysis to leave inactive metabolites.
It is here where organophosphates present their acute toxicity. Under normal operation, the enzyme with a serine residue at it's active site, becomes acetylated through transesterification with acetylcholine. This acetylated-enzyme activated complex is readily hydrolysable; however the when phosphoesters come in contact, a different transesterification processes takes place - the phospho group is transferred to the serine derivative. This phosphorylated serine possesses a strong bond which causes an effective irreversible binding known as an enzyme blockade and so the neurotransmission stops 2.
There are three main variations of the basic organophosphate motif:
The different types are differentiated by which esterase they inhibit, for example Type A organophosphates are broad-spectrum esterase inhibitors that are capable of affecting Type A non-specfic esterases. Type B inhibit carboxylesterases which are predominantly found in muscles and then type C, inhibit acetyl esterases primarily.
Many parallels can be drawn between organophosphate insecticides and war-chemicals - the most common structural difference being simply the inclusion of a strongly electron withdrawing substituent bonded to the phosphor-nucleus, which presumably strengthens the serine-agent ester bond through electron induction thus making them more efficious killers.
In 1943, the German Gerhard Schrader became the first chemist to produce a fully synthetic organophosphate pesticide. He called this chemical bladan (ethion). Later that year he also prepared parathion, codenamed E-605. This O,O-dialkyl thionophospho-ester was produced by condensation of an alcohol and thionophosphoric chloride, which was itself made by reaction of phosphoric trichloride with elemental sulphur at 190.
When working on amido-phosphoesters in 1936, Dr Schrader and his team became very ill after attaining the substitution of (dimethylamino)phosphoric acid with sodium cyanide and ethanol. After three weeks recovery, the evidence was verified and Dr Schrader made his results available to the national Heereswaffenamt (Army Ordinance Office). The potential use of these compounds as chemical war agents was immediately recognized, and the first mass produced for war-time use was named Tabun. In the years to come he and his team synthesized a variety more nerve agents including Sarin and Soman (Latin, somnus - to sleep)3.
The original pesticide synthesis route was advanced by Fletcher et. al.4, with research carried out on the aliphatic esters of thiophosphoric acid by Mastin and Norman 5. This new method made use of phosphorous pentasulphide (or pentoxide) as a source of O,O-dialkyl thionophosphoric thiol ester, which is comparable to carboxylic anhydrides. This was substituted with elemental chlorine to produce the activated acid chloride (comparable to carboxyl acid chlorides). This had the advantage over the original German method in that the starting material was already in it's maximum oxidation state and reaction proceeds at room temperature as opposed to 190, although both techniques give excellent yields 4.
This method can be used to make a huge array of other Type B and C organphosphates
The pentoxide can also be used in place of the pentasulphide affording type A pesticides
It has been found that the activity of biodegradation is massively increased in soils that have been exposed to repeated applications of OP pesticides. This represents the adaptation of soil borne bacterium and other prokaryota to be metabolically capable of OP degradation 6. Biodegradation is thought to be at-least 10 times faster than environmental hydrolysis and so in repeatedly-exposed areas, is the main route of degradation. The general hydrolytic degradation mechanism is sensitive to pH and light intensity - with acid hydrolysis occurring very slowly.
However, there is new evidence suggesting that under the controlled conditions of the laboratory, the degradation half-life of OP's is increased from 10 days to a year when under cold, acidic environmental conditions. In areas where the local soil organism population is unacquainted to dealing with OP's, the high solubility incurred to the compounds by the highly polar nature of phospho moiety can be a serious cause for concern where the ground pH is low. The result; slow degradation of the OP's, and the subsequent run-off into local waters. This would be mainly a problem in coniferous forests, areas with acid inducing bedrock and high rainfall (eg., Viginia, USA is known to have a soil pH of between 4 and 5.5)7, areas where excessive ammonium and urea based fertilizers are used, land close to mining operations and intensive agricultural processes. Fortunately, not much if any foodstuffs for human consumption is produced on acidic soil so immediate danger to humans in low; but seepage into ground water may result in bioaccumulation in plants and trees and could lead to destruction of local non-target insect and avian populations feeding on those insects.
The extremely high toxicity of organophosphates is of serious concern. For the plus argument, only very little is required to kill off pests, and so is rather cost effective - for the negative argument, only very little is required to quickly kill off people too! In Sri Lanka, current figures suggest that self-administration of organo-phosphates is the number one method of suicide 8! The quick degradation in most climates certainly addresses the cumulative problems associated with organochlorides, except of course in areas of acidic soil for which the problem of potential accumulation is more significant. Immediate OP treatment for humans is possible and parallels closely the nerve-agent antidoting used by the military ie., anti-cholinergics and esterase reactivation, which I suppose is preferable to teratogenic birth defects.