This practical investigates the properties of two metal acetylacetonate complexes. The complexes are first synthesized, purified and their UV-Vis and IR spectra obtained.
A dark blue solution of oxovanadium(IV) sulphate hexahydrate (5.045g) in water (75ml) was made-up and combined with a solution of acetylacetone (5ml) and anhydrous sodium carbonate (5.0093g). The resulting solution turned black and was nearly opaque when held to the light. It was maintained at 80C until light opaque blue crystals where seen to form (10minutes). The solution was then cooled in an ice bath, which promoted further crystallisation of intensely coloured, opaque indigo petrol-blue crystals. The solution was filtered with a sintered glass crucible under reduced pressure and washed with water to reveal flaky intense indigo-blue, granular crystals of varying particle size ranging, from course to sand-like. Moisture was driven from the product using an oven set to 100C.
The dry green product (0.9986g) was fused in a nickel crucible with white potassium hydrogen sulphate (2g) to form a black bubbling mass. Once the effervescence subsided, five further portions were added to affect total decomposition. A green-blue solution of the cooled melt in sulphuric acid (200ml, 1M) had to it added, a microspatula-worth of sodium sulphite and was brought to a gentle boil for two minutes. An aliquot (20cm 3) of the resulting solution was titrated with potassium permanganate (0.02M).
Analysis shows that Vanadium content by weight = 18.22% (5.35% error when compared to the literary value of 19.25% quoted by Row and Jones, 1957).
The bis(pentandionato)vandyl complex can be though of as a derivative of the vanadyl cation (V 4+ ligated to O 2-). It has a has a d 1 configuration and is thus diamagnetic. Arising from the d-d transitions, as with many other vandyl coordination compounds, this complex is blue. The spectrum for Vandyl bis-acetylacetonate yields a new strong peak at 997cm -1 which corresponds to the vibration for the vandanium-oxygen vanadyl bond - this is close to the value stated by Nakamoto, 1986 of 1001cm -1, and of Selbin, 1965 of 996cm -1. This is significantly stronger than the MO vibrational frequencies quoted by Nakamoto, 1986 for the metal-oxygen acac bond. The V=O bond is exceptionally short due to an increased bond order as electron density in populated p-orbitals residing as lone pairs on the oxygen, are donated into vacant d-orbitals on the metal cation ie., ligand-to-metal p-d donation. This gives rise a particularly high bond stretch vibrational frequency, ie., 940-980cm -1 (Shiver & Atkins, 1999). This results from the increased bonding order of the V-O bond. The orientation of orbitals is such that a triply bonded moiety is entirely plausible.
This postulate is supported by thermodynamic evidence showing one of the strongest M-O bonds of any metal (with the exception of T 4+). Occupation of those previously vacant d-orbitals on the metal disfavours ligation trans to the oxygen atom as to avoid competition for the d-orbitals, hence a tetragonal (square) pyramidal structure is found. The shape of the pentandionato ligands causes a slight deviation from the perfect square base to more rectangular.
Association of a ligating species trans (the only available site) to the vandyl oxygen causes a reduction of the V-O bond order and thus the (VO) is made less energetic, ie., the result of adduction of pyridine is to shift the (VO) to a lower wavenumber. This is supported by the work of Selbin, 1965, in which works he states that in many solvents with un-appreciable coordination ability the wavenumber of vibration is 10062 (solid mull in nujol, (VO)=997cm -1), whereas in highly coordinating solvents, (VO) is lowered close to 972cm -1.
The number of unpaired electrons can be found by manipulation of the magnetic moment,  of the complexes.
The number of unpaired electrons present in the manganese complex suggests the octahedral splitting parameter is low enough as to allow unpairing of all electrons. The octahedral shape is distorted with the result being the compression of some bonds and extension of others, this would alter the splitting pattern but only the pure octahedral splitting is shown below.
Lever, 1984, explains that distortion along the z-axis will cause splitting of the e degeneracy. However, this principle was not specifically applied to the complex vanadyl bis-acetylacetonate and so the undistorted model will be used.
Spectra was obtained at 850-350nm.
In all UV-Visible spectra obtained, there is a distinct trough centred at 400nm. This is quite probably due to the wavelength cut-off set for the bulb switch over from the visible bulb to the mercury UV bulb. The actual spectrum is more likely to be continuous from 450 up to 350nm. To establish this, a different spectrometer would have to be used, or it known for definite if it is viable to adjust the bulb cut-off wavelength using this spectrometer and the samples run again. However, upon closer inspection, the spectrum for Vanadyl bis-acetylacetonate appears to have two troughs at 400nm - one is for sure to be caused by the bulb switch-over, but the other could perhaps be the Band III peak!
In addition, the spectra obtained for the vanadyl complex in pyridine, and the manganese complex in both toluene and pyridine exhibit major fluctuations to the expected smooth spectrum at wavelength under 375nm. This can perhaps be rationalised by considering the absorbance below this wavelength goes above the working range of spectrometer of between 0 and 3.5. Above A=3.5, the sensitivity becomes very low for the machine ie., in the case of vanadyl in pyridine, the absorbance approaches 6 which given the logarithmic ratio nature of the measurement means the machine is trying to make measurements in the one part transmission per million range (0.000001% transmission). Thus, instrumental error will become large. The major fluctuations perhaps result from UV dispersal in the sample or a failure of the apparatus to self compensate using the UV bulb which just turned on. For what ever reason this occurred, a possible fix would be to try diluting the sample solution, by one hundred fold for instance.
Locating the band I & III peaks for the manganese tris-acetylacetonate in Toluene were difficult, and the value quotes an estimate. The vandyl bis(acac) complex, with C 2V symmetry the degeneracy of the e* is removed, and thus four d orbital transition are possible although not all are allowed following formal symmetry rules. The bands between 500nm and 800nm are these d-d transition. This is what gives rise to the colour of the complex. The strong adsorption characteristic of the vanadyl centre gives rise to it's typical blue-green colour. All higher bands are charge transfer.
The effect of an associating solvent is shift the band II peak higher in wavenumber, and band I to a lower wavenumber, as is quoted by Selbin, 1965.