Molecular modelling is an aspect of chemistry made possible through the use of IT. IT opens the field of computational chemistry, which very quickly has become the main stay of many chemists across the world. Certain computer software not only allows for the design of complex chemicals but also the manipulation in 3-dimensions and several energy optimisation routines to be applied.
For this aspect of the course, the software package Cerius 2 will be made use of, running on SiliconGraphics 'Indy' workstations which operate Unix. The SGI Indy line of computers where introduced as 'cheap' Unix workstations capable of 2D and some 3D application. They have video cards which update the screen very quickly and so the machines seem to run fast and smoothly. Unix has many security features which makes it the operating system of choice for many professional and academic applications. This makes them ideal for computational chemistry uses.
Computational chemistry applications utilise many empirical and semi-empirical routines designed for the 'realisation' of entered chemical structures. The routines allow for the calculation of steric energies, optimisation of structures, measurement of bond angles, lengths and degrees of torsion, calculation of charge distribution, intermolecular interactions (hydrogen bonding, van der Waals interactions, electrostatic energies) and many other processes which relate to structure. The 3D rendering aspects of the visual environment allow for the investigation of all conceivable conformations of molecules, provided along side calculation for the energies of each conformation. This allows you to find heats of formation and steric energies for chemical models which can give the user a feel for the stability of their designed model.
For this course, I created, manipulated, measured and optimised several organic molecules including caffeine, E/Z-dichloroethene, 1,2-dichloroethane, isoflupredon (a corticosteroid) and syn/anti-dimethyldecalin. Through the application I also designed a complexing agent for removing Ni 2+ from a mixture containing also Cu+.
Molecular modelling is based on statistical semi-empirical methods. This means that the information was partly derived from experimental evidence and partly from theory. Bond angles and lengths are obtained experimentally, and related to electronic configurations. Data concerning the elements is collected and filed in a database which the chemical software can access in real time when performing the calculations.
The calculation of minimum energy is achieved through a combination of optimising the bond angles and bond lengths by adjusting the coordinates of the atoms step-wise to obtain a conformation known to be stable. After each spatial adjustment, many calculations are performed to obtain the energy of the state, and the energy compared to the previous step to see if an improvement was made.
Calculations performed involve the interaction between atoms and electrons, bond energies, torsions and strains, van der Waals and coulombic potentials. The variables provided to the maths engine are taken from the database and are specific to the identity of the atoms in question. A potential drawback of this method, is that the results of the maths engine can only be as accurate as the variables provided to it (taken experimentally) and the calculations are limited to the parameters provided.
The calculation of the steric energy is involves several energetic contributions,
The constants involved in the calculation, k s, k a, k t, B, A, l 0, 0, n, s, A and B are the empirical constants derived from experimentation, stored in the database.
Cerius 2 provides an intuitive environment for the investigation of molecules. Upon start-up the user is presented with a main view window 'model window', a text port and a controls window. The chemical drawing and rendering takes place in the model window, in which chemical structures can be designed and the 3D views are rendered and the models manipulated. Atoms and bonds can be created by selecting the appropriate tasks from the controls window, and messages reported back to the user form the environment are displayed in the text port.
To begin with I created a molecule of cis-dichloroethene. This I achieved by drawing a line of four carbon atoms with the draw atom function and then changing the identify of the two terminal atoms to Chlorine with the change atom function. All the functions are easily accessible from the control box, and a built in guide is provided to give assistance whilst using the features of the application.
With the four atoms drawn, the molecule must have attached to it hydrogen to complete the valence of each atom. This is done quickly using the "Correct for Hydrogen" function. With the hydrogen added, the charge distribution must be calculated and is done so by selecting Charge from the 'OFF SETUP' menu in the control window. This assigned a charge distribution to the molecule and allows for calculations involving the electrostatic interactions. With the polarities established (which can be viewed by selecting the atoms and changing the labels to "charge"), the molecule is ready to have it's energy minimised.
This routine is a semi-empirical method which involves the calculation of the total steric energy as contributed to by bond angles, bond torsions, bond lengths, non-bonded van der Waals interactions and electrostatic interactions. This procedure uses the results from many observed phenomena modelled using empirical parameters relating to the actual geometry of the molecule, to shuffle the molecule into the lowest energy, most stable structure. This must be carried out with the model view set to 'stick' because if set to a 3-dimensional view, the operation can cause system instability due to the large CPU overhead of rendering the 3D model.
Using the 'minimise energy' procedure, Cerius 2 reports that the trans (E) isomer of the 1,2-dichloroethene is the lower energy conformation. Also provided in the text port messages are the individual contributions to the molecular energy: for 1,2-dichlorethene, it is reported that for the trans isomer 80% of the total energy is contributed by electrostatic interactions, whereas for the higher energy, less stable conformation, the cis isomer has contributed 90% it's total energy from electrostatic interactions. It is the ability of the chemical modelling software to give a breakdown of the total energy which makes it so powerful.
From the molecular mechanics summation it is obvious why the trans- isomer is more stable: with the bulky chlorine atoms on opposite ends and opposite sides of the molecule, the electrostatic repulsions are minimised. When the chlorine atoms are brought closer together, as in the case of the cis- isomer, the total energy rises because the electrostatic repulsion increases and becomes a more significant contribution.
For this task I built a molecule of ethane. The species exists in two conformations, the staggered and the eclipsed forms.
If the molecule where to have it's energy minimised, irrelevant of the prior conformation, the procedure will always result in the staggered conformation. This is because the eclipsed form always has a steric clash between the syn- hydrogen atoms, and so electrostatic contribution forces the lower energy less repulsive form.
95% of the total energy is contributed by electrostatic terms.
Next, I built 1,2-dichloroethane.
This has two groups of conformers, the staggered and the eclipsed. The eclipsed forms however experience a steric clash between the syn- chlorine atoms which raises the steric energy so high that the conformation is never observed.
The three staggered conformation are shown below. The first two conformers are of the same energy, since the structure is the same but the chlorine atom is displaced in the other direction. The third conformer has the two chlorine atoms anti-periplanar which results in the least electrostatic repulsion and so is the minimum energy conformer.
The different conformations are afforded by changing the torsion angle Cl-C-C-Cl from the MOVE menu. This is a much easier way to build the different conformation as the alternative involves manually rotating about the carbon-carbon bond.
A potential draw-back of the molecular mechanics energy minimisation energy procedure is that the energy is decreased step-wise by 'jiggling' the atoms by adjusting their coordinates to result in the lower energy term conformation. This continues until the difference between consecutive steps is less than 0.2kCal/mol. This means that if the molecule must go through a high energy transitional conformation to reach the global energy minimum, the minimise energy procedure will fail - or at least, only result in the lowest energy conformation this side of the transitional state.
For this task, I built a molecule of cyclohexane which exists as a pair of conformations, the chair and the boat conformers. With the pair of conformers built, and their energies minimised, it was reported that the chair form is the lowest energy. The difference in energies arises from the C-C-C-C torsion angle along the plane.
The chair form is the most stable because the structure is closer to the 'perfect' tetrahedron and nearly diamond like in terms of torsion angles. Each vertex approaches the perfect tetrahedral angle.
Isoflupredon is a corticosteroid, which has a close relative used in vetinary medicine to alleviate the symptoms of respiratory blockages in horses.
The chemical is chirally sensitive for it to be pharmacologically active, the stereochemistry must be rigorously adhered.
I found Cerius 2 quite slow when rendering this molecule. Also, method of drawing atoms I found frustrating at times as I connected the wrong atoms together. Stereochemistry was fairly easy to ensure since the 3D view allowed the molecule to be rotated round to view from alternative planes.
Decalin is bicyclo[4.4.0]decane, with the 5 and 10 positions being the bridging atoms. In the exact same fashion as cyclohexane, decalin can have different conformations. The two homocycles can adopt either the boat or the chair conformation, where the bridging atoms held in the axial plane. Naturally, since the chair-cyclohexane is more stable, the chair-chair will be lower in energy than the chair-boat.
With the 5 and 10 positions methylated, the compound adopts two isomeric forms, the syn- form and the anti- form. The syn- form has the two methyl groups in a plane with the bridging atoms, and the anti- form has a methyl-bridge-bridge-methyl torsion angle of 60.
One of the most exciting features of Cerius 2 is the real-scale modelling of molecules. This becomes especially important when designing ligands which specifically bind certain metal but not others. Such is the case, for a ligand designed to chelate Nickel(II) but not Copper(I). The specificity is brought about by the minimum energy conformations of the complex geometries. Copper(I) forms complexes with a planar tetrahedral geometry, whereas Nickel(II) forms stable complexes with an octahedral environment.
The molecular modelling software enables us to design ligands, with atoms and bond lengths chosen specifically to match the geometry of the Nickel(II) ion. The software has access to a database containing all the significant data regarding the species used in the simulation so that when a models energy is minimised, the specific radii and geometric preferences of the Nickel(II) can be taken into account. A such, very specific cage ligands (cryptands et al) can be developed with absolute specificity towards one species over another.
The molecule I designed to chelate Nickel(II) preferentially over Copper(I) is a hexadentate cyclic amine. Four donor atoms lie in a heterocycle which associate with the Nickel(II) in a plane with each other. The remaining two donor atoms extend from the ring system to claw round, above and below the ion. This forces the octahedral geometry required, and the ring was designed such that the bond lengths are optimal for an energetically favourable association with Nickel(II).
This molecule is systematically known as, 1,8-diamino-3,6,10,13-tetraazacyclotetradecane, or less verbosely, 'A certain kind of Magic', since it worked very nicely.
Utilising the same principles employed to design the ligand for task 5, more specific molecular models can be designed with affinities for certain species. The challenge was to design chemical system which has a high affinity for the Phosphate (V) ion. My approach to the problem was to design a rigid "empty bowl" with partially charged sites to which the oxygen atoms in the phosphate (V) ion can associate. The bowl must be large enough to accommodate the entire phosphate molecule, and so the inner diameter must be the sum of largest dimension of the phosphate ion. That is,
The phosphate ion is a distorted tetrahedron. One vertex of the tetrahedron is doubly bonded and so the is slightly shorter than expected. This causes the remaining vertices to have reduced torsion angles. The largest dimension is thus the hypotenuse between the shorter vertex and one of the longer vertices.
The average carbon-carbon bond is 154pm long, at the tetrahedral angle of 109.5. So the average length of a C-C-C chain unit is 298.1pm
I did not complete the task. I found Cerius 2 unbearably slow when dealing with very large molecules such as the one I had in mind, which hindered my efforts (the workstation may have needed a reboot)