Histamine is the principle endogenous agonist effecting the release of gastric acid in the stomach []. Produced in the tissue upon which it acts, in this situation histamine is known to as an autocoid (amongst others including the prostagladins and serotonin), a locally acting signalling hormone. Action is brought about through binding to the histamine H 2 receptor, which can be orthogonally blocked with respect to H 1, H 3 and H 4 receptors found attributed elsewhere in the body to entirely unrelated physiological systems []. Blockade of this H 2 receptor causes a reduction in intracellular cyclic AMP concentrations, a principle cellular requisite in the cascade of events surmounting to gastric acid release. Hence inhibition of this site is an obvious target for suppression of stomach acid release to assist the healing process in recovery from peptic ulcer disease.
The chemical and structural aspects that stand out most obviously is the presence of the five membered heterocycle, with its mildly basic pKa (7.5, which at physiological pH results in 56% ionisation) and the imidazole-5 chain substituent with it's pKa of 9.7 [] (which under the same conditions is 99.5% ionised). Certain putative criteria can be drawn:
The compounds created are required to meet these criteria, as such the corollary structural constraints can be surmised as follows
All of the drugs which arose from this development are orally active, and are distributed throughout the body extensively (unfortunately including in mammarial lactate and placental plasmas). Generally the drugs are administered orally twice-daily, or once orally pre-nocturnally, although intraperitoneal preparations have been employed albeit rarely. Excretion is actualised mainly by urinary excretion as unmetabolised drug (ca. 70%) and to a lesser extent, by microsomal imidazole-4-methylation and sulphoxidation (ca 30%). The serum levels drop rapidly, as reflected by the plasma half-life of 2.1 hours for Cimetidine, Ranitidine of 2 hours and Famotidine of 3.3 hours.
A more recent development is Nizatidine, whilst not being the most potent mole / mole, it is not-metabolised by human hepatic microsomal systems and thus administration is devoid of first pass metabolism. Bioavailability is in excess of 90% (as compared to ca. 50% for cimetidine), and hence weight / weight, the drug is more cost efficient.