Photochemical reactions play an important role in the chemistry of the atmosphere. In the troposphere, photolytic mechanisms operate that gives rise to a vast diversity in the chemical nature of species present, and thus determines the reaction chemistry associated. One such mechanism is the photolytic dissociation of Nitrogen Dioxide which liberates the important excited state oxygen species, 3P which plays in integral role in the atmospheric synthesis of Ozone.
The gross absorption characteristics of the sample are described by the Lambert-Beer law, which defines the Absorption in terms of a linear relationship between the concentration of the sample (c), the beam path-length (l) and the all important experimental constant, the 'absorption cross-section' ().
Relating this to the rate of photolysis involves a further experimental constant, the 'quantum yield' which defines the ratio of productive dissociations per flux on photons absorbed.
With a knowledge of the reference beam intensity, in terms of a power (energy per second), the number of incident photons can be calculated, and hence with the experimentally determined absorption, the total absorbed photons can be found.
The spectra of two samples of Nitrogen Dioxide at known pressure were obtained using a Varian Cary UV/Vis spectrometer, with a quartz-windowed cell of 10cm path-length. The sample cell was vacuum-evacuated and charged using a borosilicate-glass gas-handling line.
Upon evacuation of the gas-handling line with a vacuum-pump, a pressure of 1.7x10 -1Torr was established. Transfer of gaseous sample into the cell was performed quickly as to minimise the effects of error introduced due gas leaks into the apparatus. Despite the majority of transmission measurements carried out in the visible region, there exists a small overlap into the UV region, as such a baseline correction is required for operation of the instrumentation in single beam mode. This was carried out using an empty sample cell evacuated to 1.7x10 -1Torr.
The storage reservoir attached to the gas-handling line was charged with the gaseous sample to a pressure of 103 Torr; it was isolated, and from it was drawn into the cell the sample to a pressure of 51 Torr, from an evacuated pressure of 0.3 Torr (net pressure 50.7 Torr). The absorbance spectrum (in log 10 units) between 550nm and 280nm was obtained using the Varian Cary UV/Vis spectrometer, in the single beam operational mode with a medium scan speed. The data output into plain ASCII format for import into Excel for analysis. A further spectrum was obtained for a sample of 24 Torr pressure, and data was pooled from other experimenter groups for the pressures of 41, 19, 29 and 13 Torr.
From a collection of spectra at different concentrations, the Lambert-Beer cross-section's can be calculated, as functions of the analytic wavelength. The effect the dimerisation equilibrium has on the adsorption must be compensated for.
Due to the fine-structure of the NO 2 spectrum, the average values over a 5nm region were calculated and plot for graphical analysis.
From absorption data for a large spread of concentrations, the Lambert-Beer cross-section can be found by plotting Absorbance (in natural log units) against Concentration at constant wavelength.
Hence at constant path-length, a straight line which intercepts the origin should be observed with a gradient from which the cross-section can be calculated.
Assuming an ideal gas behaviour,
Pressures are converted into concentrations (where 760Torr = 101,325Pa; R=8.314Jmol -1K -1; T=295K; N A=6.022E23 molecules/mol; V/m 3)
The plot is not linear as deviations become significant at high concentrations.
The complicating factor not considered in the above analysis is the deviation from this 'initial concentration' of the experimental sample (NO 2), which arises due to its nature as a radical species: a dimerisation equilibrium is established.
From these 'initial concentrations' (ie., before equilibration) of monomeric NO 2, we can take in account the effect of equilibration, and thus make allowance for the deviation.(let c be the 'initial concentration', k be the equilibrium constant and x be the change)
The condition for equilibrium is that:
The change in initial concentration can be solved as a quadratic function of equilibration
// QED
Solving this quadratic gives two possible solutions for the change in concentration, with the magnitude of one solution larger than the initial concentration clearly being non-sense. The solution with the root term subtracted provides the correct result.
Under the condition of equilibration, the amount of NO 2 present would be less than that initially placed in the analytic cell. Hence corrected concentrations can be calculated.
Due to the volume dependence of the equilibrium, at increased pressure we expect the concentration of monomeric NO 2 to drop with increasing significance which helps to rationalise the deviations of graph 2 from a linear plot at high conc. Hence in attempting to attain higher concentrations by raising the pressure of NO 2, we inadvertently shift the equilibrium away from NO 2, which resists an increasing concentration. Thus at higher concentrations, and thus higher pressures, the ratio of nitrogen dioxide to dinitrogen tetroxide increases. This significance of this equilibrium becomes clear when we consider the spectral absorbancies which have some overlap. Thus the resulting absorbance is the sum of which caused by both species.
At the analytic wavelength of 385nm, dinitrogen tetroxide adsorbs with a cross-section of 3.5510 20 cm 2 / molecules - with this cross-section, the concentration (from the quadratic) and the path-length of the cell (10cm) known, allowances can be made (at this wavelength), and the co-absorbance compensated for.
With the interfering factor removed from the acquired absorbance data, the linear plot obeying the Lambert-Beer law is obtained.
Through application of the Lambert-Beer law, from the gradient can be found the cross-section of the reaction.
The results obtained compare well to those quoted in reference
With cross-section data available at different wavelengths, it is possible to calculate and hence remove the contribution to the absorbance spectrum that N 2O 4 makes. A new spectrum can be constructed with compensation taken into account for the contribution provided by both species present.
The photolytic reaction that takes place is one of photolytic dissociation. This liberates excited state oxygen which can subsequently react with molecular oxygen to form Ozone. In the atmosphere this is an important reaction, responsible for the regeneration of ozone.
Literary sources provide a bond dissociation energy H dissociation(N-O) of 304kJ/mol (394nm). The fact the quantum yield is quoted to be non-zero at wavelengths greater than this bond dissociation energy, perhaps reflects an input from thermal or other vibrational dissociative contributions, or perhaps even uncertainty.
From a plot of quantum yield vs. wavelength it is clear that upto an approximate value of =390nm, the quantum yield varies very little, but beyond the datapoint (=394nm) that the quantum yield rapidly drops off, as such the bond dissociation can be taken to be around this figure. The quantum yield drops to zero at long wavelengths because the photon no longer carries sufficient energy to bring about the photolytic dissociation reaction.
Photochemical reactions require the incidence of photons upon the reagent species. The amount of photons incident upon the reaction depends upon the photonic flux, a measure of photons per unit area, per unit time. Photons incident may then be absorbed, as determined by the cross section, and finally, not all absorbed photons will result in a reaction, and the fraction that do is expressed as the quantum yield. With knowledge of all three terms, an approximate summation can be found as the value for the integral
With the homogeneous and photolytic rate constants for the reaction involving the NO x,
Assuming the steady state approximation for the change in Nitrogen Dioxide, we can construct a function expressing the contributions made to the formation and consumption.
A homogeneous equilibrium is established, between all four species involved
The concentration of diatomic Oxygen is in an atmospheric excess, and so the activity can be taken as unity in the equilibrium expression.
Under the requirements of a steady state, ie., d[NO
2]=0, no net forwards or backwards reaction must be taking place; another way of saying the system is at equilibrium. Thus the steady state approximated rate equation can be combined with the equilibrium expression, which gives the equilibrium constant in terms of forwards and backwards reaction rates
By defining the Photostationary State parameter (PSS) as
At equilibrium constant is the reciprocal of the backwards / forwards rate, thus the PSS=1
The 3 rd equation from the reaction scheme stated previously can be combined into eqn 2
(this step is very quick because the atmospheric excess drives the reaction forwards, and both species involved are highly reactive radical with very little activation energy for attaining the transition state)
From which a steady state approximated rate equation to be constructed.
The mixing ratios must first be converted to concentrations before the equilibrium amount of ozone can be found, and then the ozone concentration converted back to a mixing ratio.
The mixing ratio of ozone can be found by considering the equilibrium established between NO, NO 2 and O 2 in terms of the kinetic constants.
This balance of reactants to products is the photostationary state. The presence of species capable of oxidising NO to NO 2 through radical oxidation presents the system with additional NO 2 molecules which can in turn be photolylsed, thus producing more Ozone which subsequently leads to a net ozone production. This perturbation of the photostationary state can be brought about the radical oxidising species, hydroperoxyl and organic peroxyl radicals, for example.
This is particularly pertinent when considering the chemistry of photochemical smog. Automotive exhaust can contain unburned, or partially burned olefins. These are particularly reactive due to the pi bond, and combine rapidly with ambient species to form alkyl radical, which inturn combine with oxygen to form organic peroxidyl radicals.
These then react with NO, to form NO 2, which then forms O 3, which is a nasty constituent of photochemical smog.
A similar set of reactions apply to the formation of peroxyl radicals from aldehydes, alkanes and other organic species.