Fluid molecules are highly mobile and move over each other with ease, and hence a fluid cannot easily resist a displacement due to a force. However, a kind of internal resistance is exhibited, that impairs the free motion of these molecules past each other, and is referred to as the dynamic viscosity. Thus the flow of a fluid is strongly affected by its viscosity.
When a stress is applied to a body, a deformation will occur. Shearing is one such type of deformation, a type of strain. It is the bending of a medium arising from compression on one side and tensile elongation on the other of a volume on which a force is acting. The modelled used to rationalise the flow is one in which the fluid flow is visualised as the variation in displacement of 'layers' per unit time with the distance from the plane at which the force is acting.
Hence there exists a linear velocity gradient termed the shear rate, defined by the expression
A new quantity, stress () is introduced to remove the area dependence of the viscous resistance of the force ie., Stress is the relationship between an applied force and the orthogonal planar area over which it acts.
Thus with increasing shear rate, the stress will increase.
A fluid that can be modelled accurately using this scheme is a Newtonian Fluid, and is one that obeys Newton's law of Viscosity ie., there is no rate dependence of the viscosity. The magnitude of this viscosity can be quantified by the coefficient of viscosity (), and relates the force to the velocity gradient and area.
Alternatively put, relating the stress to the shearing rate
When a fluid sample is placed between a rotating disc and a stationary surface, an effective flow is established, with a linear flow tangent to the angular rotation.
A tangent to the revolution is the linear velocity, which varies with radius from the axel
It is this rotational velocity () that causes the shearing deformation, and is the shearing rate.
The viscosity of the solution can be elucidated experimentally by spinning the rotatable disc with a known torque and measuring the stress resistance caused by a known area of fluid as a function of the shearing rate.
However, a solution of P84 is not a Newtonian fluid - it's viscosity is drops with increasing shear rate, and is thus referred to as a 'shear thinning' fluid.
The linear intervening region is described using a power law
Where n is the power-law index (typically 
 n 
)
P84 is a difunctional tri-block copolymer surfactant of ethylene oxide and propylene oxide. The constitution of the polymers is such that the substance is amphiphillic in nature, and can thus act as a surfactant and spontaneously associates in solution. With a central block of 43 hydrophobic oxypropylene units terminated by blocks of 19 hydrophilic oxyethylene units (PEO 19PPO 43PEO 19), the polymer weighs 4200 mass units, and is available commercially as 10% micellar solution from BASF under the tradename 'Pluronics'and 'Poloxamer' from ICI. It finds many varied applications owing to its surfactant properties, for example in pharmaceuticals as a drug solubilizer and delayed release agent, also in the textiles and detergents industries.
The aqueous solubility of the both comonomers is temperature dependant, with the degree of solvation dropping with increasing temperature, hence a reduction in solubility. However, whilst oxyethylene is highly soluble at all temperatures in water (0-100C), the solubility of oxypropylene is dramatically temperature dependant - being fairly soluble in water below 20C but nearly entirely insoluble above. Thus the amphiphillic behaviour of the triblock polymer exhibits interesting temperature dependence.
As a surfactant, P84 in aqueous solution has a strong propensity for aggregation, leading to the formation of micelles; thus P84 is fairly soluble (>10% w/w, 25C). Prior to micellization, single-chained polymer-coil unimers of P84 exist in aqueous solution. Above the cmT (or cmC), spheroidial micelles form, with cores of partially solvated polypropylene oxide and highly solvated corona's of polyethylene oxide. By means of light scattering techniques, it has been observed that with increasing temperature, dehydration of the core occurs, and enables the elongative growth of the micelle to a thread-like structure as the aggregation number rises. Micellization is found to be dependant upon the ionic strength of solution, and the critical micellization temperature can be brought down by the addition of ionic salts.
The viscosity of an aqueous stock solution of Pluronics P84 (4% w/w), co-dissolved with sodium chloride (2 moldm -3) was obtained as a function of shearing rate. The co-dissolution of sodium chloride acts to raise the ionic strength of the solvent, which has the effect of lowering the critical micellular temperature and the micelle 'sphere to rod' (sol to gel) phase transition temperature. Under the conditions of the experiment, the temperatures range is such that the rod aggregation mode predominates in vast excess over spheroid and unimer modes. Hence, with no micellation phase changes taking place, meaningfully comparable results are obtainable. In addition, the temperature range required is lower which acts to reduce evaporation (ie., the transition temperature is reduced from 75C to ca. 36C), which is also more easily maintainable.
The shear stress was determined using a TA Apparatus 'plate and cone' viscometer, over the range of shear rates between 0.01s -1 and 100s -1, at two different temperatures (37C and 42C) with a 1 inclined cone. A peltier heat pump and thermal controller was employed to maintain isothermal conditions throughout the experiment.
The apparatus runs in three stages: pre-test equilibration (temperature), main scan, and post-test equilibration.
Data for solutions at both 37 and 42C demonstrate strong sheer thinning behaviour. To achieve a more detailed analysis of the viscosity data, the use of natural logarithms is employed which demonstrates the power trends more significantly.
The rheology of the triblock polymer, Pluronics P84 is well understood. The viscometric measurements are consistent with the theory that in solution, P84 exists as a polydisperse solution of cylindrical aggregates, which gross structure changes as an external shear force is applied. At critical shear rates, the aggregates experience a shear banding phenomena. The intial alignment of micelles results in a solution composed of two phases co-existing which is reflected by the plateau region of the stress/rate curve.