Neanderthals are known as lived between 250k and 40kya in Europe and South West Asia, and 500 individuals in total have been identified, and 12 semi-complete skeletons have been largely contributing the study of Neanderthal anatomy to investigate their environment, behaviour and lifestyles.
The physical features of Neanderthals are relatively robust in appearance, short heavily muscled body with relatively short distal limbs, distinctive cranial features in brain size, prominent brow ridge, projecting nose and nasal cavities. According to traditional view, these Neanderthal features might be the result of a genetic isolation under heavy selective stress. However, recently it is suggested that the possible reflection of severe lifestyle and cold adaptation during the last ice age. Thus this essay focused on the
Question of how much Neanderthal anatomy represents adaptations to the cold environments, with representing the significance of Neanderthal living environment, the climate reconstruction by oxygen isotope ratio analysis in deep sea sediments, and possible anatomical adaptation with several theories and researches.
The Middle Palaeolithic period is known for its dramatic climatic change, which is the later stages of Middle and early late Pleistocene. Pleistocene has at least ten of condition shifts between glacial and interglacial. The definition of glacial periods is a cold climatic episode with widespread ice sheets and reduced sea levels. On the other hand, interglacials are warm climatic episodes, with little or no glacial climatic process and high sea levels. The study of oxygen isotope ratios in deep sea sediment is key for investigating past climate, because deep sea sediments represent accumulation of oxygen isotopes. The skeletons of microscopic organisms, foraminifera, are mainly applied. These foraminifera absorb two stable oxygen isotopes from sea water. Measuring the ration of 18O and 16O in foraminifera reveals relative balance of global sea water and ice sheets. High 18O means growing ice sheets, and reducing global sea levels in glacial period. On the other hand high 16O represent warm climate with rising sea levels and reducing ice sheets.