In general, plant remains are applied extensively in the study of environmental archaeology, providing the basic view of the environmental context for early human communities. The evidence of disturbance traditionally had been considered to be associated with starting of domestic plants by Neolithic population, however this perspective was modified by increase available evidences of forest disturbance in European Late Mesolithic period (Zvelebil 1994:35-74). The new idea explains the purpose of clearance as the manipulation of environment by human to raise the productivity and predictability of the plant resources in order to the increase total carrying capacity of the environment (Mellars 1976:15-45). In the purpose of this essay, between 10,000- 5000 BC may suggest expectations about the nature and distribution of the Mesolithic subsistence systems (Clarke 1976: 449-481). However the evidence of anthropogenic forest disturbance is difficult to distinguish from natural disturbance factors. Thus the objective in this essay is to discuss the basic view of the palaeobotanical study in order to understand economy, settlement and seasonality in the Mesolithic, with evaluating the degree of human and natural disturbance factors to past environment. In first section, outline the significance of palynological and macrobotanical studies to understand environment followed by evaluation of deforestation mechanisms and anthropogenic forest clearances factors, which are investigated by recent ethnographic and palaeobotanical studies. Then, third section introduces the evidence of seasonally movements and settlement patterns with palaeobotanical records. Finally, introduce the natural disturbance factors in forest environment with the methodological and interpretational limitations in palaeobotanical analysis.
The palaeobotanical studies have been contributing the great role in the understanding of past human activity and their environment. Further researches and technical improvements revealed that the evidence is far more extensive than previously thoughts (Zvelebil 1994:35-74). Therefore this section is going to briefly represent the significance of the palynological and macrobotanical analysis, with the basic view of sampling and preservation of the evidences.
Pollen grains frequently derive from the seed-producing plants, which are disseminated over wide areas by wind, water, animals or insects. These pollen evidences are obtained from stratified sequences of sediment (Bell and Walker 1992: 11-49). In general, pollen data are sampled either from off-site or on-site. Off-site pollen data is obtained from bogs and lakes at distance from archaeological sites, particularly at upland, northern, and western locations. On the contrary, on-site pollen data is obtained within archaeological soil contexts, although data has the difficulty in interpretation compared to off-site pollen data (Edwards 1998:69-88). Figure 1 represents the maps of dominant woodland types in Britain 5000BP, due to the evidence of pollen record (Edwards 1999: 531-544).
On the other hand, macroscopic plant remains include fruits, seeds, wood and other part of plant including leaves, buds, scales and spines. Moreover, the results of the burning forests are also recognised from the inclusion of microscopic carbon particles (Bell and Walker 1992: 11-49). Both pollen and plant remains are best preserved in anaerobic conditions, such as lake sediments and peat deposits, but plant remains also occur in cave sediments, riverine sediments, buried soils and archaeological contexts, especially in carbonised conditions (Bell and Walker 1992: 11-49). However, the preservation of pollen evidences with chalkland soil relatively difficult (Edwards 1999: 531-544). According to Zvelebil (1994:35-74), there are approximately 200 and 450 edible plant species in Europe temperate regions. Table 1, 2 and 3 (Zvelebil 1994:35-74) shows the species of plant remains and the excavated place.
Intensive plant use for food consumption has been identified from contextual information, for example the high frequency of broken hazel-nut shells from Mesolithic settlements, which indicates that possibility of high reliance to the hazel nuts in the Mesolithic diets (Mellars 1976:15-45). These intensive plant use supports the notion of wild plant husbandry instead of the incidental and opportunistic use of plants for main diets (Zvelebil 1994:35-74). Moreover, the estimation for the plants contribution to diet in the Mesolithic is between 30 and 40%, in order to satisfy human protein and energy requirements from plant food consumption, because the nuts and grass-seeds contained a good supply of proteins, fats and carbohydrates, although it varies between individuals and regions. Moreover, the nuts and grass-seeds contained a good supply of proteins, fats and carbohydrates (Clarke 1976: 449-481). The heavy reliance on plant foods might be expected to increase the economic and the social status of women, providing relative independence of men's foraging activities, and invest women with the responsibility and rights associated with the distribution of plants in the community (Zvelebil 1994:35-74).
The idea of clearing forests by pre-agriculturalists is first introduced by Hans Goransson, Swedish palynologist, who claimed that foragers generated coppiced woodland by ring-barking for assisting shrubs and grasses to flourish under a more open canopy during the early pre-Neolithic stage (Zvelebil 1994:35-74). Generally these forest management activities include coppicing, pollarding, shredding, and leaf foddering (Edwards 1998:69-88). This section is going to discuss the forest clearance as part of Mesolithic promotional strategy, which disturbed the natural environment, and evidence is represented in pollen data, as well as ethnographical studies of modern hunter-gatherer society.
The deliberate forest clearance and the maintenance of a more open landscape by Late Mesolithic groups have been frequently conducted by occurrence of fire as part of promotional strategy (Zvelebil 1994:35-74). In especially, the manipulation of non-domesticated plants and animals are explained in Mellars (1976: 15-45). Firstly, burning forest increase the fertility of the soil, at the same time fire leads the reduction in the density of the over-storey vegetation. Consequently these encourage the increase in available food to browse eating animals (Mellars 1976:15-45). These occurrences of fire are supported by microscopic and atmospheric charcoal, increase in fire indicators as well as changes in pollen diagrams during the Mesolithic (Brown 1997: 133-143). In particular, there is evidence of declines in the larger canopy- forming taxa, oak, elm and lime, at the same time under-storey species, hazel and alder also decline but frequently represent a regional rise associated with clearance phases (Brown 1997: 133-143), therefore likely to expand considerably as a result of the repeated occurrence of fires, hazel is known to be a fire tolerant species (Mellars 1976:15-45). In order to detect the purposive clearance by human agencies from wide range of forest clearance episodes, three major principals tend to be applied. First is the occurrence of artefacts and archaeological sites should be associated with the pollen events. Secondly wood should be used in archaeological structure. Finally, the evidence of inferred use of artefacts, specifically axe from contexts (Brown 1997: 133-143).
Moreover, the ethnographic data suggests that the deliberate and systematic burning of vegetation is an almost universal practice among recent hunting and gathering populations (Mellars 1976:15-45). The occurrence of fire in economic terms is described in Mellars (1976: 15-45) ethnographically. In the first place, burning is likely to have led to a substantial increase in the carrying capacity of forested environments for human populations, due to the increase of a number of herbivores and plants. Secondly, burning increase the mobility of human groups by reducing in the amount of time, effort, and energy of the economic activities. These contributions by burning forest also lead to an increase in total human population, as well as changing settlement patterns of human communities (Mellars 1976:15-45). Different burning regimes are illustrated in Figure 2 (Zvelebil 1994:35-74).
However, there are several limitations in ethnographic studies, firstly similar environments tend to be considered as represent better data, although the hunter-gatherers of temperate deciduous forests are remarkably decreasing (Simmons 1996:156-195). Moreover, while analogical reasoning highly applied in archaeology, there are significant differences between analogies and the substitution of an ethnographically known practice into a prehistoric context (Brown 1997: 133-143).
The ethnographical studies frequently suggest that the fire clearance is often associated with the evidence of seasonal movements by hunter gatherers, because people tend to select some foraging grounds, by leaving others to recover from hunting and gathering activities. Such alternative use of foraging territories is widespread, especially among the North American and the Siberian groups (Zvelebil 1994:35-74). Moreover, strong seasonal variability also frequently led to the idea of seasonally movement, due to the annual cycle of available plant resources (Dark 2004:39-45). Therefore, this section is going to emphasise on the palaeobotanical evidences of seasonally occupations and population movements by Mesolithic hunter-gatherer society, as well as introduce the environmental disturbance by possible plants cultivation in pre-Neolithic period.
The site occupation at Starr Carr was traditionally interpreted as winter-base camp site according to the first excavation by Clark, although the remains of the bracket fungus and charred hazel nuts suggest deliberate collection in summer or autumn. However, the possibility of storing plant remains led to recognised as faunal assemblages are more preferable seasonal indicators. Recently high-resolution pollen and charred plant remains from worked aspen timbers represent the macroscopic charcoal of reeds and aspen, which indicate human occupation at the both time of burning and when re-growth had occurred. Moreover, charred bud scale, catkin scales, fruits and seeds represent the seasons of burning, which is summarised in the table 4 and 5 below (Dark 2004:39-45). Therefore plant remains suggest activity in summer, perhaps through to early autumn. However, caution must be employed in interpretation of these data because of the various types of plant remains possibly could have been charred after shedding from the plant (Dark 2004:39-45). According to the combination of faunal assemblages and plant remains, Star Carr raised the possibility of a human presence year-round, although it is unclear whether continuous period or short visit occupation. Therefore, in order to use plant remains as seasonal indicators, the samples should be a type produced only in certain seasons of the year, and also should be directly linked to human activity, as well as it should be less likely to have been stored and moved from site to site (Dark 2004:39-45).
Indeed by comparison with the English uplands, Scotland has more limited evidence of Mesolithic impact (Bell and Walker 1992: 147-185). The pollen, charcoal and sedimentological data suggest possible anthropogenic fire occurrences in Inner and Outer Hebrides. The evidence of anthropogenic impacts has been identified from Inner Hebrides, whereas no artefactual evidences have been recovered from the Outer Hebrides (Edwards 1998:69-88). In the case of anthropogenic disturbance forest occurs, the process of girdling trees or stripping would have been possible mechanisms (Brown 1997: 133-143), therefore the burning evidence in Outer Hebrides were considered as natural caused fire (Edwards 1998:69-88). However, these charcoal records may represent the necessity of burning to keep warm in domestic fire, due to the coldest climatic evidence between 8400 and 8000BP. Figure 3 represents pollen sites from the Outer Hebrides (Edwards 1999: 531-544). Figure 4 and 5 represent that selected pollen and spore taxa and charcoal to pollen ratios from Inner Hebrides and Outer Hebrides. These taxa are expressed as percentage of total land pollen (Edwards and Sugden 2003:11-19). The absence of the archaeological finds in Outer Hebrides might be a function of the intensity of Mesolithic-orientated survey and excavation, therefore further research are required. Moreover, North York Moors site of North Gill also has episodes of vegetational disturbance and charcoal alternating with undisturbed conditions. (Innes and Simmons)
However, Clarke (1976: 449-481) suggests that there were more complex population movements, where differences in altitude and rainfall were insignificant or, where there was a scheduling conflict between the seasonal requirements of productive resources, or special local, ecological or climatic conditions were preferred (Clarke 1976: 449-481).
In addition, stable isotope analysis is also applied to gain insights into settlement patterns and seasonal movements of population by detecting food consumption from human bone collagen. Schulting and Richards (2000:55-65) represent the stable carbon isotope results from Caisteal nan Gillean II in late Mesolithic site, which support the possibility of seasonal movements between the islands and the mainland (Schulting and Richards 2000: 55-65).
In the purpose to describe pre-Neolithic plant cultivation evidences, this essay include agricultural evidence to Mesolithic settlement patterns. The palynological evidence of plants cultivation is identified from central northern and Western European Mesolithic sites before the emergence of Neolithic communities. There are direct evidence of agriculture from cereal-type pollen and indirect evidence from pollen types associated with arable farming (Brown 1997: 133-143). Although low dispersal rates of cereal pollen tends to be difficult to identify the evidences. Moreover, the cereal pollen evidences include pollen, which corresponds to Cerealia in size, morphology, or both in which case it is regarded as derived from cultivars, therefore cereal-type pollen cannot always be distinguished from cultivated Cerealia pollen. There is the evidence of agricultural practice simultaneously in the several traditions, although no archaeological evidence has been advanced for the indigenous cultivation in Mesolithic Europe (Zvelebil 1994: 35-74).
Brown (1997: 133-143) have re-examined the forest clearance in the Mesolithic Britain, and investigate the opportunistic exploitation of some natural cause clearances, including woodland regeneration, climatic factors, wind-throw, drought, disease, lightening-strike fires, and paludification. This author summarised these opportunistic models of deforestation, which is represented in figure 6 below (Brown 1997: 133-143). This section introduces the natural cause clearance, which also makes impact on the pollen diagrams. Moreover discuss the methodological and interpretational limitations of palaeobotanical studies.
Simmons and Innes (1996: 193-197) suggest that the potential source of fire in British deciduous forest is lightning-caused fire, which tends to be occurred in spring, and especially during severe droughts period. However, the study at North Gill by Simmons (1993:109-118) indicates that the relatively low frequencies of lightning setting fire to the deciduous woods of upland Britain. This low frequency of natural fire is also supported by the study of Bennettal. (1990:635-642), which suggests the early post glacial woodlands are identified as not fire-climax type, according to the charcoal and pollen analyses of lake sequences in East Anglia.
Next important mechanism of degradation in natural woodland is wind-throw, the spatial pattern of wind-throw is controlled by tree height, woodland composition and site exposure, particularly slope orientation and angle. However, the palynological effect of a wind-throw clearance may be prolonged by the delay in regeneration caused by increased grazing (Brown 1997: 133-143).
Moreover, it is still generally believed that the climate became wetter and this caused changes in forest composition around the elm decline (Brown 1997: 133-143). Furthermore, Whitehouse and Smith (2004: 199-208) suggest that grazing animals are also considered as forest disturbance factors, with describing these role in natural environment, which is largely supported by entomological studies. On the other hand, Coles and Orme (1983:95-100) have suggested that the possibility of forest disturbance by beaver in north western European forested environment. In general, beaver dams rivulets with opening forest canopy, make available quantities of dead wood and increase in both aquatic and dung beetles, moreover it encourage aquatic plants and benefit a range of wild life. The evidences of beaver associated with human activities are represented at Hampstead Hearth in London, Thatcham in Berkshire, and Star Carr in Yorkshire, because these favourable position is tend to be occupied by human. The overall density of beaver colonies is represented in Fig 7 (Coles and Orme 1983:95-100).
In order to reconstruct past environments and human activities, there are a numbers of limitations in palaeobotanical analysis, include issues of preservation, technology, as well as interpretation. There are significant chronological problems in the study of plant remains, because only one third of pollen results are dated from 328 available pollen data from the post 5000BP deposits (Edwards 1999: 531-544). While north-west and northern Europe have many detailed pollen diagrams and improved fine resolution palynological studies. In other areas have been rarely conducted at a level of broad regional reconstruction (Zvelebil 1994: 35-74). Furthermore, archaeologists must also consider the time that palynological data take to obtain, three weeks of excavation or off-site sampling may translate into months or even years of palynological work in the laboratory (Zvelebil 1994: 35-74). In the preservation aspects, agricultural practices such as drainage and liming may be responsible for the lack of pollen in profiles, therefore the urgent consideration about site preservation is needed from danger by anthropogenic degeneration or destructions (Edwards 1998: 69-88). In the issues of interpretational aspects, many workers have used a variety of rather unspecific terms in order to explain vegetation change, such as anthropogenic disturbance, clearance-phases, deforestation events, and pre-elm decline deforestation. This may be partly the result of a lack of formalisation of palynological research (Brown 1997: 133-143). Therefore the understandings of past environments as well as human activities would be enhanced by the further research and methodological improvement as well as the combination with other evidences, such as sedimentology, faunal assemblages, and entomology.
According to this essay, the anthropogenic forest disturbance are clearly represented at least North Gill, Inner and Outer Hebrides, and the purpose of anthropogenic clearance forest as promotional strategies is discussed by ethnographic studies. Moreover, the seasonal occupations and movement patterns are identifiable on the records from Star Carr. However, it is clear other disturbance factors have also contributed to the impact on pollen diagrams, which tend to be supported by the evidence of lightening fire, animal disturbance, climatic factors, wind-throw and plant cultivation. Therefore the careful consideration are necessarily important in order to evaluate the settlement patterns, economy and seasonality of Mesolithic population.
This conclusion attempts to summarise the brief discussion of the extensiveness of anthropogenic forest disturbance, includes forest clearance, settlement patterns, seasonal movements, as well as simultaneous plant cultivation evidences, which are introduced with palaeobotanical evidences from Mesolithic Europe. Although the degree and extensiveness of disturbance vary in region and period, this essay supports wide range of human activity on the natural environment. Moreover, the palaeobotanical evidences supports highly developed economy and occupational patterns more than previously thoughts. However, it is better to consider natural disturbance factors as well, in order to evaluate the environmental impact, which are interrelated complexly each other. Although there are the palaeobotanical limitations in methodology, preservation, and interpretation, the further research and improvement of technology will largely contribute to the clear understandings of human environmental disturbance and other interrelated disturbance.