Now moving on to the exciting developments in our wonderful field over the last decade. My area of interest is still functions of a real variable and Fourier's discovery that arbitrary functions can be represented in series of sines and cosines is, in my opinion, a magnificent piece of mathematics.
We are living in an interesting time for mathematics and I feel our profession is really taking off. My advice to you would be to continue your work on pure mathematics but also consider applied mathematics which the French are becoming more concerned with. Base yourself in France if you can as I feel the focus of mathematics is shifting there. Continuity is an intriguing subject at the moment. Cauchy has given us his definition although only for continuity at an interval, not on a point - something you could consider perhaps. I have a reservation about one piece of Cauchy's work however. Abel commented in 1826 that there were flaws in his binomial theorem and described it as "a theorem that admits exceptions." Abel quotes the series  as a counter example which as I am sure you can see from Fourier's work, is copies of the function y = x/2 between -  and  and discontinuous at all odd multiples of . Perhaps Cauchy does not think this relevant to his theorem or possibly he is only considering continuity on an interval, in which case the theorem is right. Cauchy uses this binomial theorem to prove that  with his belief that if you have a series of continuous functions then the series defines a continuous function. I advise you to have a look at this.
The genius of Cauchy can be seen in not only the rigour he has brought to mathematics, but also what I think is the most significant mathematical development of recent years. Cauchy has destroyed the foundations of Lagrangian calculus. He discovered that Lagrange had used a flawed argument at the start of his account that every function admits a Taylor series expansion. Cauchy was more careful and restricted it to functions which, with their first n derivatives, are continuous within the interval [0,h]. Previously we mathematicians thought our task was to capture the fact that every function could be expanded as a Taylor series in the most rigorous way. Cauchy has shown that it is possible to define a function that does not agree as a Taylor series. He uses the example  . This is not identical to zero, but all terms of its Taylor series are zero. Cauchy has given us the question of how, if at all, can a function agrees with a representation of it. Think about this and its possible ramifications for Fourier series. It is something I will be working on.
I urge you to have a close look at Crelle's journal, the first of its kind in Germany and an example of mathematicians trying to raise the standards in that country. You will be fascinated by Abel's work on the solvability of equations by radicals. Did you know he has succeeded in showing that the general polynomial equation of degree 5 cannot be solvable by radicals? Look at the exceptional changes in our field in recent times and enjoy this mathematical age we are living in.