Applied Linguistics is the study of language in the real world - how it is really used by individuals and throughout society. Linguists find conclusions about language use by studying examples of it, by collecting evidence and analysing it. One way of doing this is by searching 'concordance lines', which provide multiple examples of words or phrases in their context in a particular corpus. Critical Discourse Analysis allows the linguist to study the relationship between linguistic choices and effects (Cook 2003), and enable one to see the way language is manipulated in order to persuade. Both these areas of Applied Linguistics will be investigated, and should provide interesting results.
The field of corpus linguistics concerns words or phrases in their context. One can find the ways in which a word or phrase is used by searching corpora - vast banks of language data that relate to how words are used in reality.
The phrase 'set in' is not in itself negative, nor does it create negative connotations. However in its context, it is clear that it is used by writers to relate to undesirable things, for example, 'panic set it'. This claim was proven by searching the on-line concordance lines from 'The Times' newspaper from March 1995.
Out of the nine uses where 'set in' is used as a verb and particle, it was found that eight have negative prosody - the phrase collocates with words with unpleasant connotations. For example: abstract nouns such as 'panic', 'recession', 'complacency', 'tiredness', 'disappointment' and 'blues' are used in terms of what has 'set in'. The nouns which have 'set in' in this particular corpus are 'infection' and 'rot', both considered highly undesirable. The remaining example is, 'But from the 1830's a reaction set in'. This does not indicate whether or not the phrase has a negative prosody as not enough information is shown in the concordance line - a possible problem in this field. Although it would not be grammatically wrong to place a word such as 'joy' with 'set in', but using the corpus it is clear that in reality it tends to be used with words with negative implications.
By using a different type of corpus, the previous conclusion about the negative prosody of the phrase 'set in' was confirmed: The fictional corpus of the language used in 'Sherlock Holmes Stories' provided two results of 'set in'. The phrase collocates with 'sharp frost' and 'equinoctial gales', both undesirable types of weather.
When considering the phrase 'resulting in', the words that follow tend to have negative company. Grammatically, it does not have to be used in such a way, so I searched 'The Times' newspaper March 1995 corpus to find its uses and prove if this claim is correct. The nine concordance lines shown in the corpus support this claim to an extent: for example, 'persistent headache'; 'drastic re-think'; '10 bookings' (concerning football players); 'excess body fat'; 'loss of more than $3 million' and 'money not being invested'. The remaining two examples have neither negative nor positive prosody, they keep neutral company. The corpus has allowed me to investigate my theory and prove that 'resulting in' is in fact generally used in phrases with negative connotations.
According to Cook (2003), 'language can be used to tell the truth...yet it can also be used to distort facts'. In Applied Linguistics, this 'distortion' is known as persuasive language: the careful selection of vocabulary and grammar by the writer, to create a version of reality that the reader will accept as true.
Using Critical Discourse Analysis, one can observe this interpersonal function of language, revealing the linguistic techniques used. The text I have chosen to discuss is an article from a tabloid newspaper 'The Daily Mirror' dated November 17 2005, entitled 'CSA RIP' (see appendix). The article concerns the Child Support Agency and its financial failures, and the writer is trying to persuade the reader using language that the agency should be shut down.
Negative emotive language or 'loaded lexis' such as the attributive adjectives 'shambolic', 'inglorious' and 'disaster prone', and the abstract nouns 'incompetence', 'torment' and the past tense verb 'scrapped' all act to reinforce the writer's opinion that the CSA is in a state of disorder and their employees are incompetent. Their drama attracts the reader's attention, helping to further convince them of the writer's view.
Within the relatively short piece of text, the writer includes four examples of reported speech. All of the interviewees draw on the negative features of the CSA, and no space is dedicated to an opposing idea, such as a CSA worker who might have defended the agency. For example, the Prime Minister Tony Blair states, '"I think the problem is a fundamental one"', and Kim Hull, a mother who has faced difficulties with the CSA said, '"The CSA has caused more problems than it ever solved"'. This in itself is another linguistic choice made by the writer: if no alternative opinion is offered, then the ideas expressed are more likely to be believed.
In addition to particular lexical choices, the writer has also used grammar techniques to persuade the reader to feel a certain way about the CSA. Modal verbs such as 'may' and 'could' are used to create a sense of uncertainty, and so the writer can make assumptions without actually saying that they are true. This technique allows the writer to present what are, in reality his or her ideas as facts, thus persuading the reader that their opinion on the subject is the true version. The writer also places blame on the CSA by using active verbs, such as 'the CSA has caused...', and 'CSA announces its failing...'. By emphasising the agency as the 'thing' doing the action, the writer attracts the readers' attention to the concept that it the agency that is at fault.
Statistics are used to support the claims made by the writer. A table is included in the article, highlighting mistakes made by the agency in date order, such as '2004: Backlog of cases hits 170,000'. By including data like this, and ignoring any possible positive data, the writer uses statistics and figures, (however selected they may be) to prove their point and persuade the reader that the agency is failing and should be shut down.
In Applied Linguistics, it is important to study language that is used in the world today. The field itself is the relation of knowledge about language to decision making in the real world. For example, if one uses Corpus Linguistics, you can examine a particular word or phrase as it is actually used, and use the results of the investigation to make further decisions about language. It is through Applied Language Studies that linguists find answers about the language itself. The studying of the newspaper article, 'CSA RIP' provided results that show how the writer adapted language to make the reader feel a certain way. Such findings will in turn help to develop knowledge about information and persuasion in language. These two cases of the application of Applied Language Studies to language in the real world are fine examples of its importance in a society where linguistic interaction is vital.