The study of Applied Linguistics aims to understand the use of language in the real world. By carrying out a multimodal analysis of an advertisement, I aim to discover the language techniques used to persuade viewers to buy a product. Secondly I will interview a number of people about a contested aspect of language. Both studies will attempt to provide important data about language use in society today.
Multimodal texts combine many types of sign which work collectively to signify a concept. Television advertisements are examples of multimodal texts, which combine a 'syntagmatic sequence of imagines, sounds and words' (Jonathan Bignell 2002:28). By analysing the signs within the Surfer advertisement for the alcoholic drinks company Guinness, one can decipher how they work together and the meanings they aim to create. The advertisement has been represented in a table format (see Appendix One) to easily illustrate and compare the four sign systems used within it.
The sign system of verbal language is used throughout the advertisement in conjunction with visual and aural signs (see Appendix 1). A male voice begins by describing the actions of the surfer in the first scene, 'He waits' - this waiting is synonymous with waiting for a pint of Guinness to settle before being ready to drink. The narrator then emphasises the sheer frustration of waiting by imitating a clock ticking, 'tick followed tock', thus creating the signified concept of anguish and waiting. The narrator then refers to Ahab, a character from the book Moby Dick by Herman Melville. This story appears to be unrelated to the surfers in the advertisement, but in fact they are linked by a common notion - waiting. 'Ahab' waiting for the whale Moby Dick is synonymous with the surfers waiting for the perfect wave. The narrator then says, 'And the fat drummer hit the beat with all his heart'. Simultaneously the aural sign of a drum beat increases its volume - creating connotations of an increased heartbeat as a result of the excitement. In turn this excitement is linked to the signified anticipation of drinking the Guinness. The final statement by the narrator is, 'Here's to waiting', creating the signified concept that the wait is worthwhile.
The complete advertisement is in black and white: the signification is the two colours; the signified is Guinness - a black and white drink. The advertisement uses the iconic images of four surfers and the electronic iconic images of horses jumping from the crest of the wave. Jonathan Bignell (2002:32) points out that 'signs in ads also have connotations, meanings which come from our culture'. Jumping horses are a metaphor for rolling waves, adding to the drama and excitement of the advertisement. After the wave, there are two 'still' shots of the triumphant surfer. The signification here is simply the surfer's satisfaction at riding the wave, but the signified is the celebration that the wait for the Guinness to settle is over.
The only linguistic sign in this advertisement is the slogan for Guinness - 'Good things come to those who...'. Although this sign is arbitrary, it works because it is used conjunctively with other types of sign. The narrator says, 'Here's to waiting', so the producers did not even need to finish the linguistic sign as the viewer already knows what is about to be said. Guy Cook (2001:103) confirms this, 'the denotation of a word is an analysis of its signified; its sense is its relation to other signs'. The suspense created by the unfinished sentence adds to the semantic field of waiting which runs throughout the advert. The words are above the iconic image of a pint of Guinness settling - this is the 'super-sign' (Bignell, 2002) that 'holds up' the other signs in the advertisement.
Taboo language is an area that produces many strong opinions, and so carrying out interviews concerning the topic will provide an interesting set of data to analyse. According to Peter Trudgill (2000:18), taboo language is used to refer to taboo behaviour - 'forbidden, or regarded as immoral or improper'. The interviewees are: a twenty year old female 'A' (see Appendix Two); a twenty year old male 'B'; and a forty-five year old female 'C'. I chose these people in order to investigate the differences or similarities in opinions which may be caused by gender, and also age.
Interviewees A and B both admitted to using taboo language in the form of swearing in their daily speech, with B declaring that it is 'alright in society today'. C (the eldest out of the three interviewees), regarded the use of taboo language as unnecessary and offensive. The two females (A and C) agreed that the aggression behind the spoken word is worse that the sound of the word itself. B differed here, stating that his use of taboo language is, 'for humour' rather than anger.
When discussing the situations where using taboo language in the form of swearing is acceptable, there were many similarities with the interviewees' answers. They agreed that it is inappropriate in any formal situation, with interviewees B and C specifically stating a job interview. Interviewee B decided that using it does not help to present himself, 'in the best possible way'. When describing the people they would or would not use taboo words in front of - they all confirmed that they would avoid it in front of relatives and children. Interviewees A and B, both aged twenty, said that they use taboo language where their conversation partner has already done so, A doing this with figures of authority such as lecturers and teachers and B with his older sister. Interviewees B and C avoid taboo language around people they do not know, as not to unknowingly offend.
All three interviewees made reference to the taboo word cunt, both to its severity and inappropriateness in daily speech. Interviewee C could only describe it using its initial consonant, 'the c-word'. C also found the word fuck to be unacceptable, whereas B, the twenty year old male, uses it regularly in front of friends. The interviewees agreed that taboo words concerning sex and genitals were distasteful, and ones that describe faeces, i.e. 'crap' and 'poo' were softer; with A arguing that she does not even considered them taboo.
When asked to recall a situation where the use of taboo language has shocked them, the interviewees all expressed annoyance at the level of swearing used in front of children: whether by the parent; or by other children. Interviewee B added that elderly people using strong language was shocking, and unexpected. The shock felt here is explained by Janet Holmes (2001:206) as she states 'people [...] tend to use more vernacular forms as they get older', and so it would be unusual to hear older people swearing. A and B (the younger of the interviewees) agreed that they associate taboo language with speakers from the lower class, particularly males. C held opposing views here, stating that the upper classes seem to use it too, with women using the same amount of taboo language as men.
In conclusion, both the analysis of the multimodal text and the analysis of the interview results produced a number of interesting points about language use. The makers of the Guinness combined many different types of visual signs and denotations: verbal; visual; aural; and linguistic in order to create a range of connotations. These were ideas of waiting and anticipation, frustration, determination and finally celebration. It became clear in the analysis that one sign can not be analysed without discussing another - they are intrinsically linked to create the desired effect: the viewer will believe that the emotions of the surfers will be recreated within themselves by waiting to drink a pint of Guinness, and so they will feel the need to buy the product.
The interviews that were carried out to understand opinions about taboo language resulted in a diverse range of results. The two interviewees who were the same age (twenty years) agreed on many aspects of the subject, for example they both use taboo language frequently whereas the older interviewee (forty-five years) did not. Both females agreed on certain aspects that the male did not, such as the aggressiveness behind swearing. There were however many notions that all three interviewees agreed on. This study could have been improved by interviewing more people to create a larger and more accurate range of results in order to further understand how language is really used and speakers' attitudes towards it.