The speech we use every day is determined and influenced by certain social variables. Two of these variables are class and gender. It has been suggested by Sociolinguists that individually, these social variables affect the way we use language in terms of grammar, vocabulary and pronunciation. In this essay I will discuss the effects of these two variables and also consider whether or not they are linked in shaping the way we speak.
David Crystal (2005:38) states that, 'One of the chief forms of sociolinguistic identity derives from the way in which people are organized into hierarchically ordered social groups, or classes.' The fact that we have different societies and lifestyles is reflected in the way we use language. Firstly one must understand what class is - a social or power variable that can be calculated using: the occupation of the family's breadwinner; the education of the respondent; and the family income. These class boundaries are however not clear-cut and their fluid nature makes ascertaining results from specific social groups somewhat challenging.
Peter Trudgill (2000:24) states that social barriers and social distance cause differences in linguistic choices in the same way as geographical distance. The 'social stratification' or hierarchical ordering in British society has resulted in 'social-class dialects'. Trudgill's results from The Model of regional and social variation (1974; in Trudgill, 2000) suggest that there is a direct correlation between social class and regional background (see Appendix One). The higher up the social scale you go, speakers are more likely to use Standard English. Conversely, the lower you move down the social scale, there is a greater chance that the speakers will use a regional or non-standard dialect. These results are mirrored with regards to accent - the higher up the social scale, speakers of the same class are likely to sound the same (specifically the overtly prestigious non-regional accent Received Pronunciation). The lower down the social scale, the less similar the speakers of the same class tend to sound (they might use more regional accents such as West Country or Cockney).
The effect of social class on use of vocabulary was studied by Alan Ross in 1954 (Holmes, 2001:136). The phrases, 'U' usage and 'Non-U' usage (where the 'U' refers to upper class) are used to distinguish between the vocabularies used by different social classes. A list was compiled of words considered 'U' such as - napkin, supper, sitting room. These are words that mostly only members of higher social classes would use. These were compared to 'Non-U' words such as - serviette, tea, lounge which tend to be used by members of lower social classes.
In 1966 William Labov produced The New York Department Store Study. Labov set out to prove that the use of a specific social dialect was not random but indeed socially stratified. In this instance he studied the pronunciation of the post-vocalic [r] in the words, "fourth floor" which was repeated twice by shop assistants in three stores, 'Saks' (a high status store where it is presumed that high class shop assistants are employed to serve high class customers), 'Macy's' (a store considered middle class), and 'Klein's' (a store selling cheaper items). The results displayed clear social stratification of [r] pronunciation (Holmes, 2001) (see Appendix Two). The higher the status of the store, the increase in the use of the [r] - its use is seen as prestigious in New York, and the lower the status of the store, the less it was used by shop assistants. This experiment highlighted the link between social status and pronunciation of language.
Another phonological experiment was conducted to analyse the percentage of [h]-dropping between social classes in West Yorkshire and Norwich by Peter Trudgill in 1974 (Holmes, 2001:138). The results proposed the idea that the higher the social class, the less the percentage of [h]-dropping. Speakers from the Upper Middle class in Norwich dropped only six percent of [h]s) compared to speakers from lower social classes who dropped ninety-six percent of [h]s.
The way we use language everyday is influenced by our gender. To what degree men and women speak differently is the cause of many studies. Firstly there is the 'sex-exclusive' theory - where men and women seem to speak different languages. Secondly there is the 'sex-preferential' theory - where men and women speak the same language, but differently. Or one might question the whole concept of gender as a social variable and conclude that the debate has been totally exaggerated (Lecture handout notes 'Language and Gender 1: The sociolinguistic approach').
In considering the 'sex-exclusive' idea, it is clear by observing language use in British society today that men and women are in fact using the same language. However in some parts of the world, female and male members of the same community literally speak different languages. A village near the Amazon Basin consists of men who use the language 'Tuyuka' and women who speak 'Desano' (Holmes, 2001:150). This is an extreme example of speech affected by gender (men and women marry into different tribes who have their own language) and it is more likely that in other societies men and women use the same language, but they have different features and forms - the 'sex-preferential' theory.
The key question to ask when researching gender as a social variable of speech is, 'do males and females differ in their use of standard and non-standard speech?' Trudgill (2000:70) states that, 'women on average use forms which more closely approach those of the standard variety or the prestige accent than those used by men'. Many sociolinguistic studies have been conducted - whilst taking into account the social variables of social class, ethnic group and age - in order to answer the above key question. One such study was carried out in Norwich by Peter Trudgill in 1974 to ascertain the percentage use of the non-RP - in' variable at the end of words such as 'walki ng'. He concluded that in all social classes, women use the higher prestige form 'ing' rather than the non-RP ' - in'. In particular the highest gender difference is in the Lower Middle class where only three percent of females used the non-RP form compared to twenty-seven percent of males.
The sociolinguist Jenny Cheshire (1982) carried out a case study in Reading to find out if one's gender was linked with their social network and use of the vernacular. From conducting an ethnographic study of two single sex social groups over a period of time, Cheshire found that females socialise in more closely knit groups than males, and in both cases the closer the group, the more frequent the use of non-standard forms (see Appendix Three). Cheshire compiled a table entitled 'Gender differences in non-standard features of Reading speech' where the results show that in ten out of eleven examples of the non-standard forms; males use them more than females. Interestingly the non-standard, 'come' was used at all times by the males.
When considering the characteristics of women's language in comparison to men's, the sociolinguist Robin Lakoff (1975) provided a 'Deficiency Theory' - a list of linguistic features that she claimed were part of a 'woman's language' and made it more tentative, hesitant and indirect. Some of these were: the use of lexical hedges or fillers; tag questions; empty adjectives; hypercorrect grammar; 'superpolite' forms; euphemisms; and avoidance of strong swear words. Lakoff claims that the two key differences between women's and men's language are the use of hedges which may act to mitigate the effect of an utterance and boosters which emphasise the effect of an utterance (reflecting the speaker's fear that the listener does not understand). However these two features might in actual fact be the language of an unconfident speaker of either sex. Janet Holmes decided that both this theory and the methods used to get to it were unsatisfactory (Holmes, 1984; in Holmes, 2001) and challenged Lakoff's speculations about tag questions in particular. Holmes found that they are multi-functional in their use, (they are not just used to convey uncertainty but also convey certainty, to boost or mitigate the force of an utterance) and more importantly that they may be used more frequently by women but men actually use them more to express uncertainty (see Appendix Four).
When deciding upon whether or not the social variables of social class and gender are linked, the diagram shown in Lecturer's Notes on 'Language and Gender 1: The sociolinguistic approach' can be used as it shows patterns of social stratification which are directly correlated with gender stratification. The graph (see Appendix Five) shows a general pattern from a number of sociolinguistic studies and clearly shows that the higher the social class, the higher the percentage use of prestige forms and the lower the social class, the lower the use of prestige forms. These parallel lines are also paralleled with the gender variable - in each class women tend to use more prestige forms than men in the same social class, but interestingly not more than men in a higher social class. So there is a link between linguistic choices and the gender of the speaker, but the use of certain variants is also dependant on the social class of the speaker. Trudgill's Norwich Study (1974) which was discussed earlier shows more precise results concerning the link between social class and gender differences. The results graph concludes that the higher the social class, the greater the use of prestige variants. Within each class the women use more prestige forms than men, but never any more or less than the class above or below them respectively. Arguably, the graph shows that class membership is more a deciding factor than gender, but it also depicts a definite link between the two variables.
In conclusion, by analysing the results of many different types of sociolinguistic surveys it is clear that the social variables of class and gender do affect the way people use language in society everyday. The general conclusion about language and class suggests that the higher up the social scale one is, the more likely it is that one will use prestige forms. However increased social mobility means that people without a good education (one of the definitions determining one's social class) can move up the social ladder and yet maintain their perhaps non-standard idiolects, thus providing an anomaly to the general rule. A speaker's gender acts as a factor influencing the way we speak; with Sociolinguists suggesting that men use less standard forms than women. However in society today genders are not as clear-cut as they were previously and so Robin Lakoff's theory (197:41) that, 'If [a female] refuses to talk like a lady, she is ridiculed and subjected to criticism as unfeminine' might not be as relevant in society nowadays. A speaker's linguistic choices are never solely determined by one variable and it is apparent that gender and social class (along with age, ethic origin and other variables) are intrinsically linked in affecting the way speakers use language in society today.