The receipt of solar radiation can be broken down into two layers: a more general application of radiation received from space and the appreciation of the effect of the earth's atmosphere, among other factors, on the surface heat budget. Solar radiation is our main source of energy here on earth. Many factors can affect how much of this radiation we receive but Figure 1 represents a good approximation of the effect within the earth's atmosphere (see appendix). Firstly however we will ignore the effect of the atmosphere and look at how we primarily receive radiation from the sun. To fully understand solar radiation we first need a brief description.
The sun is continually shedding part of its mass by radiating waves of electromagnetic energy and high-energy particles into space. This constant emission represents all the energy available to the earth (with the exception of radioactive material decay here on earth itself). The sun behaves virtually as a black body i.e. it absorbs all energy received and in turn radiates energy at the maximum rate possible for a given temperature. Solar radiation is commonly divided into various regions or bands on the basis of wavelength. Ultraviolet radiation is the part of the electromagnetic spectrum between 100 and 400 nm. It is, in turn, divided into three major components (Fig. 7). For solar radiation about 7 per cent is ultraviolet radiation, 41 per cent is visible light and 52 per cent near infra-red. Solar radiation is very intense and is mainly short wave radiation.
We will first assume that all the solar radiation is available to earth and analyse the receipt of solar radiation ignoring the effect of the atmosphere. The amount of energy received at the top of the atmosphere is affected primarily by four factors: solar output, the distance from the sun to the earth, the altitude of the sun and day length. Here is a brief outline of each:
Solar output- solar energy originates from nuclear reactions within the sun's hot core and is transmitted to the sun's surface by radiation (see page 2). The total solar output to space is 3.84 x 10 -8Wm -2K -4 but only a tiny fraction of this is received by the earth because the energy received is inversely proportional to the square of the solar distance (150 million km) i.e. it decays as it travels to earth.
The Distance from the Sun- Obviously we know that the distance from the sun produces variations in solar energy received by the earth throughout the year. This is what defines our seasons.
Altitude of the sun- the greater the sun's altitude the more concentrated the radiation intensity per unit area at the earth's surface and the shorter the path length through the atmosphere.
Length of day- Obviously the longer the time the sun shines the greater the amount of radiation a certain part of the earth will receive e.g. at the equator the day length is close to 12 hours all year round.
So far, we have described the distribution of solar radiation as if it were all available at the earth's surface. This is, of course, unrealistic because of the effect of the atmosphere on energy transfer. It is important to understand some basic transfers of heat energy to fully appreciate the receipt of solar radiation and its effects at the earth surface.
Heat energy can be transferred by three mechanisms:
Radiation: Electromagnetic waves transfer energy between two bodies, without the necessary aid of an intervening medium, at the speed of light. This applies to solar radiation as it travels through space. Radiation entering the atmosphere may be absorbed in certain wavelengths by atmospheric gases, but most short wave radiation is transmitted without absorption.
Conduction: By this mechanism, heat passes through a substance from a warmer to a colder part through the transfer of adjacent molecular vibrations. Air is a poor conductor so this type of heat transfer is negligible in the atmosphere but important on the ground.
Convection: This occurs in fluids that are able to circulate internally and distribute heated parts of their mass. It is the chief means of atmospheric heat transfer.
The atmosphere arguably has the biggest effect on the surface receipt of solar radiation as it governs what we know as the surface heat budget, which explains the amount of radiation entering and leaving the atmosphere. The effect of cloud cover, latitude and the land and sea are also important in the surface receipt of solar radiation.
The incident solar radiation at the earth's surface is very different to that at the top of the atmosphere due to atmospheric effects, as shown in Figure 1.10.2, which compares the solar spectral irradiance at the earth's surface to black body irradiance from a surface of temperature 5900K i.e. the sun.
Solar radiation is virtually all in the short wavelength band i.e. less than 4m. About 18 per cent of the incoming energy is absorbed directly by ozone and water vapour. Ozone absorption is concentrated in three solar spectral bands, while water vapour absorbs to a lesser extent. About 30 per cent of incoming solar radiation is immediately reflected back into space from the atmosphere, clouds and the earth's surface, leaving approximately 70 per cent to heat the earth and its atmosphere. The surface absorbs almost half of the incoming energy available at the top of the atmosphere and re-radiates it outward as infrared waves greater than 3m. Much of this re-radiated long-wave energy is then absorbed by the water vapour, carbon dioxide and ozone in the atmosphere, the rest escaping through atmospheric windows back into outer space, principally between 8 and 13m.
The solar radiation absorbed by the Earth causes the planet to heat up until it is emitting as much energy back into space as it absorbs from the sun. Because the Earth is absorbing only a tiny fraction of the sun's energy, it remains cooler than the sun, and therefore emits much less radiation. Most of this emitted radiation is at longer wavelengths than solar radiation. This retention of energy by the atmosphere is vital to most life forms since otherwise the average temperature of the earth's surface would fall by some 40 oC (natural greenhouse effect).
Thick and continuous cloud cover forms a significant barrier to the penetration of radiation. The amount of radiation that is actually reflected by clouds depends on the amount of cloud cover and its thickness. The proportion of incident radiation that is reflected is called the albedo, which is largely affected by cloud type. The albedo of a complete overcast sky ranges from 44 to 50 per cent for cirrostratus to 90 per cent for cumulonimbus. A table of typical albedo values can be found in the appendix (Figure 3).
The effect of cloud cover also operates in reverse, since it serves to retain much of the heat that would otherwise be lost from the earth by long-wave radiation throughout the day and night. Over the whole surface of the Earth, about 30 percent of incoming solar energy is reflected back to space. Because a cloud usually has a higher albedo than the surface beneath it, the cloud reflects more shortwave radiation back to space than the surface would in the absence of the cloud, thus leaving less solar energy available to heat the surface and atmosphere.
Different parts of the earth's surface receive different amounts of solar radiation. The time of year is one factor controlling this as more radiation is received in summer than in winter because of the higher latitude of the sun and the longer days. Latitude is a very important control because it controls the duration of sunlight. For example over the North Pole there is a maximum solar radiation at the June solstice but only 30 per cent of the radiation is absorbed. This is because of the high density of clouds over the Arctic in summer and the high Albedo of the snow and ice surfaces. Figure 2 in the appendix highlights the effects of latitude.
Relative values (ratios) for solar radiation as a function of latitude are shown in Figure 4. The important inferences include the following:
the latitudinal trends vary with season and solar angle, attaining a minimum declination in December (winter solstice) and a maximum inclination in June (summer solstice);
the trends for the other months fall within these two limits; and
the annual mean values show a declining trend.
These phenomena are dictated by the solar angle and its variation as a function of latitude and month (Fig. 6). Also illustrated are the seasonal variations in the angles of the earth's tilt and of the sun's altitude at noon, indicating the minimum and maximum levels attained worldwide and at 34 N in Beirut.
As we can see from these graphs the integration of the angle of the sun with the sun's altitude has a massive effect on the surface receipt of solar radiation.
Another important control on the effect of incoming solar radiation stems from the different ways in which the land and sea are able to profit from it. A large proportion of the incoming radiation is reflected back into the atmosphere without the heating of the earth's surface. A sea surface reflects very little unless the angle of incidence of the sun's rays is large i.e. only 2-3% when the angle exceeds 60 o but is more than 50% when the angle is 15 o. Land surfaces generally have an albedo of 8-40% (see Figure 3 in appendix) with snow somewhere nearer 90%.
In conclusion we can say that solar radiation is unevenly distributed throughout the world because of such variables as solar altitude, which is associated with latitude and season, and atmospheric conditions, which are determined by cloud coverage and the surface heat budget governed by the albedo of the land and sea and the properties of the atmosphere i.e. the ozone, greenhouse gases etc.