Meniscus is defined as the curved upper surface of a liquid that forms due to such factors such as surface tension and adhesive attractive forces between a liquid and a container for example. Although meniscus is very common in modern science, i.e. mercury in a thermometer, the complexity of some liquids and their distinct properties begs the question of why it forms on some liquids and not on others.
Imagine a volume of water in a small container such as a measuring cylinder. The molecules of the water have an attraction to each other, as well as an attraction to the molecules of the container. As water is made up of polar molecules, which have positively and negatively charged ends, and since opposites attract, all of the molecules 'stick' to one another. Glass molecules also happen to be polar and therefore the water in a glass tube will actually tend to stick to the sides of the tube. This will result in a meniscus at the top of the cylinder and will either be curved upwards or downwards. If it is curved downwards, this usually means that the molecules of the liquid are more attracted to the walls of the container than to the other molecules of itself. If it is curved upwards (e.g. with mercury in a glass tube) then the molecules of the liquid have more attraction for itself than for the walls of the container.
As shown above there is a force of attraction between molecules in liquids, and it is also known that liquids can flow until they take on the shape that maximizes this force of attraction. Below the surface of the liquid, the force of cohesion between molecules is the same in all directions. Molecules on the surface of the liquid, however, experience a net force of attraction that pulls them back into the body of the liquid. Subsequently the liquid tries to take on the shape that has the smallest possible surface area, i.e. the shape of a sphere. The magnitude of the force that controls the shape of the liquid is called the surface tension. The stronger the bonds between the molecules in the liquid, the larger the surface tension. There is also a force of adhesion between a liquid and the walls of the container. When the force of adhesion is more than half as large as the force of cohesion between the liquid molecules, the liquid is said to "wet" the solid. Water wets glass because of the force of adhesion that results from interactions between the positive ends of the polar water molecules and the negatively charged oxygen atoms in glass. As a result the water will form an upward-curving meniscus.
Meniscus is largely dependant on molecular forces in a liquid but also on the properties of the liquids themselves. Pouring oil onto water for example results in two distinct layers, clearly separated by a curved meniscus. However, pouring grain alcohol into water results in a single liquid phase and therefore no meniscus. Thermodynamics can provide a more complete explanation of why liquids sometimes won't mix completely and why a meniscus is nearly always present in any liquid mixture.