Cloud formation relies heavily upon the process of condensation but to properly understand the processes that lead to the production of precipitation we have to closely examine the formation of cloud droplets. An ordinary cloud droplet is very small in size, having an average diameter of around 0.002cm. In order for this cloud droplet to fall as rain it needs to increase in size. Cloud droplets will increase in size if there are more water molecules evaporating from it than condensing onto it. This means that smaller droplets require a greater saturation vapour pressure to keep them from evaporating away. The saturation vapour pressure is the pressure that the water vapour molecules would exert if the air were saturated with vapour at a given temperature. This basically means that there constantly has to be more water molecules surrounding the droplet because the rate of evaporation from it is so great. Therefore, in order to keep the tiny cloud droplets in equilibrium with the surrounding air, the relative humidity of the air must be greater than 100%, i.e. the air must be supersaturated.
However, relative humidities rarely become greater than 100 per cent. This is where condensation nuclei become important in increasing the size of cloud droplets. We already know that condensation in clouds begins on tiny particles called condensation nuclei. Therefore, cloud droplets form on cloud condensation nuclei in order to grow in size. Hygroscopic (having a tendency to absorb moisture from the air) nuclei, such as salt, allow condensation to begin when the relative humidity is less than 100 per cent. This happens because when condensation begins on hygroscopic particles, they dissolve, forming a solution. The salt ions bond more closely with the water molecules, making it harder for them to evaporate, thus reducing the saturation vapour pressure. If the relative humidity of the air were to increase, water vapour molecules would attach themselves to the droplet at a faster rate than they would leave, and the droplet would grow in size. But, we now have a cloud composed of many small droplets, which are unfortunately too small to fall as rain. This means that some other processes must be required to produce precipitation. The complexities involved with the formation of rain are not yet fully understood, however, there are two important processes that we can identify, the first being the collision and coalescence process.
The most important factor in the production of raindrops is the clouds liquid water content. Clouds that have above freezing temperatures at all levels are called warm clouds. In such clouds, precipitation forms by the collision and coalescence method. The basic process of collision occurs as the cloud droplets fall through the air and air resistance decreases their speed. The speed of the falling drop increases until the air resistance equals the force of gravity and the drop falls at a constant speed called its terminal velocity. However, larger drops have a smaller surface-area-to-weight ratio, therefore they must fall faster before reaching their terminal velocity. Therefore, larger drops fall faster than smaller drops. This leads to larger droplets overtaking the smaller ones and colliding with them further down their path. This merging of cloud droplets is called coalescence. It should be noted that collision does not always guarantee coalescence; sometimes the droplets actually bounce apart during collision. Other factors can affect the growth of a cloud droplet. Generally the longer a cloud droplet spends in a cloud, the larger it gets and the thinner the cloud is, the less time it would spend in the cloud and therefore be smaller in size. Also, large updraughts in a cloud suspend the cloud droplets in the air for longer allowing them to coalesce and grow in size meaning that when they do fall through the cloud they are large enough in diameter to be classed as rain.
The ice crystal method, also known as the Bergeon process, is the alternative to the collision and coalescence processes and occurs in cold clouds where the air temperature is well below freezing. Water droplets existing at temperatures below freezing are known as supercooled. Ice crystals only really become noticeable when the temperature pluments to around - 20 oC around the middle level of the cloud. Just as liquid cloud droplets form on condensation nuclei, ice crystals may form on ice nuclei, thought to include kaolinite and decaying plant material. Ice nuclei may start the growth of ice crystals, but they are not found abundantly in the atmosphere. For the precipitation process to begin ice crystals and cloud droplets must exist in harmony together in a supercooled, saturated cloud. In the subfreezing air of a cloud, many supercooled liquid droplets will surround each ice crystal. The most important thing to note with this method is that the vapour pressure just above a water surface is greater than the vapour pressure above an ice surface. This means that vapour molecules can diffuse from the droplet towards the ice crystal, therefore reducing its vapour pressure and causes evaporation to start in an attempt to subsidise the gradually decaying droplet. This gives a continuous source of moisture for the ice crystal and means that it will grow larger at the expense of the surrounding water drops. However, even a very large ice crystal that can overcome the clouds updraught is not enough evidence of precipitation. Therefore, more ice crystals are needed. In cold clouds ice crystals may collide with other crystals and freeze hundreds of supercooled droplets on contact. In warmer clouds ice crystals may collide with supercooled droplets, freezing them on contact and sticking together, called accretion. In both cases the ice crystals may collide and stick together forming a snowflake. If the snowflake melts before reaching the ground it continues to fall as a raindrop. For ice crystals to grow large enough to produce precipitation there must be more water droplets than ice crystals, a typical ratio being in the order of one ice crystal to 100,000-1,000,000 droplets. This one-sided ratio is very important in the production of precipitation because it means most of the cloud can be converted to precipitation, as the majority of ice crystals would grow big enough to fall as precipitation.
In cold, strongly convective clouds precipitation may begin only minutes after the cloud forms and may be initiated by either process. Once either process begins most precipitation growth is by accretion, which you could, say slightly biased towards the collision-coalescence method. But, in general, precipitation is thought to form principally by the ice crystal process because the liquid water content is generally higher in convective clouds, thus making the collision-coalescence process less effective. Other more obscure processes of precipitation production include artificial cloud seeding, where the cloud is almost forced to precipitate. However, the actual effectiveness of this method is very suspect and that is why the two methods described above should be taken as the foundations for the production of precipitation within clouds.