Snowflake formation is a dynamic process. A snowflake may encounter many different environmental conditions, sometimes melting it, sometimes causing growth, but always changing its structure. Although there are different classifications of snowflakes the key to their unique structure lies in their growth history and the corresponding natural environment.
Snow starts as crystals of ice, which form a cloud when water vapour condenses and then freeze around minute particles, known as condensation nuclei, in the upper and middle levels of the atmosphere where the temperature is well below 0C.The individual ice crystals coalesce in a process known as aggregation and then eventually these bonds become snowflakes, which once they are heavy enough, fall from the cloud. The snowflakes can be made from 2 - 200 hundred ice crystals.
Snow-crystal structure, however, takes on many forms. Besides the six-armed stars that look like frozen lace, there are a variety of shapes from flat hexagonal plates to three-dimensional small hexagonal pillars with hexagonal plates lying on each end. We now understand that the shape of a snowflake is first determined at the molecular level by the atoms composing the water molecule. Each molecule contains two atoms of hydrogen and one oxygen i.e. H 20. During crystallisation the molecules align themselves in order to maximise attractive forces and minimise repulsive forces and therefore water molecules align themselves in predetermined spaces and in a specific arrangement.
Ice crystals are sensitive to the conditions under which they form, particularly the air temperature, and the excess relative humidity expressed as the supersaturation level - both within and without the clouds. These factors not only affect how the crystals grow but the basic shape they take. The colder the temperature, the sharper the ice crystal tips. At warmer temperatures, the ice crystals grow more slowly and smoothly resulting in less-intricate shapes, i.e., more needles and plates. Thus, dendrite crystals generally form in high clouds, needle or flat six-sided crystals often originate in middle height clouds, and a wide variety of shapes grow in low clouds.
The complexity of snow crystal arms arises from the fact that snow crystal growth is extremely sensitive to external conditions. As it grows, its external conditions are constantly changing as it falls, and its final shape reflects the 'time history' of these growth conditions. The more complex the growth history, the more unlikely it becomes that any two crystals have experienced the same history, therefore it is unlikely that you will find even two complex snow crystals that look alike in nature. Since so many factors affect the structure of a snowflakeand since snowflake structure is constantly changing in response toenvironmental conditions, it is improbable that anyone would see 2 identicalsnowflakes.