The standard model of an atom that we have today started life in 1911 when the well-known physicist Ernest Rutherford put forward his 'classical' idea of the atom. He proposed the existence of a nucleus, a small central region of the atom that contains all of its positive charge. This acted as the 'hub' of the atom with the electrons randomly fitting in around it, sometimes described as a 'cloud of electrons'. But this presented a problem. If an electron was stagnant outside the nucleus of the atom then it should fall back towards the nucleus, causing it to collapse. Rutherford tried to rectify this problem by imagining the electrons orbiting around the nucleus in a fashion not too dissimilar to the planets in our solar system. But it is known that orbital motion involves a continuous acceleration. This means that as the velocity of the electrons changed they should radiate energy and as a result fall back into the nucleus. Therefore, it didn't matter what the electrons were doing relative to the nucleus, they would always fall back into the nucleus according to the model. Subsequently, Rutherford's atom could not be stable according to the classical laws of electrodynamics.
A young physicist named Neils Bohr was the first to identify this major fault in Rutherford's atom and one of the first to see that the solution was to use quantum rules to describe the behaviour of electrons within atoms. Bohr recognised that the electrons could not spiral inward out of those orbits, emitting radiation as they did so, because they were only allowed to emit whole pieces of energy, quanta. As a result Bohr decided to venture down the road of including electron states, which corresponded to fixed amounts of energy or energy levels as they are now known. This came from the idea of quantum theory, already a hot research topic for many scientists at the time of Bohr's postulates. Bohr's postulates were both daring and ridiculously intuitive at the time. He proposed energy shells where electrons didn't radiate, particular values of angular momentum and quantum leaps. These were the real steps forward in terms of integrating quantum theory into the model of the classical atom proposed by Rutherford, as quantum leaps in particular identified the ability of electrons to move between energy levels emitting radiation as photons.
Bohr's atom can be described very simply with the use of a diagram (see figure 1). In the Bohr Model the neutrons and protons (symbolized by red and blue balls in the image) occupy the dense central region called the nucleus, and the electrons orbit the nucleus much like planets orbiting the Sun.
The great early triumph of Bohr's work, in 1913, was that it explained the spectrum of light from the simplest atom, hydrogen. White light is made up of all different colours with different wavelengths and frequencies, i.e. short wavelength blue light is on the opposite end of the spectrum to long wavelength red light. Spectral lines therefore represent very precise frequencies of light. The spectrum of hydrogen is very simple, because the atom has only has one proton and electron. The lines in the spectrum that provide unique identification of hydrogen are called the Balmer lines, after a Swiss teacher who worked out a formula describing the pattern in 1885. Balmer's formula relates the frequencies in the spectrum at which hydrogen lines occur relative to one another. However, Bohr was somewhat nave to the science of spectroscopy even though at the time these Balmer lines were the obvious progression in his theory. Instead he went to look at Planck's constant, h, to try and integrate this quantity into his theory, hoping to find out more about the mysteries of energy within the atom. It was near impossible to measure the size of an atom using Rutherford's model, as the only two quantities involved were charge and mass. However, Planck's constant could be used to calculate some kind of rough-and-ready size of the atom, which was in a similar range to that found by scattering experiments etc. Bohr said that the electrons 'in orbit' around the nucleus of an atom stayed in place because they could not radiate energy continuously. However, they would be allowed to radiate a whole quantum of energy (a photon) and migrate from one energy level to another. By combining Balmer's equation and Planck's constant it meant that Bohr could calculate the possible energy levels permitted for the single electron in an atom of hydrogen, and the measured frequency of the spectral lines could now be interpreted as revealing how much energy difference there was between the different levels.
Bohr's model of the atom also had another major string to its bow. By working outward through the electron shells and incorporating evidence from spectroscopy, he could explain the relationships between the elements in the periodic table in terms of atomic structure. Bohr reckoned that atoms combine and in such a way that they get as close as they can to making a closed outer shell. All chemical reactions can be explained in this way, as a sharing or swapping of electrons between atoms in a bid to achieve the stability of filled electron shells. Energy transitions involving outer electrons produce the characteristic spectral identification of an element. Bohr's model was confirmed by successful prediction of missing elements in the periodic table that had similar properties to other elements. This meant that Bohr's model of the atom and analysis of spectral lines could lead to the prediction and discovery of unknown elements.
Soon, using Einstein's statistical ideas, Bohr was able to extend the model of his atom, taking on board the explanation that some lines in the spectrum are more pronounced than others because some transitions between energy states are more likely to happen. However, Bohr's model allowed many more spectral lines than can actually be seen in the light from different atoms, and discretional rules had to be brought in to say that some transitions between different energy states within the atom were forbidden. Also, new properties of the atom, quantum numbers, were consigned to fit the observations with no solid support of a theoretical foundation to justify why they were required, or why some transitions were forbidden.
Bohr's model was quite frankly a bit of a mess despite the fact that it was brilliant in its simplicity and ability to smooth over the inequalities that made previous models so misunderstood. Bohr's combination of classical ideas and quantum theory was revolutionary but not a straightforward linear process. As Bohr incorporated new ideas and as the model began to evolve, more and more adjustments and fine-tuning was needed. This was left up to a very astute young gentleman from Germany called Arnold Somerfield. His involvement in the seemingly continuous updating and refining of Bohr's model was so much so that the model was often referred to as the 'Bohr-Sommerfield atom'. Even though the atom was effectively a combination of Bohr's brilliant imagination and classical physics ideas it lacked mathematical reasoning and a final, stable condition that meant it had to be adjusted after every new observation.
It cannot be argued that Bohr's atom was a clear indication that quantum ideas had to be integrated into any respectable theory of atomic processes. It definitely made people think seriously about bringing quantum theory into the model of the atom and putting classical ideas on the back-burner for a while. Bohr's atom has made a huge impact on a huge range of people, firstly, on the scientists of the time who had trouble even talking about quantum theory and classical ideas in the same sentence, let alone accepting them as one of the most profound unified statements of the last century. A notable contributor to the theory was Albert Einstein who, in 1916, introduced the idea of probability into the atomic theory, which eventually became the underpinning foundation of the true quantum theory. Secondly, there was the generation of scientists who had no previous knowledge of classical ideas and were able to tackle Bohr's model head-on and spend years refining it and further integrating the idea of quantum theory. These included now well-known scientists such as Paul Dirac and Wolfgang Pauli, among others. And lastly, there is everyone who has ever learnt basic chemistry at school or part of their general education. The Bohr model of the atom has since become 'accepted' by many educational bodies as the basis for understanding the basic ideas of molecular chemistry and chemical elements. This longevity stems from the fact that the classical orbital model is easy to visualise and is especially useful as a first version of the atom to teach to younger students.
On the other hand, the flaws in his model as so obvious that they demand criticism and improvement. Many parts of the model are not backed up by rock solid foundations and are instead moments of sheer brilliance rather than a result of years of hard graft with classical Newtonian ideas. This has meant that his model has been open to opposition since day one and has not only gained recognition and interest as it has evolved, but it has also gained sceptical viewpoints from many leading scientists. However, I believe that constructive criticism and the subsequent improvement of a scientific theory are essential to its successful evolution and global recognition. Bohr's model may have been simplistic and rather 'bodged' together but it spurred on many other scientists and encouraged them to think about developing the existing model, such as Dirac and Pauli, or developing an alternative one of their own, challenging a view that had become front page news in the early parts of last century. If it wasn't for Bohr's brave attempt at incorporating two hugely massive and contrasting physical principles in explaining atomic processes, we may never have the complicated yet technically brilliant quantum development of the atom that we have today.
It really boils down to whether you are prepared to accept that great physical ideas have flaws and whether you are prepared to ignore these in search of the bigger picture. Alternatively you might think it is better to exploit these existing defaults and slowly build up an alternative theory that gains momentum not from brilliant initiative or imagination but from the definite exclusion of previous 'grey areas' and ideas. I believe that the Bohr model of the atom has been useful despite its flaws. If you pick up any textbook or scientific publication today you will still find his model as the centrepiece of the explanation of atomic processes, despite the fact that we now understand the complexities involved and recognise that there is a lot more to the atom then a pretty picture of a nucleus and orbiting electrons. In its final form it represents just about the last model of the atom that bears any relation to the images we are used to in everyday life. Bohr's rough-and-ready approximation of atomic processes has allowed us to bridge the gap between Newtonian physics and atomic quantum ideas. Bohr's theory was famously recognised by Einstein as an, 'insecure and contradictory foundation', that appeared to him as a miracle in its significance to chemistry. Bohr's model proves that scientific idealism need not be perfect and need not be supplemented by mathematical vigour but instead, can be rooted firmly in the soul and passion of any upcoming scientist with the desire to succeed.