The most important aspect of statistical physics involved with the above events is that of self-organised criticality. These events are all similar in the way that they can be applied to the same idea of a system that lies between a state entropy and order. This system can subsequently be used to model future predictions of natural disasters in the modern world i.e. spread of forest fires, earthquakes etc.
SOC was first introduced in 1987 to explain the occurrence of power laws in nature and its patterns have subsequently been found in a number of fields ranging from forest fires to global epidemics. It is used to describe systems that will evolve naturally into a critical state that have no characteristic time scale. Self-organized critical systems exist as weakly chaotic systems. The uncertainty in such systems grows with time, but at a much slower pace than chaotic systems, so it follows a power-law distribution rather than an exponential distribution. One characteristic of weak chaotic systems is the lack of a time scale that is present in chaotic systems allowing for long-term predictions.
To show that a forest fire can be a SOC, a simple version of this model can be used to show how uniform energy input could result in fractal energy dissipation. The uniform input are trees growing uniformly and the power-law spatial distribution of energy occurs when the trees burn. After the initial transient period the system will settle into a state where energy which is put into the system (in the form of bolts of lightning) will be dissipated by rare events which occur on all length scales (that is forest fires which can burn down anything from one or a few trees to patches of forest as large as the system itself.) The growth rate of the forest depends on the growth of each individual tree and as, according to the model, each tree grows with a small probability, we can say the rate of growth can be approximated to the density of the forest. Thus, the greater the density of the forest, the easier the spread of the forest, as there is a higher probability that there will be trees next to a burning tree.
There are of course many assumptions and technicalities that have been ignored in the forest fire model as in reality trees will not grow with equal probability as different species of trees have different growth rates. Also, the simulation of a closed system with only one form of energy input is unlikely, with human intervention such as logging and fire fighting. However, this simplified model can be directly applied to the spreading of diseases and the propagation of real forest fires. Since forest fires follow a SOC, the model may assist in the predictions of forest fires and their spread. It can also be taken as evidence that self-organized critical behaviour is insensitive to the details of the model. As long as the model captures the essential features of the real system, it is possible to extrapolate the findings and results to real world situations.