This study investigates the attitudes of young people towards mobile phone use, before and right after seeing an advert identifying mobile phones as a threat to traffic safety.
Participants. 128 participants were recruited from Leamington High and Leamington Scruffy. The participants were randomly allocated into an intervention and a control group. The groups were divided equally by school, age (14-16 and 17-18) and sex, producing a total of 16 groups with 8 participants in each group.
Procedure. Each group was tested in two sessions, six weeks apart. In session 1 the participants completed a questionnaire that estimated their attitudes to mobile phone use. In session 2 the participants in the intervention group were shown the advert and then completed questionnaire. In the control group the participants completed the questionnaire and were then shown the advert.
Three cases, two containing missing values and one containing an error value, were removed (in condition 1, 2 and 10), leaving 125 cases. The scores obtained at the first session were subtracted from the scores obtained at the second to yield difference scores. The means and standard deviations for each condition (outliers not included) are shown in table 1.
ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of group F(1,109) = 65.17; p<.000. Removing three outliers (in condition 10 and 16) generated additional significant effects of sex F(1,106) = 7.32; p<.008, and an interaction effect of age and group F(1,106) = 6.709; p<.011. Data screening revealed that the distributions had very different variances (e.g. 3.238 in condition 1 and 0.214 in condition 7), and that some were skewed (condition 2, 7 and 12). However, square root transformation of the difference scores did not remove the significant effect of group or sex, nor did Log10 transformation, nor did squaring the scores. Analysis of the residuals revealed no systematic patterns.
The present study aimed to investigate the effect, on attitude towards mobile phones, off an advert identifying mobile phones as a cause of traffic accidents. It is surprising to find that the advert seems to have produced significantly more positive attitudes overall in almost all the control groups. These scores may be the result of an inversed Hawthorne effect; the purpose of the advert cannot have escaped anyone in the intervention groups, arguably to the extent that the obviousness of the attempt at psychological manipulation may have annoyed several participants. This may have caused them to give more positive answers. It also seems that female participants were more prone to such acts of protest. To exclude possible effects of protest, and allow for any generalizations outside of the experimental setting, future studies should perhaps make use of adverts and questionnaires addressing a variety of topics or in other ways try to conceal the purpose of the study.
Another weakness in this study was the absence of any equivalent treatment in the control groups, such as a neutral advert involving mobile phones and traffic safety. Showing the control groups the advert after they completed the questionnaire did not contribute to the study. As mentioned, the data did violate some of the assumptions of the model. A larger sample would have been advisable. Before these errors have been corrected and implemented in a new study, no conclusions can be drawn about the effects of the advert.