The natural phenomenon of thunderclouds involves the very basis of thermodynamics in the form of density and convection principles. The subsequent production of lightning can be accredited to electricity principles such as the separation of electric charge, the change in an atmospheric electric field and ideas concerning the effective discharge associated more commonly with capacitors.
Thunderclouds are formed from ascending wet air masses when the fronts of cold and warm air meet each other. The concentration of heavy ions is at a maximum in the low atmosphere with approximately half of all the particles being charged. The ascending air mass subsequently picks up these particles or charged aerosols as they are known, and during ascent the air mass is cooled. The rapid growth of aerosols with negative charge makes them heavy and their lift with the ascending air mass is stopped at low altitudes. At the same time the aerosols with positive charge continue to rise and stop rising at higher altitudes. This creates the basic electric charge separation within a thundercloud and effectively the thundercloud forms an electric dipole, that is, a primary positive charge region found above a primary negative charge region. (see Appendix 1)
Lightning is a high-current discharge generated when the insulation of air breaks down and consists of a flow of electrons from the cloud towards the earth. One of the most common types of lightning, a negative cloud-to-ground discharge, begins in the cloud and effectively lowers some tens of Coulombs of negative charge to Earth via a leader 'stroke'. The potential difference between the lower portion of the negatively charged leader and the earth has a magnitude in excess of 10 7 volts. As the tip of the leader nears the ground, the electric field at sharp objects on the ground or at irregularities on the surface increases until it exceeds the breakdown strength of air i.e. the insulation. When one of the upward moving discharges contacts the downward-moving leader, some tens of metres above the ground, the leader is effectively connected to ground potential. The leader channel is then discharged by an ionising wave of ground potential that propagates up the previously charged leader channel. The electric field across the difference in potential between the 'return' stroke, which is at ground potential, and the channel above, which is near cloud potential, is what produces the additional ionization that can lead to further flashes of lightning.
There are many different types of lightning but they all adhere to specific 'natural' electrical mechanisms in the atmosphere. Charge separation in particular plays an important role in determining the intensity of a lightning storm and other factors such as electrical discharge and the change in the atmospheric electric field. Not only this but there is potential to explore other areas of physics, particularly when other types of lightning are considered, i.e. cloud to atmosphere discharge.