Results of the analysis included in the appendix have been summarised in table form here for ease of reference. Table 1 outlines the details of the deposit sampled for analysis. Since this report focuses on a single unit of a single thin section this table is very simple, whereas in comparative studies a more complex table could be constructed to include units from different sites or areas of the same site or within a single thin section.
Table 2 summarises the most important characteristics of the unit which will also briefly be described here. The deposit represented in the unit is between 4-6 mm thick and comprises of a sandy clay loam which appears beigy brown with dark brown/black flecks in plain polarised light. The coarse/fine ratio ranges between 60/40 and 70/30 with the nature of the fine material being organo-mineral. The groundmass has low-order birefringence and is crystallic, with limey clay inclusions undifferentiated in cross-polarised light. The microstructure includes chambers and planes which vary from 10-40% abundance. The related distribution is embedded and the groundmass is unsorted. The basal boundary is a smooth gradual transitional anthropic boundary while the upper boundary is more diffuse.
As archaeologists "our task remains to move between our interpretation of objects as determined by material science techniques and what these interpretations might tell us in terms of the intentional and meaningful aspects of material culture" (Jones 2002: 66). This is expressed in diagrammatic form in figure 19. Micromorphology operates on a microscopic scale which can provide detailed insight and high resolution data which cannot be achieved on the macroscale of excavation. However, in order to conduct a thorough investigation it is necessary to move between scales of interpretation. This process is particularly relevant to this study given that the results of the micromorphological analysis provides information about what the unit is comprised of, but this raw data needs to be interpreted in the wider cultural context of the site as a whole if it is to be useful and informative. A summary of interpretations is outlined in table 4.
The chert fragment could be interpreted in two different ways. Firstly, it could be interpreted as evidence for the use of fire-stones in the lighting of fires where percussion of stone against stone is used to create a spark. However, Cessford and Near have conducted research into pyrotechnology and the use of fire installations at atalhyk and have concluded that fires were most likely to have been started using the friction created by wood rubbing against wood which leaves little trace in the archaeological record (2006: 176). An alternative explanation for the presence of this chert chip could be that it represents flint knapping activity which has taken place in the vicinity. It might be expected that flint knapping would leave a larger assemblage or flint scatter, but this can be explained by other anthropogenic formation processes such as sweeping and cleaning the area. "House floor assemblages cannot be presumed to be fossilised representations of past activities" (LaMotta & Schiffer 1999: 21), deposits may have been removed, rearranged or re-deposited. This is particularly relevant to the interpretation of activity floors which would require the clearance of debris for the continuation of activities. The majority of this refuse may have been deposited elsewhere in a secondary context. The chert fragment, measuring only 1.5mm, would be small enough to be overlooked by this clearance, perhaps by laying between the fibres of a broom-like sweeping implement or falling into a crack or depression in the floor. As a result, this and other microartefacts can become incorporated into the archaeological record.
LaMotta and Schiffer note that "microartefact studies on the floor matrix are required for isolating reliable samples of primary refuse from assemblages in well maintained houses" (1999: 21). Therefore, by examining the microartefactual evidence present in the thin section, such as the chert fragment, it may be possible to reconstruct the activities conducted and thereby ascertain the function of the building. Other microartefacts of cultural origin contained in the sample which may be included in this study are the basalt grains and the burnt oven plaster aggregate. The former could be the interpreted as evidence of the use or manufacture of grindstone tools, while the latter has been burnt so appears to indicate that at some stage in the history of this fragment it has been exposed to fire which could have been in a hearth or oven.
Previous micromorpholocial analysis of oven plasters has shown the fabric to be characterised by sandy silt-clay loam particle size with quartz and feldspar inclusions and an orange oxidised surface and darker core (Matthews 2005: 372). The fragment observed here is not in situ and is only a small fragment (c.1mm), nevertheless it has a comparable particle size with quartz inclusions and appears to be orangy brown in plain light suggesting oxidisation. As a result of comparison with descriptions of known examples of oven plaster it is possible to infer that this is an oven plaster aggregate.
It is not surprising to find remnants of oven plaster in an oven rake-out. Recent ethnographic studies of local villages around atalhyk have revealed that ovens can be re-plastered after every firing (Matthews 2005: 361). Although this act may have been performed for a number of different reasons such as symbolic or ritualised renewal, as has been argued for wall and floor plaster (Matthews 2005: 368), a functional explanation for this practice may be that the clay plasters weaken under the intense heat, crack and disintegrate. If this is the case, then it would be usual to find fragments of broken up oven plaster in the oven rake-out. As previously discussed, the small size of this fragment may have facilitated its incorporation into the archaeological record while larger pieces may have been swept away.
The limey clay plaster fragments are highly calcareous and are likely to have come from the surrounding Pleistocene lake deposits (Matthews 2005: 365). The wall and floor plasters throughout the site are made from this fine clay mixed with water and ethnographic studies of modern surrounding villages found that local people still utilise this resource (Matthews 2005:365-6). The aggregates in this unit can be interpreted as the remains of some kind of soft lime clay plaster flooring. The pieces are fragmented which suggests trampling, this supports the interpretation of floor plaster rather than re-deposition from a wall, ceiling or other installation. The rounded shape of the fragments may indicate sweeping activity which would have the effect of rolling the particles which would alter their shape. This sweeping action may demonstrate how this material was incorporated into the oven rake-out.
Spherulites are produced in the digestive tract of herbivores and are incorporated into the archaeological record through deposition of dung. In this context the presence of spherulites could be interpreted as Neolithic burning of dung as fuel. Ethnographic studies have shown that the use of dung as fuel is widespread and is often chosen by preference over other fuels (Sillar 2000: 46, 53) and in some cultures dung is imbued with symbolic meaning or associated with ceremonial practices (Sillar 2000: 52-53). Alternatively, the choice of dung for fuel may be related to over-exploitation of wood resources for fuel and building leading to substitution of one for the other. As Sillar remarks "it is difficult to overexploit the use of dung as a resource" given that cows, sheep and llamas annually produce 4 times their body weight in dried dung (2000: 51, 46). However, the presence of charred deciduous wood remains demonstrates that wood was still available. These charred remains may also be evidence of the fuel used to fire the oven. Given that evidence for both dung and wood exists, the most plausible explanation is that the villager exploited a mixture of fuels in their fire installations.
Given the use of red ochre elsewhere in the site for painting, the particles included in the unit could be interpreted as the remains of paint from walls or perhaps from the oven itself. Since it is not associated with any plaster fragments this may seem unlikely. It could however, have been trampled into the floor as a raw material during a painting episode. Mellart described how the building next door was "a fine example of a Level X shrine" (Mellaart 1964: 70).
The burnt bone may represent either the remains of dietary subsistence, having been incorporated into the oven rake out, or alternatively could be a chipping from the manufacture of bone implements which is attested at this level (Hodder 1999) which could have accidentally been blown into the oven where it became burnt. A final possible interpretation could be that these remains could be human. Although this seems unlikely, there does exist a practice of burying neonates behind ovens at atalhyk, and a single skeleton was found in space 171 in the south-east corner (Hamilton 1999). The tiny fragments which exist in the unit could easily have ended up in the oven without being noticed.
The aim of this study was to provide a detailed analysis of thin section W0197 in order to establish the nature of the deposit. The results of this analysis have provided support for the field interpretation of this context as an oven rake-out. Charred and silicified plant remains, ashes and burnt oven plaster provide evidence for significant temperatures being reached, with the interpretation of charred wood and dung spherulites as fuel residue confirming the most likely explanation as oven rake-out.
Hodder has proposed that in levels IX and X the hearth or oven provided the focus for daily activities such as the knapping of obsidian and manufacture of bone beads, arguing that "there seems to be some specialisation in craft production between different buildings, but obsidian knapping and storing seems to have been closely associated with hearths and ovens on the southern 'dirty' floors in most buildings" (Hodder 1999). Although there is no direct material evidence for obsidian knapping in the unit analysed, the interpretation is not necessarily disproved. It should be remembered that a thin section is only a 30 m two-dimensional slice through the deposit, and as such may not necessarily be fully representative of the context as a whole. This interpretation of the hearth area is not disputed by the microartefactual remains, in fact, the chert chip and basalt grains support this notion of craft activities and if the bone fragments can be assumed to be the remnants of bone implement manufacture then this would also support this explanation.
Micromorphological analysis can provide high resolution data about microstratigraphy and microartefactual remains which may not be evident in the macro-scale excavations. Through an interdisciplinary approach combining micromorphology with modern excavation techniques and ethnographic studies, it is hoped that a fuller, more detailed picture of the past may be reconstructed without losing sight of the wider issues.