The study of molluscan data can yield important palaeoenvironmental information about the changing landscape throughout history and prehistory, providing indications of long-term climate change and variation in land use. To provide a reliable interpretation of ancient environments, a multiproxy of bioarchaeological evidence should be considered, including mollusca, pollen, macroscopic plant remains, charcoal, and insects. Unlike pollen, which can be anemophilous (and therefore distributed over a wide area) molluscs are useful for examining micro-environments due to the specific nature of the distribution of shells in particular habits (Evans 1972: 87). Similarly, mollusc analysis is suitable for samples from chalky and lime-rich areas, conditions which are not favourable to the preservation of pollen grains (ibid.: 5).
The subject of this investigation is the Ufton Green area, which is located in the Kennet Valley between Reading and Newbury. The Kennet Valley has produced evidence for human activity at numerous sites along the river including over 50 Mesolithic sites between Hungerford and Newbury (Allen & Allen 1997:1). Figure 1 shows the location of Ufton Green and other sites in the Kennet Valley.
A number of cores were taken from the river palaeochannel along a transect close to the Mesolithic site of Ufton Nervet. This report is the analysis of the mollusc assemblage from core 50, with particular reference to sample depth 53-65 cm (figure 2). A percussion corer was used to extract this core from the present ground surface to the bottom of the channel, a depth measuring approximately 2 metres. The identification of mollusc species and the examination of their distribution throughout the core sequence will be used to interpret the environmental landscape at Ufton Green. Changes in land-use, as indicated by the appearance of different species, may be inferred to be the result of human activity and impact on the environment.
Samples of soil were taken at varying intervals through the core. The molluscs were extracted from the sediment by wet sieving. This process also preserves other organic remains including charcoal, seeds, and insect remains. Microscopic analysis of each sample was undertaken a member of the class in order to separate the molluscs by species and to identify any other potentially interesting or informative remains. The method employed in the classification of mollusc species was detailed visual analysis of each shell. In addition to overall shape and size, characteristic features include:
In some cases, comparison with the study collection was necessary to confirm the identification. For example, in the analysis of molluscs from sample depth 53-65 cm, the similarity in appearance of Carychium tridentatum and C. minimum necessitated the comparison of shells from the sample with known examples of both species from the reference collection. It was only in contrast to the taller  C. tridentatum that the unidentified shells could be verified as C. minimum.