John Locke lived in the 17 th century and is one of the three most renowned empiricists; that is he believed that we are born a tabula rasa; blank slate, and that all our knowledge is gained through experience and interaction with the world not reflection and that we hold no innate ideas. This can be opposed to the rationalist standpoint whereby we do have innate ideas and thus some knowledge is universal; Plato or Descartes would be considered a rationalist.
The quote in the title is taken from Locke's Essay concerning Human Understanding [1690] in which Locke talks about the properties of material objects and how objects come to possess the properties that we associate with them. Locke distinguished between the properties or qualities of an object and the ideas they cause in us, giving the example of a snowball;
Robert Boyle was Locke's mentor and, not surprisingly, can be seen to have a great influence over Locke's work. Boyle was, at the time Locke was writing, developing a scientific theory of the material world based upon the atom, an idea which had long been out of fashion. Locke uses Boyle's terminology and distinguishes between two different classes of properties; the primary and secondary qualities of an object. Primary qualities are factual and verifiable and include extension, shape and solidity whereas secondary qualities are those which we experience through the senses including colour, taste and smell. Locke argued that whilst primary qualities existed within objects and independently of a conscious observer, secondary qualities do not and are dependent on primary qualities and a perceiver for their very existence. That is that secondary qualities do not exist in objects but rather are a result of our observation of objects. Locke supported Boyles theory that everything is made up of many tiny corpuscles, and that if you cut an object in half enough time you would get to one singular atom, however it seems impossible to think that this 'atom' would hold any secondary qualities such as a taste or smell so it must be that secondary qualities are in the mind of the perceiver rather than the object itself. Locke is telling us that in a sense the world is not really characterized by properties that resemble our ideas, the world is not really coloured or filled with sound, those only exist through our perception of them, and exist only in our perception.
Secondary qualities can be compared to other sensory input which we automatically attribute to ourselves rather than the object, such as pain. If we are sitting by the fire we may feel pleasantly warm and state that the fire is warm. If we then slip and our hand goes too close to the fire we then feel pain, however this we do not attribute this to the fire we do not claim that 'the fire contains pain' but rather that we ourselves feel pain as a result of the fire. Just as we see orange or taste sweetness as a result of an orange, these properties do not reside in the object itself, the object simply has the potential to produce these sensations in us. Locke also uses an almond in an example to support his argument; an almond is sweet and white (secondary qualities) however if we pound an almond it will become a dirty colour and taste oily. Locke uses this example as it shows that whiteness and sweetness are not qualities that the almond itself possess just qualities we attribute to the almond when we perceive it in a certain state. An experiment which has been suggested to explain Locke's meaning is this; place one of your hands in a bowl of hot water, the other in a bowl of cold water. After a few minutes place both hands in a bowl of warm water. To the hand that was in the cold water it will feel hot, to the hand that was in the hot water it will feel cold. This simple experiment shows how hot or cold are purely subjective standpoints which have no place in reality, All the bowls of water have a temperature, Locke is not denying that, but none of them are hot or cold in or of themselves, they require a conscious observer to be given such a description.
Another argument for Locke's distinction, which he does not give but that has been suggested by modern philosophers, is that in order to speak about any secondary qualities we must make reference to a perceiver. For example to talk about the colour green you need to refer to visual systems; green things are things which appear green under the right conditions to creatures with visual systems, and this does not seem to be required when describing primary qualities such as being round or moving toward the earth. However this very point seems to lead to one objection to Locke's theory; if secondary qualities exist only in the minds of perceivers how can we talk about an dress appearing black under a green light, but actually being red? Locke would answer that when we talk about the 'actual' colour we are simply referring to that which we perceive when the object is under the conditions that we normally view it in. (e.g. white light)
Berkeley analysed and criticised Locke's work in his own writings. He felt that Locke's distinction between primary and secondary qualities was weak and that all qualities can be given the attributes Locke places on secondary qualities, that is they all exist only as they are perceived. If Berkeley's criticisms of Locke's theory work then we are lead towards idealism, a very un-commonsensical view of the world which Locke himself certainly wouldn't have endorsed. Berkeley's two main arguments were that firstly that we have no more reason to believe primary qualities, such as shape and extension, are really present in the objects themselves than we have reason to believe that secondary qualities really are present in objects, because we can't talk about an object's extension without referring to its roughness or brownness. I can't describe a table as being merely extended; to be extended it must have secondary properties as well. Berkeley's second argument runs as follows;
When referring back to the example of the red dress, the dresses secondary qualities such as its size and shape could appear different under different conditions. As with his first point Berkeley is arguing the distinction Locke has made between primary and secondary qualities is false, and thus what is applied to one should be applied to the other. So Berkeley uses Locke's arguments for the distinction between primary and secondary qualities to his own ends to support his argument that the entire physical world exists purely in our perception of it.
I feel that Lockes line of reasoning is persuasive and that his arguments for distinguishing between primary and secondary qualities, and his reasons for keeping secondary qualities purely in the mind of the perceiver are, while criticisable, defiantly compelling. However Berkeley makes some credible points in his examination of Locke's work and I feel he may be right in arguing that Locke made a mistake in separating primary and secondary qualities as both are, in the end, perceived through our senses, and as such are equally unreliable. Therefore it seems to accept Locke's understanding of secondary qualities seems to inevitably lead us to Berkeley's idealist viewpoint. One which is entirely counterintuitive and perhaps leads us to reconsider if Locke's, originally small distinction between primary and secondary qualities, was not in fact a large leap.