Descartes aim in the Meditations is a search for certain, indubitable, knowledge. He reasons that the only way that this can be achieved is for him to undertake an examination of all his present beliefs to see if any are in fact indubitable. Descartes has set himself a very high standard, he does not want his beliefs merely to be reasonable or justified as many of them are, but completely beyond even the most outlandish cause for doubt. However Descartes foresees a problem for this approach, for we all hold innumerable beliefs and it would take unimaginable periods of time to question each belief individually. Therefore Descartes concludes he should question only his most fundamental beliefs, the ones underlying all of his other beliefs and assumptions, and if a belief should fail to pass the test then any beliefs reliant upon the fundamental belief must also be rejected. The test being to only admit beliefs that are completely certain and indubitable.
The reader may contend that it seems to extreme to reject beliefs simply in the grounds that they can be doubted, however Descartes reminds us that this method is not to be applied to our everyday life, but used in the pursuit of truth from the safety of ones armchair, and that he doesn't seriously expect us to observe this hyperbolic doubt in everyday life.
What would speed up this process is finding one supreme principle on which all of our knowledge and beliefs rest. Descartes meditates on this problem and comes to the old Aristotelian conclusion that all our knowledge comes to us through the senses, so it is in the senses that we should first attempt to find some cause for doubt. Descartes argues that the senses have in the past deceived me; square towers in the distance have appeared round, a straight stick placed in water appears bent. I wasn't aware my senses were deceiving me then, so who's to say that they aren't deceiving me now? Hence "it is prudent never to trust completely those who have deceived us even once."
This argument is now commonly referred to as the Argument from Illusion; sometimes we experience illusions, such as the examples above as well as hallucinations, so we cannot always trust our senses, therefore our senses are not indubitable and do not pass Descartes test as a path to finding certain knowledge. Descartes himself points out a criticism of this approach, being that we are lead to doubt matters which it appears entirely ridiculous to doubt. As Descartes puts it only madmen who say that "their heads are made of earthenware, or that they are pumpkins, or made of glass." would doubt such certainties that the senses present us with. That I am at this moment sitting typing at my laptop seems a ridiculous thing to doubt given he evidence I am provided with first hand.
However lets propose that I am not sitting at my desk in this moment in time, but lying in bed dreaming that I am writing this essay. How would I know the difference between the two seemingly indistinguishable scenarios? We have all had dreams so real that we become confused as to whether or not they truly occurred upon waking so we can relate to the point Descartes is making here. Can we ever know for absolute certain that we are not dreaming? This is Descartes second argument to give us reason to doubt. He reasons that we can't even know that the things we see even exist, as fantastical things exist in dreams. Descartes goes on to use the analogy of the painter who uses his experience of people and animals to create creatures such as sirens and satyrs, so at least the basic components of what we believe to be real must exist. However Descartes doesn't want to excluded the possibility that something entirely new could be created, however more basic ideas like the colours the painter uses can not be created. At least the more basic components of the objects we perceive as real must, then, exist. Descartes places in this group "corporeal nature... extension; the shape of extended things; the quantity... the place in which they may exist, the time through which they may endure," It can be concluded then that sciences which depend upon empirical observation are doubtable, whereas practices such as arithmetic and geometry aren't doubtable as they are based upon more basic components, the 'colours' of reality; "For whether I am awake or asleep two and three added together are five,".
It is from this point that Descartes brings in the "malicious demon" argument in order to lead the reader to have further cause for doubt. The evil deceiver is all powerful and so has created me with faulty perceiving and reasoning faculties, so that everything I believe to be true is, in reality, not the case. This example leads on from Descartes putting aside his belief in God as Descartes acknowledges there are some who doubt the existence of God and they must feel they have grounds for doing so. An idea such as the evil deceiver however improbable is still entirely possible, and so retains presence as a cause for doubt. For if there really was an evil deceiver I would be none the wiser, the world as it appears to me now could all be the result of an elaborate deception. Fundamentally this argument leads us to doubt our own cognitive nature, our ability to reason without which even simple mathematical equations could be false. So Descartes concludes at the end of the first meditation;
Many contemporaries of Descartes, notably Gassendi, questioned the point of his hyperbolic doubt in the first meditation when he simply goes on to re-instate all his rejected beliefs latter in the meditations. Descartes replied to this query in the Objections and Replies using the example of rooten apples to represent false beliefs. If we have a basket of apples and suspect some may be rooten there is no course of action to take but to pour all the apples out the basket and re-examine each one individually before re-admitting it to the basket. For if we simply look in the basket we will only ever be able to see one side of the apple. As such we must reject all our beliefs before we accept any as true.
Another criticism is a problem with being sceptical in general; for the true sceptic may say 'I know that I know nothing', but then what does this person know? It would appear they know that they know nothing, in which case they do, in fact, know something (that they know nothing). The sceptical position appears to be a paradox and as such a position which it doesn't make much sense to side with. However such a criticism misunderstands Descartes intent, he is using skepticism mearly as a tool and would not regard himself as a sceptic of the type associated with Ancient Greece.
Charles Peirce put forward another criticism that has been raised against Descartes method of doubt. He argued that you cannot begin an enterprise such as this on the bases of doubt, for Descartes' doubt is just a maxim, or a rule, doubting for the sake of doubting. An individual may come to doubt some of their prejudices through time and the study of philsophy but cannot be expected to doubt simply because Descartes requires them to do so. To attempt to do so would not truly be doubting, or as Peirce puts it, "Let us not pretend to doubt in philosophy what we do not doubt in our hearts". In light of this criticism it is important to remember a distinction between two types of doubt, one reated to doubting how justified the belief is and the other doubting the belief itself. Descartes is providing us with justifications for doubt, reasons to doubt, he is not suggesting disbelief, or even that we may truly doubt these things, but that we appreciate that there are good reasons to doubt our prejudices.
A further cricism of Descartes approch is to argue that since Descartes is attempting to doubt everything, if he does the job well, we should be left with nothing, and how can Descartes rebuild his belief structure when he has no foundation? This problem was adressed by Descartes in a letter he wrote to Clerselier in which he states that his method of doubt could never totally empty the mind. The basic structures of human thought and priciples of reasoning remain, so perhapse Descartes has failed in his attempt to rely solely on certainties? He would argue that these notions were only used as part of the method of doubt and weren't used to provide truths.
Descartes doubt of the reliability of the senses also has its critics. Hatfield points out perhapse it is the circumstances that surround an incident that tell us if our senses can be relied upon. He gives the example of a friend who may lie about our cooking skills but wouldn't deceive us in matters of life or death. However this query doesn't do anything to belittle the fact that we can still doubt our senses at any given time, we can never be certain that they are being truthful.
I feel that the following is one of the most powerful problems for the Argument from Illusion. In everyday life how do we tell when our senses deceive us? When the tower looks round in the distance how do we find out that we were mistaken? We approach the tower and as we get closer we see that it is in reality square. The mistake made by the senses is remedied by the senses. We cannot avoid relying on our senses to see when we have been deceived by our senses. Therefore it makes no sense to talk of our senses constantly deceiving us, as without them providing some truth we wouldn't know deception. When this problem was put to Descartes he argued that knowledge that we are being deceived comes not from the senses but from the intellect, therefore the criticism doesn't stand. Otherwise how would we ever be able to make decisions when receiving conflicting messages from different senses, for example the case of the stick appearing bent in water, it may look bent but it feels straight, how are we to know, purely on sensory information, which sense is to be trusted? Descartes argues we use our intellect to make such decisions.
Descartes method of doubt needs to be viewed in light of what he is aiming to achieve in the meditations. Clearly hyperbolic doubt on this scale has no practical implications (except perhaps driving madmen madder) but Descartes it simply using it as a tool with which to remove any beliefs or knowledge which can been seen not to be entirely certain. Perhaps he could have gone further in his doubt, its certainly possible to attempt to do so, however all philosophical musings on the metaphysics have to take some facts for granted otherwise they would never make any headway or come to any conclusions. The idea of starting afresh, with a clean slate is an appealing one, and that's what Descartes is attempting to do here, wipe the slate clean and start again. However who's to say that the knowledge we get by pure reasoning is any more useful or more importantly any more true than that which we gain through the senses and through experience. Yes sometimes we are misinformed by the senses but errors in reasoning occur equally frequently. I propose that Descartes utter rejection of any 'commonsensical' notions is not entirely justified, and that his reasons for readopting many of these beliefs, as given later in the meditations, do not appear to reach the very high standard of certainty that he was so keen to impose in the first meditation.