Leckford Estate, Hampshire is a busy 4000 acre farming estate comprising of many enterprises including a dairy, mushroom farm, fruit farm and a broiler chicken enterprise. The estate is run by the John Lewis Partnership and therefore linked to Waitrose, providing fresh food throughout the seasons exclusively to the supermarket. Due to the estate producing primarily for Waitrose it is very important that it works closely to the retail outlet and links products with consumers, it is also very important that it meets all of its objectives and all enterprises are managed carefully to ensure effective productivity is maintained.
Leckford is unique being the only estate run and owned by a large retail outlet. The estate was set up by John Speden Lewis over 75years ago, with its original vision being 'farming in harmony with the environment as well as to share in the values that Waitrose continues to hold true in its everyday expertise in food (Leckford Estate 2006). Due to the estate being owned by the retail outlet it sees even greater than traditional farms the importance of linking products and consumers. It achieves this in a variety of ways, through instore schemes, open days for John Lewis cardholders, and promotions such as leaflets.
The instore schemes such as Waitrose Select Farm schemes promote the farmer on each product. The information on the packaging gives detailed information about where the product has come from and in the case of Leckford products promotes the image of produced on Waitroses 'Home Farm'. This would give confidence to the buyer through being able to associate where the product has come from and that it has been grown to Waitrose standards. Other ways in which Leckford and Waitrose link consumers and products are through providing instore leaflets and open days giving detailed information about the farm, all its enterprises, standards and the products that are produced. These give consumers more information about the products that they are buying, and are unique to Waitrose that other supermarkets do not do. This would appeal to customers and again give confidence to consumers about the products. All these methods that are used to link products with customers are very important to Waitrose and Leckford. It promotes Leckford Estate products and therefore increases sales and demand for them. It also promotes Waitroses image that they are concerned with the way in which the food they sell is produced and want to be linked to farming through having their own farm. Which other supermarkets do not have.
There are 250 employees at Leckford Estate, 75 staff in the mushroom enterprise alone and therefore management of all the enterprises and staffs is vitally important. The management structure consists of managers of each enterprise with a working team. Each manager of each enterprise consults with the general agricultural manager or commercial manager and then they consult with board directors from Waitrose and John Lewis. This shows that there are many layers in the management system and therefore links of communication are vitally important along with monitoring controls in place. Meetings take place regularly in order to keep all staff informed, meetings between enterprise managers and their team members take place daily to assert tasks, meetings between enterprise managers and general managers ensure that objectives and budgets are on track, and board meetings take place regularly to discuss changes and short term or long term improvements along with finances. The large number of meetings not only within the estate but with committees and Waitrose, do have some negative effects, it takes along time for decisions to be made, as everything has to be discussed and approved.
Management of employees and the estate as shown above is important to achieve the estate objectives. The estate objectives are: