The Single Payment Scheme (SPS) came into action from the 1 st January 2005 and replaces most crop and livestock support payments that were previously in place. There is no longer the link between production and support for farmers but instead decoupling, 'farmers will be asked to demonstrate that they are keeping their land in good agricultural and environmental condition and complying with a number of specified legal requirements relating to the environment, public and plant health and animal health and welfare (RPA and Defra 2005a), these will be in the form of cross compliance. The new system of payment will affect all producers, crops and livestock. This report will focus on how suckler cow farmers will be affected from the transfer from old payments such as the Suckler Cow Premium Scheme (SCPS) to the new SPS.
More than half the beef produced is derived from the dairy herd but in addition there are beef suckler cows that are used wholly for beef production (Allen and Kilkenny 1984). Suckled calf production usually involves either selling weaned calves at six to twelve months of age or carrying calves through to slaughter. This report will look at how suckler cow systems of production that raise the calves through to slaughter will be affected by the introduction of the SPS.
Up until 2005 suckler cow farmers would have relied upon the Beef Special Premium Scheme and Suckler Cow Premium Scheme and Extensification Scheme to supplement the income received from selling the beef calves at market or for meat. However since the introduction of the SPS there will be no payment what so ever to the farmers to supplement the income of beef production, this will not only effect the farm income but also the direction in which farmers will farm their lands.
The Suckler Cow Premium scheme (SCP) paid a premium on female beef breed cows, which are part of a regular breeding herd producing calves reared for meat. A quota is allocated to suckler producers and payment cannot be claimed on animals above the quota number. Claimants must include a minimum percentage of 5% heifers on each claim, up to a maximum of 40% (RPA 2002a). Payment is received once a year. Recipients of the SCP also received an additional payment per head from the Beef National Envelope (BNE), an EC funded scheme. Payments for the SCP scheme can be seen in the table below.
This scheme paid a premium per head to beef producers on male cattle, one payment on bulls, two payments on steers (castrated male cattle).
The scheme payments were:
(RPA 2002b)
The Extensification Payment Scheme (EPS) allows beef producers receiving either SCP or BSP or both to participate in either the Standard Scheme or the Simplified Scheme. This is an additional payment per head of cattle over six months of age. The standard scheme requires that your average stocking density for the year remains below or equal to 1.8 LU/hectare. The simplified scheme requires a stocking density of below 1.4 LU/hectare (Rural Payments Agency 2002c). The two types of stocking densities receive different payments as shown in the table below.
The schemes before the introduction of the SPS would have provided farmers with a guaranteed source of income per head of cattle kept per year. For suckler farmers they would have received a payment per head of suckler cows from the SCP scheme, including national envelope payment. They would have also received a payment per head of each beef bull calve produced from the BSP scheme and extensification payments on all cattle in the schemes. There was no payment for any heifer calves produced that were not entering the suckler herd as replacements. Farmers would have either sold these or reared to slaughter age without any subsidy payment. Farmers would also have received the slaughter payment or market sale price after slaughtering or selling the beef cattle.
These schemes have been very important to beef producers in the last few years when farmers have been receiving very low market prices for beef, yet the cost of feed and labour has remained high. The low price received for beef has been due to the BSE scare and the Foot and Mouth scare. There has also been a general move of the general public towards eating white meats believing that these meats are healthier. This has meant low market prices for beef and therefore suckler farmers have relied on the support of the SCP, BSP and extensification payments. The income suckler farmers would likely have received is shown in the table below.
The information in the table above means that a suckler herd farmer in 2004 with 100 suckler cows and raises beef calves as bulls, at the standard extensification scheme would receive a total 28397 yearly payment as shown in the table below.
The farmer would have also received a slaughter premium on all adult cattle slaughtered, therefore in this case would have been all the beef calves produced and slaughtered, 50 heifers and 50 bulls at 54.17 per head (Nix 2005). This means that the farmer would receive in one year from the government support schemes a total of 33814. After the introduction of the SPS the farmer will receive no support per head for animals kept or reared. This means that the farmer no longer has any financial incentive to keep cattle on the farm, as payment will be for managing the land in an environmental way, which does not directly require cattle.
The new payment will be made on a pounds per hectare basis and will be a flat rate regional payment with a compulsory modulation rate each year. Up until 2012 payment in the United Kingdom will be delayed flat rate- therefore will consist of historic payments and the new flat rate average, with proportions of each changing over the years, historic payments reducing and the flat rate increasing, until in 2012 as shown in the table below.
The exchange rate is important due to the payments being calculated in euros.
The flat rate payment will be made on a regional average depending on the land, three types of classified land - lowland, non-moor land severely disadvantaged area and moor land severely disadvantaged area. Payment will be made on meeting cross compliance regulations.
Cross compliance are a set of rules which farmers must follow to receive the SPS. Cross compliance is in two forms, 'Statutory Management Requirements' consisting of public and plant health, animal welfare and the environment directives and the second form consists of keeping land in 'Good agricultural and environmental condition'. Many of the cross compliance requirements are reinforcing existing laws in place and therefore farmers will already have these requirements in place. The good agricultural and environmental conditions apply to the management of soils, along with the maintenance of habitats and landscape features, these include having a soil management plan. The statuary management requirements in 2005 simply require farmers to comply with existing legislation such as wild birds, ground water and nitrate vulnerable zones. Farms will be inspected annually by the Rural Payments Agency to ensure that they are complying with cross compliance regulations.
With the total turn around on how farmers are being paid, there now seems to be two options available to farmers. These are to either carry on producing as they were previously but without any direct financial support, therefore rely on market prices. Or farmers can concentrate on receiving as higher payment as possible from the SPS and therefore carry out environmental work on the farm through entering the Entry Level Scheme and Higher level Scheme, which are environmental schemes that have replaced the previous Countryside Stewardship. This means receiving payment for different types of environmental work such as hedge planting.
The environmental choice to farmers could be a choice in which many will go, such as entering in to the Entry Level scheme and then proceeding to apply for the Higher Level Scheme which would mean more payments, but not just from environmental factors, instead from recreation o restoration projects. The Entry Level scheme could mean less stress to farmers than traditional farming practices, some income from the SPS and time in which they could work else where either remaining in the agricultural sector but not direct farming or leaving the sector altogether.
In the case of the suckler farmers continuing to produce beef would mean having to rely on market prices that are currently low and not likely to increase greatly due to cheaper imports, unless a niche market is found. This choice could become increasingly difficult for farmers, as feed prices are likely to remain high due to the high cost of production and fuel for transport. It is also increasingly difficult to find labour, few people are entering the agricultural sector and therefore labour is scarce as well as expensive. They would however receive the single farm payment, which would be a guaranteed source of income. However this choice would bring some implications to their farming methods through cross compliance. Land must not be overgrazed or unsuitable supplementary feeding must not take place in a way that adversely affects the quality or semi natural vegetation. This is through trampling or pouching of land by livestock or rutting by vehicles used to transport feed (RPA and Defra 2005b). This could bring implications to keeping suckler cows and calves out in fields at times of levels of rain such as autumn and winter when land could become poached. This could cause higher costs of feeding and bedding through having to keep cattle inside. Failure to follow cross compliance regulations could lead to a failed inspection and penalty charge or reduced single farm payment.
Either option, continue farming or environmental work would still bring in an external source of income to supplement the flat rate payment from the single farm payment. If many suckler farmers do choose to discontinue farming with livestock then the number of beef cattle in the country could reduce and reliance on beef imports increase.