Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE) belongs to a family of diseases known as Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathies (TSE's). These diseases affect six known species including BSE in cattle, humans - Creutzfeldt Jakob Disease (CJD), sheep - Scapie, deer - Chronic wasting disease, cats - Feline spongiform and mink - mink encephalopathy. TSE's all have similar epidemiology, with a long incubation period of several years. All TSE's are progressive and always fatal with no treatment.
BSE is a neuro-degenerative disease affecting the brains of cattle. The infectious agent has yet to be identified but, Blowey (1999), proposed that it's most probably a sub-cellular protein particle, which replicates by becoming incorporated into the host cell. The disease causes sponge like formations in the brain; this results in cattle displaying symptoms such as:
(Source: Defra 2004)
The disease has a long incubation period, taking years for cattle to show symptoms. 'The average incubation period for BSE is around five years, although it can be as little as two or three years' (Blowey 1999). Often cases appear in dairy cattle, occurring after stresses such as calving. Confirmation of the disease is made through post mortem examination of brain tissue after slaughter.
The disease was first discovered in 1986 in the UK when some dairy cattle died in the West Country from an unknown neurological disease. The disease started in the UK but spread to other countries due to the continued trade in feedstuffs between 1986-88 before the meat and bone meal ban came into place, which is how the disease is thought to have been transmitted. The worst effected countries included Ireland, Switzerland and Portugal. After the first cases appeared in 1986 rapidly rising numbers followed as show in graph one.
The UK government, including the animal health group and state veterinary service decided to keep the disease quite originally because they were concerned that trading partners would ban imports of live cattle and beef from the UK. It wasn't until 1987 that the disease became known and cases were confirmed and controls put in place in 1988. It even remained legal until control measures were in place to sell cattle meat known to have died from BSE.
The graph shows skewed distribution with a long tail, typical of an epidemic. Numbers of cases rose rapidly from 1988 until its peak in 1992 with around 1100 cases reported.
Graph two shows that by 1998 the numbers of cases were very low compared to 1992. The number of cases restricted decreased year on year with 1998 having the highest numbers compared to 2005 and 2006 by which they time they had dropped dramatically. By 2006 numbers each week have been between zero and four cows.
The total number of BSE cases from 1986 until 2002 are shown in table one below.
The table shows up until 2002 there were over one hundred thousand cases of BSE. This means that a significant number of cattle, farmers and other business had been affected. The number of cases account for around 2% of the total number of cattle within the UK. Cases of vCJD were also high with over 100 people being affected and confirmed with the disease. Both the number of BSE cases and vCJD cases had an effect on the market of beef, the future farming for beef farmers and consumer confidence in buying UK meat and beef, as will be seen later in the report.
The main transmission route was thought to have been feed born. Most cattle that were born in the UK in the 1980s were fed protein supplements that included ruminant meat and bone meal at some point during their lives. Also at this time the processing of this feedstuff altered from batch production at high temperatures, along with the use of solvents, to continual production with no solvents and at a lower temperature. This meant that the disease remained present in the feed that was then fed back to cattle causing the disease to be spread. It is now known that temperatures in excess of 140 0C are needed to destroy the agent preferably under steam (Blowey 1999).
Also at the same time there was a considerable increase in sheep production, and therefore sheep slaughtering which was included in cattle feed due to the high prices of protein from soya. Scrapie a TSE that affects sheep was present in the UK around this time and it is unknown whether the BSE epidemic occurred through the feeding of meat and bone meal containing sheep and therefore making BSE a mutation of Scrapie. Or, whether the infection has always been present in cattle and the relaxation of offal processing led to the recycling of the disease, causing a large increase in the level of the BSE.
Vertical transmission from mother to offspring has been a topic of research and it is thought to occur. This is because there were some BSE cases in cattle that were born after the feed ban (the main transmission route) but whose mother had had BSE.
Horizontal transmission from animal to animal has not been identified however it is not excluded.
When looking at the BSE epidemic in the UK it is important to consider the control measures pout in place and effects that it had on the UK market.
Primary prevention is key in order to control the disease as once cattle have BSE there is no secondary prevention or treatment due to it being a TSE. The main government reaction was that they would impose a feed ban, which they thought would eradicate the disease however they would speed this up through slaughtering.
June 1988 - BSE was made a notifiable disease. It became law for farmers to notify the government of any BSE suspects. After this date all suspects were slaughtered and incinerated therefore being removed from the human food chain. This control measure was important to ensure farmers realised how serious the disease was and was a way of monitoring numbers and further control measures that would be place. It was important to educate farmers about the disease and symptoms in order for this control to be effective. Therefore farmers were paid compensation for every slaughter.
July 1988 - Ban on ruminant meat and bone meal in ruminant rations, this was due to the thought that transmission took place through this system. Graph one shows an increase in number of cases until the peak in 1992 after which the numbers start declining. The feed ban was put in place in 1988; this meant that cattle born after this date in theory should not contract BSE. However for those cattle that had eaten the feed containing meat and bone meal the disease would have been present in their system, and due to the long incubation period of around five years cases still occurred up until 1992 and 1993 at its peak. After this cases started to decline as shown in the graph.
1989 - The EU banned the export of live cattle. This stopped the export of live cattle that were born before the feed ban was in place - 1988.
June 1990 - Ban the use of Specified Bovine Offal (SBO). This prevented brain, spinal cord and intestines etc of cattle over six months of age from entering the human food chain. The risk to human health is still unknown but this was a preventative measure, stopping bovine tissues that may contain the disease agent from entering the human food chain.
September 1990 - Ban of SBO extended to include ruminant feed; the whole bovine head was excluded from the feed. These measures resulted in further declines in cases. However higher numbers remained then expected after the exclusion of meat and bone meal and offal from ruminant feed. Despite the ban it was found some material was still getting into cattle diets due to cross contamination in feed mills as meat and bone meal was still being used in horse, pig and poultry food, along with failure to keep SBO totally separate at abattoirs. Blowey (1999) states: 'It was found only 1.0g of infected tissue was needed to be ingested by a calf to cause disease'. This meant that measures needed to be tightened to prevent cross contamination.
1994 - Ban in place preventing all SBO including less than six months of age entering the human food chain. These were further measures to protect human health as there was increasing press coverage and concern from the public about human health safety, threat of CJD not known.
1996 CJD - Announcement that BSE was the most probable cause of 10 cases of vCJD in UK citizens. This lead to political crisis within days and the introduction of further control measures.
1996 - EU commission declared a worldwide ban on British beef, semen, embryos and any products containing bovine material. This was a control measure to try to protect the rest of the world from BSE and vCJD. Trade however had already taken place up until 1988 in feed stuffs and animals up until 1996 and therefore BSE had already reached countries such as Portugal and Ireland as shown before.
1996 - The Over Thirty Month Scheme was introduced (OTMS). This was the UK government response to vCJD and the worldwide ban. The government needed to be seen to be doing something to protect human health and trying to control the disease due to the massive press interest, and the OTMS was this. This prevented all cattle aged over 30 months from entering the human food chain, as these are thought to contain the risk. The scheme provides compensation to farmers to have OTM cattle incinerated and disposed of.
1996 - Improved record keeping measures. This was a big step in trace-ability of cattle that is increasingly enforced today. This was again a result to the vCJD effect. From 1996 all cattle born have a passport. It became law for every cow to have the passport wherever it moved during its lifetime. This contains vital information about place of birth, mother and the cows' individual ear tag number. The passport was put into place in order to trace the offspring of mothers with confirmed BSE. These were then culled to prohibit any further vertical transmission in order to try to eradicate the disease. The birth cohorts were also traced and culled, those animals which were born at the same time as a confirmed case, as these were thought to be high risk through eating the same ration. These measures were also put in place to protect human health as a measure of trace-ability.
The effects on markets have been large. These have been through the result of the worldwide ban on all beef products alongside the massive loss in consumer confidence in UK farmers and UK beef. The result of confirmed vCJD in 1996 caused the collapse of the beef industry in Europe. The effects have not just been on farmers but hauliers, slaughters and retailers as well, especially butchers. Beef sales plummeted by 25% in a week in the UK, 50% in parts of Europe, along with this cattle prices fell correspondingly with decreases of 20% in the UK and 15% in Europe (Donnelly and Ferguson (2000). For most animal disease outbreaks the cost of containment, eradication and economic adjustment are temporary, after which the industry returns to normal. BSE has been different. New and permanent changes have been introduced which impose substantial additional costs for the indefinite future. The costs have not only been in additional control measures at farm level such as the introduction of the cattle passport but also the permanent loss of the value of each beef animal produced due to the exclusion from the food chain of certain carcass components. Some regulations have been re-evaluated such as the OTMS, and was lifted in 2005 but with cattle born before 1996 remaining excluded. Along with this 'the UK is currently in negotiation with the European Union (EU) Commission and other Member States on a proposal to lift the ban. The proposal as it stands would permit the export of cattle born on or after 1 August 1996 and beef and beef products from such cattle, subject to the necessary health and certification requirements' (Defra 2006c). These measures however have only just started happening and for the past 18 years since 1988 when BSE first hit the UK beef industry has been drastically suppressed, it remains to see whether current measures will improve the situation for the industry.
The government after twelve months of keeping BSE quiet aimed to rapidly control the disease reducing its frequency of cases and then ultimately wanted a complete eradication at a national level. In order to achieve this they put some control measures in place. It has been shown in the report that putting control measures in place was easy but making sure they work completely was very difficult as with the ruminant and SBO feed ban, cross contamination was still occurring and as only 1g of infected material was needed for the disease to occur numbers of BSE cases remained high until later control measures were put in place preventing all material entering ruminant feed. 1996 become the most effective year when big steps were made in order to try to control the disease, even though BSE numbers had peaked in 1992 and started to decline by 1996. This was mainly due to the vCJD cases highlighting to the country and the world the BSE crisis. This forced the UK and EU to take great steps and action with the worldwide ban, OTMS and passport application. These were mainly to protect human health as the spread of the disease had already tried to be suppressed by the ruminant feed ban. These measures however were shown to be too late for other countries protection such as Ireland. The OTMS and passport scheme have been effective, lasting up until today, with only the OTMS phasing out now in 2005/2006. These have protected human health by controlling the food chain and passports will continue to monitor trace-ability. The effect of control measures put in place by the government since BSE hit the UK in 1988 has greatly affected the beef industry. With future options being the lifting of the OTMS and possible lifting of the ban on exports it is hoped the beef industry will pick up.