Information Technology (IT) doubtlessly can contribute much to agriculture and rural development. The use of IT in rural businesses can lead to better communications and a closer relationship with customers and suppliers, improving both efficiency and profitability. Traditionally businesses communicated through the use of the telephone and mail. Technology has moved on greatly to the current day situation of more businesses communicating to both customers and suppliers through e-mail and the Internet. However the adoption of IT in rural businesses remains lower than in urban businesses.
The graph above shows the adoption of IT in rural and urban businesses depending on number of employees. It shows that urban adoption is always higher in every employee band, however the gap between them is not that different with the mean adoption index in all businesses in urban at 6.7 and rural at 5.7. As the businesses become larger the adoption of IT increases.
The Defra census (2005) showed that currently 80% of rural businesses that have the opportunity to access the Internet do, yet only 74% of rural businesses have this access.
The graph above shows the percentage of rural and urban businesses that have their own website. The results show that only 38% of rural businesses have their own website compared to 51% of urban businesses. This could be due to less internet access and the difference in markets in which urban and rural businesses operate, many urban businesses sell direct to consumers and therefore a website is beneficial in marketing, fewer rural businesses operate in this way.
The results from the census show that rural businesses adoption of IT is lagging behind urban. Current factors that are hindering the advancement and adoption of IT in rural businesses are the lack of education, the size of businesses, and high cost of initial investment and the lack of facilities within the area such as the Internet. Many rural businesses are smaller than those that are urban, more sole traders and therefore the lack of education and money to invest in the initial set up are real constraints. A major sector of rural businesses is agriculture and with often the age of farmers around 50 then education in IT is an important issue. Many of these people were not brought up with large amounts of computer use and therefore are put off purchasing and using IT within their businesses. The cost of investment is an important factor to many businesses and people's perceptions on whether IT is worthwhile are different.
As these issues are overcome and the increase in Internet access improves more businesses will adopt the use of IT. Broadband helps to remove some of the barriers which geography puts in the way of rural businesses (Scottish executive 2004). More rural businesses will look to use IT in their everyday actions, with legal obligations and quality assurance needing to be met and proven, cost reduction and time management improvements.
Future developments and adoptions of IT will have an increasing effect on rural businesses both in developed countries and developing countries.
The adoption of information technology in developing countries could become very important. IT could be used to meet common needs in these countries rural communities and businesses, such as enhancing crop productivity, efficient cattle farm management, providing for national and household level food security, and conservation of bio-diversity. 'These governance products and services include: information about the latest seed varieties, fertilizers, pesticides and rainfall prediction; information on various government schemes such as those on water resources management and subsidies on land development and soil conservation activities; information about local agriculture offices and officers, crop testing and training centres; information on milk processing, grain storage, livestock vaccination and crop diseases; information about market prices of various crops, rates for loans, and available credit facilities (digital governance 2006). Many rural businesses in developing countries are small family run businesses on which their whole livelihoods rely, therefore the adoption and development of IT in these businesses would have a significant impact. Better predictions of climatic conditions and crop testing with knowledge will reduce the likelihood of crop failure leading to famine and the whole country in crisis. However in order for IT to take off in these countries much money and education needs to be spent on providing facilities and knowledge. The census before shows that rural adoption of IT in the UK is low because of education and facility constraints and this is a wealthy country therefore adoption in developing countries will be even harder.
Future advancements in the adoption of IT in countries such as Russia could have a large effect both at the individual enterprise level, as well as at the national and international level. Currently parts of Russia are lagging behind in technology adoption within arable production, yet they are however able to produce high yields and have very large cultivation areas compared to the UK. This means that future adoption of IT in the next twenty years in this area of rural business could have a massive effect. At the enterprise level farmers could become more efficient with monitoring inputs with outputs such as precision farming, predicting climatic conditions and use of the Internet. The effects of this could mean that they are able to produce much larger quantities of corn more efficiently than the UK and other EU countries therefore creating large competition.
Within developed countries such as America and the UK IT plays a vital role in analysing performance in rural businesses. The use of precision farming has shown the uses of modern technology to monitor individual field performance per square metre compared to the traditional whole farm monitoring on a much broader scale. Computer software is used both in the tractor cab for the user, and in the office for the farm manager and agronomist. IT based decision support systems (DSS) can help decision making such as when and what to plant whilst considering environmental impact, market access and industry standards. Yet because of the high investment costs and the current low prices of arable crops only limited farms that can make the economic investment justifiable have adopted precision farming software. Uptake in countries such as America could be larger due to the much larger scales of arable production. This shows that in order for further adoptions of IT to take place in the future, companies need to advance and produce software that suit the smaller scale businesses as well. Other uses of IT have become more popular with the increase in rural diversification such as farm shops and Internet businesses. These rural businesses completely rely on the adoption and use of IT to be profitable.
Further developments of IT in the livestock sector have also occurred through businesses such as NMR and Farm Plan producing programmes for every aspect of running a livestock business, including herd records, and individual animal performance. These advancements in technology have been specialised to businesses specific needs but within a fairly large market, as with livestock. In the next twenty years IT advancements will play an important role in food security with emerging consumer concerns about animal welfare and diseases such as chicken flu and BSE. It will also become increasingly important to monitor individual cow performances especially with the current increasing herd sizes and reducing labour, in order to become more economical.
Other future advancements in IT could lead to better communications between what is expected by rural businesses from the government. Defra are pushing a 'Whole Farm approach' web based system including a web portal which could save the industry 28 million a year (Lord Bach 2005). This will reduce the amount of paper work that farmers and people within the industry will have to do and ensure quicker transactions. The effect this will have at individual enterprises is reduced confusion and reduced amount of inspections by the government.
The uptake of IT in rural businesses remains less than that in urban businesses. This is due to the size of businesses many rural being sole traders, education, and the cost of set up and the accessibility of the Internet. An increase in adoption in the next twenty years will require advancements in these areas. Even though adoption is low overall in rural businesses uptake in arable and livestock sectors has been to achieve higher economies of scale and better analysis of individual enterprises. Further adoptions in these sectors will take place if there are advancements in IT that suit smaller businesses as well as that which is currently available to large.
Uptake in rural areas is less than urban areas within the UK however uptake in developing countries rural areas is significantly less than that if at all. Adoption of IT in developing countries will have a significant effect on not only the individual enterprise and household level but also at the national level, potentially reducing poverty and famine. However this is unlikely to all happen within the next twenty years due to the size of the task, not only requiring investment but education and accessibility of facilities also. Any advancements and adoption in developing countries would have a positive effect.