The Copas partnership is made up of Tom Copas and his two daughters. The partnership emerged through the splitting of the farm in Cookham between Tom Copas and his brother. Today the partnership owns and runs a diverse range of rural businesses, made up of four sectors - Traditional Christmas turkeys, property and letting of farm buildings, Henley Regatta and traditional arable. Each business contributes to the Copas partnership turnover, with the regatta contributing 20%, turkeys 50%, property 21% and arable 9%. The business has changed through recent years diversifying from solely arable production to now including the other three enterprises. Arable production has been scaled down due to the decrease in prices and increasing costs. Diversification has been very important to the Copas partnership, adjusting the enterprise mix has allowed the business to become more profitable and also meet consumer demand.
Increasingly farmers are looking to diversify. In 2000 over 60% of farms received incomes from outside farming (CPRE 2000). The reasons why farmers look to diversify are the financial need, the opportunity or due to the inclination from personal interests or a particular skill. Diversification can take place in three forms -
(Source: CPRE 2000)
The Copas partnership has diversified in both on farm agricultural through the turkey production, and on farm non-agricultural diversification with the Henley Regatta and farm buildings conversion.
When considering diversification it is very important to plan the business venture in great detail in order to it to have a higher chance of being successful.
Diversification has shown to be important to the business, now providing 91% of the farm income. The success has been due to the planning and research of each enterprise before diversification has taken place. Continued growth has allowed the business to remain profitable, in order to remain successful current and future opportunities for the business are important.
Current and future opportunities for the turkey enterprise will be analysed below.
The turkeys are marketed to a very high standard, in presentation boxes, branded greaseproof packaging and with herbs and information. A current opportunity would be to continue producing marketing that promotes the product. A stuffing and cranberry sauce have been produced to add to marketing, other aspects could be to produce a serving dish with the Copas brand on to display the Copas turkey at the Christmas table. This would involve design and communication with a manufacturer that would be willing to produce for the company. But it could be successful and add to the customer experience.
Tom Copas aims to 'produce the finest quality turkeys available in the UK' (Farmers Weekly 2005). Because of this aim currently the partnership sells their birds through 250 individual butchers and at their own farm gate in order to achieve the high quality standard and customer experience. They do not sell to any supermarkets. This is because lower cost supermarkets such as Asda do not generally market turkeys produced in the way the Copas do, with dry hand plucking and hanging of the meat. A future opportunity would be to sell to high market supermarkets. This would allow the business to expand and achieve a higher market share. In order to maintain the current quality level and customer experience the partnership could sell to only Waitrose or Marks and Spencer. These two supermarkets have the high quality perception that meets the partnership standards. The implications of this however would be that the business would have to produce many more turkeys each year. However to meet this the business could contract out more turkeys to farmers to grow. The quality would still be maintained through Tom Copas stating standards for the turkeys to be grown, inspections of premises, returning to the farm for killing and processing and the company providing the birds and food, which are the same for all turkeys produced. This method of selling may however upset butchers with customers moving from purchasing their turkeys from them to the supermarkets instead.
.
Many customers that are buying turkeys also ask for details of geese. Currently the business provides a goose that has come from a neighbouring farm for these customers. This means that there is an opportunity to produce and sell geese. This opportunity is backed up by the fact that the farm already has up to date processing and slaughtering facilities, and these could be used for geese as well as turkeys. The whole niche could be maintained, producing slow maturing, dry hand plucked geese for the Christmas market exactly the same as they are currently doing with the turkeys. It is likely that this current opportunity would not grow to be any where near as large as the turkey production, as a goose at Christmas is not as popular among some customers as turkeys. Customers and butchers currently asking for geese shows however that there is a market, and instead of providing another farmers produce the Copas Partnership could take this opportunity and use it themselves.
The buildings at the farm house the turkeys for just six months of the year, rearing them from chicks to larger birds ready for Christmas. The remaining part of the year the buildings are empty. This means that a capital asset to the farm is depreciating and not being used to its full potential, this means that it is not economically viable. The average fully covered and enclosed barn costs 150 per metre squared (Nixs 2005). In order to over come this the business could rent out the buildings for the months that they remain empty. These could be for lambing, or parking vehicles etc. Any income received from renting the buildings for any purpose for the months that they are currently empty is extra income, which the farm is not receiving at the moment. The only implications of this opportunity would be that the renters would have to accept that they could only use the buildings for a few months, but if the buildings were used such as for lambing this would not be a problem.
The key to why the Copas partnership has been successful is due to the previous planning, along with identifying emerging opportunities and particular niches in the locality. The business has been successful in bringing in added income through scaling up the profitable enterprises and scaling down the non profitable, such as the arable production.
Current and future opportunities for the turkey enterprise include future marketing, goose production, renting of buildings and supermarket production. These would allow the business to continue to expand in this enterprise like they have in the past and bring in extra income to the partnership. Most of these opportunities, if the Copas choose to go ahead with them, would require no major alterations to the current business and resources that are available and would not be restrained by CAP or planning.