Bimodal and asymmetric
About  of the time there are less than 200 reported cases
The other large amounts of reported cases of measles centred around 900-1000
2 epidemic outbreaks - 2 extreme data points denote the peaks of the outbreaks.
From Scatter Graph of Data....
Data collected at equal time intervals thus constitutes a time series
One can clearly see epidemic outbreaks
Randomness? Future observations may depend on past observations b/c future cases arise from previous ones
Scatter points above 45 degreeline refer to the times when the infection/ epidemic is rising and points below the 45 degree are times when epidemic/ infection is falling.
Constructive Crit: 5 points
Only reported cases- some people may have not reported
(what if someone lives in Birmingham but goes to GP outside?)
If people have measles for over fortnight are they counted twice?
Other useful info e.g. ages may have been useful
Interesting to see 20 yr data not jus 2 yr
Data may look diff if vaccination intro.
Summary of data:
See above
2 erroneous values where the height of the cross fertilized plant < self fertilized. Both cross values are 96- has some rounding taken place?
Constructive Crit
Height associated with health but are other measures of health of a plant a good/ better indicator?
Plants that grow best in the field do not necess grow best in lab.
96's- rounded?
Median diff in heights is a more appropriate comparison than the mean.
2 outliers are at either end of the data set - if plants in a row could be affected disease/ pest
Any other plants included and omitted because died?
Five Figure Summary
Draw a box plot to compare
Survival times appear highest for monarchs - considerably higher than for presidents and popes.
Constructive Crit:
Zeros: seem to be quite a few for presidents and popes- is this because no data for this specific person or did they just die less than a year after inauguration/ election? When is the time rounded to a year?
Do not have the same sample size for each set - difficult to compare?
Working off very large time period- 1690-1990. Life expectancy has changed a lot in these years and do not have the data close to hand as when each of these people lived. Is difficult to compare a pope living in 1990 to a monarch living in 1700 etc. Would be good to group them all into categories.
How have these been selected? Are they all of the popes/ presidents/ monarchs? Is this a random sample or where these people simply the easiest to gain data about?
Does not include the the time in a persons life when they became pope/ president/ monarch- maybe monarchs (because it is birthright) come into office earlier than pope/ president which is why appear to survive longer after coronation than others after inauguration/ election.