Positron emission tomography (PET) is a medical imaging technique that has become a valuable diagnostic tool. A drug or biologically interesting molecule can be labelled with a radioactive atom that decays by positron emission. This is called a radiotracer, and a small amount is injected into the patient. When the radioactive atom decays a proton in the atom becomes a neutron, emitting a positron and a neutrino. The neutrino passes out of the body and cannot easily be detected. The positron generally travels 1-2 mm before colliding with a nearby electron. As the two particles are antimatter equivalents of each other, they annihilate on collision, emitting two gamma-ray photons, each with an energy of 511 keV. The two photons are emitted in almost directly opposite directions.
In a PET scanner the patient is surrounded by a large number of detector elements. An event is recorded if two detectors record photons within nanoseconds of each other. The position of the site of annihilation can then be calculated. 3D images can be constructed by recording large numbers of events. Generally 10 7-10 8 events are detected, representing 0.5%-5% of the total number of photon pairs emitted.
Radiotracers can be designed to monitor different metabolic functions. For example, a common radiotracer, FDG, consisting of fluorine-18 attached to a glucose molecule, is used to observe glucose metabolism. FDG is widely used in oncology (medical imaging of tumours). Glucose, and hence also the FDG radiotracer, is rapidly taken up and retained by most tumours. Oxygen metabolism can be studied using oxygen-15, and many other functions can be studied using different radiotracers. Increased concentration of radiotracer in a particular tissue leads to greater intensity of that point in the PET image.
Tumours can therefore show up as bright areas in an PET scan using FDG. In neurology, oxygen-15 is used to trace blood flow in the brain, and it is thought that areas of high blood concentration relate to increased brain activity. 'Maps' of the brain can be made, with different areas highlighted in the PET scans if the subject is asked to do different tasks. This has led to new information about the functions of areas in the brain.
PET imaging is distinct from other imaging techniques in that it gives metabolical rather than anatomical information. A malignant tumour may therefore show up on a PET scan as a bright area, but its exact location may be unclear. Combining PET and CT (computed tomography using X-rays) been an important development. A CT scan gives anatomical information to sub-millimetre resolution; it can therefore show the exact position, size and shape of a tumour, but not whether it is malignant or benign. If metabolic hyperactivity is detected at the same site in a PET scan it shows that the tumour is malignant.
Combining the two imaging techniques therefore gives experts much greater information about the patient's condition. PET is an important imaging system that shows the body's metabolic processes; its future probably lies in combination with CT, making it an even more powerful imaging method.