With people using computers more and more each day, inevitably more data from each person is being created electronically. Information such as emails, internet phone calls, photographs etc. The aim of Memories for Life (M4L) is to 'help people manage and use their digital memories across their entire lifetime'1. Amassing this collected electronic data as memories. With this idea comes a change in the way we perceive memories, there are many thoughts and permutations of what a memory is, from memories being the recollection of past events to learning skills and facts and keeping them 'at the back of your mind' for later use. In terms of computation we consider the recollection of past events to be pictures or videos of an event which happened, and learning skills to be using a computer to store information in an easily viewable format so that it can be recalled later. In terms of M4L, the aim is to combine all these 'memories' into an easily searchable base. So what could this mean for us in terms of how we use a computer to not only find out facts (e.g. from the internet) but also securely share our 'memories' with selected others or maybe with everyone whilst also feeling reassured that this information would not get into the wrong hands.
The evolution of the internet has meant that it is estimated that 13.9milltion (57%) of households in the UK will have access to the internet between January and April 2006. This is an increase of 2.9 million households (26 per cent) since 2002, and 0.6 million (5 per cent) over the last year.2 This is just focusing on the people with access to the internet in their homes not considering the free access now available at schools and libraries. When looking at the whole world it is considered that 'by 1997 most nations had some form of connection' and 'Internet penetration as a percentage of population is 66.1% in North America and 28% in Europe (Internet World Statistics).4This evolution has lead to an amazing change in the way we run our everyday lives, from shopping to communicating to even sharing or printing our digital photos. Such websites as photobox and Kodak gallery have allowed us to store our pictures online and create albums which we can allow selected others or general people to view. When the internet first became a household commodity, chat rooms and instant messaging allowed people to communicate in ways we have never seen before.
The use of such interface websites such as mySpace and facebook has let people from other sides of the world remain in contact. On these websites there has been a development from the simple profile of a person in a chat room to a whole page dedicated to the user and a place to store their thoughts, opinions and 'memories'. At most now we can add a few pictures and albums to our facebook or mySpace page and allow selected people, our 'friends' to view them. This service would not attract so many people if we felt the images we stored on our pages were available to everyone. Many people use these services to plan meetings and events and would be less keen on using the service if this information was available to anyone. With memories for life could this be developed into a secure interface which allows us to store all our 'memories' of a lifetime as well as be able to instantly search and share this memories according to what they related to?
There are obviously many angles in which a service of the sort memories for life is talking about could be taken from. People will obviously be storing extremely large amounts of data about themselves over a lifetime. An example given by K. O'Hara and Others 3 explores the image of 'someone with a camera strapped to his or her head for 70 years (2200000000s), that is something of the order of 275 terabytes of storage required or about 450 60GB iPod'. At today's prices that would cost us about 199 each of 89550, which to be fair over a lifetime seems a fairly reasonable amount, or at least a feasible amount, but what would be do with this amount of information and would we notice if a few months of our lives were forgotten? Would that also mean that someone with that amount of data on themselves stored somewhere wouldn't notice if any of the data disappeared? If not today would we ever notice, the process in our brains of forgetting things has not yet been fully explored by neuroscientists or is fully understood. Forgetting is also described by K O'Hara and Others as 'a form of mental housekeeping that usefully gets rid of information that is out of date, unlikely to be required or traumatic.
With a picture now of what sort of information people are likely to store on themselves and how they want to use the data e.g. to store, search and share, what are the main security and privacy issues that are possible for such a system.
There are several potential security and privacy risks involved in a project such as memories for life such as:
The primary risk is the sharing of this information to people we trust and then how do we revoke this trust if we wanted to . Is there some way we could track what was done with our 'memories'. I think it is reasonable to say that tracking our data is something that is not possible at the moment but could be something which could be developed. Another way would be to monitor and restrict what someone would be able to do with our data, (e.g. view, save a copy or edit) For example you could give a friend who you holidayed with 'free rights' to all the pictures containing both of you or just them. This is something which would be developed by facial recognition in photos and films. These 'free rights' could be allowing someone to have their own versions of these pictures and effectively class these as their own memories. With face recognition constantly being improved and with the coupling of new way so classifying data (such as semantics) the procedure of naming and classifying pictures and data could be an automated process. However this would need to be improved greatly before it would be of use to the public. Another issue which would have to be improved or a trust would have to be agreed upon was who would have access to the memories someone has given to someone else. For example, Mrs X gives access to her holiday pictures to Mr Y, If Mr Y subsequently allowed Mrs Y to see these would he be breaking the trust Mrs X gave to him. Even with the evolution of passwords and security there are currently no concrete ways of absolutely knowing who is on the other end of a IM chat or email, as well as who has signed into someone's account. This sort of issue could be partially solved using identity recognition such as finger print and retina scanners as well as facial recognition; however this extreme of identity recognition may only be used in the work place or other situations where security is a top priority. However for everyday use, this type to identity recognition seems a bit extreme, and the use of passwords and usernames maybe enough to distinguish users, and if it were combined with such a interface service as 'facebook' or 'mySpace' could alleviate peoples worries over who exactly they were sharing their 'memories' with.
Another example of a security issue when sharing our 'memories' would be revoking these rights. As with the example of the GC's summary 1 of a couple divorcing, who would retain the rights to the 'memories' of the marriage? During a marriage it would probably be formality to share all the 'memories' of the marriage or even create a shared 'memory store'. If the marriage were to break up would it be possible to split the 'memories' as part of the divorce settlement? The fundamental idea behind these problems is the one of classification of memories, to be able to automatically name or categorise our 'memories'. One method which is in the pipeline is the idea of semantics and semantic web. 'The Semantic Web is a project to create a universal medium for information exchange by putting documents with computer-processable meaning (semantics) on the World Wide Web, through the use of standards, markup languages and related processing tools.'5 With these types of documents we will be able to make web searches much more efficient which could be extended to the search of our 'memories' as well as easier classification of memories and thus simpler distribution of these 'memories' to our friends and loved ones.
Another significant security risk which we are targeting is the hacking of someone's computer and the stealing of data. With the development of online banking, security over the internet has obviously had to be improved. Encoding and secure servers are now used to transfer information over the internet without the fear of others stealing that information, as well as internet security to control the information downloaded onto our computer. Some sort of 'memory' security would be needed to stop hackers retrieving our information. The idea of someone being able to get pictures off our computer may seem as little trivial to some. However with 'memories' now classified from everything from internet phone calls to emails the theft of this sort of information especially to businesses could have tremendous impact. Someone's 'memories' would obviously include data from their career, so the issue would come up of intelligent data. E.g. the recall of all data related to a company once an employee's contract was terminated. At the moment many companies apply an 'Intellectual Property' clause which basically protects the company against an ex employees using data which they were privy to during there term as an employee. This clause would probably need to be added to with the widespread use of such 'memory' storage to protect companies against the use of data which a person considers to be their own memories of the company. With the previous example of a person wearing a camera for their entire life, would this images need to be erased or given to the company, if they included information such as employee salaries and contracts from personnel in Human resources or accounts information for personnel in the finance department.
The general process of gathering a case against an alleged offender include a process of gathering statements from witnesses, victims, alleged offenders and sometimes even from employers/family members to generate a profile of the person on trial, as well as CCTV recording if available. Then follows this evidence put forward in front of a judge/jury who will ultimately decide whether they agree beyond reasonable doubt that the alleged offender committed the crime and thus how they should be punished. It is often in these situations that only two people know exactly what happened during the incident, the victim and the alleged offender, so often it is one person word against another's, one who is the victim of such a crime and the other who could have committed the crime. That is why in many situations the statements of these two people alone will not convince anyone beyond reasonable doubt. This is where M4L could prove to someone that this crime was either committed or it was not. For example: a man is found dead in a park there are two suspects both of which claim to have an alibi which is backed up my others. Would the police be able to quickly and easily access the suspects M4L account in order to build a profile of them, which could include incriminating data. Would the police have to go to court in order to obtain from the suspects their login id and password or could they use their power to go directly to the M4L company and access the suspects account from their. Would the police also have immediate access to the victims M4L account? And if they do, they would obviously have to go straight to the company to gain access, as the whole process of a username and password system would be to keep everything private and not allow others access to it. This moral issue may lead to changes in the law regarding such services which hold such great amounts of data on a person.
My main aim in this essay is to discover how the world would need to evolve, from internet security and encryption, to the laws we live by in order to cope with such a powerful collection of data on a person's life. K'Ohara and others suggests 5 types of M4L projects:
An issue which is not related directed to security and privacy of our memories is the development of our minds and brains and therefore the development of our digital memories. I think it is also important to consider the continual upgrade of software and hardware we see in the computing world. Like cars there will always be a big, faster, better version just around the corner, and we have to plan these developments in order for previous data not to be lost. The security and privacy issue here that I can see deals with the loss of data, not to other people but just into the ethos, data which could be discovered later. These issues could become more important in the corporate world, it is generally taken as policy that old computers are destroyed even after they have been formatted and completely wiped to stop the risk of data reconstruction.
The above separate out the security issues outlined. Obviously this data could still be hacked into, but with is spread out and with the allowance of a part which can be seen by others you could focus the security on the SuperMe and Deposit items. The Persona part would obviously be visible to people we know but could also be stretched temporarily to potential employers so they could get a better idea of the person. This Part could also be used in criminal cases or by doctors to get a better idea and understanding of the person. . These improved are an integral part of the development of M4L and should be evolving as the technology to make such a service possible evolves