Feline Immunodeficiency Virus infection is currently one of the most infectious diseases to be diagnosed in cats. First named in 1987, but was discovered 20 years previous in 1966. Scientists first observed that this virus shared similar properties with HIV. Similarly to HIV, the terminal AIDS stage results in death. Epidemiological prevalence is worldwide, surmounting to 33% infection rate in the UK alone. Transmission is via bite wounds and infected saliva entering the blood system. Research reveals that entire, free-roaming males are the most vulnerable to the infection due to fighting behaviour most typically seen in males. The virus belong to the Retroviridae family of viruses and is classed as a Retrovirus. The virus is further subclassed as a Lentivirus, in which FIV and HIV both belong. The lentiviruses are slow developing, symptoms taking years to show. These viruses weaken the immune system of the host resulting in the host becoming more susceptible to infections. In cats, the white blood cells are depleted, leaving them less able to fight infection and so will succumb to secondary and opportunistic infections. There are four main phases of infection. Each with associated clinical symptoms ranging from lymphadenopathy to neurological disorders and tumours and finally resulting in death.. Spread of virus infection is minimised by early diagnosis using the ELISA serological method, neutering and restriction of movement. Research into immunisation of uninfected cats by way of vaccination is continuing.
Feline Immunodeficiency Virus (FIV) is currently considered to be one of the most significant feline infectious diseases to be diagnosed in domestic cats. A relatively new feline viral disease, this virus was first isolated and named as recently as 1987 in Davis, California and it was then that scientist first realised that the virus possessed similar biochemical properties with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and thus this pathogen was named named Feline Immunodeficiency Virus (FIV)4.
In general, domestic cats are vaccinated against the most common feline infectious diseases such as flu; enteritis; FeLV (feline leukemia); and chlamydia. To date, however, there is no efficient vaccination available for FIV and this immunosuppressant disease therefore remains a common pathogen which is becoming more globally prevalent.
Although FIV is becoming more widely known it is unclear how much information is available to the general public. The aim of this report is to provide the reader with a concise general overview of the causes and effects of the Feline Immunodeficiency Virus infection, more specifically to convey the primary facts of the classification, epidemiology, clinical signs, diagnosis and prevention of this terminal feline pathogen.
In order to understand the nature of FIV and it's effects on the domestic cat, it is necessary to appreciate the properties of the virus that is responsible.
The feline immunodeficiency virus belongs to the Retroviridae family of viruses. The Retroviridae family further divide into 3 subfamilies.
Subfamily Oncoviriae: This family includes viruses such as feline leukemia (FeLV).
Subfamily Spumavirinae: This family includes viruses such as bovine foamy virus, feline foamy virus and they usually result in anemia.
Subfamily Lentivirinae (lenti meaning 'slow'): This family includes viruses which are slow developing. FIV and HIV both belong to this group.
Morphologically, the Retroviridae virus is an enveloped virus, spherical in shape and possessing single-stranded RNA. They are typically 80-130 nm in diameter 2. Lentiviruses are a small group of viruses that cause very slow developing infections that are often called 'slow virus diseases' or slow infections. This means that the primary clinical symptoms of the disease may take years to show 3. It describes an infection that is persistent in nature with a very long incubation phase followed by a long, progressive and invariably lethal disease.
A lentivirus such as the feline immunodeficiency virus affects the immune system of the host by virus replication and then by efficiently destroying the helper-T-cells which are responsible for enhancing the important immunological function of the lymphocyte cells. These are complex cells and they have two main functions; i. to kill cells which have been infected with pathogens, and ii. they have a key involvement in controlling the immunological process.
The result of this is a considerably weakened immune system whereby the host becomes immunocompromised, and so is inevitably susceptible to opportunistic infections and secondary infections that are responsible for diseases associated with FIV.
The epidemiology of the feline immunodeficiency virus occurs worldwide. In 1989, Yamamoto reported that the prevalence in Europe of FIV has been reported as a range of 2% in Germany and The Netherlands, to 33% in the UK with evidence that the US infection prevalence percentages varied from 1-16% and Japan showing a very high prevalence of infection of up to 44%. (Yamamoto et al. , 1989).
The reason for the marked differences in infection rates may be due to the varying animal behaviour. Recent epidemiology investigations by Courchamp and Pontier in 1994 have reported that FIV transmission is influenced by behaviour. An article by Yamamoto (1989) stated that higher rates of infection are shown in cats that are typically free-roaming and more exposed to other infected cats, and are therefore more susceptible to the most common mode of transmission which is the bite wound.
The feline immunodeficiency virus was first discovered and isolated in 1987. This is comparatively recent to other known viruses, however in a recent article by Reid et al (1992), it was reported that FIV has been around since 1966. They know this because sera isolated from infected cats were stored in Europe as long ago as 1966.
Cats which are infected with the virus may appear to be in good health for many years, but due to the nature of the virus the infected cat is immunocompromised and so will eventually succumb to secondary and opportunistic infections.
Some of the most common clinical signs of infection are:
Oral infections - Such as gingivitis and stomatitis, both very painful inflammations of the gums and mouth and due to an under-active immune systems. These affect 50% of cats with FIV and FeLV-related diseases and can be difficult to treat.
Respiratory disease - This can affect up to 30% of infected cats. In severe cases pneumonia can develop causing coughing and breathing difficulties.
Eye disease - Conjunctivitis and Glaucoma are commonly seen in FIV infected cats.
Gastrointestinal disease - Such as chronic diarrhoea, chronic enteritis, gastritis and in rare cases, disorders of the pancreas and liver.
Skin and Ear infections - These infections can show as the first signs of an FIV infection. Generally severe in nature. The skin infections manifest as abscesses, facial dermatitis and mange. Ear mite infections are also common.
Neurological disease - Approximately 5% of clinically diseased FIV infected cats will have neurological abnormalities as a predominant clinical feature of their disease. Symptoms may be directly caused by the virus on the brain cells, or less commonly, by a parasitic or fungal infection.
Dementia has also been commonly diagnosed in infected cats.
Lymph nodes in the abdomen may enlarge - this occurs at the start of the infection.
Blood disorders, such as anemia has been observed in approximately 1/3 of infected cats. When diagnosing a cat, a low number of white blood cells are seen.
Routine diagnosis of FIV infection is currently by antibody detection in the blood. Antibodies are molecules which are secreted in response to stimulation by an appropriate antigen, the molecule which triggers an immune response. Currently, veterinarians use a test called ELISA, Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. This is a serological method which detects virus antibodies in the blood and will change colour if the virus antibodies exist, thereby confirming a positive screening of the FIV infection. The cat is now confirmed as FIV positive.
If a cat has recently been infected, it is necessary to wait up to 12 weeks after infection so that the antibodies develop. Infected Queens are able to transfer the antibodies, not the infection, to their nursing kittens, therefore although the kittens may test positive to the antibodies, it is recommended that they are retested every 60 days until they are six months old in order to clarify their infectious status.
Feline immunodeficiency virus is best prevented by keeping infected cats indoors where possible, and prevented from roaming. They should be neutered minimising the possibility of fighting and straying. They should not be exposed to other stray or feral cats.
FIV positive cats, like most disease vulnerable animals, should be fed a nutritional and balanced diet to aid prevention and recovery to secondary and opportunistic infections. Regular visits to the vet should be made to check for intermittent secondary health problems associated with the disease. Early detection of the virus is crucial and it is recommended that a newly homed cat should be tested for the virus as soon as possible to maintain the cats health and prevent further transmission to other cats.
In conclusion, despite the vulnerabilities associated with this disease, the prognosis for FIV positive cats is still quite promising. If the infected cat's health is monitored and steps are taken to test, neuter and restrict the living conditions to minimise the spread of infection, there is no reason why these cats cannot live as reasonably a healthy life as any other cat. The facts about the FIV infection are becoming more published while an increasing number of animal charities acknowledge that although terminal, the disease can be managed effectively if the cat is in the Asymptomatic Phase of the infection.
On the less positive side, both FIV and HIV are lifelong diseases, easily transmitted and difficult to prevent and control. There is growing evidence that this disease is global and may be becoming pandemic in nature. Despite this, this virus has one particular advantage that is while there is continuing interest in further research into a vaccination for the HIV infection by using this natural animal model, the future welfare of FIV positive cats encouraging albeit uncertain.