The Neolithic was a very important age in world history and witnessed the continuation of population growth and the further spread of agriculture, whether by people or ideas. We see the beginning of maybe the first religions and the construction of some of the first tombs and shrines to worship the dead and the gods. In Britain alone the people of the time have provided us with some of the most iconic images of human activity like Stonehenge or Newgrange. As we progress to the later Neolithic we see large amounts of evidence for trade and communication on a bigger scale than during the Mesolithic, and in central Europe we see the beginnings of Europe's first major cultures along side large settlement buildings and major clearance of land for agriculture. This is by no means out of the blue, the Mesolithic was not an age of primitive peoples, but it is a large step towards where we find ourselves today. There must have been a large development in social and communal skills and maybe for the first time in human history the development of society and identity, which has left its mark on the landscape.
The Neolithic as an age is confined to Europe as a whole and even here has a large range of different dates and separations. For example in Britain evidence and artefacts suggest the Mesolithic ended and Neolithic began at around 4000BC, by this time in south Europe it was all but over . This distinction seems mainly to do with the spread and use of agriculture as the spark for the Neolithic,(Scarre 2005:394) however, this is not the only characteristic of the Neolithic and therefore can be seen as a weak distinction, but a necessary one, the line must come somewhere. In Britain we see a further distinction used to divide the period up into early and late Neolithic, with 3000BC being the middle ground, or more complicated is a early, middle and late Neolithic (Whittle 1999:pg59.) This division holds some weight when you look closely at the changes in artefacts such as pottery, grave goods and those connected with ritual practice. Whittle says that Mesolithic people and society became Neolithic by 'developing a new world view' (Whittle 1999:63) as well as adopting agriculture and new technologies from the peoples of south west Asia and south east Europe. This idea incorporates the people themselves more and surly has more logic and sense than just agriculture arrived and everything else happened.
Settlements at this time seem to be few and far between, possible very small, and likely to be more nomadic than fully sedentary. Excavations and field work in east Hungary and the Danube valley suggest that some sites may have been only occupied for very short periods. Although there is some evidence for reuse of sites from the Mesolithic, such as the caves at Franchthi in southern Greece (Scarre 2005:395), there is strong evidence for the use of sites that have never been used for settlement. Woodland areas, river and lake banks, and wetland areas such as the Somerset levels have all thrown up evidence of land use and human activity. The exception to the lack of settlements seems to come from the central and southern European like the culture of Linearbandkeramik or LBK, these peoples seem to become largely sedentary by c.5600 BC in Hungary and quickly spread outwards to the Rhineland and Paris basin, and the plains of Ukraine. They seem to develop reasonable large settlements, for the time, based around a collection of longhouses, up to 11 in one area at Langweiler, western Germany and at a site in Koln-Linderthal 52 complete and 45 partial houses where found, and it was suggested that up to 21 where used at anyone time (Champion 1982:36.) It also worth mentioning that this culture left a house to go to rack and ruin after the occupant had died, offering some hint at a ritual practice not seen in any other Neolithic society.
The time and effort put into burial practice greatly increases at the end of the Mesolithic and as the Neolithic develops we see some of the largest monuments and shrines to the dead from any time in human history. Were as during the Mesolithic we find very few cemeteries, mainly in Denmark and France, the Neolithic shows a increasing emphasis on remembering the dead. We still see little evidence for single burials in a final resting place and more of a use of large deposits of bones in one area over time such as the passage tombs in the Boyne Valley, Ireland. Recent evidence seems to suggest the area was used from around 4000BC for approximately 1500 years (Battersby 2002) which would mean many generations used the site and therefore, many bodies would have been placed inside and then removed for the next lot. At West Kennet, Wiltshire it was evident that the people deposited bodies a while after death and separated body parts into different chambers within the mound and that, male, female and children where separated (Whittle 1999:67/8.) The most common burial monuments seem to be that like West Kennet, in the form of long barrows. Across the Salisbury plain there are evident on most ridges and hill lines leading us to conclude that they were meant to be seen easily seen. The highest concentration of these burial mounds seems to be in the Scandinavian areas of southern Sweden and Jutland where it is suggested that the idea developed from the LBK culture of the Rhineland (Scarre 2005:418.) This is a strange assumption as this culture doesn't use the long barrow at anytime in its occupation of central Europe, however it is obvious from records that the houses where left after the death of the occupant. This could either be a sign of respect and ritual or a lack of interest in reusing a house. It seems inefficient to leave a house to just fall apart on what must have been prime agricultural land, this must be a sign of ritual remembrance of the dead, because it is easier to reuse wood and land of someone else's home than it is to restart on a patch of land next door.
Long barrows then seem to develop along different lines. A Great development in alignments with the objects in the sky, Sun, Moon and the Stars. Many people believe that these alignments where used after the burial mounds where designated as burial sites, however a burial mound, as described by John North, an astronomer, is perfect for observing stars at night. When a person stands within the ditch of the mound he found that the eye, monument and horizon were in alignment to a celestial object (Battersby 2002.) This then could show that the ditch perhaps came first or at least that the mound was built with the aim of created an alignment to a certain celestial body. It could therefore be suggested that the use of the mounds as burial chambers was added to designs later, to special sites of interest to the people of the time.
Other monuments start to crop up on the landscape during varying periods of the Neolithic, and not all are connected with, or show evidence of being connected with, death rites and rituals. Stonehenge, Durrington walls, and Avebury all show no direct signs of burial within them, although it is true all three sites have masses of long barrows around them. These site seem to be added to areas of long human activity, and with the case of Stonehenge have strong evidence for being connected with sky watching and worship of natural elements such as the Sun (Scarre 2005:416/17.) It is also worth mentioning that most sites already mentioned in connection with burials seem to have more than one function , such as Newgrange. The placing of the site on a prominent hill, above the 'bend in the Boyne' and the strong alignment with the midwinter Sun, which streams through a perfectly placed shaft in the entrance to light the main chamber up, suggests a stronger meaning. It is also suggested by Battersby that the site of Newgrange and its cousins, Dowth and Knowth , less than a mile away, are all connected and highlight the shape of the hill as a pregnant women (Battersby 2002.) Enclosure of this period also seem to be more connected with feasting and times of the year than with anything else. This seems evident at Coneybury, Wiltshire not far from the site of Stonehenge. Here the remains deer, pig, cattle, beaver and trout along with wheat pottery waste and flints, where found (Whittle 2005:58) Whether this deposit is connected with ritual or just a rubbish heap left after a ritual feast within the enclosure is unknown but it is clear that the site is connected with food and feasting as was Durrington Walls. These enclosure and monuments such as Avebury show great emphasis on seclusion and separation from the outside world, why else would massive ditches and high embankments be built around site? It is not easy to say whether these sites where only accessed by high status individuals or whether they where based on the idea that anybody who was inside was separate from the rest of the world for that period. The lack of high status burials around this time suggest there was no major hierarchical system at this time that excluded people from certain activity's.
Trade systems dramatically increase through one form or another during the Neolithic period, especially trade of stone axes in northern Europe and ceramic wares in southern Europe. There are some extensive trade networks across the British isles of polished axes, a distinctive Neolithic trait, from areas with rich seems of flint like the south east. Large mine site are evident in the modern day landscape of the areas in question such as Grimes Graves, East Anglia. Here we can see large 'slag heaps; of the Neolithic from the mines which often went up to 20 metres below ground and followed seams along into a hillside. In Carnac, Brittany, we also find exquisite Jadeite axes from the Alps, over 800km,and also as far north as Cunzierton, Scotland over 1500km from its original origin (Scarre 2005:415) These objects are either travelling by direct trade between peoples or possible from people moving around the countryside as early traders, although little evidence suggests this. Either way they are very prized possessions very rarely found used and more often than not found deposited in symbolic areas such as those found in the river Shannon at Killaloe, west Ireland. This could possible seen as a attempted to show personal wealth, that something of such significance can just be thrown away as a gift to the gods or ancestors. Also in Ireland we get more cases of desire for aesthetic objects rather than just the practical. In Co. Carlow a ceramic bowl was found on a Neolithic site made from a micra clay, found some distance from the site and much further a field than the local clay.
The Neolithic period then, can be characterized by many traits and new ideas or 'New World Views' (Whittle 1999:61.) Agriculture developed more stable and sedentary cultures in southern and central Europe. The extra time gained from the more efficient growing of food, meant new techniques and ideas were used such as the development of pottery in the Mediterranean and the building of large monuments to gods, ancestors or as giant calendars, in northern Europe. The development of rituals like those seen at the monument sites in Britain and those seen in Scandinavia could be seen as a worship of nature or that which controls the harvest and growth of there new found crops. These rituals also seem to develop into burial rituals and the worship of celestial bodies which seems to be of great importance and connection in the period. The period must be best characterized by the fact that man begins to change and manipulate the landscape to his own needs, with the use of slash and burn farming, and the use of settlements and protection from the elements. This change is what creates whittles 'New World View' in the people of the Neolithic.