Absolute dating is a very misleading term as it puts across the idea that the method used provides a completely accurate date, which is not true as many absolute dating methods depend heavily on assumptions. The methods do, however, provide invaluable data which can produce a more specific sequence of past events than just relative dating alone.
The methods contrast with relative dating methods, which use the idea that a context or layer of stratigraphy must predate that which is above it. It is always essential to use as many dating methods as possible to get a better picture of a site and therefore all methods are important to archaeologists. Most of the absolute dating methods are based upon the chemical and physical changes of artefacts by humans and time, such as Uranium series dating which uses the radioactive decay of uranium isotopes to date rocks around a possible human inhabited site.(Renfrew & Bahn 2004:149.)
The basic principles behind dendrochronology have been known for a long time but the method used today has only been used and perfected since the 1930s. The main idea behind dendrochronology is that a growing tree adds a growth ring underneath its bark every year, this can therefore show how old a tree is. When this is compared with trees of older and younger ages from the surrounding area it is possible to get a long chronological sequence (see diagram.) However, this method , as of all dating methods, is dependent on assumptions. Dendrochronology assumes that a tree will produce 1 ring every year, but it is known that during a bad year the tree will grow less and possibly not at all, and also that it would be possible to produce two rings in areas with less defined seasonality. The method also must assume that the factors affecting the area and its trees in the present time, such as rainfall or soil quality, also affected the area when older trees in the sequence were growing.(Grissino-Mayer 1996)
These variations in temperature and environment are also what makes it possible to develop long sequences of data such as the sequence of 7000 years set up in California from the Bristlecone pine (Grant et al 2001:pg85.) If a large enough sample can be collected then it is possible to match the growth of one tree to another, as seen in the diagram. This is possible because of the effects of environmental factors on a tree. For instance if there is a higher than average rainfall in a year the growth ring of the trees in that area will be wider, this will be extenuated in a arid environment such as a scrub land or desert. In a more temperate environment, if there is a cold spell early in the year this can affect growth dramatically causing a ring to be thinner. These variations are matched up to produce a sequence. This can then be used to track back from present day and date a piece of wood and, therefore, what that piece of wood is part of i.e. house or pathway.(Renfrew & Bahn 2004:pg138)
This was seen with the dating of 'Sweet Track', an ancient causeway used to link areas of dry land in the Somerset levels. It is possible here to show that the causeway was laid in the winter of 3807BC or the spring of the following year, due to the growth rings of the wood used. The wood was driven into waterlogged soil which is why it has survived so long, preserved in anaerobic conditions, and is only part of the system of track ways that cross the levels. Oak, one of the woods used on the 'Sweet Track', is very good for dating and in the British Isles the sequence goes back a long way into prehistory. In Northern Ireland the record goes back as far as 5300BC and this has been matched with a sequence from Germany which tracks back to 8500BC, allowing a usable chronology for the whole of western and central Europe (Renfrew & Bahn 2004:pg139.)
There are ,however, many problems with using dendrochronology as a dating method. The method cannot be used on all wood that is preserved. A small section of wood such a spear handle or arrow will not have enough rings to date it, you will need at least 50 years of growth rings to date wood which is why it is only normally used on building material. This really limits it to post Neolithic sites when large structure begin to appear and when preservation is better. This method also only dates when the tree died or was felled not when it was used. It is seen today that wood can be kept for a long time and treated to strengthen it before being used for building material. If a piece of wood is left around before use it would lead to overestimation of the age of a building (Grant et al 2001:pg85.) It is also possible that a piece of wood can be reused from a old building or structure and again cause the dates to be overestimated for the newer structure. It is also possible that rings can develop on part of the tree and not others, this is known as 'locally absent' rings. This means it must be cross dated with other parts of the tree if possible, or dated in a different way. (University of Arizona 2005.)
This occurrence can often cause dating errors especially in early dates from before the 1960s.
Radio carbon-dating is another very popular absolute dating method and although the older the sample the less accurate it can be, it is possible to go back as far as 50,000 years. The principle idea is that carbon exists naturally with three isotopes, 12C, 13C and the radioactive 14C. All these isotopes work their way through the planet's food chains and natural systems, and so are evenly spread. This is essential to keep the dating accurate. This store of carbon isotopes is known as the carbon exchange reservoir, and the carbon reacts with oxygen to produce CO2. From the dating perspective we are interested in 14C and its reaction to 14CO2. This makes its way into every living thing via absorption in one form or another and remains constant in the organic material until death. After death the 14C will begin to decay at a set rate, called a half life. Today it is known that the half life is 5730(40yrs), but for dating we use W Libby's calculation of 5568years to be consistent, as he first used it during the second world war and the early 50s. This means that every 5568 years half the 14C in a sample of organic material will decay. This is how Libby first obtained dates from samples, by determining how much 14C was left in a sample and therefore determining how much had decayed.
This method assumes that 14C levels have remained the same throughout time. They are currently about 1:1,000,000,000,000 between 14C and normal carbon (Higham 1999.) This assumption has been proved wrong by the use of documented Egyptian dates and showed radiocarbon dates to be increasingly too young. This shows that a tree growing at that time must have been in a atmosphere with more 14C than is in the atmosphere today, against Libby's main assumption (Miles 1982:pg17.) It was also seen that use of tree ring dating to produce calibration curves against radiocarbon dates has determined that any dates before 1000bc were increasingly young, a radiocarbon date of around 4100bc is more likely to be around 5000bc. Now that uranium series dating has been used to calibrate older dates (up to 40000BP), it has been found that after 18000 BP dates were up to 3000 years out. There is now a large range of calibration curves which can be used easily to calibrate a date on site.
Radiocarbon dating has been used recently at Stonehenge to gain a better chronology of the uses and phases of the site. It determined that the first digging of the outer ditch was between 3020-2910 cal BC. These dates were gained from samples taken from antlers deposited at the bottom of the ditch and are also backed up by structural deposits of the ditch. It was then found that the ditch silted up over a time of 400-700 years, these dates came from analysis of deposits found within that fill although they are thought not to have great validity. They have also been used on important artefact such as the Turin Shroud dated, with some accusation, to 1260-1390AD. This dating example used a new method of Accelerator Mass Spectrometry which can pick out the number of 14C particles in very small sample, down to 5-10mg. This means that a precious artefact, such as the Turin Shroud can be tested without being damaged. This new method now means that single seeds or pollen grains can be tested rather than just large samples, giving individual dates and not dates of a whole layer of material.
These two method are extremely useful and have helped archaeology immensely. It has been seen that dendrochronology is very reliable and can be extremely useful when made into a chronological sequence such as the bristlecone pines in California. This can help date artefacts from varying sites across the state and general area. Radiocarbon dating on the other hand is less reliable, and is only useful if it can be calibrated, often with dendrochronological sequences. However, when it is accurately calibrated it can often provide the archaeologist with a efficient way of dating sites over a wide area, unlike tree ring dating. If a ceramic sample, or grave burial sample(with grave goods) can be calibrated it would be possible to fit this into other sequences by dating the context. The new use of AMS can also help us to date anything from a large cremation pot to a small speck of wood within a bronze axe.(Fagan 1999:pg126)
These to dating method may be getting older and less used as more accurate and computer based methods come to the fore but they will always be essential for the archaeologist. Dendrochronology in particular is unprecedented in that it is the best and most accurate way to date a large piece of wood, and the use of sequences can be essential in dating other artefacts and sites. Radiocarbon dating may get even more accurate with the use of AMS and possible newer methods but it will always be useful for more modern sites with charred food materials and related objects. As long as all methods can be cross referenced with others then accuracy can be at its greatest, and where this isn't possible results must be looked at as possible but not definitive.