The Delian league, set up in 478 by the city states of the Aegean, was the first footsteps towards what became the Athenian empire. The cities joined with the express purpose of having the Athenian army and its great navy on there side. Considering at the time of the creation of the league the Great Kings army still remained in Ionia, camped but a few miles from cities on the coast of modern day Anatolia and still warranted a threat to security. The Athenians were 'begged' by the allies to assume the command of the league and in particular the navel command (Cotterill. 2004:310.) The Athenians not only provided there troops and navel ships, which numbered many, but also provided the vast experience and military expertise gained from the wars with the Persians and other barbarian states. No wonder then that within the fifth century the Delian league numbered up to 260 city states, Athens' empire offered protection and trade in the Aegean.
After the great victory's at the battles of Salamis and Marathon the Greek fleet, made up of all the allied Greek states and commanded by Leotychides the Spartan, chased the Persians across the Aegean where at Mycale they eventually routed there fleet and a large army. They proceeded on up the coast towards the Hellespont, which had been there main aim, to destroy the Persian bridge that spanned the straights. When they reach the straights they found the bridge already destroyed, possible by a storm, and therefore the Spartans and most of the allies set sail for home. Athens however remained and set siege to Sestos eventually defeating the city and creating an Athenian colony on the main grain route out of the black sea. It was after this that the allies asked Athens to become the leader of the attack against Persia. It is worth remembering that Sparta declined the offer due to there on going unrest at home with the enslaved Messenia's. Also after the campaign of spring 478 lead by Pausanias, a Spartan navel commander, the allies mistrusted him and the Spartans (McGregor 1993.)
The Delian league was based on the sacred island of Delos where all tribute was collected and kept in the Treasury. It was also here that the members met to discuss, confer and make decisions about campaigns, the Athenians headed these synods and also protected the treasury with 10 man delegation, the Hellenotamiae. They saw themselves, and where seen as, leaders on an equal footing with the rest of the confederacy. They where leading as the strongest and most experienced of the members and the evidence of the synods shows that they made decisions via assembly and popular vote. 'At first they (Athens) were the leaders of autonomous allies, who reached there decisions in synodoi. ' (Thuc. 1.97.1) The first assessor of the leagues tribute was granted to a man called Aristides, who had already got the name of 'The Just' from his working with allies ad Athenians alike. His calculations of each allies tribute, to be paid yearly, was done by assessing the land and income of each states and making a fair judgment of each states capability. He played a large role in the league and helped benefit the allies as much as Athens, so much so given the command of the fleet. 'Aristides' conduct as a General was noted among the allies...and so enabled him to take over supreme command by sea...' (Diodorus xi. 46.4-47.1.) The very reason we have sources from the history of Hellas, Plutarch and Demosthenes,(Hornblower 1984:25-26) stating he was a poor man when he finished this work shows he must have been 'just.' Demosthenes even says that he had to have a funeral paid by the state, although this is disputed.
The confederacies first scalp was Eion on the Thracian coast, still very loyal to Persia and the city itself still had a Persian satrap, Boges, who Thucydides tells us throws his family and himself on a burning funeral pyre before the Greeks enter the city. After this assault, Thucydides also tells us, some of the fleet attack and enslave the Dolopians on the Island of Scyros. This act is in great benefit to the whole of the Aegean as the Dolopian race are pirates and raiders. This further frees the trade routes for all allies and we can surely assume they benefit from increased income. Cimon and his fleet continue to drive the Persians out of Thrace and the west coast of Ionia until in 469 Cimon's fleet attacks the Persian triremes in there own waters of the coast of Pamphylia and win a decisive victory from then on the Aegean is free of Persian ships and troops. 'He (Cimon) ravaged and destroyed some of there territories and made others revolt and come over to the Greeks, so he made Asia from the Ionian coast to Pamphylia completely empty of Persian forces.' (Plutarch 12.1.)
This aloud the Athenians to spread there political ideas as well keep up the military campaigns abroad. The spread of Democracy round the Aegean had already started, possibly even before Athens took the hegemony of the league, but Athenians instigates the development of more democratic states within the region. 'For the Athenians everywhere destroyed oligarchies...' (Aristotle politics. ) Erythrae for example, Athens draws up The Erythrae Decree which establishes a democracy there in around the year 453/2. We see the same in Miletus, 450/49, and Colophon, 447/6. Many authors suggest this was the culmination natural progression to better government and order, but it surly must be helped by the Athenians persuasive arguments and ad vice. The spread of democracy must of given Athens strong backing with the people of the states concerned. For the first time in there history the had power to change or at least try to change policy, yet again the Athenians and the spread of her empire has benefited her member states. However, we could easily say that there was a strong alter ire motive to spreading democracy around the empire. First of all to gain support of the mass' but it could be said that the Athenians were trying weaken there allies and there main leaders, to the extent that they cant fight back and through the shackles off.
Fighting back is just what some states tried to do, normally before they had forced democracies. The case of Naxos can be held up as the first attempt at a split from, what was still then, the Delian league. After the great campaign years of the late 470s the sea of the Aegean, even before Eurymedon, were all but clear of Persian forces. Naxos, Thucydides tells us, left the league believing there was no real advantage in being part of it any longer. She was brought back into line by Athenian forces, most likely without full league approval. Although McGregor disagrees saying 'in the early years the synods were meeting and, probably, the Athenians were not solely responsible for the sentencing of the Naxians.'(pg 40) This must be doubted as the act seems more like a message to all members not just to Naxos. After Naxos we see revolts in Thasos, over gold mines, and in Hestiaea we see the Athenians 'uprooted all the Hestiaeans from their land and planted Athenian settlers.'(Plutarch Pericles 23.4) This is where we start to see evidence of colonies and then cleruchies, set up to over see the territory of the empire. Cleruchies seem to be set up more to over see the area or city there seems little evidence for people being moved away on mass, but instead the must pay a tax or a rental. '... they sent out cleruchies chosen by lot from among the Athenians themselves. The Lesbians agreed to pay these men the sum of 2 minae per annum for each holding, and then work the land themselves.'
The Athenians, to protect there new empire, used a number of ideas to keep there colonies in check. Proxenoi, like modern day ambassadors but often citizens of the subject city, where put in place 'to give hospitality...represent them in court and to protect interests in general' (Davies 69) This proxenoi where very often protected by strict and harsh laws, which as evidence , suggests they and the Athenian empire had begun to be disliked. The judicial system as a whole was set up to defend Athenian rights and policy, such as all exile, death and civil rights cases. The Athenian defence is that people will get a fairer trial outside of the state, with a unbiased jury. It is most likely however that most people charged to that extreme where pro-Athenians or even delegates themselves. This system allows Athens to protects it interests in its colonies, and means more money comes into Athens when people must travel to take trial. The Empire also set up strategic garrisons to control unrests and portray a strong image to her subjected allies. The amount of these is unknown, Aristotle states that there where up to 20000 men 'maintained' by state fund (this includes within Athens), many of this would have been within garrisons.
By the start of the Peloponnesian war the issue of tribute from the allies had become a hot topic. After the 454 the treasury had been moved to the Acropolis at Athens for better protection, or easier access by the main benefactors. The amount Aristides had summed had been 460 talents (560 if you believe Meiggs), but by the time Pericles had taken over the assessment it had risen to 600 talents and Plutarch highlights that by the mid-war years the treasury took in an amount of 1300 talents a year from the Hellenotamiae. This cant have been popular and from when Aristides stop his work as assessor we have evidence of increased appeals against the amount of tribute demanded on certain cities. Translator of the tribute lists, Meritt, Wade-Gery & McGregor, tell us there is evidence there was a court set up by 446 but Thoudippus decree tells us that a change in the whole assessment procedure also effected the court of appeal. These cases would be heard in the Heliaea in Athens, which could again be seen as a way of controlling the allies and subjugates. (Hornblower 1984:72-73)
The main question is did the Athenians benefit there allies enough that what the took from them in tribute, freedom and land was justified. Both Moses Finley and Russell Meiggs suggest a 'Balanced Sheet' where by 'The presumed disadvantages to the allies or subjects of Athens are set against advantages that may have made up for the lose of political freedom.' (Harrison 2005:26) When looking at this question we also have to try to take into account the general feeling of the time. The Greeks by many accounts where very proud peoples, especially it seems the Athenian and the Spartans, would these to enjoy and freely except the ties of a Empire? Why then do we does Meiggs and Finley propose that the other states were content within the 'balanced sheet' this is clearly debatable. We have no direct evidence from any of the allies other than revolts and some court cases. The Mytilene debate highlights to us that one powerful ally tried to leave the empire and failed, would weaker states try after? Sources do suggest the Athenians did not set out, after being made league leaders, to gain a large empire. In a Athenian speech at the meeting of the Peloponnesian league it is said 'We (Athens) did not acquire this empire by violent means, but because you (Spartans) were unwilling to prosecute to its conclusion the war against the Persians,... Circumstances at first compelled us to develop are empire to its present extent.' They Athenian goes on to explain they expanded there empire in fear of Sparta and could not let the allies go free in case they joined with the Peloponnesian's. We will never really no when the turning point from league to empire actually was, and when Athens turned her back on a peaceful league to defend the whole of Greece. The moving of the league tribute made a big statement to the members, as did the subjugation of Naxos.