Communication is an essential element to the effective running of any business. Communication allows management to be able to operate in a more efficient method as they can receive feedback and ideas from members of staff and also customers where relevant. This can help to improve the overall running of the business or organisation and also help to make improvements where necessary.
Communication in the farming scenario given would be considered an important element to the running of the business for many reasons. Communication would be essential for me, the farm manager, so that I am able to fulfil all my management roles. I need to be able to communicate with the other employees and to organise and arrange tasks efficiently. For future planning of the farm, communication with other employees and also other nearby farms will be useful, so I can note any changes which may be desirable for the farm or the area. Communication was an element that helped in the recent decision to downsize in the number of cows in the dairy herd.
Communication is useful on the farm, so I am able to coordinate the activities of the various employees. This may include when there is additional help required with the sheep and so the tractor driver is required to help with them. I therefore need to know who is scheduled or planning to do what work on particular days, so I can arrange a time when the tractor driver is not busy and can therefore help. This indicates that communication plays quite an important role in the farm because it helps the farm to run more efficiently.
Communication means that I receive feedback from the employees in certain circumstances, such as when there is mastitis in the dairy herd. This feedback demonstrates that there is two way communication on the farm, and therefore that the recipient of the information has understood the need to communicate and then respond. The communication of this type of information is useful for me to know as I may need to order in more supplies of iodine, as this will be used more frequently if there is mastitis in the herd.
The perception of how information is interpreted plays an important role in the farm business because perception affects how different individuals chose to fulfil tasks. Different individuals interpret information differently and therefore messages can easily be distorted. This means that I may mean one thing in asking an employee to perform a task, but if that employee interprets it in a different manner to how I intended, it could lead to a different task being performed, or a task not being completed in a satisfactory manner. Two way communications is an important element in helping to ensure information is perceived in the manner intended because it means that the recipient of the information has understood, or can be corrected if they have not understood fully.
The most frequently used communication amongst me and members of staff are face to face communication. Face to face communication means that non verbal communication is also active, such as body language and facial expressions. Argyle 1988 claimed that the actual words have less significance than the accompanying non verbal signs . (Management an Introduction)
There are three types of communication that may be active on the farm. Upwards communication, which would include things such as requests from the dairy manager to me for additional help or equipment etc. It may also include reports on crop yields or amounts of fertilizer used. Upward communication means that information is being passed up to me. Downwards communication may also be used, which would include things such as when my son is back from university and therefore able to help out on the farm. Downward communication means that I am passing information down to the employees or informing them of particular circumstances. Horizontal communication may also be used, which is when information is shared between everyone, so for example planning with each other so tasks can be coordinated or adjusting plans to suit each other. These different types of communication all have relevant roles on the farm, as I have demonstrated with the examples.
Communication will encourage teamwork as there will be more discussion and therefore perhaps more joint involvement in tasks. It may therefore also help to improve motivation among employees as they are likely to feel more involved in the general running of the farm. This could then mean that the employees may want to improve output on the farm and therefore may add to a more efficient farm.
Communication on the farm does not just include communicating with employees, which is what I have focused on so far. Communication is also important with outside bodies. This will include communicating with the organisation that we supply our milk to. This may be through telephone communication, letters and also emails. Communication with this organisation is important, because it means that we can receive information on the level of satisfaction of our produce and therefore make alterations where deemed necessary. Communication is also important with organisations such as Defra. This so we can be kept up to date with any changes that may occur with subsidy payments, such as the change to Single farm payments.
In conclusion it can be said that communication plays an important role in this farm enterprise. This is because it allows information and tasks to be organised amongst the employees, which will help to eradicate confusion and hopefully lead to a more efficient farm. Communication also means that the employees may feel more motivated because they feel more involvement in the running of the farm and feel their ideas are considered. Communication plays an important role in all businesses, and is essential to the efficient running and managing of businesses and their employees.