Tuberculosis is an infectious disease that 'affects man and a wide variety of warm blooded animals' (Howard, RW 1981 pg1). Tuberculosis is caused by an organism known as the tubercle bacillus. These organisms occur in groups on the infected body and try to surround each area of tuberculosis and therefore form an abrasion known as the tubercle. Tubercle does not form spores and can only survive if passed directly from one host to another, or can only survive indirectly for a matter of weeks. Tubercle cannot survive for long periods in the soil (Howard, RW 1981). The organisms of tuberculosis usually enter the body either through the nose or mouth (Howard, RW 1981). The method by which the organisms enter the body can have an effect on the places where the lesions occur.
Tuberculosis is a slow developing disease, with symptoms often only showing later on in the disease and often has few clinical signs because usually only small lesions occur . In cattle, lesions do not start to appear until about 3weeks after the initial infection, and it will often be months or even years before the disease becomes apparent. Over the years there has been the development of varying strains of tuberculosis (TB) due to the constantly changing bacteria. The following are the main strains of TB:
This report will be focusing on Bovine Tuberculosis as this is the strain of the disease that most commonly occurs in cattle and badgers.
Bovine Tuberculosis is usually a slow developing disease. However the rate of development is dependant on the following:
Bovine Tuberculosis is a zoonotic infection with a wide range of host organisms. Mycobacterium Bovis (M. bovis) is the bacteria responsible for tuberculosis in cattle. Cattle are the main hosts of this bacterium but in 1973 it was concluded that badgers were a major reservoir of M. bovis for cattle as well. (Dunnet, G M et al.1986). This meant that badgers were carriers of the strain of TB that infects cattle. Now that badgers have established M. bovis, it is more difficult to control or eradicate the disease.
The signs of Bovine TB in cattle depend on the organisms that have been affected by the disease. Possible signs in cattle include weakness, loss of condition and appetite, swelling of various lymph nodes, persistent cough and respiratory distress (Defra Disease Fact Sheet 2005). Badgers affected by Bovine TB and that are in the more advance stages of the disease show signs such as lameness, staggering movements above ground during the day and lack of fear of humans (Wildlife Link Badger Working Group 1984).
One of the main ways of bovine tuberculosis spreading is between herds when infected animals are introduced to non-infected herds. However, not all cattle spread the disease, it is dependant on them 'shedding the organism' (Coetzer, Jal. 2004 pg 1974). Other possible routes of infection with M. Bovis between cattle are:
The other main route of infection is through badgers. In badgers, the lesions that result from TB infection occur mainly in the urinary systems and respiratory systems (Dunnet, G M et al 1986). This indicates that the main ways that infection is spread to other animals is through urine and sputum. However, infection can also occur when bacteria from open lesions are transferred into the surrounding environment. The lesions that are found on badgers are similar to those found on cattle, but 'one of the most important differences is that much greater numbers of bacilli are found in badger lesions' (Dunnet, G M et al 1986 pg 2). The transfer of Bovine Tuberculosis from badgers to cattle in field conditions is often described as 'circumstantial'. This is because the transfer is reliant on the live bacteria being inhaled or ingested by the cattle  (Dunnet G M at all 1986). Badgers often urinate on pastures which will then be used for grazing cattle and this urine can often contain high quantities of tubercle bacilli. The infection of Bovine Tuberculosis in this manor often leads to infection in the lungs. For the tubercle bacilli to produce infection in this way, there needs to a much larger dose than if infection was to occur through the respiratory tract (Wildlife Link Badger Working Group 1984).
In the UK the problem of bovine tuberculosis has become an issue of increasing concern. This is partly because the disease is no longer so localised to certain areas of the country. However, the main problems still persist in the south west and western areas of the country (Defra 2005). The amount of culling of cattle that is now taking place has therefore increased significantly, and the problem seems to generally be worsening.
Bovine Tuberculosis is also now a significant burden on the taxpayer. In 2004/05 the cost of the disease was 90.5million (Defra 2005 pg 16). Expenditure on Bovine TB is rapidly increasing and is likely to continue to do so unless further measures are taken to try and prevent the continual spread of the disease.
There has been a new compensation system introduced this month to try and balance out the payments tax payers make and the compensation farmers receive for cattle that have been infected with Bovine Tuberculosis. This is because it was thought that previously farmers were at times over compensated for the value of their animals (Defra 2005).
The following diagram shows the geographical distribution of bovine TB outbreaks in 1998 and 2004. It demonstrates that there has been a significant increase in the areas affected by the disease.
Badgers have been known carriers of the M. bovis strain of TB that affects cattle for a number of years. This was after the discovery of a dead badger on a farm that had been infected with Bovine TB. However, there has been an ongoing debate around the transmission of this disease between these two hosts (Defra 2005). In 1997 there was significant evidence reported by the Independent Scientific Review group that showed 'in Britain, badgers were a significant source of infection in cattle' (Krebs, J 2006). There is also evidence which shows that badgers are more significant hosts of M. bovis than many other types of wildlife. The following table demonstrates the different levels of infection of Bovine TB in a variety of wildlife species:
There have been a variety of methods that have been suggested or used to try and reduce the spread of Bovine Tuberculosis. As much of this spread is linked to badgers being one of the main hosts of the disease, the culling of badgers has been a method used to try and reduce the amount of infection transferred to cattle. A randomized Badger Culling Trial (RBCT) was set up in 1998, as a response to the evidence reported in Krebs scientific review. The trials ended in 2005 with full results being published this spring. However, the results seem to suggest that the culling of badgers does not affect the control of bovine tuberculosis in Britain (Le Fevreal. 2005).
There have been other suggested methods to try and control Bovine TB in cattle and badgers. In the UK each herd of cattle has to be tested for TB each year, with any infected cattle being removed from the herd. This method has been fairly successful but in recent years in the UK there has been an increase in the number of infected animals which means that further things need to be done to try and combat the disease. On the 20 th February this year a pre-movement testing for bovine tuberculosis is to be carried out on all cattle aged over 15 months before moving off farm. There will be a second tier to this scheme which will start on the 1 st March 2007, and will involve the testing of all cattle aged over 6wks (Defra 2005). This is because it will again help to reduce the spread of the disease between herds and also reduce spreading at livestock markets and also to areas which are currently less affected by the disease (Cooper, O 13/01/06). It is expected that this movement will prevent up to 700 new incidents per annum (Defra 2005).
The use of a vaccine in both cattle and badgers has been suggested as this would help to control the M. bovis infection in the main host reservoirs. However this method of control would cause questions with regards to appropriate methods to vaccinate badgers. There would also need to be thorough research into the effects and organisms of the different strains of the disease in order to develop an appropriate vaccine. It is thought that a vaccination alone would not be sufficient in controlling the disease, and therefore other methods such as the culling would still be needed (Defra 2005).
The issue of Bovine Tuberculosis is a growing problem and is particularly linked to cattle and badgers as these are the main host reservoirs for the disease. There have been various attempts to try and combat the disease, but in recent years the disease has continued to spread and now covers a much larger area. It is argued that badgers are the main spreaders of the disease, which in turn affect cattle and then lead to cross infection between other herds. The government is at present trying to combat all areas of possible infection and therefore has introduced various measures to aid with this. These include the culling of infected badgers; however the success of this method has been questioned due to the recent Randomized Badger Culling Trials. The government has also just introduced the pre-movement testing of cattle to try and prevent the cross herd spreading. The idea of this seems logical; however the effects of it will not be recognized for a while. There is also currently discussion of possible vaccines against the disease but these will not be immediate and it is also thought that vaccines alone will not be sufficient in controlling the disease.
Bovine Tuberculosis is likely to continue to be an issue among badgers and cattle. The effects of the disease will hopefully start to decline as methods of prevention and control are discovered and used.