Organic food production in the UK has to adhere to standards set by the soil association or other certified bodies. These bodies all meet certain minimum standards, but they may have additional rules that are more stringent which producers will also need to comply with to be certified by them. Under organic food production standards there must be minimal or no use of fertilizers and pesticides, instead aiming to use natural pesticides and fertilizers. Organic food production is trying to establish sustainable agriculture, with the aim of maintaining soil fertility, levels of soil organic matter and the biological activity within the soil. Organic food production can have a positive impact on the environment as the following table indicates.
The Organic food market in the UK is currently increasing. This is partly due to food scares and environmental issues which have been at the forefront of the media in recent years. This is likely to have influenced consumers to buy organic produce, as organic food is partly marketed on being healthy and having a positive impact on the environment. In the UK, 4% of all agricultural land is organically farmed. This is still a very small proportion of the total land area, and only a small proportion of this is arable land with the majority being grassland (Source Vaarst, R,L, L 2004)..
Powdery mildew is a disease that often affects a wheat crop. It is caused by the fungus Erysiphe graminis (Source HGCA 1999) and is most common in humid and semiarid regions. Powdery mildew will utilize the nutrients and reduce the photosynthesis of the plant. This means that the green area index will also decrease and therefore the plant will not be intercepting as much light and so could affect growth.
Wheat crops that are affected by powdery mildew:
A decrease in yield can be associated with powdery mildew depending on the intensity of the attack. 'Yield losses of up to 40% are recorded and are greatest when disease development precedes or accompanies flowering' (Source Wiese M V 1991)
Powdery mildew most commonly occurs on the upper surface of the lower leaves. White colonies start to appear on the leaf surface, and as the plant matures these colonies turn to distinct brown dots.
Powdery mildew development is most likely to occur between 15-22C (Source Wiese M V 1991). This means that UK temperatures are optimum for powdery mildew development in wheat, and therefore early planting of a wheat crop could increase its susceptibility to this disease.
Powdery mildew can also be spread by airborne infection and environmental conditions which may permit rapid development of the disease (such as high humidity or cold temperatures as mentioned above). Powdery mildew also thrives on nitrogen rich plants, therefore if wheat is being planted organically on nitrogen rich soil than it may be more susceptible to powdery mildew. This could cause problems for organic farmers because nitrogen rich soil is important for the growth of wheat.
Infections of powdery mildew in autumn to young wheat crops can reduce tiller numbers and can also reduce the hardiness of the crop to frost. This means that as well as the effect of the powdery mildew on the crop there is likely to be a greater effect from frost damage and therefore the crop yield is likely to be affected. Disease attacks that occur later in the lifecycle of the crop can affect the grain size and therefore also affect grain quality.
In organic production systems there are fairly limited ways to try and control the disease of crops. This is because the use of many fungicides, fertilizers and pesticides is prohibited or limited to extreme situations. Therefore other methods of disease control need to be used. A major way to try and control powdery mildew in crops is to grow varieties of wheat that are resistant to the disease. The varieties of wheat resistant to powdery mildew will change as after a few years, resistance to powdery mildew is likely to deteriorate. However, updates are available on a yearly basis on wheat varieties that are most resistant to powdery mildew.
(See  to find these varieties)
Varieties of wheat that are more resistant to powdery mildew should seriously be considered by organic farmers because a resistance to this disease will mean that the crop has the chance to produce a higher yield, as it will intercept more light and will not have to compete for nutrients. This method of weed control will also not have any negative effects on the environment which is viewed as an important aspect of organic farming, and therefore is a method that should initially be tried.
The UK has a varied climate and different diseases favour different climates. Planting the wheat crop later could be a possible defence against powdery mildew for organic farmers. This is because powdery mildew does not grow in winter weather or cold fall (Source Organic field crop production and marketing 2005). Spore release and germination of powdery mildew is also reduced when there is water or dew on the leaf surface (Source HGCA 2000). This means that powdery mildew is more likely to affect wetter areas of the UK and therefore this should be taken into account by organic farmers. A problem with the idea of planting wheat later is that wheat does not grow well in winter weather or cold fall and therefore although this method may help to defend against powdery mildew, the wheat crop is likely to suffer anyway due to being grown in unfavourable conditions. Another alternative to growing the whole crop at a later date could be to spread out the planting date so that the whole crop may not be susceptible to the disease. This would allow some of the crop to be grown at the more favourable period for wheat and some to be grown slightly later at a time when powdery mildew is less active. Again, this method of attempting to control powdery mildew will not have any negative impacts on the environment, but the practicality of spreading out the plating date could be an issue to due time restraints. This method may therefore not be an option which is favoured by some organic farmers.
Crop rotations are an important aspect for organic farmers for the following reasons:
The use of crop rotations will be an important element for an organic farmer trying to control powdery mildew in wheat. This is because crop rotation will help to break down the disease cycle of powdery mildew. It will also help to reduce the number of inoculums with initiate disease on stubble and other cereals. However, crop rotations will only help to control powdery mildew to a certain extent because the disease is also airborne spread and therefore even with good crop rotation to help break the disease cycle it is still possible for powdery mildew to spread by other methods. Crop rotations are a method used in most farming systems. It is not an impractical method and is no more time consuming than not rotating. This means that organic farmers will have few reasons as to why they should not at least try rotating crops as a means of breaking down the disease.
As a last resort to help control powdery mildew in organic wheat, farmers may opt to use non- synthetic pesticides and fungicides. However, in order for organic farmers to use these, they must first have prior approval from their certified body to use the treatment. This method should be used as a last resort only because it can disrupt beneficial insects and have an affect on the stability of organic farming. This therefore indicates that this method can have an impact on the environment and so is not fully supportive of the concept of organic farming. This method is however likely to be fairly efficient at controlling the disease.
Powdery mildew is a disease that can affect wheat grown both conventionally and organically. In organic production systems there are fewer options available to help try and control this disease in wheat. This means that careful planning is needed with regards to the type of wheat grown, the time of sowing and also the time in a crop rotation that the wheat is grown. These factors will help to try and control powdery mildew in wheat and are also methods that will have less effect on the environment and therefore will be more in line with organic standards.
However, as the disease can also be airborne spread these planning factors will only help to a certain extent. It may be that organic farmers who have a severe attack of powdery mildew to their wheat crop will have to opt to use non-synthetic pesticides and fungicides. This method should always be a last resort for farmers and should be carefully considered and of course needs prior approval from their certified body.
For an organic farmer, there are measures that can be taken prior to disease infection which will try and avoid the contamination of the crop. However, these are all actions which need to be considered before the crop is planted. If, after the careful planning of these factors the wheat crop is still attacked by powdery mildew that is when the organic producer has fewer options than the conventional producer in terms of controlling this disease. This therefore indicates that for an organic producer trying to control crop diseases careful planning is required prior to the planting of the crop.