The use of Information Technology (IT) in agricultural and rural businesses is increasingly becoming an issue. The use of IT in rural areas seems to have a much slower uptake than the use of IT in other industries. There is a variety of software available today which is specifically aimed at the Agricultural Industry. In the early 1990s about 15% of UK farm businesses were using agricultural software and IT to help run their business and record information (Offer, A 2006). At present, it is thought that 75% of farms in the UK use IT in some form on their farms.
The use of IT in agriculture can also be looked at from a global perspective. The UK has had slow development in IT usage in rural enterprises, but other less developed countries are likely to be much slower in uptake of IT. The use of IT is likely to become an issue of increasing importance, particularly with the more stringent legislation now in place requiring traceability of products and quality assurance, accurate record keeping will be an important issue. This is where greater usage of IT in agriculture should come into force.
The following graph shows the uptake of computer usage on farms in the USA between 1997 and 2005.
The graph shows that in all areas of computer usage, there has been an increase. This is the expected trend, and hopefully this trend will continue with more farms and rural enterprises realizing the need to adopt computer technology.
As previously mentioned the uptake of IT in the rural sector has been slow and from a global perspective it is likely to have been very limited in less developed countries. There are a number of reasons for this limited uptake of IT in rural businesses which are:
There is a lack of effective training for the software available in the agricultural industry. This is a major problem because often businesses such as farms will have limited IT knowledge anyway, and therefore will be deterred from using IT if sufficient training is not available.
Many rural businesses are not aware or do not feel that there are substantial cost benefits to adopting their practices to use IT. This may not be the case in the future, because of the more stringent legislation now in place, farm businesses and other rural enterprises may see how time consuming not using IT will be.
There is often a reluctance to change among many rural businesses. This is because they feel no need to change. This is an issue which needs to be addressed, but it is more often an issue with the older generations. Therefore as younger generation farmers and workers become involved in the rural sector, this attitude has the chance to be changed.
In some rural areas, there may be technological barriers preventing further IT integration into the rural business. This could be constraints such as no broadband access in some areas. This therefore suggests that some rural firms may not be able to adapt to IT.
There is a view that IT is not a reliable means of storing and interpreting information. There is also the cost implementation element to IT in rural businesses. These factors combined are likely to have a negative influence on the application of IT into rural and farm businesses. These factors may be particularly significant in those less developed countries. Less developed countries are likely to be much further behind in regards of IT and therefore even simple factors which are taken advantage of in the UK such as telephone communication may still be up and coming in rural enterprises in developing countries. Less developed countries may also face problems with initial implementation costs.
The above issues are factors that need to be addressed by software companies to try and encourage greater uptake and usage of computers in the rural business sector. There are constraints faced by these companies in the UK, that can't be avoided such as the age of many farmers and the unwillingness to change and also the money restraints faced by many farmers. The issues associated with less developed countries are factors that will gradually be overcome but the progress in such countries is likely to be very slow and limited.
The use of advanced IT software and systems within farm business is likely to depend on a variety of factors. In a farm situation, the size of the farm will be a fairly significant dictating factor in the extent of IT usage. This is because the larger scale farms will be involved in a variety of different areas and therefore more records and data will need to be stored. Smaller farms may not feel that it is economical to install new computers and software systems; therefore it is likely to be the larger farm businesses that are more involved in IT usage.
Over recent years, surveys have been completed relating to the use of IT and the internet in rural businesses and farms. The following is a summary of some of the results.
This information shows the more detailed purposes of computer use during 2002/2003 on farms in the UK:
82% of farms use computers for office management functions, e.g. record keeping
69% of farms use computers for farm management accounts
42% of farms use computers for tax accounts
23% of farms use computers for payroll purposes
39% of farms use computers for arable enterprise management
55% of farms use computers for livestock enterprise management
49% of farms use computers for statutory records
(Farm Business Survey 2003)
The UK is likely to be a fairly good example of IT use in rural businesses. If the statistics for IT usage in a developing country were looked at, it is more than likely that the general consensus for IT use would be much lower. This is mainly due to the economical state of the country and also the lack of available resources such as computers.
The information suggests that the majority of farms use computers for management functions such as keeping records of calving dates and milk yields. There is also a fairly high usage of IT for farm management accountancy purposes. The use of the more specialized software, such as software available from companies such as Farm Plan, does not seem to be used so highly in the farm business industry. However, this is likely to be a changing scenario and in the 3years since the survey was conducted, many changes such as the Single Farm Payment have occurred. These changes have meant that there are now much more stringent rules and regulations and the new agri-environment schemes will require detailed analysis of the farm business. Therefore, companies such as Farm Plan are likely to see a rise in demand for specialist agricultural software. This trend is likely to be similar across all European Countries due to the Single Farm Payment and related agri-environment schemes.
The future trends of IT usage in rural businesses in less developed countries is also likely to increase as factors such as traceability and animal welfare are becoming issues of increasing importance worldwide. In many countries, important aspects to aid the farm business such as telecommunications are relatively new ideas and therefore the development of IT usage to the stage that the UK is currently at is likely to take a while. However, as the use of IT develops worldwide in the agricultural industry, it is going to be increasingly more difficult for these countries to cope and compete without similar resources.
IT is becoming an increasingly important element for all businesses. 'It affects all aspects of organizational activity and opens up many new ideas for the management of organizations' (Boddy, D 2003).
The integration of IT into rural businesses is an important aspect for many businesses in the UK and the trend for increased usage is likely to continue to increase. This will partly be due to the greater concern in today's society over food safety and traceability issues and also the increasing amounts of legislation that are coming into force regarding agricultural practices. The use of IT will be a practical and constructive way of managing information relating to food safety and traceability and also a useful record keeping tool for legislation requirements. IT will also become increasingly more important as the use of GPS and precision farming increases. This is likely to occur particularly on larger scale farms.
There are many issues relating to the use of IT in the rural sector which will need to be addressed before all businesses adapt to using IT. The adoption of IT into the rural sector will also be much more advanced in the UK in comparison to developing countries and therefore this factor should be considered. This could mean that in the long term, these developing countries are at a disadvantage because they do not have the technology to compete with the developed world.
The use of IT in rural businesses today in the UK is likely to be very dependant on the scale of the business and the turnover from the farm. This is because it is fairly expensive to implement IT systems into the business and therefore it is likely that only the larger scale businesses will be interested in such systems. However, given the state of agriculture today, in the future there is likely to be the merging of many smaller farms and rural businesses to try and compete successfully in the market. This could lead to an increase in IT usage, particularly of specialized software such as that which is provided by Farm Plan.