There has been a steady decline in the UK dairy industry since 1984 (FAWC 1997). This has lead to an increasing intensification of dairy farming in the UK and also increased production demands. These increased demands are leading to welfare issues that are associated with this intensification. Since 1984, there has been an average increase in milk yield from 4,980 litres per cow, to 6,345 litres per cow in 1995 (Lymbery 2001). The average milk yield is still continuing to increase. In order to achieve this increased milk production, there needs to be greater feed conversion efficiency. This means that the cows are able to utilise more feed and to metabolise the feeds at a greater rate. However, high metabolic turnover in cows can be associated with a greater risk of:
This therefore means that the cows require better care to maintain a good standard of welfare (FAWC 1997). High yielding dairy cows in modern farming practices are pushed to their limits through a combination of high protein feeds, selective breeding and the latest technology (Lymbery 2001). These factors help to lead to the increased yields associated with intensification of the dairy industry.
This report will focus both on the benefits and the issues that are associated with high yielding dairy cows, to try and reach a conclusion on this subject.
High yielding dairy cows can have additional issues which are associated with them being farmed more intensively with greater production expectations. The five freedoms are used as general guidelines for keeping all animals in a welfare friendly manner. The following table will show how these five freedoms relate to dairy cows.
The five freedoms mentioned in the above table highlight the issues that are faced by dairy farmers, with regards to the welfare of their livestock and ways in which they can try and ensure that the welfare of the dairy cows is not compromised. These freedoms do not just relate to high yielding dairy cows. However it is important with high yielding dairy cows that there is a very high level of stockmanship, good management and housing to try and avoid any welfare issues that might arise.
In recent years the average life span of dairy cows has reduced and it is often less than four lactations (FAWC 1997). This issue can be associated with high productivity that is related to high yielding dairy cows. High production can lead to increased levels of metabolic stress which in turn will lead to earlier culling. Culling is also increasing and occurring more frequently due to an increase in lameness and infectious diseases that are associated with the high intensity milk production systems. On many dairy farms, culling rates exceed 30-35% of the herd per annum (Jones 1999). The following graph highlights the main reasons for culling.
The factors mentioned in the above graph are commonly associated with high yielding dairy cows and are issues that will need to be addressed should the yields of dairy cows continue to increase.
There are other main issues that can be associated with high yielding dairy cows which include:
These factors will be looked at in detail to discover whether the policy of promoting yet higher yields in dairy cows should be stopped.
Mastitis is an inflammation of the udder that is usually caused by a bacterial infection, although it can also be triggered by stress (FAWC 1997). Mastitis is a problem that is often associated with high yielding dairy cows. The pathogens of mastitis are usually either environmental or contagious. Contagious pathogens spread from infected areas to healthy areas of the same or other cows, such as from the milking machine or the herdsman (FAWC 1997). Environmental pathogens are usually associated with dirty wet bedding or poor ventilation in housed areas. Mastitis results in reduced quality and quantity of milk and therefore can have a negative effect on the economics of milk production.
A five point plan was introduced in the 1960s to try and combat mastitis. It recommended:
Since the recommendations there has been great uptake of the plan and it has lead to a decline in contagious mastitis. However, there has been no change in the incidence of environmental mastitis (Blowey and Edmondson 1995) and this is mainly due to the increase in herd sizes which is related to higher milk yields. This is mainly due to the increased milking speeds, which are leading to 'a 12 fold increase in mastitis susceptibility' (Blowey and Edmondson pg 2 1995). This suggests that the policy of promoting yet higher yields in dairy cows should be stopped unless further preventative action for environmental mastitis is introduced.
The problem of lameness in dairy cows is unacceptably high and it is now a greater problem than it was 40 years ago (FAWC 1997). Lameness is seen as a major welfare issue because it affects the cow's ability to fully interact with the environment, and also causes unnecessary pain and distress (FAWC 1997). Factors that cause lameness include:
'High yielding dairy cows appear to be more vulnerable to lameness, probably for metabolic reasons associated with high milk production' (FAWC 1997). This means that very high standards need to be adhered to in high yielding dairy herds to try and reduce the incidence of lameness. If this cannot be tackled then promoting yet higher yields should be stopped.
Infertility is a major problem in UK dairy herds and can have serious economical impacts on the farm. Poor nutrition, metabolic stress and poor heat detection have been associated with causes of infertility. While infertility itself is not seen as a major welfare issue, many infertile cows are prematurely culled which is seen as a welfare issue. It is 'Cows with the greatest milk production that have the highest incidence of infertility' (Lucy 2001). This therefore suggests that although infertility is a problem experienced by all dairy farmers, it is more significant in high yielding dairy cows.
Other Production Diseases can also be associated with high yielding dairy cows, such as an increased incidence of ketosis. This usually occurs in early lactation and is a result of an overworked metabolism, which results in the cows having to use their own energy resources to continue producing milk (Lymbery 2001). Ketosis can be caused by an imbalance of nutrients in the diet, but also if other diseases have occurred which lead to a reduction in appetite and therefore feed intake (Andrews 2000).
There are many diseases and illnesses which seem to be linked to high yielding dairy cows. However, there are some factors that might lead to a reduction of these issues in high yielding dairy herds. These will be looked at next.
It can be argued that the policy of promoting yet higher yields in dairy cows should not be stopped. There are many economical benefits and greater specialisation and expertise that can be associated with high yielding dairy cows.
High yielding dairy cows are more efficient, in that higher yields can be achieved with fewer cows being milked per litre. There is also a greater emphasis on animal husbandry and welfare, because the high yielding dairy cow is a greater asset to the farmer. There will be superior expertise involved with such herds, this could include:
These factors will all help to improve the welfare and comfort of high yielding dairy cows and ensure that they are treated to the highest standards.
The welfare of animals is protected under The Protection of Animals Act 1911 - 2000. This act covers all farm animals and therefore includes high yielding dairy cows. The act states that it is an offence to 'cruelly beat, kick, ill-treat, over-drive, over-load, torture, infuriate, or terrify any animal' (Defra 2006). This demonstrates how high yielding dairy cows are well protected under current legislation, and therefore there is no real reason why the policy of promoting yet higher yields should be stopped.
Economic benefits are an important aspect for high yielding herds. The following table demonstrates some of these benefits.
Table 2 shows how as yield per cow increases, the gross margin per cow also increases. This demonstrates how the higher yielding dairy cows are more efficient and therefore bring about economic benefits to the farmer. The price per litre for milk is lower with the higher yields, which is most likely associated with slightly lower quality of this type of milk (eg: butter fat content etc).
Selective breeding is also an important aspect for high yielding herds. The Holstein freisan makes up 90% of all European dairy herds. They are highly efficient cows, which better utilise grass and produce high yields.
There are many arguments both for and against promoting the policy of yet higher yields in dairy cows. Many of the welfare issues mentioned in the argument against higher yielding dairy cows are common both in average yield dairy cows and higher yielding dairy cows. However, these issues do seem to be more severe and frequent in higher yielding dairy cows. There is also greater culling in higher yielding dairy cows which is associated with the increased production diseases that are prevalent in the higher yielding herds. Greater and earlier culling is also associated with a reduced average life span in higher yielding dairy cows, which is seen to be a welfare issue.
There are factors such as selective breeding which can help to improve the condition of higher yielding dairy cows, but these factors alone cannot significantly contribute to reducing factors such as lameness and infertility which are commonly associated with the higher yielding dairy cows. This therefore indicates that although steps are taken to ensure that higher yielding dairy cows do not have their welfare compromised, there are still issues that do affect them. The Protection of Animals Act 1911 - 2000 does help to ensure that the welfare of such animals is not threatened, but these intensively farmed animals are still put under significantly more pressure and stress than other dairy cows.
High yielding dairy cows do produce higher gross margins per cow and per hectare (see table 2). However, these gross margins do not take into account factors such as the stress and production diseases or issues that can be associated with the higher yielding cows. Therefore although there are steps in place to ensure that the welfare of higher yielding dairy cows is not compromised, so far I feel that there still many issues that surround the higher yielding dairy cows and as a result the policy of promoting yet higher yields in dairy cows should be stopped.