Over the last few decades there has been a move away from agriculture being the focus and main economy of rural areas. There has been a decline in employment within this sector, which has led to changes within rural communities. This factor has meant that many residents within such areas are required to travel further distances to work, and can also been linked with a growing trend of 'townies' moving to countryside areas. Due to this trend, there appears to be a lack of affordable housing in many rural communities, which is pushing out local young families and those that are unable to afford the higher house prices now commanded by many rural areas. This has been a focus of government policy in recent years and has led to the need for sustainable rural communities.
Around 19% of the UK population live in rural England or Wales (Banister 2005). Sustainable rural communities are linked to the greater need for sustainable development within rural areas in the UK, to enable this percentage of the population to have access to services and facilities that are readily available to other members of the population. Sustainable rural communities need to focus on providing a good quality of life for residents and also ensuring that developments are taking into consideration the environment and the future of the community. This can be linked to the main factors associated with sustainable development, which are:
The above factors all need to be sustained, positively link and contribute to each other in order to achieve sustainable development.
Sustainable rural communities will be focused on trying to achieve the above idea of sustainable development. There is a need to centre this on factors that will contribute to sustainability. Although each rural community will be different and therefore will achieve sustainability through different means, there are some main factors which will be prevalent. They include:
The above factors are again linked to the idea of sustainable development and demonstrate how there is a need for some degree of uniformity, in order to meet the desires of sustainable rural communities. It will now be useful to look at the idea of sustainable rural communities in the context of rural economies, services and housing and conservation of the countryside.
As previously mentioned there is a prevailing trend of a movement from towns to the countryside. A major contributing factor to this trend has been employment. This is partly because some jobs are moving to countryside areas, partly because people moving are seeking different types of jobs but also due to the increase in car ownership over the years, many people are now able to commute to work or alternatively work from home.
Employment in agriculture has decreased by 30% in the last 20 years (Bradford et al 2006). This indicates that younger generations that have grown up in small farming communities, may be pushed out of their local areas due to a lack of suitable employment. There is often seasonal work available in the agricultural sector, but there is now a greater trend for migrant workers to fill these positions, which is affecting availability of work for these areas.
The following table highlights main areas of employment in the rural workforce:
The table shows that much of the work available focuses on manufacturing. The local economies of rural areas appear to be driven by outsiders that are moving to the area rather than the locals. This demonstrates how the rural economy at present is contributing to pushing locals out and is a factor that needs to be addressed in developing sustainable rural communities. The rate of self employment in the rural sector is also higher than urban areas, with 11% of people in rural communities being self employed compared to 8.5% in urban areas (Rural Economies 2003).
The rural economy has been greatly affected by the 2001 outbreak of foot and mouth disease. It is important that rural economies are maintained because:
The following diagram shows a break down of the main components of rural economies:
Diagram 1 demonstrates how there are opportunities arising within rural economies and that it is developing even after the setback from foot and mouth disease. However, Planning Policy Statement 7 (PPS7) has recognised that there is a need to continue to identify sites for future economic development and that it needs to continue to encourage rural enterprises "to provide a range of jobs and underpin strong economies" (PPS7). It is hoped that these measures will help to contribute towards sustainable rural communities.
In recent years there have been increasing issues relating to the growth of rural areas and whether there is sufficient housing and services to accommodate such growth. Between 1991 and 2002, 60,000 people migrated to rural areas every year (Bradford et al 2006). In some rural villages there is currently greater demand than supply for housing, and therefore this is pushing the price of housing up. This factor is leading to an ageing population, as younger generations are unable to afford the price of housing in such areas.
This factor demonstrates that there is a need for more affordable housing in rural areas. Local authorities in rural areas have been working on an agenda based on restraint, and have been trying to meet local needs rather than accommodating additional growth (Curry and Owen 1996). However, there are still the ongoing issues of affordable housing.
In 2005, the government set up an Affordable Rural Housing Scheme to try and address this issue further. Affordable housing can be defined as "non-market housing provided to those whose needs are not meet by the market" (Defra 2005). Planning Policy Statement 3 (PPS3) highlights changes which have been designed to allow more affordable housing to be developed in areas where they may previously have been rejected by planners. These include:
Exceptions Policy - This involves buying land that would not normally get planning permission and therefore the land is cheaper to buy and so can then develop affordable housing through housing associations.
Home Buyers Scheme - Government can help people to buy homes, particularly key workers. Government will provide loans. Both for rural and urban areas.
Deliver affordable housing alongside market houses. This is mainly used in urban areas, but could be used more in rural development.
Affordable rural housing needs to be provided to maintain and enhance sustainable rural communities. Without affordable housing, many rural areas would see the trend for aging populations to increase, and this would be contradictory of developing sustainable rural communities.
Transport links are an important aspect in sustainable rural communities. In rural settlements, only 51% of people live within walking distance of a bus stop that have regular services (Bradford et al 2006). This can affect the quality of life of individuals as it will limit access to certain services and also jobs. However, the reverse of this situation is that people are using cars much more and therefore are using larger services in other areas, such as out of town shopping centres, instead of supporting smaller local shops. This will need to be addressed in developing sustainable rural communities, as quality of life is an important aspect in sustainable development for the future of rural areas.
The main trend in the provision of services at a local level has been a 1 or 2% decline in services such as post offices, pubs and village stores. The main reason for this has been due to the greater mobility of customers (as mentioned above). This is leading to social exclusion is some areas due to a number of people not having the mobility to access other services and also because it is leading to a loss of community meeting places. This factor can also be linked to the issue of climate change, because with more people opting to use private transport to access other services, it is leading to an increase in carbon emissions.
Conserving the countryside is a significant issue when planning for the sustainable development within rural areas. It is important to remember that the environment is a major aspect in attracting visitors to rural areas, and therefore supporting the rural economy (Bradford et al 2006). Planning Policy Statement 1 (PPS1) has a section dedicated to 'Protection and Enhancement of the Environment'. This includes factors such as valuing landscapes and protecting wildlife habitats and natural resources. This indicates that the government understands the significance of the countryside in developing sustainable rural communities.
PPS1 highlights that developments should be sustainable, durable and adaptable to the specific area and also make use of local resources. This would be supportive of a sustainable rural community, as it is focusing on the local economy by trying to use local resources and it is considering the environment by looking at sustainability and adaptability to the local environment.
Climate change could have serious implications for conserving the countryside. Unpredictable weather patterns are likely to lead to changes in the landscape, which in is turn will likely affect the biodiversity targets that the government has set (Bradford et al 2006). This therefore indicates that climate change is likely to be a major factor that affects sustainable rural communities.
The different aspects of sustainability that have been mentioned (rural economies, housing and services, and conservation of the countryside, within the context of climate change) are all important issues in the development of sustainable rural communities. In an ideal world, these factors would not contradict one another, but there is likely to be some areas where this cannot be avoided.
Planning for sustainable communities will need to take the issues mentioned into account, in order to try and develop and improve for future generations. It is important that each aspect is considered and all possible steps are taken to try and avoid conflicts between rural economies, housing and services, and conservation of the countryside. The housing and services provision is an important aspect in relation to the aging population, and therefore should be considered as vital for the development of sustainable communities. This may overlap to a degree with conservation of the countryside, due to new developments taking place and the affect this could have on biodiversity. However, the affordable housing issue particularly is a major problem in rural areas and therefore needs to be addressed.
Climate change will be a major factor in future years that is likely to contribute to conflicts between these aspects. This is because it is thought that human activities are a main cause of climate change (Banister 2005) and therefore increasing activity in rural areas is likely to lead to damaging effects on the environment. However, this issue will not just be specific to rural areas; it will be a worldwide issue.
Planning for sustainable rural communities should try to consider the aspects mentioned throughout this report. However, I do not feel it is unfair to expect that the conflicts between the different aspects of sustainability must be resolved. I feel that by doing this, the development of rural sustainable communities will be compromised and will not benefit the individuals in the communities. As long as reasonable care and consideration of all the mentioned aspects are taken into account in the development of sustainable rural communities, I think that this will suffice.