Sheepdrove farm is an organic farm in Lambourn, Berkshire. The farm is trying to achieve lamb production throughout the year, in order to be able to sell lamb on a regular basis throughout the whole year. This year, Sheepdrove farm ran 2,000 ewes with two different lambing periods. The early lambing period started at the end of February, and these ewes were lambed inside. However, the second lambing period, which is at a later time in the year, usually end of April through May, is lambed outside. This is because with indoor lambing there is a greater risk of disease such as ecoli, which needs to be avoided particularly in organic production systems. With organic production, only minimal chemical and artificial inputs are allowed, such as the use of antibiotics. This therefore demonstrates that where possible the production system needs to be designed to reduce disease risk and other health problems that may be likely to occur.
As an organic farm, Sheepdrove is increasingly concerned with issues relating to animal welfare. For this reason, the farm does not castrate male lambs. This is a slightly different approach to conventional sheep systems as the growth of the lambs is slower. The farm therefore tries to use this to their advantage in finishing the lambs. Young male rams also produce a different quality of meat, which Sheepdrove again try to use to their advantage which is involved in the way that the meat is marketed.
Sheepdrove have three different varieties of lamb/sheep meat to try and market:
Sheepdrove website is the focal point of sales for the farm. The website aims to educate consumers which Sheepdrove feel is an important aspect of the marketing strategy for the lamb and sheep meat. The farm uses a variety of different strategies throughout the year, as Sheepdrove is marketing lambs of different weights throughout the year and therefore has to make what is available appeal to the consumer. The website provides consumers with recipes and information on the lamb and mutton and also information about the type of joints available. This all helps with educating the consumer and therefore is a useful technique for marketing the produce.
The mutton market is a newly created market. There is now greater interest in this area of the market and so Sheepdorve has managed to create a market for what was originally a waste meat. This market is not as lucrative as the lamb market, but it is a definite improvement on no market at all. The development of the mutton market is an indication of how marketing has developed.
Sheepdrove farm aims its produce at a fairly niche segment of the market, because consumers are paying a premium price for the assurance they receive from buying organic meat and also for the quality service provided by Sheepdrove. The meat from the farm is sold through the box schemes, and the farm also has two farm shops, in London and Bristol.
Lowland sheep breeding such as that at Sheepdrove farm is an important aspect of the sheep industry. Lowland sheep contribute a high proportion of finished lambs to the sector (Croston, D Pollott, G 1985 pg 179). Lowland sheep farmers tend to use crossbreed ewes and terminal sires to produce lamb for slaughtering. At Sheepdorve the early lambing flock are usually 'a hardy cross of Shetland and Poll Dorset ewes, naturally lamb at the beginning of the year' (Sheepdrove Organic Farm 2003). These breeds are used because the natural lambing means that no artificial stimulation is required to encourage the ewes into season. This therefore is an important aspect in terms of animal welfare.
Shetland ewes tend to be fairly small and therefore the cross breeding helps to keep the sheep size relatively small. This therefore allows for a higher stocking density. The farm soil is relatively thin and not ideally suited to organic production. However, this breed of sheep is suited to the thin soil and also due to the nature of the breed they are better adapted to looking after themselves. Crossing Shetlands with Poll Dorsets is a good combination because Poll Dorset 'ewes are of medium size and are naturally prolific '(National Sheep Association 2006).
Sheepdrove also cross the Shetland breed with Texels and Hampshire Downs. The farm is currently phasing out the Hampshire Down Sires, as this breed is not ideally suited to the soil type at the farm. The Texels are a good breed for long keeping lambs, and so this breed is often used in the later lambing flock.
Sheepdorve uses a variety of different breeds of sheep because different breeds finish at different periods throughout the year. Sheepdrove therefore use a variety of sires so that the lambs are finishing at different periods. This is therefore an important aspect for Sheepdrove, as it is aiming to finish lambs throughout the year and needs to be able to kill 50 lambs per week.
The indoor lambing flock at Sheepdrove are housed 6weeks prior to the start date for lambing. This allows for the ewes to adjust to the housing and the feeding techniques in the housing system. The early housing means that the ewes are not getting stressed closer to the pregnancy which is when the ewes need the highest energy intake. Housing later in the pregnancy can often lead to pregnancy toxaemia. Sheepdrove only house the early lambing flock because of the disease risk associated with the system and it is usually the older stocks that come inside.
The indoor flock is feed for 1 month before being housed. The ewes are feed oats, and by feeding a month before housing, allows the ewes to get used to the oats. Last year Sheepdrove feed a mixture of beans and barley, but this feed was making the lambs too big and therefore the ewes encountered greater problems during birth. Later on in the pregnancy the ewes require high protein content in feed and also during the early lactation period. This is because 'the requirements of the ewes and lambs are high' (Croston, D Pollott, G 1985 pg 127) during this period. The ewes are also feed grass silage as a bulk feed. Grass silage should be 'wilted to a dry matter of 25-28%' (Croston, D Pollott, G 1985 pg 127). This is because the intake by the ewes will be reduced if the silage is high in acid and wet.
The condition of the ewe during mating and throughout the pregnancy is an important aspect in relation to the feeding of the ewe. During the early stages of pregnancy 'ideally ewes should maintain live weight and body condition' (Boden, E ed 1991 pg 31). This is the ideal, however it is acceptable for ewes to lose about 3% of live weight or 0.25 of a condition score (Boden, E ed 1991 pg 32). In the middle stages of the pregnancy the important aspect is the growth of the placenta which is complete at 90days (Boden, E ed 1991 pg 32). It is important that during this stage of pregnancy ewes are not too fat and also ewes with a very high body condition score may benefit from a drop in condition score as it can lead to reductions in the lambs birth weight. The last 6 to 8 weeks of pregnancy are vitally important for both ewe and lamb. During this period the lamb gains about 70% of its birth weight (Boden, E ed 1991 pg 33). This demonstrates why the nutrition of the ewe is of great importance during this period. It also suggests why Sheepdrove start feeding slightly before this period to ensure that the ewes are used to the feeding system and therefore do not jeopardise the birth weight of the lambs.
The following table shows the growth rate of lambs from birth to 5 weeks of age.
The table demonstrates that the growth rate of the lambs is relatively consistent from year to year. This indicates that the use of indoor housing systems to help to control the feed management in ewes and therefore contributes to the nutrients in lactation. At Sheepdrove the lambs are finished on a mixture of grass, turnips and oats. They are also feed a good silage mix.
Biosecurity is an important aspect on all farms as it involves taking appropriate measures to ensure that good hygiene and cleanliness practices are in place to prevent the spread of animal diseases (Defra 2005). This is particularly important in organic farming systems because of the reduced artificial inputs that the farm is able to use. Sheepdrove farm has no scrapies in the sheep flocks which will partly be due to Biosecurity. Also, the farm has a closed flock which means that no new replacements are brought into the flock which helps to maintain a healthy flock.
Biosecurity is important to prevent the spread of diseases such as foot and mouth disease, but it is also important to control the spread of diseases such as ecoli and foot problems. Sheepdrove do still experience problems such as ecoli in the indoor housed ewes and also foot rot is a big problem for the farm.
Sheepdrove has to produce a farm health plan that is approved by a certified body such as the Soil Association. As Sheepdrove is an organic farm it requires permission to use certain products. This health plan is linked to the issue of Biosecurity because it helps the farm to outline any possible issues and problems and to achieve suitable outcomes.
Sheepdrove has to carefully consider the sheep production system used due to the organic status of the farm. The farm is careful to lamb the majority of its ewes outside to avoid the disease and health problems associated with indoor housed lambing. The farm needs to continue with the indoor housing however, in order to be able to produce lamb for year round sale through the farm shops and box scheme.
The breed's chosen for the producing are an important aspect in the year round production because different breeds finish at different live weights and also at different periods throughout the year. This is a very important aspect for Sheepdrove farm because of the way they market their lamb. The feeding of the ewes during pregnancy is also an important element for Sheepdrove. The ewes need to be feed appropriately at each stage of pregnancy to avoid any problems during the pregnancy and birth. The correct feeding of ewes will also help to produce healthy lambs. This aspect is particularly important in organic systems because the use of antibiotics is only allowed at the discretion of the certifying body and this is usually only in extreme circumstances.
Sheepdrove farm seem to use appropriate breeds and management practices to allow for the year round supply of lamb. The marketing strategies used by the farm are an important tool in aiding the sale of otherwise unusual meat, such as the mutton and young ram meat.