The automation of the London ambulance dispatch system will be referred to as simply "the project" throughout this report.
Numbers following quotes (e.g. - 3112) refer to the labelling of paragraphs in the original Inquiry Report (Feb 1993)
In 1990, the London Ambulance Service "performance standards were extremely low and came nowhere near to meeting the nationally agreed ORCON standards" - 3035. The modernisation of the London Ambulance Service was essential, and the executive board saw a new CAD (computer aided dispatch) system as the prime means of improving these standards. This meant that the feasibility of this project did not really come up as an issue. Similar computer systems had already been implemented in other parts of the UK, such as Surrey, West Midlands, and Oxford, and also in police and fire services, showing that it was indeed possible. Hence, initial investigation focussed more on the shortcomings of the existing manual system. This gave the impression that CAD should be implemented as soon as possible, leading to hasty project planning, and an unrealistic time scale. The LAS management were fully aware that the project they were proposing was the most complex of its type, and perhaps should have been more tentative at issuing such a project, especially after the abandonment of a previous attempt.
Time was taken to develop a list of problems with the existing manual system:
identification of the precise location of an emergency can be time consuming;
the physical movement of paper forms around the Control Room is inefficient;
maintaining up to date vehicle status and location information is a slow and laborious process;
communicating with ambulances via voice is time consuming and can lead to mobilisation queues;
identifying duplicated calls relies on human judgement and memory.
dealing with call backs is a labour intensive process as it often involves staff leaving their posts;
identification of special incidents needing a Rapid Response Unit or the helicopter relies totally on human judgement.
The initial aims for the new system were to eradicate these issues. A team was assembled involving the systems manager, a contract analyst, the control room manager, and representatives from training and communications, but not from the ambulance crews. This might be the first reason why ambulance crews later "could not (or would not) use their MDTs (mobile data terminals)"- A.Finkelstein & J.Dowell. Some involvement from ambulance crews or their union, could have expressed the need for simpler terminals that would not become confusing to frustrated crews under a lot of pressure.
"the original specification for this system changed as the development project evolved." - 3010
Although it often necessary to adapt the requirements of a project, this indicates that the original specification was either unrealistic or badly devised. Careful research could have eliminated many of the problems encountered by the project. Corresponding with the personnel who would ultimately be running and working with the system would have highlighted the need for the system to be able to run in a semi-automated mode in the case of problems.
Such a large failure as was experienced by the project implies that the requirements were not broken down into categories of essential, desirable, and less important. Or if they were, too many were described as essential, making the project too ambitious for the planned time scale. An important part of defining the requirements is determining whether they are realistic. More attention should have been paid to this process, since ultimately several important specifications were either not met, or even specified:
Quality assurance - when implemented, the system could not handle the load of all the emergency calls.
Data - inadequate research was put into the amount of data that would need to be handled, otherwise the problem above would not have occurred.
Training - According to the inquiry report the training given to personnel was not comprehensive nor consistent, and "should be reviewed" - 3100
Deadlines - since the system had not fully lived up to its specifications, the deadlines should have been extended to ensure a safe implementation.
LAS management boldly decided to produce a state of the art system which "no other emergency service, certainly in the UK, had attempted" - 3013. To move to this in one big changeover was appalling misjudgement.
The design stage also acts as validation of the requirements specification, yet amazingly, poorly defined specifications were not rectified at this stage.
Firstly, "contact was made with other ambulance services... to determine whether or not their existing systems might be... extended to meet the LAS vision". All of these systems were rejected, and so the LAS system was designed from scratch, with no elements coming from an existing working implementation - another bold decision by the LAS management. The design included the following sub-systems:
The technical design of the system was not undertaken by LAS, but contracted to bidding suppliers. There was no list of approved suppliers for systems, and so the cheapest option was taken. This cheapest option was to cost 937,463. Previously, Arthur Andersen (Management Consultants) had recommended a budget of 1.5m for a system which did not even include an AVLS! Much better guidance should have been available to the team procuring a system of such critical importance.
The proposal "would require absolute co-operation from all parties" and "absolute confidence in the system... to work perfectly all of the time" - 3025. There was no scope to compensate for human errors, misjudgements, or incomplete or inaccurate information. The development team did not fully understand the importance that software, hardware and communications function perfectly at all times.
The chosen suppliers were asked no questions about why their bid was so much cheaper than all the others. It eventually became obvious that they had massively underestimated the complexity of the requirement.
LAS management were given advice that "if a packaged solution could be found... a timescale from specification to implementation of 19 months would be appropriate... if a package solution cannot be found then these estimates should be significantly increased" - 3036. They chose to ignore this advice, and selected hardware and software suppliers based on their ability to meet much shorter deadlines. The project was to go from specification to implementation in only 6 months. It can only be the case that the design stages were extremely rushed.
At a LAS Board meeting in May 1991, "doubts are raised as to the ability of the communications system to cope with the potential load to be placed upon it, and of the reliability and state of readiness of the RIFS system." These two crucial concerns were dismissed, underlining the fact that there was very little technical evaluation of the proposed designs.
Overall, the design of the system was inadequate, and the suppliers proposals were not looked over thoroughly enough by LAS management. It is essential that a design is checked to fit the specifications before it is implemented, especially in such a crucial scenario.
It is my belief that the CAD system should not have been implemented in one go. Rather, a basic system should have been put in place by the original deadline, and the full system gradually formed by steadily introducing new features (known as an iterative and incremental model). This was a solution that several suppliers suggested as a much better approach.
One main benefit of this approach would have been the ability to gain feedback from the personnel who use the system (ambulance crews, call takers), before the system was too heavily developed and implanted to have elements changed.
All three suppliers had trouble implementing their technology before the deadline. Software was continually delivered late, and with bugs in. The physical installations also suffered problems, and there were instances of poor quality equipment installation by one subcontractor. "There was patchy resistance to the installation of Datatrak equipment in the vehicles. There is much circumstantial evidence of wilful damage to or misuse of Datatrak equipment." - 3110
It should have been realised that the deadlines were unachievable. Instead, contractors were heavily pressured to meet them, and a partial solution was implemented in January 1992. From this time, several short term expedients were added in haste to allow the partial solution, and to keep the project showing positive progress.
"Throughout the project there are references to function... and load testing". This statement states that testing did take place, but clearly the load testing was not effective. This is a continuation of the suppliers not understanding the full scale of the system required.
While each supplier tested their own hardware and software combinations, the system as a whole remained untested until it was put in place. The design should have been tested much more thoroughly, investigating the consequences of human errors, and system faults of many different types. There were many possibilities for failure, and the following should all have been investigated:
Shockingly, it seems that none of the above were tested. Rather, it was the implementation of the technologies later on which identified all the faults.
While it is obviously preferable to have no faults at all, it is critical that no fault should cause the entire system to fail. Ultimately this is what happened.
In March 1992, The LAS Systems Manager produced recommendations regarding the maintenance and improvement of the system, but his points were ignored.
For the next nine months, LAS and its suppliers continued to work on implementing the final parts of the project, and smoothing out the problems that occurred. Many issues that should have been cleared at the testing stage began to appear:
There was a Project Issue Report system, which gave feedback to the suppliers of software issues which needed rectifying. In the nine months up to Oct 1992, 1513 issues were reported. The software suppliers were constantly working to solve these, and all but 81 issues did get rectified quickly enough to keep the system operational.
The system was being amended all the time. Often parts that had previously been tested, were being altered "on the fly", introducing new bugs.
On 4 November 1992, the system completely halted as a result of these "quick fix" bits of software reprogramming. The suppliers could not locate the problem, and a completely manual system was adopted in an emergency measure.
Therefore, during the systems lifetime, nearly all the maintenance carried out by suppliers was corrective. I do not believe that these post production stages are in any way to blame for the failure of CAD. It would have been an impossible task to fully maintain such a flawed system.
Overall, I consider the 4 main causes of the project failure to be:
Several examples of the latter can be given:
LAS had no full time participants assigned to the project;
the lack of formal clarification of how the PRINCE* methodology was to be applied;
the lack of a formal programme for project group and other meetings;
the fact that "the timescale of six months was somewhat less than the industry average for this sort of project which would be more like eighteen months";
the draft project plan as provided by the supplier left no time for review and revision.
The above were all raised at a group meeting on 17 June 1991.
*PRINCE is a project management method covering the organisation, management and control of projects. It was developed in 1989 as a UK Government standard for IT project management.
Correct application of the PRINCE method would definitely have helped, if not ensured, a working system, since it encourages:
All of the above were severely lacking in this LAS project, probably due to the Director of Support Services having no experience of controlling major software development projects. A professional independent project manager should have been recruited, since a project as technical and time critical as this deserves full time management. This might not have stopped all the problems from occurring, but they certainly would have been identified and addressed more quickly.
There was no quality control or quality assurance at any time during the CAD development!