Here, we have shown that mean fecundity of Acyrthosiphon pisium, is greater when on a good quality Vicia faba than when on a poor quality V. faba. This was supported with all clones, with one exception. Figure 2 illustrates that clone 23 had a higher mean fecundity on a poor quality test plant than a good quality test plant. This could be investigated further in future experiments to see if this is always the case with this individual clone and to what extent varying plant quality has on its rate of reproduction.
Some clones can also be seen to be more affected by the varying plant quality when on the maternal plant, rather than the host, e.g. for clone 1 fecundity was markedly higher on the Good host than the Poor host, than when transferred to the test plant, where difference between the two plants qualities had a lesser effect on fecundity. Clones 26 and 36 however, showed a greater variation in fecundity; seeming more affected by plant quality, on their test plant.
Overall the experiment did support initial hypotheses for fecundity-plant quality interaction, and correlated with existing information on the subject.
Figure 3 compares the reaction of clones to the change of plant quality when placed on a test plant and shows there was great variation in the result of dropping behaviour observed between the different clones. Clones 1, 4, 6, 23 and 24 had a higher mean proportion of dropped aphids on Good quality plants, clone 21 showed a fairly even dropping rate and clones 25 and 36 had a higher mean proportion of dropped aphids on Poor quality plants; clones can be seen to act in a number of ways and each to a different degree.
This is evidence for clonal diversity in pea aphids in relation to their behaviour and plant quality. Clonal diversity maybe maintained in a population if there is variation in relative fitnesses of clones, due to selection caused by variation in the environment (Vrijenhoek 1979; Maynard Smith 1980; Weeks & Hoffmann 1998). Clonal diversity may also be the result of recurrent formations of new clones. Both these processes are considered important regarding aphids because obligate and cyclical parthenogens can form mixed populations (Vorburger 2006). These results were not unexpected and similar examples have been provided in other studies such as those done with the aphid  Myzus persicae which has high genetic variation among clones in their performance on different hosts (Weber 1985, 1986; Edwards 2001; Vorburgeral. 2003).
There maybe several reasons as to why some clones dropped more than others from each quality of plant, and these traits have evolved due to selection in the field. A benefit to a low dropping behaviour from a Good plant is a good food supply which may not be discovered again if an aphid reacts and leaves the plant. This theory is in opposition to the observation of other clones which showed higher dropping which could be due to their higher fitness (due to better quality sap) which may allow them to spend less time feeding. In contrast, aphids on Poor quality hosts may not be successful if time was wasted on unnecessary predator avoidance behaviour.
Aphid colonies are dynamic in nature and the dominance of any particular clones is unstable due to changing environment, further samples would provide a wider picture of their clonal composition.
This work provides further evidence that plant quality does affect aphid fecundity and dropping behaviour, and that intraspecific genetic variation can influence the outcome at an ecological scale.