In order to ascertain when modern science was born, a comprehensive definition of the word 'science' is paramount. One such example can be found in the Oxford English Dictionary, characterizing modern science to be 'knowledge involving systematized observation, experiment, and induction'. Therefore, science can be viewed not as a series of discoveries, but rather as the system by which these may be achieved.
Using the key points in this definition therefore, the title of 'first scientist' should be given to the person with earliest records of these practises. The new method can be seen in comparison to customary techniques of obtaining general knowledge at the time, and as a revolutionary way of thinking.
The suggested beginning for science is during a period of advancement in a broad range of fields, termed the 'Renaissance' by French historian Jules Michelet and meaning 'rebirth'. This progress, made through approximately the 14 th to 16 th centuries in Europe, was significant in arts, architecture and, most importantly to this discussion, technology.
Galileo Galilei (1564-1642) was born in Italy towards the end of the Renaissance era and became credited with such significant contributions to the field of science that he has become a candidate for the prestigious title of 'first scientist'. Such a notable claim however is most definitely controversial, with debate as to whether Galileo's work warrants such an accolade. Therefore when attempting to answer the question under consideration a variety of perspectives need to be considered in order to reach a balanced conclusion.
Prior to the 14 th-16 th centuries surge in understanding, the established wisdom concerning the nature of the world which was being taught in universities and given to the public was largely based on the writings of Aristotle; a Greek philosopher who lived between 384 and 323 BC whose teachings on an expansive range of theoretical philosophy had been maintained since then. This certainly would not be deemed even remotely 'scientific' adhering with views expressed in A Short History of Science to the Nineteenth Century stating that ' no body of doctrine which is not growing, which is not actually being made, can no longer retain the attributes of science'3.
The Western European society of the early 14 th Century had lost much of its earlier knowledge due to lack of up to date written history in the Middle Ages. This hindered progression during the period, with no scope for building on the work pre-established by others. It is easy to imagine then that the great structures such as the Colosseam and the Pantheon in Rome could seem intimidating to those whose understanding of how to construct anything of the like had been long buried.
Consequently, much of the esteemed knowledge had been unchanged since the great days of Ancient Greece, and the inferiority of the people caused them to 'accept the teaching of ancient philosophers such as Aristotle and Euclid as a kind of Holy Writ' 2.
The key point to be noted here is that expertise on the ways of the world was not discovered by the modern method of observance, instead it was provided from the conjecture of great minds. Theories were founded on imagination and often endeavours for elegance in a system, and were successful when they appeared to fit to the world.
The Renaissance was a significant time of change and described in John Gribbin's Science: a history as 'when Western Europeans lost their awe of the Ancients and realised they had as much to contribute to civilization and society as the Greeks and Romans had contributed'.
Within Aristotle's teachings, the universe was shown to be geocentric and this belief allowed the Christian creation story to situate 'humankind and hence the earth at the centre of a divine plan'. 1 Aside from the European's inferiority complex, another great factor in the sustenance, albeit with some amendments, of quite ancient ideas was the power of the Christian church. The clergy were in command of all universities in Europe and could be selective over the publishing of books. They are described in Scientific Culture and the making of the Industrial West as the 'purveyors of the written and spoken word'. Therefore any theories or new ideas which could threaten the Church's authenticity could be filtered from the public domain.
This effect can be seen in different locations based on the attitude of the localized clergy. When a country was run by a clergy who allowed new ideas to pass neutrally, or even to be encouraged, 'science flourished'1. In contrast to this 'in parts of Catholic Europe dominated by the Inquisition, relative intellectual stagnation in science was the price to be paid'1.
However, European culture was eventually transformed and the burden of the classical past remedied, with actions making the period dramatic in comparison to the dormant former years in many aspects of culture and knowledge.
Likely the most central and innovative concept deserving attention on the subject matter at hand is the first modern heliocentric system of the solar system, envisaged by Polish astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus. The fundamental point of controversy in his claim was of the sun being the centre of the universe, instead of the Earth, which along with other celestial bodies, revolved around it. It was principally this theory, published within 'De Revolutionibus Orbium Coelestium' that caused such turbulence in the academic community, and whose defence led to a revolt against the Religious institution which was later deemed by some as the 'Copernican Revolution'.
Galileo Galilei made a huge leap away from the Aristotelian approach of perceiving the natural world, taking the crucial step in working towards explaining how things work, rather than speculating as to why they do so. As mentioned previously, experiment is the most distinctive component of modern science and this was the backbone of Galileo's work. A successful mathematician, he gained the highly esteemed post of Chair of Mathematics at the University of Padua in 1592 2, and it was his employment of his mathematical skill that allowed him to describe interactions that he observed in the world.
With the chief goal of finding the solution to a specific problem, experiment is a system of observations and controlled actions which aim to give reasonable values relevant to credible conclusions. Galileo repeatedly tested his hypotheses in this manner and used his results to decide whether these should be revised, disregarded or revered.
It is important here to refer back to Galileo's proposed title of 'first scientist' and consider that although he may have been the first to utilise this technique expertly, he may not have been the very first to formulate it. In fact Galileo described the earlier William Gilbert (1544-1603) as the founder of the experimental method of science who alleged that 'stronger reasons are obtained from sure experiments and demonstrated arguments than from probable conjectures and the opinions of philosophical speculators'. 2 Although Gilbert used experimental method he did not make the further advancement of Galileo, in using a quantitative approach which allowed the use of mathematical formulas to analyze the data. In this approach, Galileo was a radical.
A well known example of Galileo's new method of obtaining knowledge being subject to critique is over his claim that 'different weights fall at the same speed'. A professor, remaining defiant over the entrenched beliefs of his Aristotelian school, challenged the claim using the experiments carried out by engineer Simon Stein, who dropped lead weights from a tower and published these results 2. On this issue Galileo comments: 'Aristotle says that a hundred-pound ball falling from a height of one hundred cubits hits the ground before a one-pound ball has fallen one cubit. I say they arrive at the same time. You find on making the test, that the larger ball beats the smaller one by two inches. Now, behind those two inches you want to hide Aristotle's ninety-nine cubits and, speaking only of my tiny error, remain silent about his enormous mistake.'
On accepting the position in Padua, Galileo had access to many influential characters. The rapport he succeeded to build must have supported him during a time when it was not unheard of for the people who adhered to beliefs contradicting religious teaching, to be severely prosecuted, e.g. Giordano Bruno in 1600.
It proved particularly advantageous when Galileo became acquainted with the Cardinal Roberto Bellarmine who was a leading scholar of the church and was partly accountable for Bruno's execution for heresy. Both figures were dedicated Copernicans, but only Galileo escaped the fate of death, though confined to house arrest in 1633, his case was influenced enough by Bellarmine for his punishment to be lenient.
Like many concepts rejected by the church, the public teaching of the Copernican theory was forbidden and this obviously made the extension of the work arduous (arduous maybe, but not impossible). During Galileo's time as Professor of mathematics in the University of Pisa, he gave additional teaching to those who could afford to pay for the benefits. This assisted his objective in spreading his own work, as during these private lectures he was able to teach scholars his own ideas, rather than the commonplace knowledge of the time. He effectively initiated his inspirations upon an influential circle which gave height to his stature 2, and as a result 'the beginnings of the scientific movement were confined to a minority among the intellectual elite' 4.
The Copernican system was finally sanctioned by the church in 1835 partly on account of support from observations of the solar system, enabled by Galileo's development of the telescope.
Existing at a pivotal point in history, Galileo is a famous representative of changes which would most likely have been undertaken by countless other individuals in the time following, if it were not for his presence. The arrival of the Renaissance hurried these developments, and an example of this is suggested with the application of a 'renaissance style of art that privileged realism contributed profoundly to Galileo's ability to imagine valleys and mountains on the moon when in fact all he could see in his telescope were shadows'1.
It is essentially impossible to determine the 'first scientist' in the strictest sense, since there is no hard evidence to prove who initially used the all important method we would now classify as 'experiment'. It is reasonable to confer this title instead, on the person who first utilised this skill to the advantage of progress, and considering his tremendous achievements, as a pioneer of the new science, Galileo does seem worthy of this honour. Galileo's development of the telescope was able to shed light on the structure of the universe and gave support to the famous Copernican theory, and there is no argument to the immense advancement that this bestowed on science. In addition, he is credited for a wide range of important discoveries, inventions and hypotheses, including his work on pendulums and theories of motion; mechanics; invention of the first thermometer, and his numerous contributions to amassing knowledge in astronomy.
On the matter of Gilbert's influence over the experimental method of Galileo, it is debatable as to whether he should gain more recognition for the birth of Science as we know it. However this is, in essence the expected progression in light of the topic and the claim that science is built on what was established previously. Therefore it may be unwarranted to use this in counter to suggestion of resting the dignified award of 'first scientist' on Galileo.