The term 'seclusion', meaning to 'remove from sight, or contact with others' should be approached with care when arguing this topic of Athenian women. David Cohen makes this point in his article suggesting a "tendency to confuse separation and seclusion." He also suggests that even though men and women have their different and separate 'spheres' in the household, this does not necessarily mean that women are 'secluded' from men or vice versa. With this in mind is it too dogmatic to purely state that women and men were merely separated because they had to under social dictation? Could it be argued that their difference in roles in the household formed a 'team' rather than a separation or even seclusion? Another factor to consider when looking at this topic is which class of women are being looked at; "much depends on precisely which women we are talking about; daughters, sisters, or wives; rich or poor, free or unfree women" considering these factors it is very hard to generalise to the whole of the female race in fifth century Athens, in terms of being secluded. However, by looking at evidence of this time we can learn what the majority of women may have experienced.
Women were expected to be inside the house and men outside. It is argued by scholars that "men are associated with commerce and politics, the market place, caf, fields...the women with the home." (Cohen 1989) Men would be in charge of harvesting crops in the fields, involved in most public affairs and particularly matters of the state. (Polis) Women were expected to stay inside the house and organise the food brought in from the harvest. They would also be in charge of supervising the slaves inside the house and responsible for sending out slaves to the fields. In addition to this, women would be in charge of the accounts of the household and the general daily activities of the family. Primary evidence shows Xenophon's oeconomicus declaring that the gods arranged the "household to the woman and the outdoors a mans" Even with this 'separation' of the sexes in the household, it could just be that men's roles were simply 'outside' for such activities as the harvest, because they were physically stronger and arguably more capable of agriculture work. This in turn would leave the women to remain 'inside', as someone needs to organise the household. This then could be seen as separation rather than an intention to seclude.
Further to this, women were not expected to leave the house unless for a valid reason. Bourdieu states "husbands find them [their wives] out of the house and want to know what they have been doing. The husbands know that they go out, but they should not be found to have been out." This coincides with the Ancient Athenian feeling that women should not attract attention to themselves, especially from men. One argument to this could be that men might not have liked their wives being seen and gossiped about. Women were not supposed to be talked about in society, whether good or bad. In Xenophon's Oeconomicus, Ischomachus challenges his wife for wearing makeup claiming it's deceptive. When considering this evidence it must be remembered that this is a fictional piece of writing. Additionally, Xenophon believed girls should be trained on how to be wives before 15years old. Although it shows a biased opinion, it does not mean that it only belonged to one man and so this evidence can be useful to historians today. Ischomachus, as well as finding his wife's makeup deceiving, could also find her act suspicion for an affair. This is seen with Euphiletus in Lysias, O n The Murder of Eratosthenes. "...how I had had the idea that my wife's face was rouged. All these things rushed into my mind, and I was filled with suspicion" It could be argued that although makeup was probably allowed, it did, like the above passage, create suspicion and fear of adultery when married. This fear of adultery, which can be seen in many different extracts, was because it posed so many problems. If a married woman were found guilty of adultery, the legitimacy of her children would be questioned; whether they belonged to the husband and also whether they were true citizens of the 'polis'. She would in turn be divorced and humiliated by society. For these reasons we can expect that fifth century Athenian men would want to make sure their wives were faithful, and so they got suspicious at makeup and if she would talk to another man. Women, especially those married, would not be well spoken of if found conversing with another man other than their husband. J. Williams details "insulting a woman by saying she seizes passers-by out of the street, or that she answers the door herself, or that she talks with men, is equivalent to 'this house is a brothel'" So with this in mind it would be understandable in fifth century Athens to be suspicious of a 'well off' woman talking to a man on the street. As well as in public, women would not be allowed to talk to a visiting male in her home. "It was a common thing for a man to invite a friend to dinner, at which his wife would not be present". However, Euripides' Medea
, shows Medea talking in public to the Athenian king, Aegeus and neither of them seem phased.
It could be argued that the secrecy of married upper class women and withdrawing them from the male population was considered appropriate. However due to errands and coincidences this did not always happen. Due to this, it is questionable that some women may have had to talk to men in public at some times as they could not escape it, but it would have been frowned upon. This point can also be seen in Medea, as Aegeus does not enter the house, nor does Medea offer, as this would be seen socially unacceptable. From the majority of this evidence it is very clear that married upper class women were physically 'separated' from other men. And in addition to this separation it can be argued that married 'well off' women were secluded from the male population, to maintain their honour, children's legitimacy, and for what can be seen as the main reason, preventing adultery. When looking at the other social classes of women in Athens, there is a different story. The richer women, would send out slaves to carry out the work outside of the house so she would not have to. This was not the case for the poorer women, as they obviously could not afford to have slaves. "Athenian women participated in a wide range of activities which regularly took them out of their houses. This included working in the fields." It can be see that not all women were confined to their house and 'separated' from society or men. It could be argued that it was only richer women that could afford to send slaves to go out that were secluded, avoiding the possibility of adultery.
One role in society where women were very important was religion. They were priestesses in over 40 different cults and had a large role allotted in ritual. The most well known of these public festivals was the festival of the harvest; the Thesmophoria, in which only women would organise and celebrate. The festival celebrated the new harvests and fertility, which was considered a 'womanly' aspect in society. Other festivals included the Kallynteria and the Plynteria, in which women would either wash or make a new cloak for the statue of Athena. This part of Athenian society arguably does not seclude women; they were considered 'purer' than men and were seen as the middle person between the gods and man. Religious festivals often coincided with theatrical performances. There is dispute among scholars whether women were permitted into the theatre; as some views in fifth century Athens were that women would be too frightened or that it was too much of a public place. However, The world of Athens
 says that male or female foreigners were allowed to attend the courts, theatres and festivals once they had paid a tax. Even with this evidence, it is still not accurate to say that all Athenian women went to the theatre as no known evidence shows freeborn citizen women going to the theatre. By looking at the previous evidence of citizen women and their prohibited relations with men, it can be suggested that it may have been unacceptable for most citizen women to attend the theatre. They would be in a very public place and around many men. Without knowing exact evidence it is impossible to make a rigid argument on fifth century Athenian women attending the theatre. However, it is likely to assume that they would not be permitted to the theatre. The mass of male influence and the constant anxiety of female dishonour and corruption were on many husbands' minds causing them to 'seclude' to maintain their reputations.
As stated earlier, political aspects of Athens were in the male 'sphere' of society. This is seen as women could not defend themselves in court, and had to have a male do it for her. This can be seen in a speech extract where a woman's son is defending her right as a citizen in a court because she is not permitted to be present As well as a citizen women, poorer non citizen women were not allowed to be there either. The courtroom speech accuses a courtesan, Neaera, of not being a true freeborn citizen because of her sexual activities. Further to this point, in the speech accusing Neaera, her name is mentioned on numerous occasions. This is not the case in the other trial mentioned above, (Isaeus 8) as the citizen woman being defended is not named, arguably to maintain her honour and respectability as a freeborn citizen.
Women were also not allowed to vote and were not allowed to sit on juries. Again, this physical separation calls in to question whether it leads automatically to seclusion. In this case, it is possible that this physical division was created purely as an attempt to keep women at home, and nothing to do with secluding them from politics. There is enough evidence however, to suggest that there could be a factor of seclusion from the male populous rather than politics. The male orientated area of government could be a dangerous place to have a 'vulnerable' woman to be 'corrupted', as the importance of citizenship was so relevant to the ancient Athenians.
To conclude, when arguing this question, there are many factors to consider. To label all women as either being secluded in fifth century Athens is too much of a dogmatic statement. Firstly there were different social classes, each describing different accounts of women's lives in that day. Poorer women were working in the fields and out of the home and the richer could afford to stay home. Secondly, men have written all evidence that historians have and so understanding an Athenian woman's life from a woman is near impossible. It can be argued that freeborn Athenian women were secluded from male interaction. Furthermore, the poorer women would work outside their home and would be most likely in the presence of others, including men, and so arguably were not secluded as much as the upper class. This is obvious as most of the male orientated spheres of society such as, politics, juries, and the theatre were deprived of female presence. One argument is that it was due to the protection over the women's respectability. Another is that the women were being blocked out of society; but I believe this to be untrue as they were heavily involved in religious festivals that would have been public and seen by the majority of the city. Instead, I believe that women were secluded to an extent of being kept away from the male populous; as there was major anxiety of 'corruption' of a mans wife. Additionally, I do not believe that women were purposely secluded from society, because of their involvement in religious rituals.