Myths come from the Greek word mythos, which means "word", "speech", "tale", or "story". A myth is a story that would have usually been told orally and then written down in the later years. Myths can also be seen on pottery, paintings, in plays and in music. However, there are some scholars who are not content with this definition of a myth, and want to recognize myths that are 'true' and those that could be confused with a 'folktale' or a 'legend'. Myths were used in ancient society as stories, but also as moral situations and lessons as example for society to follow. They were well known to the public and would have been recognised if for example they were acted out in a play. There were many 'lessons' and themes that occurred in myths such as, glorification, rape, male and female relationships, marriage and also virginity. To understand the reason why virginity was such an important them in myths, different areas of mythology will have to be considered. It will be important to look at the definition of virginity, any myths in which 'virgins' preside, virginity as a part of people's lives and also its position in the area of religion.
Defining virginity in its ancient terms can often be confused with the modern definition. There are different views on what defines a virgin; some believe that it is when a females hymen is still intact, when someone has not had sexual intercourse, and some even say it is when you are unmarried. However, a modern definition details that a virgin is "someone who has never had sexual intercourse." Furthermore, modern definitions tend to disregard the rule of an intact hymen as some sports can cause this to break. This oversight cannot however be applied to the ancient times, as they would not partake in such sports or activities. With this in mind, how would it be possible in ancient Greece, to test if a girl is a virgin without breaking her hymen? There were different theories to the characteristics of a virgin in ancient times. For example, one theory suggested that a maiden would have a high-pitched voice, and if she had sexual intercourse her voice would deepen in comparison to how it was before. Some other theories proposed that a virgin would dress in a certain way; where she would be modest and would tend to 'hide' or cover herself up. This shows the unproblematic way a girl could 'fake' her virtue and virginity by simply dressing herself in a certain way. However, although the most obvious way of testing a virgin in these times would be the breaking of the hymen at intercourse, some historians believe that the Greeks were unaware of the hymen. "Greco-Roman science never isolated the hymen that the modern anatomy identifies as occupying the vaginal introitus" Therefore, it can be seen that through this lack of knowledge and not being able to be certain of a girls virginity, moralistic 'stories' may have been introduced to give lessons to girls on how they should behave. Thus, the myths would have persuaded girls to behave 'properly' for fear of how they may be punished by the gods or society.
The three main Olympian Goddesses that remain virgins are, Athena, Artemis, and Hestia. Athena's birth is detailed in a hymn, "Zeus himself gave birth to her from his holy head...she quickly sprang forth." Hesiod details the reason for Athena being born from Zeus; he states that he "swallowed her [Metis] down into her belly." By swallowing Metis, Athena's mother, Zeus takes all childbearing responsibilities from her. Could it be argued that this lack of intimacy with her mother caused Athena to have no interest in having a husband or lover? Even when Hephaestus pursues Athena, she does not want him and rejects his advances.
Hestia is the goddess of the hearth and stayed a virgin throughout her life. She rejected the advances of Apollo and Poseidon and she vowed to live as a virgin. She often gained precedence at banquets for being the eldest child of Cronus and Rhea. One hymn details, "For without you, there are no banquets for mortals where one does not offer honey-sweet wine as a libation to Hestia." Hestia's choice of remaining a virgin was reflected on her priestesses who had to follow her 'role'. As Hestia's duty was the patron of the hearth and home, it could be argued that she did not want to 'pollute' or 'corrupt' the idea of a respectable Greek home (oikos) by voiding her virginity.
Lastly, Artemis was the goddess of hunting and archery. "In Classical Greek literature she was characterised by a deliberately chosen and forcibly maintained virginity." She was known to punish those who violated this state and her followers were to be virgins too, just like Hestia's. This punishment can be seen when Actaeon sees her bathing, and as she was worried he may boast at seeing her naked, she turns him into a stag. Artemis is mentioned many times in Euripides's Hippolytus, where Hippolytus himself sees her as the 'purer' of the Gods. He chooses to follow her by remaining a virgin himself, which later causes him his destruction. One argument for this punishment of Hippolytus is because he remained a virgin and did not complete his 'transition process'. It has been seen that mortals had to go through 'stages' in their life, such as becoming the age of marriage, marriage itself, and also having children. At these stages, gifts were often given at temples to Artemis, who would overlook the transition to the next stage. As mentioned above one of these transition stages would be the union of marriage with a partner and the consummation. It can be seen in the play Hippolytus, that Hippolytus does not complete his transition, as he does not wish to marry, remains a virgin and thus is punished.
Another example of individuals failing to complete their transition is the myth of the fifty daughters of Danaus. They were given in marriage to 50 other men and each given a dagger to kill them on their wedding night. Forty-nine of the daughters did kill their husbands, and as a result of not completing their 'marriage' and 'consummation' stages they were "punished in the underworld by eternally having to fill water jars, through which the water leaked away." Both these myths show the consequences for not following the transition process in which they are supposed to follow. Like mentioned above these myths would have acted as 'lessons' for everyday society. Additionally, the myth of Hippolytus demonstrates the reasons why Gods and Goddesses should not be taken as 'role models'. Although all three goddesses represent and preside over some from of chastity, it must be seen that to follow their lives would end up in punishment. Hippolytus stays a virgin and follows the lifestyle of Artemis by hunting with her and so is punished. One view could see this punishment caused because Hippolytus was a man. There is no other evidence that shows women being punished for remaining virgins. Could it be argued that men were not meant to be virgins all their life? Another reason for this punishment could be that it was improper for any mortal to remain a virgin all their lives, but as goddesses, they were permitted and they would physically show their function to its full scale.
One aspect of society however does not fall into the above category of punishment when they are virgins. As stated before, Hestia's priestesses had to be virgins; this is also true of Apollo's and the Vestal Virgins in Rome. Apollo's priestesses were called a Pythia. They were virgin girls who when people came to seek advice or prophetic answers, would become processed by the God. It was believed that virgins had to be used for this process because they were seen as 'clean' since they were untouched by a man. It can also be observed that these virgin patrons of religion were mostly women. Apollo's Pythia would have been a girl, and additionally in Virgil's Aeneid, it is a female Sybil that takes him and instructs him to the underworld, under the influence of Apollo. "'The God is here'...her face was transfigured, her colour changed...she spoke as no mortal had ever spoken when the God came to her." Through this it is visible that it was in these circumstances that virgins were permitted to remain virgins. However it is not likely that a girl would become a priestess to purely remain a virgin, but is more likely that she would become a priestess and have to stay a virgin as part of her duty.
In conclusion it can be argued that myths served as stories and lessons for everyday society, and included many themes such as virginity. These myths would have been 'lessons' for young girls growing up to try and ensure they behaved properly in society. This would have been further influenced by the lack of 'tests' or knowledge the ancients had on ensuring a girls virginity. These myths arguably looked at different aspects of virginity, such as maintaining it till marriage, but also in Hippolytus's case, of when to let it go. As mentioned above the main influence of these myths may have been directed at girls, but some other myths could have arguably been projected at males. Evidently with Hippolytus, it is clear that he was punished for not completing his 'transition' or 'stage' in his life. Additionally, this myth also would have shown the downside of using a god as a role model even if it meant following them in their 'chaste life'. Lastly, some myths also show the importance of those living as virgins who were permitted to serve the Gods. It is clear to see their importance, as they are the ones who become possessed and trusted by the god. With all these themes giving contemporary Greeks moralistic ways of living, it can be understandable that there were many different variations of myths. Virginity was such an important theme in myths as it was an important issue in society. Furthermore, it would have been these myths that would have given examples of how individuals should live their lives according to the gods and society.