Metabolism is defined as the sum of the chemical reactions that occur within living organisms. The various compounds that take part in or are formed by these reactions are called metabolites. The synthesis (anabolism) and breakdown (catabolism) of most compounds occurs by a number of steps. This reaction sequence is termed the metabolic pathway.
In respiration, the reactions can be grouped loosely into three steps. The first of these, glycolysis, takes place in the cytoplasm. Two molecules of ATP are used to convert glucose to fructose 1,6 bisphosphate, which is more reactive and can therefore be split by enzyme action into two three-carbon molecules of glyceraldehydes 3 phosphate (G3P). These molecules are then converted to pyruvate. The second step in the metabolic pathway, termed the link reaction, takes place in the mitochondria. The pyruvate diffuses into the mitochondrial matrix and converted into a two-carbon acetyl group. A molecule of carbon is lost, in the form of carbon dioxide. The acetyl group becomes associated with a vitamin-related organic molecule called coenzyme A, to form acetyl coenzyme A.
After these two steps comes the citric acid cycle, also known as the Krebs cycle or the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle. This is the final common pathway for the oxidation of fuel molecules - amino acids, fatty acids and carbohydrates. The acetyl coenzyme A combines with a four-carbon molecule, oxaloacetate (also called oxaloacetic acid), to form citrate (citric acid), a six-carbon molecule. The coenzyme A is released in this reaction and is reusable. The reaction is enzyme-controlled which neither requires nor releases useable energy.
An isomer of citrate is then oxidatively decarboxilated to give ketogluterate, which is a five carbon compound. This is then oxidatively decarboxilated again to give succinate, a four carbon compound, from which oxaloacetate can be formed. During this cycle, three hydride ions (six electrons) are transferred to three NAD+ molecules (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) and one pair of hydrogen atoms (two electrons) is transferred to one molecule of FAD (flavin adenine dinucleotide).
The citric acid cycle itself does not generate a large amount of ATP, nor does it include oxygen as a reactant. The function of the citric acid cycle is, instead, to produce high energy electrons from carbon fuels. These are now contained within three molecules of NADH and one molecule of FADH 2. Since there are two molecules of citrate produced per molecule of glucose, for the respiration of one molecule of glucose six molecules of NADH and two molecules of FADH 2 are produced. The high energy electrons contained within them undergo the process of oxidative phosphorylation.
Oxidative phosphorylation is the process by which ATP is formed as a result of the transfer of electrons from NADH or FADH 2 to O 2 by a series of electron carriers. This occurs in the mitochondria, which has a double membrane. The gap between the inner and outer membranes is termed the fluid filled space, whilst the area surrounded by the inner membrane is known as the mitochondrial matrix. The inner membrane is folded into cristae which gives a larger surface area for the attachments of enzymes or electron carrier chains.
The hydrogens are removed from molecules of NADH and FADH 2 leaving NAD+ and FAD. The electrons are transferred to a chain of electron carriers located on the inner membrane and the H+ ions are pumped into the fluid filled space. The movement of electrons along these protein complexes towards O 2 causes the pumping of protons out of the mitochondrial matrix and into the fluid-filled space. The resulting uneven distribution of H+ ions generates a pH gradient, a concentration gradient and a transmembrane electrical potential that creates a proton-motive force. The protons flow back into the matrix in pairs via the stalked particles, which contain ATP synthetase. This drives ATP production. As the electrons reach the end of the carrier chain, they are taken up by an enzyme and combined with H+ ions from the matrix and O 2 to form water. This is the only reaction that involves oxygen but if this reaction were not able to occur then the electron transport chain would be blocked and ATP could not be produced in this way.
As well as being closely linked to glycolysis, the link reaction and oxidative phosphorylation, the citric acid cycle is linked to the degradation of amino acids. Since surplus amino acids cannot be stored, they are used as a metabolic fuel. The -amine group is removed and are converted to urea through the urea cycle, and the remaining carbon skeleton is converted into a metabolic intermediate, which will pass through the citric acid cycle. The carbon skeletons can form one of seven molecules: acetyl CoA or acetoacetyl CoA (ketogenic amino acids), pyruvate, keto-glutarate, succinyl CoA, fumarate or oxaloacetate (glucogenic amino acids).
However, the urea cycle is also linked to the citric acid cycle. The urea cycle synthesises fumarate which is hydrated to malate, which is in turn oxidised to oxaloacetate. This oxaloacetate can be converted to glucose via the gluconeogenic pathway, and can then be respired through glycolysis and the citric acid cycle. It could also be condensed with acetyl CoA to form citrate in the citric acid cycle, or even converted into pyruvate, which would go form an acetyl CoA molecule, which would take part in the citric acid cycle.
The citric acid cycle also has an anabolic role within metabolism, facilitating the production of glycogen, cholesterol, ketone bodies, fatty acids, lactate and alanine. Biomolecules are constructed from much smaller precursors, which allows for a highly diverse set of complex molecules and a small number of different building blocks. The metabolic pathways generate ATP and NADH, but also provide these building blocks. In this way, central metabolic pathways have anabolic as well as catabolic roles. In this essay, only glucose-6-phosphate, acetyl CoA and pyruvate will be discussed.
Glucose-6-phosphate is formed when glucose enters the cell; it is rapidly phosphorylated in order to maintain a favourable concentration gradient. This can then either be stored as glycogen, when ATP is abundant, degraded to pyruvate, when ATp is carbon skeletons for biosynthesis are lacking, or converted to ribose-5-phosphate, to synthesise nucleotides.
Pyruvate is derived primarily from glucose-6-phosphate, alanine and lactate. Pyruvate can be reduced to lactate under anaerobic conditions, by lactate dehydrogenase to regenerate NAD+. The lactate formed in active tissues is subsequently converted to pyruvate by oxidation. This action shifts part of the metabolic burden of active muscles to other tissues. Pyruvate can also undergo transamination to form alanine. This reaction is readily reversible, and several other amino acids can be converted to pyruvate. This provides a link between amino acid and carbohydrate metabolism. Pyruvate can also be carboxylated to oxaloacetate. This can be introduced into the citric acid cycle or converted into phosphoenolpyruvate. This bypasses the irreversible glycolysis reaction and allows glucose to by synthesised from pyruvate. Finally, pyruvate can be converted to acetyl CoA by oxidative decarboxylation. This is an irreversible reaction that occurs within the mitochondria and after it occurs the carbon atoms can only be used in the citric acid cycle to synthesise lipids. This generally only occurs if ATP or lipids are needed.
Acetyl coenzyme A can be produced by oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate or the -oxidation of fatty acids. It can also be derived from ketogenic amino acids. The acetyl CoA can be completely oxidised to CO 2 in the citric acid cycle or three molecules of acetyl CoA can form 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA. This is a precursor of ketone bodies and of cholesterol. Acetyl CoA is also exported to the cytosol in the form of citrate to synthesise fatty acids.
When intermediates of the citric acid cycle are drawn off in this way for biosynthesis of macromolecules, it is very important to replenish oxaloacetate in order that ATP and high energy electrons can still be yielded from the citric acid cycle and facilitate oxidative phosphorylation and the synthesis of chemical energy.
In conclusion, the citric acid cycle is conceptually very simple, but chemically very complex. The cycle links with many other metabolic pathways, such as glycolysis, oxidative phosphorylation, the urea cycle and the degradation of amino acids. Although it does produce some ATP, its main purpose is to harvest high energy electrons for oxidative phosphorylation. The citric acid cycle also plays a very important anabolic role in metabolism, facilitating the production of glycogen, cholesterol, ketone bodies, urea, fatty acids, lactate and alanine.