There are many myths that circulated throughout Greece. These would have served as entertainment or even as metaphorical 'moral lessons' to give knowledge in everyday life. Myths always entailed many different themes, such as war, glorification, relationships with men and women; and almost always involved the role of a God. Many of the myths known today, have some sense of a moral or achievement that was to be gained. They usually involved a conquest of some sort, such as a physical fight against another man, or more occasionally, an animal-creature. To comprehend the role of these 'creatures', it is clear that an analysis of many myths would need to be considered. Such creatures to be looked at could be the transformation of Scylla, sirens, harpies, centaurs, and also Medusa.
One main aspect of the roles of these half human half animal creatures in myth is that they are always portrayed as evil or ghastly. "The centaur is the only one of the fancied monsters of antiquity to which any good traits are assigned." This in turn leads to the argument that the role of these creatures provided literature heroes with a conquest and 'capture' to add to their tale. This can be seen in the majority of all heroic stories, such as Odysseus, Aeneas, Perseus and Jason and the Argonauts. Odysseus has to defeat many different creatures while struggling to get home to Ithaca. While on his journey he had to sail past Scylla and Charybdis and as a result of some help from Circe, Odysseus and most of his men survive. In Book 12, Circe gives a description of the creature; "she has 12 feet, 6 long scrawny necks, each ending in a grisly head with triple rows of fangs, set thick and close...up to her waist she is sunk in the depths of the cave."
Additionally on his voyage home, Odysseus had to encounter the Sirens, who were known to lure ships to their rocky shores. They were "bird like" creatures with a female heads that sang so beautifully that sailors were urged to jump overboard to get to them. "They would lure passing sailors onto rocks; all around them were the whitened bones of their victims." Odysseus was one of the few that survived the passing of these bird-creatures. The cause for this was the help of Circe; she advises Odysseus that "the sirens, who bewitch everybody who approaches them. There is no homecoming for the man who draws near them unawares and hears the siren's voices." She advised him to have his men put wax in their ears to prevent them hearing the songs and being 'lured' to their shores. These encounters arguably make the tale of the hero more interesting and exciting.
One other creature that was fought and slain was Medusa, the Gorgon. "The Gorgons, whose home was somewhere on the edge of the world, usually situated in North Africa", were three daughters of Pharcys and Creto. These three sisters were said to look so horrific that when looked upon the onlooker would turn to stone. Medusa was the only mortal Gorgon and so makes her important as she was the only Gorgon to be killed. She was beheaded by Perseus who skilfully only looked at the Gorgons reflection in his shield while she was asleep. These creatures provided a part of the story to emphasise the braveness of the hero, either by being slain or overcome where no one had before. Each of the above 'conquerors' or leaders, had to face some sort of creature, or challenge for their claim to the title of a 'true hero' or leader. Furthermore, this role of being a conquest in a 'story' or myth could be argued as a literary technique or even symbolic.
It could be argued further that the role of these creatures in ancient myth was to illustrate the symbolic 'evils' or troubles facing their world. It can be seen from Bulfinch's (1981) quote mentioned above that all animal creatures had no positive characteristics, with minor exceptions. This is also evident in the above descriptions of the creatures the heroes had to encounter. Additionally to these myths there is another creature that is shown to be evil. Harpies, meaning "snatchers"
 were bird like creatures similar to the sirens. They were held responsible for the disappearance of "whatever could not be found." They were depicted in art as birdlike creatures with faces of women, often "terrifying and a pestilence." The main known myth of the Harpies is when they torment King Phineus in Salmydessus. Whenever he had a meal placed in front of him they would steal his food and foul the rest.
Another example of the wicked behaviour of these creatures is shown in the wedding feast of Pirithous and Hippodamia in Thessaly. Among the human guests were the centaur creatures. They were represented as men from head to waist and the remainder was horse. At this feast, Eurytion, one of the centaurs, got drunk on the wine he was not accustomed to and tried to carry off the bride. Many of the other centaurs followed his example and a large fight broke out between them and the humans Lapiths. However, one of the centaurs is not tarnished with the same reputation, he is called Chiron. Chiron was known to be gentle and was skilled in hunting, medicine, music and the art of prophecy.10 It was said that he had been taught by Apollo and Diana and tutored many Greek heroes. It could be argued that the myths that portray animal creatures as bad could be suggested as an analogy for the 'evils' of the world. It could also be said that these animals represent the non-Greek population, suggesting that Greeks should be wary of those who may be cruel and potentially dangerous. However, the one creature that does not fit the criteria of a dangerous animal; Chiron, could be an example that although there should be uneasiness of non-Greeks, we should also accept those who are not seen as brutal or cruel.
Lastly, one other role that these animal creatures could serve in myth could be the message of punishment. Many of these creatures were once humans, who as a result of some 'wrong' action had been turned into monsters. This can be seen with Scylla, who was a maiden before she was turned into the creature mentioned above. There are two different versions to how Scylla was changed, one states that Poseidon made advances on her and his wife, Amphitrite was jealous and threw magic herbs into her bathing place, causing her to change. Another better-known version is that Glaucus fell in love with Scylla and she rejected him, and so he turned to Circe for help. Circe however fell in love with him, and so in her jealousy poisoned the waters of Scylla's bathing place. Although this may not seem Scylla's fault, she is still punished by Circe as she has the love of Glaucus that Circe desires. Another example can be seen in some versions of the creation of the sirens. Some scholars suggest that the sirens were once the companions of Persephone, when she would pick flowers before she was Hades's wife. As a result of them letting her be abducted by him, they were punished by being turning into bird like creatures.
In conclusion, it can be argued that there were many different reasons for the roles of half animal and half human creatures in ancient myths. Firstly, the addition of these animal creatures added excitement and interest into the mythical stories being told. Secondly, these mythological creatures provided 'action' for the literary heroes. These 'monsters' acted as conquests to emphasise the growing reputation and the 'heroicness' of the hero. Creatures could also be identified in myths as a resemblance of the 'evils' or danger against the Greeks. The killing of these animals could also show the power of the Greek and mortal people against those who are 'non-Greek'. Lastly, the role of half human creatures could be seen as a warning for those that do something wrong, or those who do not please the Gods. These myths of mortals being punished into terrifying creatures, could be a warning to those who do not behave the way the Gods wish, and would also show the consequences of those actions.