Free radicals can be any species capable of independent existence (hence the term 'free') that contains one or more unpaired electrons. A normal atom exists with paired electrons orbiting around its central nucleus, while each pair moves in its own region of space. Molecules can be free radicals if one or more of the atoms present have unpaired electrons, therefore, many different free radicals exist. Free radicals are paramagnetic and highly reactive, because they intend to "steal" one or more electrons from other species to equate their electron pairs. Consequently, the species losing electrons are virtually oxidized.
Antioxidants can prevent oxidation by firstly minimizing free radical's formation; secondly scavenging free radicals mainly through donating their own electron(s) and proton(s) to free radicals to equate the unpaired electrons, while forming a stable molecule or compound. Thus, free radicals become less reactive or non-reactive at all and no longer attack other species.
Free radicals can attack DNA molecules in the body and cause the changes in their building blocks, such as purine (adenine, guanine) and pyrimidine (cytosine, thymine) bases. Furthermore, the attack on the pentose sugar of DNA can cause DNA backbone breakage in one strand or both strands of the DNA double helix, which can lead to severe cell damages.
Free radicals can also modify protein molecules in the body from attacking them, leading to the protein backbone's breakage, oxidation of thiol (SH-) groups and other amino acid residues, cross-linking of different protein molecules by joining-together of amino acid radicals on those molecules. These can bring about protein mutations, complete block of replication and functional changes, e.g., reaction rate of enzymes changes.
The third type of damage is oxidative degradation of lipids (lipid peroxidation) in the body. During this event, free radicals "steal" electrons from the lipids in cell membranes, lipids are oxidized and become unstable radicals. These radicals react readily with molecular oxygen, creating peroxyl radicals. The peroxyl radicals will then oxidize other free lipid molecules, producing different lipid radicals. Polyunsaturated fatty acids are particularly susceptible to peroxidation, leading to further damages to membrane-bound proteins. This free radical chain reaction will result in cell damages and lead to various diseases, such as Atherosclerosis.
Last but not least, free radicals generated at sites of inflammation during infection can attack the host cell, leading to apoptosis and necrosis.
As the endogenous (inside body) antioxidant capacity is dependent upon the concentrations of individual antioxidants and the activities of protective enzymes, the endogenous defences are not always effective and efficient, especially under oxidative stress (i.e., free radicals' generation rate is greater than their elimination rate by antioxidants). For instance, if you were frequently exposed to air pollutants in an urban area or you smoked heavily, your body would be under more oxidative stress than your endogenous antioxidants could cope with. Therefore, antioxidant supplements become important in diminishing the cumulative effects of oxidative damages in the body. Also, they help reduce the susceptibility of tissues to oxidative stress and prevent the deleterious effects of free radical-mediated processes in cell membranes. Thus, many diseases and age-related conditions can be prevented, such as cardiovascular disease and high blood pressure (by vitamin C supplementation), cancer (by carotenoids supplementation), atherosclerosis (by Vitamin E supplementation), cataract and age-related macular degeneration.
There are plenty of dietary sources offering antioxidants to us. Vitamin-E is found in vegetable oils (e.g., salad oils and margarines), nuts and whole grains. Vitamin C is available from green peppers, broccoli, cauliflowers, tomatoes, potatoes, oranges, and other citrus fruits. Carrots, broccoli, tomatoes, red peppers, pumpkins, apricot and grapefruit are rich in carotenoids. Foods containing flavonoids also have antioxidant potential, e.g., dark chocolate, tea, red wine and citrus fruits. Soyfoods are also rich in natural antioxidants. Recently, functional foods fortified with antioxidants have become available, too.
Phytochemicals are the chemical compounds formed in the plant's normal metabolic processes and referred to as "secondary metabolites".
Phytochemicals are important in contributing to the flavour and colour of many fruits and vegetables, and products derived from them such as wine, tea and chocolate. They may also act as building blocks for other compounds and plant defence mechanisms.
Although phytochemicals in plants we consume as food are not nutrients, they exhibit diversified physiologic and pharmacologic effects. Their best known function, especially in flavonoids and phenolic compounds, is acting as antioxidants in human body by numbers of potential pathways. The most important mechanisms are free radical scavenging in which polyphenols break the free radical chain reaction and chelating of metal ions (Iron and Copper) by flavonoids to stop them involving in free radical generation process. Additionally, they can possibly interact with other physiological antioxidants like vitamin C and E to create another antioxidant pathway. Thereby, phytochemicals can inactivate cancer-causing substances, stimulate the immune system, protect the heart from disease, and help prevent cataracts. Phytochemicals function best when obtained from the whole plant, i.e., fruits, vegetables, seeds, legumes, and grains, rather than being extracted and taken individually in supplement form.
Oxidative damage to DNA, lipids and proteins by reactive oxygen species (ROS) and free radicals in the body is an important factor leading to cancer. Besides, ROS appear to be involved at all stages of cancer development. Antioxidants can actually minimize free radicals and ROS' formation from precursors of various sources (e.g., tobacco smoke, industrial pollution and food contaminations), stop them reaching the targeted tissues by scavenging them, repairing the damage and suppressing the expression of tumour formation in attacked cells as well as destroying damaged target molecules and replacing them with new ones. Therefore, they have a great potential to prevent cancer.
As the endogenous antioxidants are not powerful enough to prevent cancer, it becomes worthwhile taking dietary or supplemented antioxidants to maximize the cancer-prevention capacity of the body. High intakes of green vegetables and fruits provide strong evidence in a cancer-protective effect.