As consumers, all of us engage in highly informal descriptive procedures everyday. We may denominate a food as being delicious, nondescript or unacceptable, which alone is a matter of simple description, but to arrive at that ultimate decision we go through a complex process, subconsciously for the most part, assessing several individual characteristics to make our simply expressed decision. In order to keep or improve the product's appeals to consumers in respects of both quality and sensory properties, many food industrial firms have been trying to mimic the descriptive procedures of consumers on the products during their decision-making process, particularly by setting up various descriptive sensory analysis on their products. In fact, the real value of descriptive procedures resides in those of a systematic nature. From them, we derive many practical benefits as well as fundamental knowledge of the relations between composition and sensory quality. The descriptive procedures to follow will be considered from four points of view: (1) procedures available; (2) practices allowed; (3) pitfalls to be avoided and (4) the potential for the development of uses or practices even more beneficial than those which exist at present.
Nowadays, the most common approach by the food industry is quantitative sensory profiling (QSP) of products. The main principle of sensory profiling is to determine the nature and intensity of all the sensory characteristics of a food (i.e. appearance, taste, aroma, mouthfeel and aftertaste) or a particular product, through a series of events, including intensive descriptive analysis on each single sensory characteristic of a product, determination of the key attributes of each sensory characteristic through a group discussion, quantitative evaluation of each key attribute of the characteristics as well as the final statistical analysis of the results from the panel. There are many variants of QSP procedures. One of the major variants is quantitative descriptive analysis (QDA). In essence, QDA boils down to screening would-be assessors for possible membership on a panel, developing a list of descriptive terms, training judges, using sufficient replication so that the performance of the assessors, the effectiveness of descriptive terms, product differences and possible interaction effects may be isolated and evaluated by statistical analysis, and expressing the results graphically as well as numerically.
In this practical session, all the students are treated as would-be panelists and will be exposed to the method of QDA and 4 similar samples of a food product. The students are then expected to carry out the sensory profiling of the 4 samples by using the method of QDA as a group. In the end, they will be asked to analyze the results by implementing the relevant statistical analysis tool (i.e. ANOVA) and determine the ways in which the 4 samples differ by using graphical methods of data presentation, such as Spider diagrams or other statistical methods, such as principle component analysis (PCA). This practical session, in fact, helps to familiarize the students with the principles of sensory profiling and the approaching technique (QDA), also it enables the students to be capable of carrying out independent statistical analysis of the collected data and reaching to reasonable judgments by utilizing graphic and statistical tools.
A critical appraisal of the QDA method can be summarized as below: