Metamorphoses was the only epic written by Ovid, and there are many notions of change within it; a point made immediately by the title itself, which means 'changing of forms'. Indeed, the first words of the epic lead one in to the ostensible subject matter;
But in my opinion, Ovid does not merely tell of change, but look at it from different angles, cast humorous or political allusions through it, and indeed change most concepts of what an epic poem had been up until that point. It is these things I wish to discuss in the following essay.
There are approximately 250 stories told throughout the fifteen books of the Met., and all refer to a change in some way, in most cases as the main point of the story, but sometimes included into a familiar one as an excuse to write about it. The changes are treated in different ways by Ovid himself, by the various storyteller mouthpieces he uses, and in their own accounts. The Met. starts off with the tale of creation; things being made, changed from water and earth and nothingness into living, breathing creatures, a 'step up' the ladder of classification. In this way change is treated as something miraculous, something that transcends normal human understanding; it is brought about by the gods, but not any one of them in particular. The first actual change of one living, breathing person into another living thing is found with the story of Lycaon 2.
Lycaon is one of the first race of humans, and so vile and corrupt that he serves up human flesh to Jupiter as a test of his divinity. A human daring to try and outwit a god; the impious Lycaon is changed by an angry Jupiter into a monster wolf. Thus here, change is used as a punishment, an interesting introduction by Ovid to the theme of metamorphosis.
Most of the changes of humans or nymphs into other things by the gods can be divided simply into a few categories; change as a punishment (as seen by Lycaon), change as a reward (cf. Baucis and Philemon 3, who were transformed into trees by Jupiter for their  pietas), change through pity (cf. Perdix 4, who was saved from death by falling by Pallas, who changed him into a lapwing) and change through consequence, in which the gods seemed not to be involved (cf. Cygnus 5, who bemoaned the fate of his cousin Phaeton and became a swan). The portrayal of these types of changes can be various, especially when it comes to things like punishment.
We have already seen the crime and punishment of Lycaon, and he is shown to be rightly punished, his crime being something most people would find horrific. However, one must then take into account the other 'punishment' transformations.
In this case a horrible crime is punished by a just god; but in Callisto's 6 case, for example, Juno in a jealous rage sees fit to punish her purely because she had caught the eye of her husband Jupiter. Surely this is not fair? Ovid portrays both scenes neatly in the way we would expect, loathing overlaid through the text describing Lycaon's change, and pathos through the fear written through Callisto's change. Certainly, she has become a unsightly monster, a mountain bear, with 'grisly fur' and 'hideous jaws'; but still,
She has kept her human thoughts and mind, which seems all the more cruel of Juno. Scylla 7 was changed into a bird for her treachery, but seemed not to have known enough to regret it; Callisto's only crime was to be pretty, and it is through no fault of her own that Jupiter came and raped her. Indeed she even fought against him. How could this punishment be justified?
Sometimes the crime for which transformation is the punishment is caught between these two extremes, however; and the way they are portrayed seems to be mixed. Arachne 8 was a mortal woman who dared to think she could outweave Pallas Minerva, and does in fact do so; she is transformed into a spider by the angry goddess a punishment for her hubris, which is also a recurring theme. Is hubris that terrible a crime that it warrants transformation as a punishment?
This brings us also to discuss how, bizarrely, an action that can be used as a punishment can also be used as a reward. Most of these transformations are simultaneously pity, in that they tend to happen as a result of a plea to the gods to save them from something terrible happening. Examples of this would be, as I said previously, Perdix who was saved from falling to his death, or Daphne 9, who was changed into a tree by her father the river god to prevent her rape at Apollo's hands. There were a few true rewards, as in Baucis and Philemon's case, where they lived their full lives together as they had requested from Jupiter, until the time came for them to die and they both turned into trees, to end together and live on in that way.
What is interesting about this opposition of how change can be used is recognised by Ovid himself in Book II, with the story of the crow; she herself tells how she was pitied by Pallas and turned into a bird to escape the blandishments of the Sea god, and then banished from the goddess' sight for being a tell-tale. But this is not the worst of it, she says;
Here Ovid is giving the reader just that curious viewpoint, and early on in the poem as well; this is setting you up to go on and read the rest of the Met. and try and see it that way, and whether those all-powerful gods are actually something to be feared or just as human and petty as the rest of us.
And what of those changes which the gods are not even involved in? In the proem, it clearly states that it is the gods who 'wrought every change', and yet Ovid is quite happy to mention not only changes that are wrought by almost-humans (Medea and Circe are both granddaughters of the Sun, but otherwise not gods themselves) but changes that occur seemingly with no interference at all. Cygnus was changed to a swan and Niobe 11 to a spring (one might argue that this is part of her punishment for hubris, but I rather consider the punishment to have been the murders of her children that made her weep in the first place), and they both seem to have happened merely from the output of their emotion, rather than specific interference. The gods have already been shown to be petty; if transformations can take place without their knowledge at all, how can they be omnipotent, something to be feared, at all?
Looking at the transformations actually told by the Metamorphoses, one might consider this all to be one point Ovid is trying to make with change, one of poking fun at the gods and the roles of humans above animals or inanimate object. Or perhaps one might see it that it is not the physical change, but the change in emotions each character in each story experiences, and how they are 'transformed by it'; this is another whole viewpoint that I will not go into here. But this is not merely all that can be read into this epic.
For this is epic; a format of writing Ovid as a young man had previously ridiculed as the realm of the serious, lofty poet, not something he, as the writer of love poetry, could ever bother attaining. 12 But it is not epic as is previously known, or held up by Callimachus in the Alexandrian ideal; rather, it is another change that Ovid has wrought. Traditionally, epic has a single hero, a journey or warlike theme, and clearly divided even separations of books. The Metamorphoses turns these ideals on their head; with its many storytellers, its rambling and continuous storyline and its often comic themes of myth phasing into history, it seems to constantly draw on older epic but change everything about them. So, before we even examine the changes within the poem itself, we have the change from Ovid's previous works and the change in the stereotypical idea of an epic. Of course, he does include many themes one might expect of epic, but twisted to his own unique flavour; the catalogue of ships made famous by the Iliad is reduced to a catalogue of hunting dogs 13, the older heroes of Homer assemble as young men for a heroic boar hunt, but flee like timid girls rather than the great men they have been previously portrayed as 14. As Ovid writes through history he passes through those epic themes himself, but from other angles; the shipmates of Odysseus are given roles as storytellers, and Aeneas, the hero of the previous great Roman epic written in Augustus' time, is merely another wanderer, and themes that Virgil took up whole books upon are reduced to a few lines (Dido is mentioned but once, and in a couple of sentences only). 15
Another change that might be considered is how Ovid works from the past to the present day, and starts with far-off mythical times, eventually ending with the modern (then) day and the deification of Augustus. Realising this, and the fact that the Metamorphoses was almost certainly finished before Ovid was sent into exile by Augustus in 8 AD 16, one cannot ignore the possible political allusions made by the poem. As early as the first book, Apollo tells Daphne that she will always be a glorious tree, spanning even the gates of Augustus; by the end of the epic he beseeches the gods that (in a somewhat tongue in cheek manner) Augustus might be deified as was his father Caesar;
This is obviously flattering Augustus (and can be read in a highly unflattering way if one wishes), but the idea of political epic is not a new one; after all the Aeneid was written (some say) in the beginning as something to prove Augustus and the Roman people's stock as greater than that of the Greeks. But the way in which this is done is a lot more straightforward, and conversely, more hidden; with Augustus came change, from civil war to a much more peaceful, prosperous time, this cannot be denied.
What of Rome itself, then? It surely was going through a time of change; previous epic poets (e.g. Virgil) had hoped that their words would survive up until the climax of civilization, where they were currently, but Ovid is more forward-thinking than that. In Pythagoras' speech 18 (yet another 'mouthpiece' for Ovid himself to be talking) he declaims that all cities rise and then fall, leaving nothing but names behind; after listing many famous cities that now lie in ruins, he goes on to talk of the power of Rome, but cleverly does not state that it will last forever. Instead, the power of poetry is portrayed as lasting much longer, putting Ovid himself as a poet above those people who have achieved other fame.
With the Metamorphoses, Ovid is able to utilise so many different aspects that the word 'change' that he sings of might associate with. The physical change of a human into some other form of being, change as a punishment or a reward, change of storyteller throughout the epic, change in the very nature of epic itself; all of these are covered admirably, and there are surely yet more beneath the surface to find.
1. Book I. 1-2
2. Book I. 195-261
3. Book VIII. 616-730
4. Book VIII. 225-260
5. Book II. 360-380
6. Book II. 400-510
7. Book VIII. 1-175
8. Book VI. 1-125
9. Book I. 450-575
10. Book II. 550-600
11. Book VI. 120-315
12. Amores Poem 1 ; 'I tried to write lofty epic, but I ended up writing love poetry instead'.
13. Book III. 198-235
14. Book VIII. 382-418 ; The Calydonian Boar Hunt
15. Book XIV. 64-92
16. Commentary on Ovid's Metamorphoses trans. Melville
17. Book XV. 753-784
18. Book XV. 406-441