The goddess Isis was one of the last pagan goddesses to survive in the Mediterranean world after the spread of Christianity, well into the 6 th century AD 1, and during the late Greco-Roman period her cult was astounding in strength. A few other gods managed to make it out of their home country as cult figures (e.g. Cybele, Mithras and the amalgam that was Serapis), but no other achieved such universality. The Greek, Macedonian and finally Roman influence on the country of Egypt is finally what allowed her name to be heard abroad, but what was it about Isis that made her particularly appealing? In this essay I would like to discuss several concepts surrounding this question.
Isis' origins as an Egyptian goddess do not necessarily reflect that which she became. Egypt itself was never as unified in its concepts of religion as the Greek city-states were; throughout the country gods and goddesses were identified with different aspects of each other and with different animals. There were three main schools of Egyptian religion, centring in Memphis, from Hermopolis and from Heliopolis. Isis came from the latter, a collection of eight (later nine) deities known as the Heliopolitan Ennead. I will now take a brief look at the earlier myths about Isis to provide a background for her later changes (I will be using the Hellenised versions of the names of the gods throughout this essay).
The Heliopolitans believed that the world came into being with a primeval swamp, and from the swamp was born Shu and Tefnut, the god of wind and the goddess of moisture. They begat Geb and Nut, another brother and sister who married, this time aligned to earth and sky. Nut gave birth to four children; Osiris, Isis, Set and Nephthys. Osiris and Isis were a loving husband and wife, as Nephthys was ostensibly the sister-wife of Set; but Set was the red god, of the desert and chaos and evil, and he constantly warred against his brother the king Osiris. Horus was the son of Osiris and Isis, and later he was said to have been born at the same time as the other gods (as his following became larger and his importance was emphasised) and born of the alliance Isis and Osiris had before they left the womb.
This typical story told of Osiris, Isis and Set can be found recorded in several sources, including Herodotus and most notably Plutarch. The myth goes that Osiris and Isis were reigning as a benevolent king and queen over Egypt, but their jealous brother Set tricked and killed Osiris and dismembered his corpse, scattering them to the winds. Isis, as his sister and wife, was heartbroken, and mourning his death set out to try and restore all of the pieces. When this was finally done she restored him to life with magic, but he was sent to become king of the underworld as one who had already seen death once. This is why in the iconography of Osiris he is normally portrayed as a mummy with green or black skin. While Isis was reassembling Osiris, in the original myth it was here she conceived their son the king Horus, who went on to rule Egypt in his father's stead, against the wishes of Set. 2
This myth established Isis as a mother goddess in the early Heliopolitan context, and a mistress of magic. She, as mother of Horus, was also seen as the mother of the pharaoh, and thus a powerful deity to invoke; she was also revered as a mourner. This is seen in many later inscriptions, even magic papyri 3 (though this is not surprising given her role as a magic user). Unusually for an Egyptian deity she did not have a specific town as a starting place for her cult (as Horus was said to have been raised at Buto, and Bastet had her own town of Bubastis 4), and perhaps this made her more easily accepted by the rest of the country. Isis was also associated early on with the Dog Star (or Sothis), and the star's rising signalled the seasons where the Nile flooded.
Even this early in her history as it were, Isis had several different aspects. This was not unusual for an Egyptian deity; many of them were worshipped as amalgamations, for example Hathor, ostensibly the cow goddess of music, inebriation and sex and the wife of Horus, was identified with Sakhmet the lioness-headed goddess of war in the one particular instance where she slaughtered thousands and drank their blood, but was fooled into drinking red beer and fell into a drunken stupor, quenching her killing rage. 5 In this way the goddess of wine was identified with the goddess of inebriation. This merging of one deity with another (or syncretism) is therefore not unknown, especially in Egypt. Indeed, Hathor herself became merged with Isis in approximately the 23 rd dynasty; Isis gained the distinctive cow's horns on her head, but remained the mother rather than the wife of Horus. It was in this aspect the Greek traders first probably came across her.
The Greeks, due to their seafaring ways, certainly came across many new religions and cultures. But rather than installing their own gods, they tended to have a curious habit of looking at the local deities and observing that they were just one of their own, but under a different name. At Naukratis she was worshipped as Isis-Aphrodite, in probably reference to her syncretism with Hathor; this also gave rise to her being the consort of Jupiter who was turned into a cow, Io 6. Whether this is also because of the myth that Io wandered for years and ended up in but probably her most important identification came to be with Demeter.
Herodotus, writing in the 5 th century, claimed to have little interest in religion, and where he does refer to the gods in his discourse on Egypt, he uses the Greek identifications that later became almost set. In fact he even expostulated that the Greek names for the gods came from Egypt in the first place 7, making the Egyptians older and wiser than other races. In his books, Set became Typhon, Thoth became Hermes; in his role as he who made the soil black and the river flood Osiris became Dionysus, as a fertility god. This then fit again with Isis as his wife becoming Demeter, the lady of harvest.
Some of these conclusions may seem a little odd. Demeter as one who grieved (for her daughter Persephone) could be also seen as the mourning Isis, though she grieved for her husband; contrarily, Demeter never had a husband, so could not be the loving wife that Isis was. However, the advantage of being identified with Demeter was that that goddess was one of the elder deities in Greek religion, a daughter of Cronus 8. Writing circa. 90 AD, Plutarch used this in his 'On Isis and Osiris' essay, taking a hymn to Demeter 9 that one of the oldest epic poets, Hesiod, had written in his Theogeny, and modifying it to fit with the stories of Isis already known 10. Whether this is Plutarch himself making this connection or something already assimilated into the corpus known about Isis in uncertain however.
So by the time the Greeks were making their trading presence known in Egypt, Isis was already known as a powerful mother goddess, guarding the king, and perhaps, despite her stolen cow's horns, less intimidating to the foreigners (to whom the zoomorphism of Egyptian religion was somewhat mystifying or disgusting 11). That the opposite had happened with Egyptian traders, and that the cult of Isis was known in Greece itself before 330 BC, can be dated from an inscription found in the Piraeus, stating a request to 'found a shrine to Aphrodite on the same terms that the Egyptians have founded one for Isis'. Another point that must be looked at is how the Egyptians, never seafarers before being introduced to it by the Greeks, looked to Isis as a protector of sailors and a goddess of navigation, and would have told their foreign traders the same.
It is hardly surprising, therefore, that the Greeks would worship her whilst they were in Egypt. But why bring her cult back with them to Greece? Certainly even by this point she was a lot more all-encompassing a goddess than any of the Greek deities, and as more and more deities and powers became syncretised with her the list of her powers could only grow. By the time Alexander invaded, and the reign of the Ptolemies began, Isis was already identified with many other goddesses, and as such taking on their attributes and expanding her sphere of dominion, losing some of her older, original aspects in the process.
As protector of the king, the invaders that became pharaohs either truly believed or thought it politic to pay honour to she who had become a powerful mother goddess. In the newly built city of Alexandria Isis was jointly honoured with another syncretistic god, Serapis 12; the Serapeum and Museon were huge, elaborate buildings that became iconic with the importance that Alexandria grew to have. However the most important temple that Isis was to have was constructed at the island of Philae, and it first came into importance with the buildings added by Ptolemy IV, though many later rulers of the ancient Mediterranean world made their mark there, including Augustus and Claudius, both Roman emperors. It is at Philae the famous Aretalogies can be found. Whether these are Egyptian or Greek is unclear, especially because by this time it was obvious that Egyptian priests were eager to identify their religion with what foreigners might understand (c.f. Herodotus, Plutarch and Manetho, an Egyptian priest who was equally fluent in Greek) 13. The Aretalogy is basically a list of self-proclaiming statements in which Isis declares her dominion over most aspects of the world. Earlier, shorter statements attributed to Isis did exist;
The later Aretalogies show Isis saying she created writing, civilization, the paths of the stars, and that she had power over the sea and childbirth and fertility, and that she conquers fate itself 15. All these aspects meant that the Isis that the later Romans first came across could be adopted by many areas of society. As protector of the sea, the sailors who would spread her cult in the first place would worship her; as a loving mother and protector women would pray to her; as an all-powerful being who had dominion over and above the other gods she could be anything that one wished. Indeed, the Greco-Roman Isis, along with many of the foreign cults that spread around the Mediterranean as the Empire made the world smaller and travel more possible, was growing much closer to a monotheistic aspect than the older religions of both Greece and Egypt (perhaps accounting for the enthusiasm with which Christianity was adopted later on). She was known as 






, 'many-named', because people were admitting that perhaps all these female deities they worshipped were all just Isis in different aspects, one goddess portrayed as many  16. The Greco-Roman world was prepared to move away from their old deities; the new and curious, especially from the strange and mysterious East, was welcomed with open arms. Despite early suppression in places, Isis was eventually honoured with her own sanctuaries throughout the Mediterranean; she became an accepted part of the culture, appearing as just another well-known goddess in Roman epigram 17, and given a prominent role in one of the only surviving Roman novels, Apulieus' Metamorphoses (or the Golden Ass), written in the 2 nd century AD. If we examine how Isis appears to Lucius, the main character, one might see the accumulation and syncretism of what Isis became in entirety; the cow horns and the sistrum 18, symbols of her Egyptian roots (ignoring the fact that these were originally symbols of Hathor!), the ears of corn from her identification with Demeter, and her many-coloured robe, something that was almost certainly taken from Plutarch's discourse.
So, this is what Isis became, a much changed version of her conception as a mourning wife in Egyptian religion. I think the main reasons for theses changes can be attributed to her early syncretism within her own country, her association with the sea (so Greek traders were more likely to learn her name, with their own associations with the sea) and finally her Oriental mysticism and eventual perceived overall dominion, with a control over fate in troubled times. Many levels of Greek and later Roman society could identify with her, and so she became strong where other deities failed.
1. The temple to Isis at Philae was finally closed on the order of Justinianus in 550 AD.
2. Plutarch De Iside et Osiride, sections 13-17
3. PGM IV. 94-153
4. Though later through the effects of syncretism the city was attributed to Isis herself (Aretalogy, P.Oxy.1381)
5. Myth and Symbol in Ancient Egypt (see bibl.)
6. Ovid, Metamorphoses I. 731-60
7. Herodotus Histories Bk II 50. - contrast with Plutarch De Iside et Osiride 2., where he states that the name Isis is actually Greek in origin.
8. Aretalogy , P.Oxy.1381, though this states her as the 'eldest' one, which was originally Hestia.
9. Hesiod Theogeny 'Hymn to Demeter'
10. Plutarch De Iside et Osiride, sections 15-16
11. Isis among the Greeks and Romans (see bibl.)
12. 'Serapis' was a syncretism of Osiris and Apis (the god worshipped as a bull). The Greeks identified him with Hades or Dionysus.
13 . Isis among the Greeks and Romans (see bibl.)
14. The Coffin Texts , Spell 148
15. Aretalogy, P.Oxy.1381
16. Hymns of Isidorus (see bibl.)
17. Martial, Epigrams 2.14
18. Apuleius Metamorphoses Bk XI