The Yorkshire Wolds form my home surroundings and it has always been a common sight to see them grazed by livestock, particularly in the more extreme areas of the landscape. I would like to know if the land was always used in such a way, or when this form of land management first began so that I can decide whether this is a landscape created by livestock. I also wish to study how the various forms of leisure pursuits carried out on the Wolds work alongside the livestock and whether the future of livestock on the Wolds is secure.
The characteristic appearance of the Yorkshire Wolds as they are now known was first developed in 1730 with the arrival of the Enclosure Act. Prior to this the Wolds were a "hedgeless and treeless countryside," (Stephen Harrison, 2000) populated mainly by sheep. Two thirds of the landscape was covered by grass and because the sheep ran wild, whatever was planted with arable crops was often destroyed, resulting in the decline of agriculture in the area (Gwendoline Hurst, date unknown).
Sheep were able to survive on the Wolds, whereas cattle couldn't, due to the shortage of available water. The land on which the Wolds are based is very well draining and there are very few ponds and only one surface stream running through them. Sheep are able to gain the water needed for survival through the water content of grass, but this was more difficult for cattle to achieve. Therefore the grazing of cattle on the Wolds is a more recent development than that of cattle grazing on many other areas of the UK.
The result of the Enclosure Act was that 83, 360 hectares of the Yorkshire Wolds became enclosed (Stephen Harrison, 2000). The main method of field division was through hedging, although some fields are now fenced with wire netting. The division of the land caused the numbers of sheep to decline and grazing was mainly confined to the valley sides and bottoms, as new agricultural technology allowed some of the valley slopes to be ploughed.
As technology evolved through time, methods were developed of supplying water to the Wolds and this allowed cattle to begin grazing the Wolds (Stephen Harrison, 2000). Due to the quality of the arable land, very few dairy farms have arisen on the Wolds and most of the cattle grazing the land are either fattening animals, or suckler cows and calves. Suckler cows and calves are the most common users of the grassed valleys as the land is highly productive and can support relatively high stocking densities. Many of the valleys are emptied of cattle over winter, due to the cold temperatures and also the timing of calving on many farms. However, sometimes sheep are then turned onto the valleys, but normally they are left to recover over the winter.
The main leisure pursuits that are enjoyed over the Yorkshire Wolds are that of Foxhunting and Partridge shooting. Following on from the Enclosure Act, many plantations of trees were grown, some on valley slopes, but more often at the side of valleys. Although these are rarely used to house livestock, they became good locations for the establishment of the game birds used in shooting. In addition to these plantations, fields of Kale were also sown to act as cover for the birds. This has provided a second form of vegetation for sheep to be housed on, for after the shooting season ends, sheep can be turned onto the Kale, where they can then graze it down. This has allowed sheep and cattle to be kept on the Wolds without competition for the same feed source.
Foxhunting has also aided the grazing of sheep on the Wolds, for by managing the numbers of foxes in the area, it has reduced the chance of attacks being made on lambs. This is a big issue with sheep farming on the Yorkshire Wolds, as farmers often try to keep their sheep outside all year round to minimize the costs of bringing them inside.
It is currently unclear as to whether the future of livestock on the Yorkshire Wolds is stable; however I believe that it will be. It is likely that farm machinery will continue to develop and that cultivation equipment will be designed that can cope with the steep valley sides typical of the Wolds. However, I think that the soil erosion that would arise from the tillage of this land would be too great for it to be used as arable land.
Another factor is the financial value of livestock. The livestock that are raised on the Yorkshire Wolds; suckler calves and lambs, have been raised in such a manner that they would qualify to be sold as value added products and this means that they can command a greater price in the market place, which is currently enjoying large demand for these products. Some farmers are currently talking about diversifying with their land and creating adventure centres for off-road vehicles and other associated activities, however there is not enough customer demand for them all to go ahead with this move and so I believe that the farming of livestock on the Wolds is the most efficient use of the land available.
From the information that I have collected I now feel it is clear that the Yorkshire Wolds used to be a landscape created by grazing animals, but that is certainly no longer the case. As technology has developed, farmers have been more able to control the behavior of livestock and this has enabled them to decide what they want to do with the land available to them. The leisure pursuits that are enjoyed on the Wolds are considerate towards the needs of the land and I feel that they will contribute towards the sustainability of livestock on the Wolds. I think that we will always see livestock on the Yorkshire Wolds, so long as trends in consumer demand continue in the direction that they are currently headed.