Manydown is a large mixed farm made up of 12 farmsteads surrounding the village of Wootton St Lawrence, near Basingstoke. The farm is owned by the Oliver-Bellasis family, but they employ a farm director, Richard Stirling, to see to the day to day running of the farm. In addition to the production of of meat and arable products, the farm also owns 83 private dwelling houses. The rent from these buildings pays for the maintenance of the estate, but a considerable profit has been made from converting buildings into accommodation. The farm was initially purchased in 1871 and has survived three "Farming Depressions," but Manydown has now diversified and developed its own Farm Shop in order to improve the profit made from its meat. My main aim in this report will be to highlight the changes that Manydown has made over the years to gurantee the future of their business.
One method of securing the future of a farm business is to expand in size and since 1994 Manydown has increased its arable land by 1, 045 acres and almost doubled the number of cattle finished per year. This decision by the farm should stand them in good stead at a time when the UK Government is pushing farmers towards entering more competitive markets (Defra, 2005).
Manydown has also increased the range of produce yielded by the farm, as under the current farm director, pigs, sheep and chickens have been introduced to the farm. Within the pig unit only 6 sows and 2 boars are kept from breeding. I personally believe that to maximise profit made from use of the boars, more sows would be needed. Manydown's argument against this is that should they keep more pigs than they currently do, they would be seen as an intensive pig unit by the public and this is not the image that they wish to put across. Each of the sows at Manydown has two litters of 10 piglets per year, this is an average production rate compared to the rest of the UK (Nix, J., 2006).
Although Manydown has increased its acreage farmed, it has decreased its number of staff at the same time, which means that the men still employed often have to specialise in more than one area of farming. For many years Manydown supported its own team of builders to maintain the buildings owned by the estate, but recently it had to terminate the builders' contract as they had become too much of an extravagance to spend finances on. The farm also reduced its number of gamekeepers from 3 down to 1. Yet despite this the farm does still employ its own carpenter and decorator to assist in the maintenance of the estate. I am not convinced that this is an effective use of resources, for although the accommodation side of the estate brings in a large amount of money, I think it could still be more efficient for the farm to employ outside workers to complete these jobs only when necessary.
Manydown opened its own farm shop in 1994, however, their farm director believes that it would no longer be possible for a farm business to open its own shop with the resources that they had available to them in 1994, such are the changes in agriculture that have occurred since then.
Manydown's farm shop has been very successful and has led to the estimated annual turnover of the business as a whole as being 1 million by 2008. One of the reasons why Manydown made the decision to open the own shop was as a method of marketing their beef produce. By processing and selling the meat themselves, Manydown was able to cut out many of the areas of food production that reduce the profit of farmers so drastically. In 2005 the amount of money spent by consumers on food was 112 billion, whereas farmers only received 14 billion for that. The rest of the money was lost into the retail and food service industry (Ashbridge, I., 2006). These are precisely the losses that Manydown are wishing to eliminate.
Manydown does not produce organic meat, but the meat that it does produce is very high quality free-range. Indeed it is fully accredited by RSPCA Freedom Foods. Because of this, Manydown's produce should appeal to customers who want to eat ethically, but who cannot afford the high costs of most organic produce and this is currently seen as being a large number of consumers (Just Food, 2006). Therefore Manydown has accessed a consumer market that is relatively uncatered for in the UK food industry.
Another bonus for Manydown is the location of its farm shop. Situated directly next to a main road, the farm shop is in an ideal location for attracting customers. The site of the farm shop also has an old barn built on it which has been renovated and rented out as part of Manydown's diversification. The barn has been rented by a smart gym company and this may serve as another advantage for Manydown, as its customers will be interested in eating good quality, healthy food and so therefore should prefer the meat produced by Manydown. However, Manydown has already expanded the building that they currently use as their shop and if their business continues to grow they will run out of space, as it is not particularly big. This may lead to the problem for Manydown, of whether to extend the building again, or find a new plot. Finding a new plot may result in the loss of customers, due to new location and would also require a considerable investment.
In conclusion I consider Manydown to be an efficient business. The farm has experimented with the production of livestock and gained very positive results. By marketing their own produce in the shop, the farm has identified the key area in which UK farmers are losing out most drastically on profit and should be able to prevent that for themselves. In addition to this, it has made its enterprise more efficient, due to staff cuts, and it also has sustainability, due to the rent it receives on buildings. Although the money the farm receives due to rent will not alter, regardless to the changes in farming, it will not be enough to support the farm should there be a severe problem. The farm shop is a major asset for Manydown, but for it to maximise profit and security still further it needs to find new ways of enlarging and developing this business.