Throughout the many breeds of horse in the world today, the nobility of the Cleveland Bay horse highlights the injustice in its status as a rare breed. According the 2006 Watchlist (Rare Breeds Survival Trust) the Cleveland Bay is in category 1, which means that its survival is critical. To those who know the breed well, this must come as a surprise. The Cleveland Bay is a very versatile, strong horse which can be used in a variety of different ways. It also has a tremendous amount of history, which should not be ignored. As a measure of the value of this horse, the Patron of the Cleveland Bay Society is Her Majesty The Queen. In order to understand The Queen's support for this breed we should learn more about this most worthy of breeds.
The Cleveland Bay, as the name suggests comes from an area called Cleveland along the north eastern coastline of Great Britain. The Cleveland Bay is the oldest breed of horse to be bred in Great Britain. The first compilation of the Cleveland Bay Horse Society stud book was produced at the end of the 19 th century, however it is believed that the breed originated long before this time.
During the Middle Ages it is thought that the initial Cleveland Bay horses were bred in monasteries, to be used as pack horses between the abbeys and monasteries. At this point the wider community realised the talent of the horse in this area and so it started to be used by many other people. These horses that were primarily used as pack horses were known as Chapman horses. Chapmen were packmen seen in the Yorkshire Dales at the time.
The Cleveland Bay horses of today were bred when Chapman mares were paired with Barb stallions imported into the harbour town of Whitby. This produced a larger horse which could then be used to meet agricultural needs.
Further development of the Cleveland Bay breed led to another sort known as the Yorkshire Coach Horse. The Yorkshire Coach Horse was produced to meet a demand for faster coach horses. The Cleveland Bay was crossed with Thoroughbred blood making it possibly the most desirable horse at the time. The combination of the Thoroughbred's speed and elegance with the Cleveland Bay's strength and power meant that it was not long before Yorkshire Coach Horses were seen throughout London, pulling carriages and many were even exported abroad.
However, with the era of mechanisation, the place of the Cleveland Bay was lost People turned to tractors and cars to supply the power they needed instead of horses. Unlike the Thoroughbred, the Cleveland Bay could not be raced and it did not have the widespread appeal of the Shire, which has been kept by many as a pet. Slowly the numbers of Cleveland Bays fell until it reached the level that it is at now. A recent estimate has put its numbers at less than 500 worldwide (Cleveland Bay Horse Society of North America).
As a breed the Cleveland Bay has an enormous amount of versatility. At the moment it is mainly used as a driving horse, police horse and as a hunter and it is very successful at each of these occupations. Yet it is also thought that as an event horse, the Cleveland Bay will come into its own and will reach its full potential, at which point it can be commercially exploited. An indication of this has already been noted, as one of the breeds pure bred stallions has already been tested by the National Stallion Association in the disciplines of dressage, showjumping and cross country and it scored very highly.
Both the physical and mental attributes of the Cleveland Bay will contribute towards its certain success in the field of eventing. Some of the key areas in which the Cleveland Bay excels are listed below: -
Long life-span lasting up to an average age of 20 will help it to gain experience whilst still being competed.
Strong, muscular body with plenty of bone should ensure that it has the endurance to last the 3 days of hard competition.
Bold and honest instinct means that it will follow the riders instructions without fear.
Intelligent and sensible nature confirms that the horse is unlikely to get itself into trouble, but should that happen it will be able escape from it again.
Hoofs of only blue horn give its feet strength and the famous saying of "no hoof, no horse" indicates the importance of this quality.
Many of the most successful horses in eventing at the moment are European Warmbloods and many of them contain some Cleveland blood. The horse has the height, the intelligence and the temperament to flourish in eventing. Eventing is a difficult sport, but for those bold enough to try it on a Cleveland Bay, the rewards will be many. The Cleveland Bay is already described as "a valuable horse" (Cleveland Bay Horse Society) and its worth will be vastly improved after its success in the field of eventing. Eventing horses are worth many thousands of pounds and are very much in demand.
Although a great many successful British event riders at the moment are using another great British breed, the Thoroughbred, as their mounts, surely it would give the British public greater pride to see them winning on the oldest of British breeds.
So far there are no conservation measures in place to protect the Cleveland Bay, apart from the obvious propaganda of the breed supporters club. Yet no measures will need to be imparted, should the full potential of this breed be realised. If the public learns to value the Cleveland Bay as a serious competition horse, the future of the breed will be safe.
In conclusion, it would be a national tragedy should the Cleveland Bay not be conserved. The mere fact that Her Majesty The Queen stands as the patron of the breed society demonstrates how important the breed is to our country. The Cleveland Bay Society states that "the Cleveland Bay is our heritage" and they are quite correct. The Cleveland Bay is a breed that was highly important to our ancestors and surely it should be important to us too. We cannot afford to lose the brilliant genes that lie within this prestigious breed.