Recently the population of Wild Boar in the UK has risen significantly; this is due in parts to the reintroduction of a wild community and also due to increasing consumer interest in the meat. Historically, Wild Boar have been a native species to our country, but currently there is controversy whether it is good for them to be present again. Although the greatest numbers of Wild Boar remain on farms and therefore in captivity, there is always the danger that they could escape, or be released. Surely Wild Boar are not called "Wild" for nothing. My objective in writing this report is to study whether the production of Wild Boar in the UK is a positive thing and also to investigate whether it has a sustainable future or not.
The Wild Boar has a very similar appearance to that of the domestic pig. The Wild Boar grows to a maximum height of 1m and has a thick brown, bristly coat with a ridge of longer hair along the spine. They have a long snout, which assists them during rooting and after 2 years they grow tusks. Male Wild Boar grow two sets, one from the top incisor and the other from the lower incisor, whereas female Wild Boar only grow one set, from the lower incisor. However, it is this set which is the sharp dangerous set and so is of more use to the Boar.
The Wild Boar are seasonal breeders mate through October and November, as their breeding pattern is triggered by decreasing day length. Farrowing occurs in April. Litter size is typically 4-6 piglets, but can be larger in captivity. However, their seasonal breeding pattern can be a problem when farmed as it means that the sows can only produce 1 litter per year (British Wild Boar, 2006) and this is seen as inefficient. If sows are kept indoors all year round, they can be induced to believe that the seasons are changing by careful control of lighting. However this form of high input system is not viewed favourably by the public.
Wild Boar typically feed on plant matter, such as roots, bulbs, tubers and fruit and this accounts for 90% of their diet. Animal matter takes up the remaining 10% in the form of mice, birds, eggs, worms and carion (British Wild Boar, 2006). To obtain the majority of the plant matter, the Boar must root. This can damage the ground and although this is not a major issue for those Boar kept within captivity, it can cause disagreements where Boar kept in the wild root on agricultural land. Throughout the rest of Europe, there are Government based compensation schemes in place for damage caused to farmland, however this is not the case in the UK.
The growth of Wild Boar is very fast, which makes them an economically feasible animal to produce. Wild Boar can either be produced in an extensive, free-range system, or produced in an intensive, semi-housed system. For both systems the farmer must hold a Wild Animal Licence, which costs between 100 - 150 per annum and depends on the number of Wild Boar held on the premises (Basildon Council, 2006). The Wild Animal Licence has been part of the law since the Dangerous Wild Animals Act of 1976.
For Wild Boar produced in an extensive, free-range system, their only requirements are that they have enough land to roam and give them nutritional satisfication. This can be quite a very large area, as in their natural wild habitat they enjoy moving over a km per day (British Wild Boar, 2006). The area given over to the Boar must contain wood and scrubland as the Boar, in particular the females, enjoy the security that thick cover gives them. Also during the farrowing period, the females form nests for themselves that they line with leaves. A large benefit of employing the extensive, free-range system is that the amount of labour required will be lowered significantly. Indeed 1 man per 70 sows is needed in an extensive system, compared to 1 man per 60 sows in an intensive system (Scottish Agricultural College, 2006).
Employing an intensive, semi-housed system for the production of Wild Boar gives much faster levels of production. The Wild Boar are not given the same area of land to cover as those in an extensive system have and normally they have a lot less tree cover, however they are given access to indoor housing and so therefore can make the choice between spending time inside or outside. It is possible to keep Wild Boar completely indoors, but at the moment there is very little consumer interest in this product (Harmony Herd, 2006). When kept in an intensive system, Wild Boar sows are often fed on a mix of cereals and ad lib vegetables. The young are weaned onto ad lib vegetables with a specialist grower ration. When keeping Wild Boar in an intensive system, care has to be taken in the formation of each group of Boar kept together. A breeding group can comprise of 5-20 sows and 1 mature male, but the addition of new sows can cause fighting. Also it can sometimes be wise to castrate mature males if they are to be kept together, because sometimes they can fight and cause fatal injuries.
One aspect of the production of Wild Boar that is equal to both systems is the provision of adequate fencing. In order for a farmer to acquire a Wild Animal Licence, the fencing of his land must reach a certain standard (Basildon Council, 2006). Extra high tensile fencing must be used and must stand 1.8m heigh and 0.5m below ground level. It is important for the fencing to stretch below ground, as the Boar like to root and can dig fencing up. The fencing must be electrified and gates and access areas padlocked.
In terms of the financial returns made from the production of Wild Boar, these are often similar between both intensive and extensive production methods. This is because although the intensive system will have a higher rate of production per year, its inputs are higher. The extensive system will have a lower rate of production per year, but its finished product should reach a greater price due to the higher welfare experienced by the Boar before slaughter. In many cases Wild Boar produced in extensive systems are categorised as organic (Harmony Herd, 2006) and this is very popular with the consumer. Wild Boar are protected under the UK Biodiversity Action Plan and they agree with the extensive farming of Wild Boar.
The ultimate use of Wild Boar is as meat, but there are two methods of reaching that point: by direct slaughter at an abattoir, or through hunting.
The hunting of Wild Boar is a sport that is increasing in popularity. Before the numbers of Wild Boar in the UK began its recent climb, many keen hunters were travelling over to Europe to enjoy this pastime, however it is now possible to continue with it in England. It is mainly Wild Boar raised in extensive systems that can be used for hunting, as those kept in intensive systems become diurnal and lose their natural wariness of humans. Therefore hunting becomes easy and animal rights activists argue cruel, for the animal has lost his fight or flight instincts (League Against Cruel Sports, 2006). Also many huntsmen enjoy hunting Wild Boar because of the thrill they get from arousing the Boar's aggressive nature. Yet the future of Wild Boar hunting could be in jeopardy, as the League Against Cruel Sports and other such organisations are unhappy about its continuance and the banning of foxhunting with dogs may be seen as a warning sign.
However, the use of Wild Boar simply for meat has a definite future. The production of Wild Boar meat currently occupies a niche market, but as long this market is not flooded by more farmers diversifying into Wild Boar it should be sustainable. The meat of Wild Boar is a deep red, similar to the colour of venison and it has a gamey flavour. Male Wild Boars are generally slaughtered up to the age of 2, as after that the flavour of their meat becomes too strong, however sows can be slaughtered up to the age of 8, which enables them to live a productive life up to that age, increasing the amount of profit that can be made from them. Although the popularity of Wild Boar meat is relatively small at the moment, the market is currently worth 2 million per year (British Wild Boar Association, 2006).
One particular worry for the future of the Wild Boar's marketability is the possibility of an introduction of contraceptives into the wild herd of Wild Boar. At the moment the UK Government is worried about the ever increasing size of the wild herd and wishes to maintain it at a sensible population density. Therefore it is considering using contraceptives to prevent further growth and is currently running trials on how this would work (DEFRA, 2005). The main fear for Wild Boar producers is what would happen should meat contaminated with contraceptive enter the food chain. This could happen very easily, particularly with unregulated hunting often occurring, but would have a big result on the industry. It is currently unknown whether the Wild Boar contraceptive would have an effect on humans, but if it should then consumer confidence in the product would drop enormously. This is just one of the reasons behind the British Wild Boar Association launching its own quality assurance scheme.
One of the main problems of production is whether it is actually cost effective or not. Certainly the gross margin ascertained from the production of Wild Boar is higher than that of low input domestic pig production, but it still remains lower than the gross margin that can be made from high input domestic pig production. The gross margin of Wild Boar production is 355 per sow, whereas it is 381 per sow for high input pig production (Nix, J. 2006).
That is not the only cost implication of Wild Boar production either. There is also the high insurance prices that are brought on by the animal's dangerous tendencies. Many Wild Boar farmers fence their animals correctly, however the animals can still escape. Sometimes the electric fencing may short and there are also reports of animal welfare activists cutting through fencing, as they believe that Wild Boar should be left to roam wild, instead of being limited by fencing. During their escape these Boar may cause damage, either to people or property and even though it is not always the farmers fault, the price must be picked up through the farmers' insurance.
Wild Boar are also carriers of Bovine TB, Foot and Mouth Disease and Swine Fever (British Wild Boar, 2006). Many of the UK veterinarians are very worried about the results that might emerge due to contact between Wild Boar and domestic livestock. A Wild Boar can smell a domestic sow in heat from a great distance and will try its utmost to get to it, often breaking through fences. This could lead to cross contamination, but also once having served the sow it will attack the domestic boar, leaving it badly, or fatally injured. Attacks such as these are not particularly common, but they could become so, should the UK population of Wild Boar continue its rise.
A main factor in the production of Wild Boar that is often overlooked is that of stress. Wild Boar have to be managed very carefully to avoid irritating them and provoking an attack. This is particularly important during the breeding and farrowing period, which is when the farmer may wish to keep a closer eye on his stock. It can not be easy looking after an animal that has the potential to seriously injure, or possibly even kill you.
On the surface it would appear that the production of Wild Boar in the UK is a positive thing, as historically, Wild Boar were a native species to our country, however, our country has changed dramatically since then and Wild Boar no longer fit in as we would like them to. It would be nice to alter our farming to more ecologically friendly methods instead of the high input, high output ones that we are currently using, but the worry is that we would be unable to compete with the world food production market if we changed our methods. The production of Wild Boar is not terribly efficient and only commands a small level of consumer interest. This; coupled with the potential damage it could cause to land and humans, means that as an industry it is unlikely to grow enormously in the near future, due to the risk factor. However, it should definitely be sustainable if kept at the levels of today, for it is not taking anything away from the land and it should maintain its market.