Ongoing research in the Severn Estuary has been investigating the interaction of Mesolithic people with their environment. The project has been particularly interested in the identification of human agency and other disturbance factors, at a time when sea-level rise was producing a constantly changing environment (Bell  et al. 2004). Work at the site of Goldcliff East (Fig. 1) has been particularly useful due to the amount and quality of environmental evidence preserved under peat and estuarine silt (Bell  et al. 2003; Bell  et al. 2004). The micromorphological work at this site, undertaken by Virgil Yendell, has focused on the evolution of the buried land surface at Goldcliff in respect to climatic change and the interplay of these factors with human lifeways in the Mesolithic (Yendell 2004). This project utilises one sample from Goldcliff Site B, slide 5525, to address questions about site formation and human activity, post-depositional processes, and the use of micromorphology on sites of this kind.
The thin section was described using criteria from Stoops (2003), with additional use of Bullock et al. (1985). The laboratory sheets are attached in Appendix A.
The sediments identified in this slide suggest that at Goldcliff East Site B, a soil may have begun to develop in the early Holocene on the underlying Ipswichian sand and head deposits. This soil formation is seen from the presence of organic matter and clay movement through the sediment, and may have exhibited more pore structure before compression by overlying sediments. The pale colour also suggests that there is low iron content resulting from mobilisation of the iron and redeposition as pyrite. The sediment appears to have been compressed with little evidence of soil structure remaining. Yendell suggests that the palaeosol can be classified as a saline gley (Yendell 2004), similar to that found at Westward Ho!, Devon, with its weakly developed soil characteristics, massive structure and root channels with organic and silty infill (Balaam  et al. 1987).
The numerous episodes of channel formation by roots and burrowing organisms may originate during the period when the site was still vegetated before marine transgression occurred. Once the site was waterlogged by rising sea-levels, the conditions became reducing and pyrite formation occurred. At a later stage, some of this pyrite was oxidised to gypsum, but it is not possible to determine when this occurred.
The only evidence for human activity at the site from this slide comes from the presence of charred plant material in higher quantities than at other parts of Goldcliff East (Yendell 2004). Although charcoal can occur naturally, elevated levels in an estuarine environment suggest some human activity, either from small fires at occupation sites for cooking or warmth, or more general burning of reeds and woodland. Such burning has also been identified at other sites, such as Star Carr (Dark 2004), and may have been intended to encourage new growth of food plants or grazing for herbivores. The trampling of the upper boundary of the land surface may also represent human activity, but could also result from animal trampling - footprints of humans and animals have been found at Goldcliff East Sites C and E (Scales 2003).
This study has been able to draw some conclusions about the nature and origin of the sediments at Site B at Goldcliff East, and the interaction of humans with environmental change at an estuarine site. In particular:
The land surface was found to be a sandy clay with soil development occurring.
There is little direct evidence for human activity from this slide, but charred material suggests possible anthropogenic burning of the reed swamp.
Numerous post-depositional processes have acted on the sediments, including burrowing roots from vegetations, burrowing organisms and waterlogging of the site as a result of rising sea-level in the Holocene.
The study of this site using thin-section micromorphology has enabled a very detailed understanding of the sedimentary history of the site, which would be difficult to fully understand without this technique. Although analytical techniques can be used to characterise the particle size and organic content of a sediment, it is only when viewing the sediments in thin section that the relationships of the various components to each other can be properly identified. In addition, the complex post-depositional history of this sediment makes micromorphology the best approach for interpreting the sequence of events correctly.
Although palaeosols have been identified at Goldcliff East, both in this section and in other areas, the exact mechanism of soil development has not yet been fully established (Yendell 2004). Further study should be undertaken to determine when and how this soil may have formed, as micromorphological techniques are not able to date these layers to a specific period. Radiocarbon dating of the organic material should assist understanding of the formation of the palaeosol. Additionally, the order in which the post-depositional disturbance occurred should be confirmed. There are also questions about the presence of glauconite in the sediment, which may be detrital or could have weathered from the pyrite. The iron distribution and exact composition of the iron minerals could be determined using electron microprobe analysis (Courty  et al. 1989: 51-2). This work will further our understanding of the environmental history of the Severn Estuary and its relationship to human activity and changing climate through time.