This essay investigates the different types of stem cells, their origins and properties and why these characteristics have generated so much hope that stem cells can offer solutions to numerous different diseases and medical conditions.
Stem cells are a unique population of cells found in both adult and foetal tissues which have the ability to renew themselves, to remain undifferentiated and to respond to specific signals and conditions, triggering differentiation. Within adult tissues (such as bone marrow, the brain and muscle), stem cells act to replace cells lost naturally, by disease or through injury. As such, adult stem cells are multipotent and can renew their own population and differentiate to yield the specific cells of their originating tissue. An example of this is shown in Figure 1 where haematopoietic stem cells (HSC) found in the bone marrow may divide symmetrically to regenerate their own population, or asymmetrically forming a further HSC and a daughter cell, the latter of which is committed to one of the two major haematopoietic lineages and hence replenishes the body with all the different blood cells (1).
In contrast to adult stem cells, those obtained from embryos are pluripotent and have no fixed developmental process. The fact that pluripotent stem cells can theoretically differentiate into any cell type in the body has generated much research into developing methods to use pluripotent stem cells for cell-based therapy, and hence repairing tissues damaged by disease or injury.
Pluripotent stem cells i.e. distinct cells with complete developmental plasticity can be found in three different sources; embyronal carcinoma (EC) cells, embryonic stem (ES) cells and embryonic germ (EG) cells. The ability of stem cells to differentiate into such a wide variety of different cells was first recognised in testicular cancers. It was noticed that weird tumours formed that contained a wide variety of different tissue types, for example squamous epithelium and muscle, all of which were derived from pluripotent EC cells which themselves were derived from the primordial germ cells (2). The extent of tissue differentiation in this finding was examined using artificially cultured EC cell lines derived from the tumours, in the presence and absence of a mitotically inactive layer of fibroblasts, the feeder layer (Kahan et al. referenced in 2).
The second category of pluripotent cells ES cells, are derived from the three to five day old embryo known as the blastocyst which consists of a hallow microscopic ball of around 150 cells (3). This pre-implantation embryo contains around 30 pluripotent cells in its centre known as the inner cell mass (ICM) which, as demonstrated by outgrowth cultures, can differentiate to yield many different specific cell types. During the outgrowth of ES cells, it was noted that some of the cells remained undifferentiated and if sustained on a feeder layer to which they could adhere and obtain nutrients from, they could be expanded to produce a seemingly immortal ES line (2).
Finally, EG cells are derived from the primordial germ cells (PGC), the embryonic precursors of gametes and the same cells from which EC cells derive (4). This final group of cells were identified as having stem cell properties after growth upon feeder layers supplemented with serum and growth factors produced clusters of colonies that were morphologically indistinguishable from EC or ES grown under the same conditions (2).
In recent years the potential uses of stem cells in medicine have gained increased appreciation and as a result have driven the need to understand the factors regulating and controlling stem cells in their natural environment. However, the challenge of producing different types of differentiated cells from pluripotent stem cells first needed to be overcome. Many investigations focussed on changing growth conditions, for example cell density or adding specific growth factors, but as such changes were dictated by trial and error the cellular differentiation achieved in this way was extremely haphazard and varied (2). In contrast, other studies where ES were grown in a development culture demonstrated that the cells began to differentiate into multicellular aggregates called embryoid bodies- clusters of cells that due to the variety of tissues formed represent early embryos (1,2,5). If these embryoid bodies were then transferred to a solid medium they developed into many different cell types for example neural cells and cardiomyocytes which could be separated for further study by methods such as fluorescence activated cells sorting (FACS) (6). However, the generation of embryoid bodies in this way could not be used in a controlled manner to produce specific cell types as it was due to spontaneous differentiation (5). As a result other molecular methods such as those shown in Figure 2 have been used to determine protocols for directed differentiation of ES cells into certain cell types.
If the differentiation of ES can be developed reliably as suggested in Figure 2, then stem cells have the potential to become an important tool in treating some of the major diseases such as diabetes and traumatic spinal chord injury. However at the present time this ability is only available to a very limited number of cell types.
The use of stem cells in medicine is not only relevant for curing diseases such as diabetes and muscular dystrophy, but also in gaining an increased understanding into the development of our own species. By using ES cells to understand why developmental points such as cell formation and proliferation occur and how these process impact upon embryogenesis, we can gain an increased understanding as to why conditions such as teratogens (which cause foetal malformations) are generated, and in addition possibly develop new pre-natal screens to detect such conditions (7).
However, the main potential of pluripotent stem cells lies in the development of patient-specific tissues for transplantation and restoration of damaged or diseased tissues. This process of therapeutic cloning would involve taking samples of the patients ES cells and manipulating them to differentiate into the large numbers of cells needed to cure disease or restore tissue function. Figure 3 gives an outline of the range of conditions ES could be used to treat.
Many success stories have been documented (8) however a major factor holding back the development of such techniques in many countries (for example the United States of America), are the ethical issues surrounding the cloning of embryos for use in stem cell research. As such, research is also being undertaken to investigate the potential for adult stem cells in medicine.
In comparison to embryo-obtained pluripotent stem cells, which are obtained from the PGC, multipotent stem cells from adults, are derived from soma i.e. cells which are no longer capable of making germ cells due to developmental totipotency (2). Because of this it was thought that adult stem cells had only very small differentiation ability.
However in contrast to this belief, a plethora of research such as that carried out by Ferrari et al. (referenced in 9) showed that cells derived from adult bone marrow recent could differentiate into muscle cells i.e. differentiate into cells that were from a completely different tissue to the one from which they were isolated (9). In addition to this work, other studies such as that conducted by Frisen et al. (10) found that adult stem cells could even cross from one classic germ layer to another for example as CNS stem cells were shown to behave like ES cells when introduced to blastocytes, hence forming cells of all three primary germ layers.
Although it is unlikely that adult stem cells will ever be able to produce the same range of differentiated cells types as pluripotent embryo-derived stem cells, with such findings of adult stem cell differentiation becoming more frequently documented, further research is needed to establish how adult stem cells could be used grow specific cell types to treat some human diseases and potentially relieve the need to use politically sensitive ES cells.
Although there has been great insight into the potential use of stem cells in medicine, there still remain a large number of issues which need to be overcome before the theory of cell-based therapies can be made a reality. Primarily stem cells would be needed in large quantities and their differentiation would need to be controlled in order to form a homologous population of cells (2). At present the controlled generation of specific cell types differentiated from stem cells has only been documented in a limited amount of cases and therefore the lack of knowledge in this area represents a real challenge before the full potential of cell-based therapy can be realised. In addition, at present there are only a limited number of human pluripotent stem cell lines and only a few of these have been successfully accredited. It is likely however that of those accredited an even smaller number will actually prove to be useful in clinical practices and many of those may be unavailable due to patents and material transfer agreements (2). The long-term survival of some cultured stem cell lines is also a worry as those cells which survive may do so as a result of gene mutations or chromosome abnormalities (2).
One of the major safety issues is the generation of histocompatible tissues for transplantation. With such a huge genetic diversity within the human population the problem of tissue rejection must be discussed. Two solutions to this problem would be to either suppress the immune system of the patient or induce tolerance. However, these solutions are only short-term and the ideal situation would be to make pluripotent cells from embryos that would be compatible with any individual (2). This could be achieved in two ways. Firstly, samples of nuclei taken from the patient's soma could be used to reprogram the cytoplasm of an oocyte, such that when the embryo develops it produces stem cells that are genetically identical to the patient i.e. therapeutic cloning. Secondly, homologous recombination could be carried out in existing stem cells to create a line which is compatible with the patient. Both of these techniques however are difficult to conduct and therefore at present the problem of histocompatibility remains.
A second safety issue is the improper differentiation of implanted cells or development of tumours after transplantation. This concern has come from research such as that carried out by Tada et al. in which EG cells were used to study the changed in epigenetic modifications in the germ line by analysing the effects on a somatic nucleus (11). Analysis found that the presence of EG cells caused 'striking changes in methylation of the somatic nucleus, resulting in demethylation of several imprinted and non-imprinted genes' (11). Such modifications were shown to be heritable and affected gene expression (11). This and other findings of a similar nature therefore reinforces the idea that differentiated cells rather than stem cells may be more suited to transplantation.
The final issue surrounding the use of stem cells in medicine is the worry that patients may acquire infectious agents from infected embryo-derived pluripotent stem cells or the bovine serum feeder layers required for growth (2). As a result, work has been carried out to develop murine ES cells that do not require feeder cells for growth and human ES cells which require either foetal calf serum or conditioned medium processed by mouse feeder cells (Nichols et al. and Xu et al. respectively as referenced in 2). However in order to eliminate the concern of infectious agents in stem-cell derived transplantation materials, a serum-free medium with purified recombinant growth factors on a defined extracellular matrix will need to be developed.
Diabetes is a condition characterised by abnormally high levels of glucose in the bloodstream which reduces life expectancy by a median of twelve years (Mangel et al. referenced in 13) and affects sixteen million people in the USA (12). The development of this disease can be classified as either type one or type two (1). Type one diabetes, or juvenile-onset diabetes, is an autoimmune condition in which self-pancreatic cells are targeted by immune cells and are destroyed. As a result the islets of the pancreas are unable to secrete insulin in the presence of glucose. Type two diabetes is generally associated with older, overweight individuals and develops when the body cannot use insulin effectively (1). In both cases the result of this disease causes excessive glucose accumulation in the blood which can lead to further complications such as blindness and heart failure.
At present the well-established treatment for diabetes, the use of exogenous insulin, is very effective and safe for self-treatment by patients (12). However the side effects of this treatment are not well understood and although the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial Research Group (referenced in 13) have shown that intensive treatment in this way controls hyperglycaemia and reduces long-term complications, there is still room for improvement.
The childhood onset of type 1 diabetes predisposes the patient to complicated secondary conditions and therefore this population would certainly benefit from alternative treatment. In addition, intensive insulin therapy treatment doesn't achieve the normal haemoglobin A1c levels which is important in the generation of diabetic organ damage and therefore this problem could be combated using stem cell therapy. As a result, if stem cells were to be used in the treatment of diabetes, they would have to compete against the well-established exogenous insulin treatment and be able to offer significant advantages over this system before the risks associated with transplantation could be justified (13).
At present two milestones have been achieved in the development of ES for treating diabetes. Firstly ES cells have been directed to differentiate to form insulin-producing cells in vitro (13). McKay et al. (12) first demonstrated this showing that mouse ES cells self-assembled into structures that both physically and functionally resembled normal pancreatic islets. These engineered cells could even secrete insulin when triggered with glucose in a mechanism similar to that seen in vivo (12). The protocol used to differentiate such cells was based upon an already established method for producing neurons from ES and is outlined in Figure 4.
Tests carried out by Csernus et al. (referenced in 13) measured the level of glucose-dependant insulin release in the engineered cells. They found that at the end of stage five (as shown in Figure 4) the cells released insulin in a 'dose-dependant manner with fast kinetics characteristic of primary pancreatic islets in vitro'. However, it was calculated that the cultured cells contained fifty times less insulin than normal islet cells, a figure which is likely to increase with further research. The mechanism of insulin secretion was also investigated by detecting the effects of several agonists (e.g. tolbutamide, a sulfonylurea inhibitor of ATP-dependant K+ channels) and several antagonists (e.g. diazoxide, an activator of ATP-dependant K+ channels). It was found that similarly to in vivo, the agonists all stimulated the secretion of insulin whilst the antagonists inhibited insulin secretion. This therefore suggested that the insulin-positive cells generated from ES cells used normal pancreatic machinery to secrete insulin (12).
The second milestone was demonstrated by McKay et al. and showed that engineered insulin-producing cells have transplantation ability (12). When injected into diabetic mice the cells rapidly self-assembled by vascularizing and maintaining a clustered, islet-like organisation. This is shown in Figure 5.
The experiments by McKay et al. were unable to demonstrate that the engineered insulin-secreting cells could overcome hyperglycaemia in diabetic mice, however this was not unexpected as it was known through previous investigations that the engineered cells could not produce as much insulin as native pancreatic islets (12).
It is clear that engineering ES cells in this way holds great prospects for generating immunocompatible tissues for transplantation in the treatment and potential cure of diabetes. It needs to be remembered however, that although the research into this area is moving forwards the clinical approach to compete with exogenous insulin use is still a long way off.
The process of tissue engineering refers to the production of spare parts to replace damages or lost organs using postnatal stem cells. The skin is a well-understood organ and as such there has been much research into the ability of stem cells to generate skin grafts for patient-specific transplantation. The precursor skin cells are ranked into a hierarchy and under clonogenic conditions form three different types of cell types, holoclones, meroclones and paraclones (15). Of these three lines only holoclones have the ability to self-renewal and therefore are the only product of a true stem cell. Because of this, a small pure population of holoclones could be used to generate an epidermal graft (15). The production of skin autographs in vitro is described in Figure 6.
The results of such experimentation have been varied. It was found that if the experimental conditions were not correctly set, the holoclone-generating compartments in the cell cultures became depleted in a manner similar to when part of the epidermal stem cell compartment becomes depleted during ageing. Secondly, graft failure was also noted (15). As a result, this study demonstrated that the experimental design and potential uses of using stem cells in tissue engineering are present, but putting them into practice is a long way off. Currently only a very small number of areas have seen the theory translated into clinical practice.
The use of mouse ES cells during the past twenty years has revolutionized our understanding of embryonic, foetal and postnatal development in mammals. The availability of human pluripotent stem cells has now opened up many exciting possibilities for the future. In the next few years, new molecular advances may aid the identification of critical genes involved in stem cell differentiation and renewal, whilst others may develop methods to manipulate stem cells in vivo.
Although there have been many success stories of different cell lines that have been developed from pluripotent cells and transplanted into animal models, we may find that there are some cell types which are impossible to develop, whilst others may not be suited for human transplantation. With so many unanswered questions and endless possible uses for stem cells in medicine, it is without doubt that stem cell research will remain highly active for many years to come and in doing so will hopefully provide many answers for diseases such as diabetes and muscular dystrophy which affect thousands of people throughout the world every day.