When looking to compare the representation of war in Wo warst du Adam? and Die Brcke, one must firstly examine how war is portrayed in both the novel and the film before beginning to draw parallels between their representations. There are a number of concordant themes portraying war as a horrific and futile experience within both oeuvres and the purpose of this essay is to examine and compare the representations of these wartime representations thematically.
The paramount theme in both the novel and the film is that of futility and Bll and Wicki provide us, as a reader and a viewer, with several examples of war being pointless and meaningless. The representations of futility can be split into various groups. One example is the whole war itself being completely futile; this is seen in the very beginning of Wo warst du, Adam? as Bll describes the appearance of a General - "Der General sah mde aus." This is significant as it is a man who is high up in command in the German Army, and ergo one who should evoke confidence and enthusiasm and inspire a will for success in his soldiers, appears apathetic and resigned. In fact: "Dieser magere, gelbe Generalshals ohne Schmuck lie an verlorene Schlachten denken, milungene Rckzge". At the start also, Bll makes a point of showing that the soldiers are merely numbers, they are nameless, inhuman pawns with which the Officers can do what they want. The view that the entire war itself is pointless concurs with the theory of Charlotte W. Ghurye, who states that at this point in history, all German efforts are futile and Bll makes this point by emphasising the ever-present confidence of the German soldiers in the continuing success of the Nazi war machine. This is a myth yet "life goes on...in the hospital... in the school... and at the inn...in a self-assured manner as if the Germans were still victors." This pointlessness of war is present in Die Brcke where the boys are sent off to train and prepare for next-day combat, but are only taught how to retreat. The point, therefore, is mirrored in the film but it is portrayed differently as there is the acceptance in the film that victory is already lost, yet Bll's characters are still completely "oblivious of the fact that their defeat will come in a matter of hours". War is portrayed by Bll, according to Bernd Balzer "als bermchtige Sinnlosigkeit, die dem Einzelnen einen Ausweg nur in die Transzendenz gestattet."
In both Die Brcke and  Wo warst du, Adam? There is a great sense of needless, human sacrifice which ties into the representation of war; for example in Wo warst du, Adam? Bressen is sent back to the front even though he is unfit to fight. His injury is dismissed as "Eine geradezu lcherlich geringfgige Verletzung der Kopfschwarte. War in fnf Tagen abgeheilt."
 In Die Brcke the average age for the attack is fifteen; boys still in school and with only one day's training (which was ironically spent learning to retreat) are sent on a hopeless mission when the war is, in effect, already lost. The Officer who speaks to inspire the soldiers sounds more than a little pessimistic when he gives the soldiers only the option of "Kampf, Zieg oder Tot!"
 It is also completely pointless for the boys to die; they are only positioned at the Bridge to keep them out of harms way after a request from their teacher to their commanding officer. The bridge itself serves no strategic purpose and is in fact to be blown up. They are fighting not only a lost but also a pointless battle. Wicki uses the boys' enthusiasm for war as a tool to help emphasise how much of a needless death it is, as, should the boys have not appeared so keen to go to war in front of their teacher, he probably wouldn't have spoken with the Officer in the way in which he did. Bll, on the other hand, makes it clear throughout that it is a needless sacrifice in Wo warst du, Adam? - Wicki makes us think, until the confrontation with the enemy that the boys will be successfully spared.
The theme of futility extends also to the realisation that most of the deaths are caused by logistical mistakes. For example, the removal of the dud that kills Scneider in Wo warst du, Adam? had been ordered several times and, after the explosion, the Russians begin firing for a long time, however, "Erst spter merkten sie, da von der anderen Seite kein einziger Schu fiel."
 Finck receives contradicting orders and ends up getting killed whilst attempting to save the wine he carried rather than his own life; "Finck stirbt einen sinnlosen Tod, weil er einen Koffer voller Weinflaschen mit sich schleppte."
 Those in command cannot decide whether to keep the bridge or not and in chapter eight: "eine Brcke wird gebaut, um sie danach zu sprengen."
 The Lieutenant who speaks with Feinhals explains that he feels there are mistakes in the logistics of the war; "meine Ausbildung hat den Staat einige nette Einfamilienhuser gekostet, damit ich mir jetzt als Infanterist die Hucke vollmachen lasse, meine Seele aushauche, um nach Walhall zu fahren."
 In Die Brcke the Sergeant assigned to look after the boys is shot by a fellow German soldier even though he has a perfectly legitimate reason for being there. These examples both show how simple, but more importantly, needless mistakes (often by those in command) lead to unnecessary death. "In einem sinnlosen Kampf fallen alle Jungen bis auf einen"
 is one interpretation of the boys' needless death. The representations differ between the book and the film as Bll prolongs the effect, that is to say the effect of the mistakes, in these instances at least, comes fairly long after the mistake itself. Wicki's effect is perhaps a little more dramatic in the sense that it is immediate. This can be put down to the fact that, as a director, Wicki, does not have the luxury of allowing his viewer time to contemplate, as Bll might have in a book, as it is a film and only occurs over a matter of hours. It is therefore necessary to keep the viewer shocked and interested. Any deep thought and consideration must come afterwards.
Bll makes the point in Wo warst du, Adam? that war is futile in that no matter who one is, the fate of death cannot be avoided. There is certainly the feeling in Wo warst du, Adam? that a Jew dies in the concentration camps, and a German on the battle field. Bll makes the point that war is so futile that everybody dies, no matter also at what stage the war is at. C.W. Ghurye states; "What constitutes the utter absurdity is the fact that he (Feinhals) is killed when the war is practically over, seconds before he is reunited with his parents". Wicki uses the dramatic tool of the vision of the young boys' death to convey his point of everybody being killed and at the end and this point links in with the representation of the horror of war - "Einzig Mutz bleibt, verlassen und verzweifelt, am Leben." Bll, by contrast, at this point in the book almost makes it sound normal and routine for Feinhals to get shot at this stage; such is the futility of war.
The portrayal of relationships in wartime differs between the two mediums, however, both Bll and Wicki agree that they are futile. In Die Brcke, such is the excitement and enthusiasm of the boys, the relationships are portrayed in only one way; that is to say it is only the mothers of the boys - not the boys themselves - who are particularly worried about their loved ones. In Wo warst du, Adam? it is different as the main relationship is between Ilona and Feinhals, although they have both expressed their love for each other they know they cannot be together: "in seiner Nhe gekommen war sie noch nicht...er htte sie gern gek
t; nur kam sie nie in seine Nhe."
 Bll underlines the fact that it is because of the situation of war, C.W. Ghurye agrees that this relationship is "essentially ironical and can only lead to a dangerous, clandestine affair." Frau Susan also thinks of her husband but this is useless, as she has no idea where he is. Maria is made pregnant by Peter and, under normal circumstances, they could perhaps be together but this is made impossible by the war again as Peter is moved on shortly after. Both the director and the author, therefore portray relationships as futile during the war.
Another main theme in both Wo warst du, Adam and Die Brcke is one of escapism. This can happen sexually in the cases of Bressen - "Das einzige, was ihn whrend dieser Zeit trstete, war die Mglichkeit, mit ihren Frauen ab und zu ein Abenteuer zu bestehen."
 and Maria and Peter in Wo warst du, Adam? and Barbara and Karl's father in Die Brcke, in the form of denial or the search for escape into one's memory. The boys in Die Brcke think of war; "halb als nationale Verpflichtung, halb als romantisches Abenteuer."
 They cannot wait to be called up for service and Wicki emphasises the naivety of the boys at this point with the scenes of jubilation when one of them receives the first letter. This is a powerful image for the viewer who is shocked at the sight of such enthusiasm for war. They cannot wait to see the bridge where a bomb was rumoured to have dropped, and casually joke about the school being bombed - "Ich werde Churchill meinen Stundenplan schicken." Following this, when in the classroom, the boys discuss the war tactics they would pursue should they be in charge. This image is mirrored in Wo warst du, Adam? where Feinhals calls to Ilona: "wir spielen Generalstab, ein wunderbares Spiel" and Ilona later describes it "wie Relief." Even after the boys are called up and positioned at the bridge Wicki still portrays them as thinking that it is not quite real - it has not sunk in to them that they are involved in a real war. They show their immaturity when wanting to shoot cans on the bridge. One boy asks their Sergeant if he could be stationed in an observation post similar to one that he held when the boys used to play children's games on that very bridge. This denial extends even after they face the enemy and they show great delight at successfully shooting them. These attitudes continue all the way up arguably until Karl dies. Bll portrays Filskeit as someone who does not like killing but carries out orders scrupulously, he uses his love of art and music as a form of escapism from the horror in which he finds himself; "(da) er jeden Neuankmmling zum Vorsingen bestellte und seine gesangliche Leistung auf der Karteikarte mit Noten versah". Another example is found in the form of Greck who yearns for a go on the "Schiffschaukel" and "Diese Vergnngen waren ihm nicht vergnnt gewesen...so ffentlich, blde wie ein Affe, in der Luft herumzuschaukeln." Both Bll and Wicki therefore, portray their characters in a certain way to evoke sympathy, as they are in a terrible situation and try to find refuge from it by means which to us as a reader or viewer may seen simple or unreal. One representation specific to Bll is the use of the past as a sanctuary from the horrors of war; his "characters were continually in search of lost innocence." Alan Bance agrees. Bressen is one character to use as an example for this. When he sees the picture of the shepherd he remembers "da er frher eine Zeitlang Nicker in einem Hotel gewesen war, in einem sehr vornehmen Restaurant" - these were happy times for him.
Given the fact that both pieces of work portray a horrific situation (the Second World War) one would expect to find reference to the horror and the inhumanity of war. Indeed the examples of this are many. Both Bll and Wicki show that death is a very common part of wartime practice and especially in Wo warst du, Adam? these deaths are numerous and the human loss, particularly as affects Frau Susan, is devastating. Perhaps the most horrific death is that of Ilona who is shot by Filkskeit, a man who has spared other Jews and was thought not to be able to kill. C.W Churye puts this down to envy as Ilona possess both what he desires most ("beauty, stature, religious faith, and a perfect voice") and "all the qualities that his (Filkskeit's) own cherished demagogic racial theory denies the Jews." Alan Bance says that "it goes without saying that war is evil" and this is shown in the death of Bll's characters. The inhumane aspect in the book comes arguably in the form of Filkskeit's selection basis for who should be killed and who should not, "In seinem Lager kommen die Juden, die gut singen knnen in den Chor, die anderen in das Krematorium."
This inhumanity of war is represented somewhat differently in Die Brcke; it is through the representation of the boys. Owing to their ridiculous enthusiasm the viewer is provoked into wondering why the boys hold such attitudes. Although this contemplation would perhaps come after the film, Wicki makes us think of the extent of the indoctrinated evil (probably, in this case, of the Hitler Youth or, ironically, the same English teacher who tried to persuade the Captain to spare their lives) for the boys to have such enthusiasm for war. When they hear that they will be called up "Die Jungen sind sehr stolz darauf, endlich auch fr das Vaterland kmpfen zu drfen"
. Even when two of them have already died and they are given the chance to surrender by the Americans they do not give up. This, however, is not a direct link towards Nazism and as Peter Zander explains: "Der Film ist somit keine Abrechung mit dem Nazismus"
. This is a different representation to Wo warst du, Adam? as people address and leave each other with the exclamation "Heil Hitler!" and there is a felling in the book of people upholding and staying loyal to the Nazi criteria for how one should behave. Greck is one such example, as well as worrying whether he has given the correct Nazi salute or not, he is also concerned after having sold his trousers to a Jew.
Both oeuvres portray the role of women in wartime in much the same way, that is to say perfectly fitting with the Kinder, Kirche, Kche Nazi ideal. In Wo warst du, Adam? this is done primarily through the representation of Frau Susan who cooks and looks after the soldiers staying with her and worries about her husband. In the film the boys' mothers worry that their sons are going off to war at such a young age. These representations are similar in that the role of women is very limited and it is the men who make all the decisions and go to fight in the war - both mediums focus on them.
It is undoubtedly the case that both Bll and Wicki emphasise the horror, futility and inhumanity of war. However, to ensure a balanced account is given, it is important to state that sometimes, in both cases, war is portrayed somewhat paradoxically; and is seen not to be a terrible experience, in rare circumstances. For example in Wo warst du, Adam? when stationed at Frau Susan's house, there is a relaxed atmosphere and wartime life could almost be pleasant or at lest mirror that of the everyday: "Dort sa nun einer von ihnen den ganzen Tag und guckte ins Gebirge hinauf...und die anderen lungerten herum und langweilten sich."
 Likewise, earlier on, we see this in Hungary, which, according to C.W. Ghurye is "continuing its normal routine. The Hungarian civilians are eating, amusing themselves, and transacting business without concern for war." Bll also suggests that the war can be profitable as: "Die Soldaten waren die besten Kunden, die sie je gehabt hatte: diese acht verzehrten mehr im Monat als alle Leute zusammen, die einzeln ber die Brcke gegangen waren. Die Soldaten schienen viel Geld und sehr viel Zeit zu haben." Although this is not directly the case in Die Brcke and people do not seem to get on as if it was their daily routine, this idea does, however, coincide with the representation of war being as a game for the boys.
One major difference between the representations of war in Wo warst du, Adam? from that in  Die Brcke is that the book refers to Jews and religion whereas the fim does not. Bll uses Ilona firstly to highlight the inconsistencies of the Nazi prejudice and to discredit the Aryan myth, and also to portray the horror and inhumanity of war, more directly, regarding the treatment of her by Filkskeit. Religion is used to illustrate the ignorance of Bressen who had no idea there were Catholics in Romania and to make the point that the Nazi claim of Heim ins Reich is actually not valid. Although both are major themes to do with the Second World War, no reference is made to them in Die Brcke. Similarly, there is no depiction of the enemy in Wo warst du, Adam? - we see them at the end of  Die Brcke, perhaps as Wicki wants to highlight the differences between the experienced, mature American opposition to the novice youths. Bll's point in not showing an enemy is one of futility, the fact that war is pointless and an enemy is not seen. This futility is mentioned by C.W. Ghurye who describes "the battles raging some 50 miles away, futile in themselves" - meaning there is no point the soldiers being there as they never see combat. An ironic twist, highlighted by Ghurye is that Schniewind "shoots at his own people (Feinhals), but does not fire a single cannon at the enemy".
The representation of war between these two mediums differs mainly as, in Die Brcke we are drawn emotionally, as a viewer, to follow the lives and fate of the characters. Bll, however, throws us in the thick of the battle and the same point is made over and over again using different examples and characters - Rainer Ngele explains: "die Handlung ist nicht mehr auf ein Individuum hin angelegt, sondern zielt durch Parallel-Episoden auf eine gr
ere Breite."
In conclusion, Heinrich Bll's Wo warst du, Adam? and Bernhard Wicki's Die Brcke both agree on several common wartime themes. The representation of these themes is often similar, yet one must consider that they are not always trying to make the same point. In some instances, therefore, the tools they use to control us as a reader or as a viewer are different.