As traditional views of predictable ecological succession are challenged by dynamic theories of patchy development (Bell & Walker 2005: 182), there has been increasing debate about the character of the vegetation of northwest Europe before human interference. The nature of forest environments in the past has implications both for the conservation and management of woodland today, and for our understanding of the human/environment interactions during the Holocene. The debate has centred around Vera's hypothesis that the natural vegetation of Europe was not closed forest, as previously assumed, but an open, park-like landscape managed by large herbivore grazing (Vera 1997). This hypothesis was based on the fact that oak and hazel do not survive well in modern closed forests but are continually present in the pollen record of temperate periods in north-west Europe.
Jens-Christian Svenning is a biologist by training and wrote this paper while completing post-doctoral work at the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute in the USA. The journal of publication, Biological Conservation, is focused primarily on ecological conservation and the influence of man on the biosphere, and it is therefore no surprise that the main objective of the article is to aid conservation agencies in their management of present woodland (Svenning 2002: 134). However, this ecological focus is not detrimental to the usefulness of this paper to environmental archaeologists. Svenning focuses his efforts on understanding the vegetation patterns in the temperate interglacials, particularly the last Eemian interglacial and the early Holocene, as analogues for the natural vegetation in the present if humans had not interfered (the present-natural vegetation). His conclusion is that the vegetation was predominantly closed forest, but that some areas such as floodplains and chalklands had more open vegetation (ibid: 140). Svenning suggests that light-dependent species such as oak and hazel would have been able to maintain themselves in closed forests through occurrences of fire, windthrows and certain edaphic-topographic conditions which favour these species (ibid: 140).
The primary method Svenning uses is a literature review of palaeoecological studies of the temperate interglacials and early Holocene. It is not clear from the paper exactly how many sources were included in the review, but there are over 160 references, suggesting a fairly thorough coverage of approximately the last 40 years. Unfortunately there is no discussion of the methods used in the source material, and the reader cannot be certain that all the evidence can be directly compared. Although pollen methodologies have been established for some time, there is no clear indication from the paper as to the range of methods and analyses used in the source materials, or whether any criteria were used in selecting the papers to be included in the review.
Svenning uses the non-arboreal pollen (NAP) percentage to estimate the amount of tree cover in an area. There has been some debate about the use of this measure for estimating tree cover (Sugita et al. 1999), but Svenning makes a comparison of NAP percentages with estimates of tree cover from beetles, molluscs and plant macrofossils, and shows that pollen can present a reasonable measure of forest openness (Svenning 2002: Fig.1). He admits that, wherever possible, supplementary evidence should be used to confirm pollen results, and throughout the paper he draws together evidence from beetles, molluscan remains, plant macrofossils and vertebrate fauna. This multi-disciplinary approach ensures that the conclusions Svenning draws do not stand or fall solely on the pollen data, and lend greater credibility to his arguments.
Having established his methods and the range of evidence used, Svenning presents the results gathered from the literature for vegetation patterns in five landscape types and assesses the overall picture they present. For example, the section on 'normal' uplands begins with a definition of the environmental parameters being investigated, then describes a regional view, with evidence from pollen data, beetle assemblages and plant macrofossils, followed by localised evidence from small hollows (Svenning 2002: 135-136). This logical progression makes it easy for the reader to follow Svenning's thought process, and the extensive references provide ample opportunity to follow up on his conclusions. He makes good use of case studies and presents a balanced view where the evidence points in two directions or where more than one interpretation is possible (e.g. the possible reasons for the presence of Pteridium aquilinum and Melampyrum - ibid: 137).
As well as analysing five landscape settings separately, Svenning also provides an overview of the vegetational succession in the pollen record of northwest Europe as a whole (Svenning 2002: 138), and then moves into a discussion of the reasons why oak, hazel and pine were able to regenerate in the closed forests that he suggests were present on 'normal' uplands (ibid: 138). This section is one of the major strengths of the paper; Svenning looks at a wide range of factors that could improve the survival of oak, including fire, tree throw and edaphic-topographic variability (ibid: 138). The only factors not mentioned are disease and storm patterns, although as tree throw is one of the main results of storms, the possible effects of this are covered in Svenning's discussion. The flow of argument and interpretation throughout the whole section is well structured and easy to follow, drawing on the evidence already presented and bringing in additional sources such as faunal material (ibid: 139-140). By discussing a range of contingent disturbance factors, a picture of a dynamic mosaic environment emerges which could have been used by humans in a more flexible and spontaneous manner. Svenning does fail to discuss the nature and scope of anthropogenic impacts (their potential role in fire regimes is briefly mentioned; ibid: 139), but considering the stated aims of the paper and Svenning's non-archaeological background, this is hardly surprising and does not detract from the value of his analysis as a whole. Especially important is his recognition that modern regenerating forests are dominated by young, densely packed trees which do not provide a good analogy for the old forests which would have been present before human intervention (ibid: 139). This point is rarely recognised by archaeologists, yet is vital if modern growth patterns are to be used to infer past vegetation, as Vera did (Vera 1997).
Svenning sets out a clear summary of his conclusions in Section 6 (Svenning 2002: 140), and then discusses the implications of his findings for nature conservation and suggests future research (ibid: 141). Svenning is aware that the conclusions he draws require further supporting evidence, particularly in understanding herbivore-vegetation interactions and the effects of fire, and his own evaluation of his work shows that he has carefully considered the limitations of his methodology. Having drawn together previous evidence so effectively, Svenning's paper is a good basis for such future research. Because of the cross-disciplinary importance of the character of past vegetation, it would be beneficial for both biologists and archaeologists to contribute, giving a balanced view of the anthropogenic and natural causes.
The paper is well written and presented, but there are a few points that would have made the paper more readable for a wider audience. One in particular is the use of binomial nomenclature for plants and animals rather than common names, which are rarely indicated. This poses potential problems for readers not familiar with these terms, and a table or appendix giving the scientific and common names of the most important species would have been helpful here. Of the two appendices, the first is very useful, comparing the fauna present in the Eemian and Holocene (Svenning 2002: 142). However, the purpose of Appendix B ibid. 142-44) is less clear, though the information it contains may be more meaningful to the audience of conservation biologists that the paper was originally aimed at. These issues suggest that Svenning may have failed to consider the wider application of his research for the archaeological community.
This paper was published four years ago, and has been followed by several others that support and build on its conclusions (e.g. Bradshaw et al. 2003; Mitchell 2005). This paper presents a good case for considering past vegetation in a more dynamic way, taking into account that there are many factors which can contribute to the character of forested areas. Svenning's work has been particularly significant in providing a wide-ranging review of the available evidence, which others can now build on. If further research continues to support Svenning's conclusions, the conservation strategies of English Nature and similar organisations may need to be adjusted to take his recommendations into account. For archaeologists, the character of the wildwood is a significant topic in understanding the interaction between humans and environment in the past, and this paper may help them consider these issues in new ways. Svenning has provided a significant and well-written contribution to the debate on the character of north-west European vegetation, and despite small deficiencies, his work succeeds in its aims and draws some important conclusions which are refreshingly non-anthropocentric. It is likely to become a standard reference for archaeologists assessing palaeoecological evidence in Europe.