Table 1 contains the data used in this exercise, which consists of five assemblages of Upper Palaeolithic endscrapers recovered from the rockshelter site of No'kulchaear. Table 2 shows the summary statistics for each assemblage (mean, median, mode, standard error, standard deviation, sum, sample size). The mean lengths of the endscrapers in each assemblage have been compared in Figure 1.
The five assemblages were tested for normality in three ways - production of a histogram for each assemblage (Figures 2-6), and two calculations, which are summarised in Table 3.
In the skewness/standard error and kurtosis/standard error tests, the data is normal if the values for both tests lies between -1.99 and +1.99. As Table 3 shows, all the assemblages have values in this range and are therefore normal. The histograms show that all the data have a fairly normal distribution, although Assemblage D has an anomalous peak at 45-50mm, and B and C have no data in one range.
The ANOVA (analysis of variance) test will compare the mean lengths of all five assemblages to see if the differences between the assemblages are statistically significant. The significance level is set at 0.05. Two hypotheses may be established.
The chi-squared test is used to test the distribution of the endscrapers in relation to the distribution of animal bones on the site. This test was performed on Assemblage A, and the null and alternative hypotheses are given below. The observed values are given in Table 7 and the expected values calculated in Table 8 by multiplying the sum for the row with the sum for the column and dividing by the total number of observations. The significance level of this test is 0.05, and there is 1 degree of freedom.
This test establishes whether there is a correlation between two variables, in this case the tools:waste flake ratio and the distance to the flint source. This data is presented in Table 14, and the two variables are plotted against each other in Figure 7. The correlation value is calculated in Table 15, and shows a very strong correlation (>0.8) between the two variables.
The tools:waste flake ratio and the mean endscraper length were also tested for correlation. A correlation value of - 0.14 (Table 16) suggests that there is no apparent correlation between the two variables, and this is supported by the appearance of the scattergram (Figure 8).
The linear regression equation is
The regression equation for the correlation between tools:waste flake ratio and distance to the source (Figure 7) is
Using this equation, the number of waste flakes in a new set of assemblages (F-J) can be predicted from the distance to the source of the raw material. Once the ratio is calculated, the actual number of waste flakes can be predicted using the formula:
The results of these calculations for the new assemblages are presented in Table 17.