Lowland heath is a key habitat of England supporting a wide range of species, it consists mainly of heather plants but there are also grass and gorse species present as well as some trees. Lowland heath land has always been a regular feature of the English countryside, but decline has occurred here and worldwide and is now a globally rare habitat, 20% of which can be found in England.
Lowland heath grows in poor soils, these are often sandy gravely soils that are slightly acidic, the factors that create good soil conditions for heather are shallow soil, acidic, and low nutrient level. On these types of soils it is believed that heath land is the climax vegetation. All areas of heath located below the Pennines are classed as lowland heath, diagram one shows the line that the Pennines forms across the UK, all heath land below this line is classed as lowland heath.
Diagram one.
Grazing by animals has occurred on lowland heaths for centuries, and without this grazing most areas of heath would have been lost. Grazing by domestic animals used to be common practise in England, and most areas of common land were heath land areas. They were important areas for grazing of cattle, ponies, and sheep, with areas of grazed lowland heath becoming "a distinctive part of the cultural landscape in many southern counties" (Hampshire Council). The livestock were essential to creating the habitats on the heath that encouraged such a large amount of diversity on the heaths, when the animals were removed it caused a disturbance in the balance which also led to the loss of the amount of species diversity.
Since the domestic animals have been removed from the land the area of heath land has decreased, control of succession is still needed and is a constant threat and the heather needs to be grazed to kept it in the building stage, this is the stage of the heathers life where most growth occurs, the plants growth quickly and cover the ground often causing other plant species to disappear. If the heather is not kept in this stage it will reach the mature and then degenerate stage and then eventually die back.
Using grazing livestock of lowland heath has many benefits, such as the control of invasive species, the creation of diverse habitats, which helps to increase species diversity of a site, grazing animals also help to control scrub encroachment.
Fourteen thousand years ago the UK was coming to the end of an ice age. The ice sheets that covered the country were beginning to melt. Tundra vegetation began to grow which included heather plants.
The climate continued to warm and this allowed trees to establish. Between 10,000 and 6,000 before present the heather may have only survived in open areas in the woodland, or on the edge of woodlands.
Neolithic man began to make its impact on the countryside 5,000 years ago, plants and animals were being domesticated, this was the birth of agriculture. Areas of woodland were cleared to grow crops. When all the nutrients had been used from a piece of land the people moved on, this allowed heather to start to grow, grazing from both wild and domestic animals prevented the tress to re-establish. This meant that by the Bronze Age, 3,000 years before present, large areas of England were covered in heath land.
Heath lands were used by man for many things such as bracken for animal bedding and gorse for fodder. Trees were cut for fuel and potash, grazing and peat cultivation also took place on the heath land. These actions maintained the heath land.
During the 18 th century new agricultural technology was developed that allowed 'waste areas' to be cultivated, common lands became enclosed and field systems were introduced and arable farming increased, this all led to the downfall of heath land.
In the 19 th century the heath land areas declined further, many of the traditional activities ceased, as did the reliance on local resources, this was due to the availability of new cheap and easy transport. This meant the heaths were no longer maintained and so reverted to woodland.
As time progressed so did technology, larger more efficient machines were introduced capable of cultivating more land, producing more timber and extracting more sand and gravel. The increasing population needed more housing and this resulted in urban encroachment. All these factors have led to the decline of heath lands. Almost all remaining heath land is artificial, it has been created on sites that were once wild wood that were cleared and the regeneration has been prevented, this is continued for two reasons to create a habitat that would otherwise not exist, and for use as grazing land in agriculture.
The threats to lowland heath are succession, invasive species, over grazing, conversion to agriculture or forestry, urban encroachment, and change to recreational land. Picture one shows an area of lowland heath in Danbury Essex, this is what most areas of heath land now look like in the UK, small areas of heath surrounded by encouraging trees and scrub.
Lowland heath can only survive if certain factors are present, these are, exposure, poor soils, grazing, and human activity, if any of these are missing succession will occur. Succession is the process where other trees and plants grow on the heath and out compete the lowland heath plants, this results in a loss of the heath and creates a new habitat, succession will occur from plants and trees such as Scots pine, Birch, Rhododendron, Wavy Hair Grass and Purple Moor Grass.
Grazing has declined as the drive towards more intensive agriculture increased, and now most lowland heath sites have been totally abandoned as a site of animal grazing. This has meant that the only remaining grazers of these sites are rabbits and deer, but there are not large enough numbers to continue the amount of grazing that the domestic animals carried out, this has meant that the heaths were allowed to be encroached or put into other uses.
Lowland heath first established itself and the end of the last ice age and the amount present has increased as man started to clear areas of woodland and use that heather that grew in its place. As agriculture became more intensive and grazing ceased the heath land was either ploughed and put into agriculture or left and succession occurred. Without the grazing of domestic animals heath land is never likely to survive.