In the same power range 3-phase is typically 150% more efficient than single-phase. In a single-phase system the power falls to zero three times during each cycle, in 3-phase it never drops to zero. The power delivered to the load is the same at any instant. 3-phase power is relayed using four wires while a single-phase system uses two. To transmit the same power using a 3-phase system instead of a single-phase system requires less than a third of the conducting material. A phasor diagram shows that the three phases of voltage/current are displaced by 120. The concept was originally conceived by Nikola Tesla and was proven that 3-phase was far superior to single-phase power.
There are two types of connection configurations, star '' (or wye) and delta ''. These configurations reduce the amount of conductors needed to convey power (generator to end-user) from six to four.
The equivalent circuit method is used to simplify calculations. Below is the 'initial' equivalent circuit (Thevenin) for the induction motor. It shows per-phase, so the phase voltage and current are used. Any power considerations need to be multiplied by three to obtain output power or total power loss.
If the current through the magnetising branch (R c & jX m) is significantly low compared to I ph and I 2', then the equivalent circuit can be simplified further. The magnetising branch is moved to the terminals. Also the reactances are combined. Moving the magnetising branch should not affect the accuracy because the voltage across it is so low and most of the current should flow around the rotor loop.
Phase to phase Resistance R ph-ph=64.1
Graphs 1, 2 & 3 show the theoretical results. Graph 1 shows the torque/ speed curve. It shows a starting torque of approximately 0.775Nm, compared to the measured 0.85Nm. The peak torque of 1.44Nm occurs at 1145rpm, whereas the measure peak torque is 1.15Nm at 1100rpm. The synchronous speed is 1500rpm. Synchronous speed is a theoretical value that could never be achieved because the motor will always have some load however small it is. The running light test doesn't give actual no load results. This is because there is a slight load from the measuring equipment, for instance the dynamometer.
Graph 2 shows the line current/ speed curve. The starting current matches that of the measured starting current. Generally that starting current is 5 to 10 times higher than the full load current. In this case it is just about five times higher. This over-current, even though it only lasts for a few seconds, can be a problem. The solution of this is to use a starter or wound-rotor motor. The measured results are close to the theoretical, showing that speed decreases with current.
Graph 3 shows the efficiency/ speed curve. The motor is most efficient (68%) at 1410rpm. Beyond this speed efficiency drops off rapidly to zero at 1500rpm. The measured values are quite close to the theoretical. Any differences between actual and theoretical results are due to friction within the motor.