The beams' dimensions (breadth and depth) shall be measured using a micrometer. This shall aid the calculation of the second moment of area of the beam. Four readings shall be taken at different positions along the beam and averages calculated. The equation used for calculating 2 nd moment of area is:
Below is a table of the data used to calculate the 2 nd moment of area:
The test rig shall be set up with the three following configurations:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
Each time a 1kg mass shall be used which equates to approximately 10N. Setup one has a central load, two has 'quarter length' load and three has a 'quarter length' load with a central simple support. All the end supports are simple with setup three having an additional 'simple clamp'. This 'simple clamp' is an effective 'knife edge' and should not affect the curvature of the beam, it simply prevents the right hand end breaking contact with the support. For setup one and two a rule shall be used for measuring. The rule shall be clamped into the slider on the rig and the initial profile of the beam with hanger obtained. Next the 1kg mass shall be added and the new profile of the beam obtained. Measurements shall be taken at 10cm intervals. Once all the data has been collected the 'new' profile shall be subtracted from the 'initial' to give a deflection profile. For setup three a dial gauge shall be used instead of a rule, because of this a direct deflection reading can be taken. Three sets of measurements shall be taken and an average calculated. Throughout the procedure the slide track should be kept free from obstacles to prevent inaccuracies in measurements.
Graph one shows the deflection profile for experimental and computer calculated results. The maximum deflection is in the centre of the beam where the load is applied. There is slight variation between the experimental and computer calculated deflection profiles. Overall the experimental profile shows greater deflection. This could be because of fatigue in the beam. It has been used in previous experiments therefore shall be 'weakened'. Also it could be due to inaccuracy of the Young's Modulus of the steel.
This setup also requires prediction of the deflection profile via the integration method. Below is the process of obtaining the general deflection equation.
when
Graph two shows the experimental, computer calculated and integration method deflection profiles. The maximum deflection is at 40cm from the left hand end. The computer calculated and integration method profiles are exactly the same. This means that the computer program uses the integration method to obtain its results. The experimental profile is again slightly greater at the extreme. This is probably due to fatigue or an inaccurate value of the Young's Modulus.
This setup creates some complication for predicting the deflection profile using the computer. Two external loads have to be used, firstly the actual load of 10N at 250mm from the left and secondly the reaction force (Q) of the middle support. This reaction force is working upwards so it should be input as a negative load at 500mm from the left.
Setup two is similar to three accept it doesn't have the central support. The mid deflection of two is 20.9mm. If there were a support in the centre of two it would not deflect here. In setup one the load is central, this can be thought of as the reaction force of the central support in setup three. The 10N load should be thought of as working upwards, but this gives a deflection of 30.4mm. The beam would be bent upwards by approximately 10mm in the centre. Clearly this is not the reaction force required to give a deflection of zero.
Therefore a ratio of the two deflections multiplied by the 10N load gives the required reaction force.
Graph three shows little variation between the experimental and computer calculated deflection profiles. The computer profile has slightly greater deflection at the two extremes. In practise the central support is not a knife-edge or 'true' point load as the computer simulation takes it to be. Therefore the surface area of the support reduces the overall deflection in practise.