Bread is an important element of a healthy balanced diet. Bread is part of the 'fibrous' food group, which includes bread, potatoes, pasta, rice, noodles and breakfast cereals. These foods are high in fibre and rich in vitamins from the B complex, they should be the main part of every meal. Bread is mass-produced commercially for the domestic consumer giving a relatively low final cost. Many people prefer bakery bread either because of the fresh traditional taste or because of its low additive concentration. With the use of a domestic breadmaker the consumer can decide exactly what goes into their bread and have a freshly baked loaf to greet them and their family in the morning. There is a variety of domestic breadmakers, with a great range of price, features and design. The six breadmakers that shall be focused on in this assignment are:
Four of the breadmakers were used in this section, with the Kenwood being used in two different modes. Each mixture used was brand recommended.
Testing of the bread could have been quantitative rather than qualitative. This would have given scientific comparisons between the different breads. The following criteria could have been followed:
Moisture content, the loaf could be weighed once it came out of the pan, then dried out and re-weighed. Then the moisture percentage could be calculated.
Colour, a "colourometer" or "reflectometer" could be used to determine the colour of the crust. This would probably correspond to the breadmakers temperature.
Crustiness, a hardness test such as Rockwell or Brinell could be performed on the crust.
Density, the loaf fresh out of the maker could be weighed and then the volume and finally density calculated. The volume could be obtained by measuring the displacement in water. The bread would have to be wrapped in a non-porous material such as cling-film to prevent water absorption.
Instead of using the brand recommended recipes in each machine, the same recipes could be used. This would give a fairer comparison for quantitative criteria.
The Cookworks, Morphy Richards and Kenwood have no safety warnings on them. The Panasonic has a safety sticker warning about steam and hot surfaces (Figure 2). The large Breville has a safety warning printed on the lid (Figure 1). The small Breville has an embossed warning on the lid and bread pan (Figures 3 & 4).
The small Breville's pan has an integrated heat element. It is located at the top of the pan that gives better heat distribution than a low element. As a performance improvement this is good but for a safety point of view this is bad. The heat element will remain extremely hot and shall put the person at risk that is trying to remove the bread from the pan.
Every breadmaker has vents for the release of hot air/vapour. None of the breadmakers apart from the Panasonic had warnings about vent 'exhaust'. The temperature of this exhaust is 90c as measured on the Kenwood. Steam at this temperature can cause harmful burns. Also the window temperature is 70c, this can also cause burns. Using more warnings and colour-coding the vents could improve this. The vents could be coloured red to signify danger.
The Morphy Richards has the best button layout with nice large buttons. The buttons are easy to read and are arranged in an attractive way (Figure 5).
All the control panels are relatively easy to use they all have numerical displays apart from the small Breville. This used LED's to display the amount of time remaining of a cycle. This method is not as affective as the others
because it only displays the time to the nearest half hour (Figure 6).
Overall the large Breville has the best display panel. It uses both a numeric and LED display to convey information (Figure 7).
The most aesthetically pleasing model is the large Breville (Figure 8). It has curved corners, a dome like section for the bread pan and a viewing window. The Panasonic is quite the opposite (Figure 9). It looks more like a storage box or bin.
The best ergonomically designed model is the small Breville (Figure 10). This is the only model with carrying handles that makes it easier to move around.
This graph shows the noise level of each breadmaker. They all give out a similar result, the Panasonic being the quietest and the large Breville the noisiest. This is as expected because the Breville has a fan which adds to its noise output.
There are no energy consumption figures available for all models. The fast bake modes consume less energy because the program doesn't run as long. The smaller Breville consumes more energy than the larger Breville. This doesn't seem as it should, because the larger model has a fan to run whereas the smaller doesn't.
Only four of the breadmakers were taken apart for inspection. Three of them, the Cookworks, Kenwood and Morphy Richards, use an induction motor with a belt to drive the mixing paddle. The small Breville uses a universal motor with gears (Figure 11). Induction motors are robust giving good reliability. Universal motors are not as reliable and they are noisier than induction motors. They run at relatively high speeds, this speed is dependent on loading. So in theory a zero load would give infinite speed, therefore speed control is needed. The positive for using a universal motor is that they start with an initial high torque compared to the induction motor. Also they are cheaper, lighter and smaller than induction motors.
The gearing on the small Breville uses a worm gear connected to the motor shaft that actuates a 'dual' gear that in turn actuates a single cog gear (Figure 12). The overall gear ratio is 1:149. Therefore the gears that transmit the motion to the mixing paddle step down the speed of the motor.
All the models have metal surrounds except the small Breville. The small Breville has a plastic surround. This is more pleasant to touch as it has an 'ambient' temperature.
All the lids have a metal heat shield apart from the large Breville. This is because the large Breville is fan assisted so the heat is evenly regulated. All the windows are made from glass, again apart from the large Breville. The large Breville's window is plastic, this is an advantage, as it has a relatively low heat conductivity compared to glass. Therefore it shall not get as hot to touch, so it is safer.
Four of the bread pans are pressed mild steel whereas the two Breville's have cast aluminum pans.
The gears used by the small Breville are made of glass-reinforced nylon, whereas all the belts are made from felt-backed rubber. The belts are toothed so they can engage the cogs.
The Panasonic has an integral nut/raison dispenser. A good nut or raison loaf would have even distributed nuts or raisons. This feature was not tested but it seems that it wouldn't work as effectively as it should. The contents of the dispenser are released all at once so it seems that mixing wouldn't be uniform (Figures 13 & 14). A better design would release the contents gradually.
The small Breville bread pan has shallow indentations around rivets head, whereas all the others have deep indentations. The shallow indentations enable efficient cleaning, therefore good hygiene.
Overall the price of each breadmaker has fallen. This is as expected because of the release of newer more advanced models. The Panasonic is the most expensive each time prices were obtained. Next most expensive is the large Breville, then at the high end of the budget market are the Morphy Richards, Kenwood and small Breville. The most basic of all the models, the Cookworks, is the cheapest.
The best value for money model in my opinion is the small Breville. It is averagely priced, produces a decent loaf and has sufficient safety warnings. It also has the added bonus of a viewing window, although this is not essential it is a nice feature. The best overall model I think is the large Breville. It is not extortionately priced, it produces a very good loaf and has good safety warnings, all like it's 'younger brother'. The extra pros of the large Breville are its aesthetics and its display/control panel. This uses both LCD and LED displays, an effective way to convey information. Overall both Brevilles are the 'pick of the bunch'.