There are three methods of heat transfer, these are radiation, conduction and convection. These methods can work simultaneously or alone.
Radiation- is the transfer of energy via electromagnetic waves. This requires no medium therefore can work in a vacuum. This is the main transfer of energy emitted from stars (and all other bodies above absolute zero) through space.
Conduction- works via the physical interaction between molecules. All molecules above absolute zero vibrate to some degree, these vibrations transfer energy from one molecule to all the adjacent molecules. Fourier's law governs heat transfer via conduction.
Convection- takes place through the motion of fluid. On a macro scale level the flow of fluid transfers energy from/to a surface. Conduction slightly contributes to this method at the micro scale level.
When more than one of these methods contributes to heat transfer the total heat transferred can be split into the component amounts. For the purpose of this experiment each method will take place but it is possible to calculate the amounts for which each contributes. Firstly conduction can be neglected as it only acts over the leads that suspend the element. As these leads are long and thin the heat transfer via conduction is minimal. This is because;
The surface area of the leads, A, is so small that conduction is neglected.
The ideal method for calculating the heat transfer via radiation is to create a vacuum inside the vessel. This would totally restrict any heat transfer via convection as there is no medium for it to occur in. The trouble is that a complete vacuum cannot be obtained with this equipment so a slightly different method has to be used. This involves calculating the emissivity of the element by plotting element and vessel temperature against varying pressure (to the power of four). Then extrapolating the graphs back to zero pressure. The corresponding temperatures can then be used in the following equation to calculate the emissivity;
.
In order to calculate the value of C in the relationship between the dimensionless numbers at ambient pressure, convection must be taken into account. At ambient pressure (atmospheric) the temperatures of the element and vessel are taken. These are then used in conjunction with the previously calculated emissivity and electrical power input to the element to calculate the heat transfer via convection. This can then be used to calculate the Nusselt number and Rayleigh number (for which the film temperature is also needed). Once these two dimensionless numbers are calculated the value of C can be obtained from the following equation;
(where n=1/4).
During this experiment we are using varying pressures. These varying pressures alter the amount of "air particles" in the vessel. The higher the pressure the more particles there are. The Parani effect relates the pressure to the efficiency of heat transfer.
The air particles in contact with the surface of the element receive energy from the element. This energy excites the particles causing them to move at higher velocities. The heat energy from the element is converted to kinetic energy of the particle. The particle moves away from the element and collides with other particles and the vessel wall. On collision energy is transferred from the particle to whatever it hits.
At low pressure there are relatively few particles in the vessel so any excited particle has the ability to bounce back and forth from the element to vessel wall with little obstruction of other particles. This results in a very efficient heat transfer from the element to the vessel.
At high pressure there are relatively many particles in the vessel. This means that any excited particle will collide with many other particles on its journey to the vessel wall. This slows down the heat transfer from the element to vessel as the energy is dissipated over many more particles.
The element is constructed from a copper tube with the heating element (Nickel-Chrome) mounted in alumina. The emissivity of 0.581 indicates that the surface of the copper has oxidised.
The ratio of heat transfer at ambient pressure via convection to radiation is approximately 3:2. This is expected because an effective convection current system was set up in the ambient pressure atmosphere.
From page 34 of the Heat Transfer notes it states that for horizontal cylinders with Raleigh numbers between 10 4 and 10 9 that the C value should be approximately 0.53. The Rayleigh number calculated here is only in the order of 10 3 so a C value of 0.385 seems to be appropriate.
The experimental procedure has some slight inaccuracies. The main one is the measurement of pressure via the manometer. The measurements are taken by eye from a wooden ruler with 1mm intervals. Therefore the readings are only accurate to the nearest millimetre, this inaccuracy then multiplied by two as two readings are taken for either side of the manometer tube. The wooden ruler shall also expand/contract with varying humidity. These inaccuracies where overcome for pressures ranging from 0.1-100 Torr as they could be measured accurately using the McLeod gauge.