Many people in the construction industry have different opinions on the exact definition of 'intelligent buildings'. Some of these definitions include:
"A building that is fully leased." So according to this, any feature that helps to lease a building fully could be thought of as intelligent.
"An intelligent building combines innovations, technological or not, with skillful management, to maximize return on investment." This definition resulted from the International Symposium on the Intelligent Building, May 28 and 29, 1985 in Toronto.
The Intelligent Building Institute proposed: "an intelligent building is one that provides a productive and cost-effective environment through optimization of its four basic elements - structure, systems, services and management - and the interrelationships between them. Intelligent buildings help business owners, property managers and occupants to realize their goals in the areas of cost, comfort, convenience, safety, long-term flexibility and marketability."
"Intelligent buildings use electronics extensively and are high-technology related."
An intelligent building "... provides a responsive, effective and supportive environment within which the organisation can achieve its business objectives". (Worthington, 1997:89)
"An intelligent building is one that creates an environment that maximizes the efficiency of the occupants while allowing effective management of resources with minimum lifetime costs." The Intelligent Building Institute.
All these definitions point in the same direction. An intelligent building uses a high level of technology that enables it to be proficiently managed while maintaining an energy efficient existence.
Due to the relatively high cost of manufacture, these buildings are mainly constructed for leasing agencies. The buildings are leased to companies generally as offices. Some companies have them build for themselves mainly large internationals and multinationals. Large establishments such as schools, universities, councils and governments also use intelligent buildings. It is very rare to have intelligent buildings as domestic properties but some do have a certain degree of intelligent features.
As already mentioned intelligent buildings use a high level of technology, this relies heavily on electronics. With regard to the use of electronic technologies we can split them into four groups:
In an ideal world all the systems would be part of one integral system. This system could be controlled and managed from a single computer. All the hardware and software of the systems would be from a single source that uses the same interfaces so that all systems are compatible.
The type of building I choose to build shall be a domestic property. The location of the building shall be very important. Firstly I shall want it to be a rural location but this might conflict with the second factor. The second factor is the area must have broadband for high-speed Internet access. Currently rural areas in the UK have limited broadband availability. Therefore a few miles outside of a major town shall have to suffice. Ideally an old farm barn to be converted into a dwelling shall make a good start. Also a few aches of land preferably with woodland. I want the house to use a high level of technology for comfort, ease of living and entertainment. But I don't want to compromise my main objective. That is to an energy efficient home that uses 'Green' energy and resources and as much recycled materials as possible.