There are several different types of photovoltaic cells, two that were explored during this study were monocrystalline and amorphous. The table below shows the annual electrical output for both types using the proposed design in Reading.
Monocrystalline PV gave 100% more output than the amorphous PV, this was due to monocrystalline having double the nominal power.
The main grant scheme available for school based PV installations is a government scheme called the 'Low Carbon Buildings Programme' which is ran by the Dept of Trade & Industry. It will provide grants for a maximum of 3000 or 50% of the capital costs. For more information visit the following web site,
''.
PVSyst has the ability of calculating the array output when there is known shading on the array. Figures 3 & 4 shown the sheltered play area with a tree 4m taller than it and 2m in front of it.
The graph in the bottom left of each figure displays the linear beam shading loss on a clear day. In winter 20% of the irradiance is lost per day whereas in summer only 3% is lost. The reason that more is lost in winter, is because the sun is low in the sky so the tree has more of a shading affect as shown in Figure 3. Notice how in Figure 4 the sun is much higher therefore not behind the tree as much.
Over the whole year the array with shading produced 3991 kWh. That equates to almost a 9% dip in energy per annum. To remedy this problem the tree could be removed altogether or trimmed down to below the level of the array.
RETScreen PV project was also used for a comparison between the performances of different simulation programmes. However the chosen modules from PVSyst were not one of the listed modules in RETScreen. Therefore modules that featured in both programmes were used, these modules were BP Solar 5170. PVSyst gave an energy production of 4074 kWh/yr and RETScreen 3586 kWh/yr. This was a difference of about 0.5MWh/yr, which is quite a substantial difference. A full version of the data from RETScreen can be found in Appendix 2.
PVSyst is an easy to use programme with some good initial and detailed simulations methods. It has a simple CAD package built in for the simulation of shading effects. A couple of down points are the awkward multiple-window user interface and inability to quickly and easily compare various inverters and modules.
RETScreen is also relatively easy to use but seems rather primitive compared to PVSyst. It doesn't have an extensive PV module database like PVSyst and there is no ability to select an inverter. Another drawback of RETScreen is the lack of data analysis methods, ie. Irradiance and array performance data-tables and graphs.