Normalised means that the steel has been heated to approximately 800-900c then left to cool 'normally' in air. This is a very slow cooling rate so the austenite transforms fully into ferrite and pearlite. Pearlite is a lamellar structure of alternating layers of ferrite and cementite. Pearlite is hard and it gives the steel strength. Ferrite is soft, and gives the steel ductility and toughness. If the amount of carbon in the steel is increased, this increases the amount of pearlite in the steel. This has the effect of increasing the strength, but it also decreases the ductility and toughness.
Tempering is a process that involves reheating the already quenched steel. Quenching steel transforms the austenite to a partially or completely martensitic microstructure. The martensite is extremely hard and brittle. To regain some ductility the steel is reheated to a temperature in the range of 200 to 600c. This allows some of the body centred cubic of martensite to transform to pearlite and/or ferrite. Tempered steel is harder and stronger than the normalised steel, but has less ductility.
A general trend (of EN6A samples) shows that as the test temperature increases the fracture energy increases. From observation of the broken samples it can be said that brittle fracture occurred (Figure 1). Brittle fracture takes place when failure develops along the cleavage planes of individual crystals. This gives the fracture surface its 'glittery' appearance.
The sample of EN1A took almost five times the energy of EN6A to fracture. This is because EN1A has a smaller carbon content (0.1% compared to 0.4%) than EN6A. As mentioned in the theory an increase in carbon corresponds to an increase of pearlite and therefore a decrease in ferrite. Pearlite is hard and brittle, whereas ferrite is soft and ductile. So EN6A is more brittle than EN1A, brittle materials are more prone to fracture. Ductile materials will have some resistance to fracture. Upon failure they don't leave a 'clean' break whereas brittle materials do. Ductile materials have the appearance of layers being 'ripped' apart (Figure 2), the surface is said to be 'fibrous'. Plastic deformation is associated with ductile failure. The material is taken past its 'limit of proportionality' and into its plastic region. This deformation is permanent and unrecoverable after load is released.
Series 1&2 are the results obtained during this laboratory session, the rest are from previous sessions. There is a lot of variation between the results of corresponding temperatures. This is due to the difficulty of heat treatment. Also the samples used in previous sessions might be from different batches. There may be discrepancy of re-quench time and/or furnace reheat time. Re-quench was done it batches of three samples, therefore the middle sample may have cooled slightly slower giving it a higher pearlitic structure and slightly more ductility.
The graph shows increasing fracture energy with increasing tempering temperature. The higher the tempering temperature the higher the proportion of martensite that gets transformed back to austenite. On re-quench (dependant upon cooling rate) this austenite shall be transformed into a proportion of pearlite and ferrite. This will give the tempered steel a higher proportion of pearlite/ferrite than the original quenched steel. Therefore it shall have more ductility and a greater ability to withstand fracture.
So...higher temp more austenite more pearlite/ferrite greater ductility Increased fracture energy.
This graph is consistent with the previous results. The higher the tempering temperature the lower the crystalline percentage. Again this is because, higher tempering temperature gives more pearlite/ferrite that in turn gives greater ductility and resistance to fracture. Crystalline appearance is associated with brittle steels of low temperature.
The results show the correct trend but the 200c result is extremely low. The 400c is just about matches the theoretical and the 600c is slightly too high. Series four samples would probably give the best crystalline percentage results. This is because its 200c fracture energy is less than half of the used sample, so it is more brittle giving a higher crystalline structure. Its 400c is approximately the same as the used sample and its 600c's fracture energy is about 10% higher than the used sample. Therefore it would be more ductile and should give a completely fibrous fracture.