The proposed PV site is a sloping roof sheltering an area of 58 m 2 at a school in Reading. The sloping roof will have a slope angle of 20 o; this gives a total roof area of 42.6m 2. The roof is also angled at 30 o west of south. Analysis of a potential solar PV site was carried out using the PVSyst software, assuming that the roof is ventilated.
There existed no meteorological data for Reading, and so data for London (a location with a similar latitude) was used.
The sensitivity of a PV array output to changes in slope angle and azimuth is shown in figures 1 and 2.
These two figures only show how changing one parameter affects the output while the other parameter remains the same. Changing the azimuth has an affect on the slope output curve, and vice versa.
As the slope angle increases from 0-30 o, the azimuth curve changes from a flat line to the curve shown in figure 2 Past 30 o, the azimuth curve retains its shape but drops further down, so that the peak does not reach the optimum output.
For the slope curve, it is the optimum at 0 o azimuth, as shown in figure 1. As the azimuth angle increases (the array is turned away from the south in either a westwards or eastwards direction), the slope curve peak drops, and the curve flattens out.
To obtain the maximum electrical output for a PV array at this latitude, approximately 50 o N, the optimal slope angle is 30 o, and the array should face directly south.
The proposed array will therefore not produce the maximum possible output, as it will not be receiving the total possible amount of sunlight; however the difference in output of the optimum array and the proposed array are not large: the combined effects of the non-optimum tilt and orientation mean a 3% reduction in power from the optimum amount.
For a hypothetical array of mono-crystalline PV cells, the potential outputs of the optimum array and the proposed array are compared in table 1.
For the same identical array at the same latitude, the cost and nominal power output will be the same. The difference in the array slope and orientation causes the proposed array to fall short of the maximum potential output by 0.1 MWh/yr, causing the cost of the energy to be greater. The energy cost is an estimate of how much the array would be costing per unit output.
The potential profit is based upon a selling rate of 10 pence per kWh of the electricity to the grid. From the estimated annual production rate, it can be seen that the school could earn about 430 if all the electricity were sold to the grid.
The value of kWh/year/m 2 shows how a unit area of the proposed array will receive less solar energy than the array at the optimum orientation, but that this difference is not that large. The proposed array will give approximately 97% of the output of the optimum array. The value of kWh year -1/kWp shows that the proposed array produces less energy per unit nominal power of the array than the optimum array.
For an identical array in Benin, Nigeria (also at 20 o slope angle and 30 o azimuth), the array output is summarised in table 2 below, in comparison to the proposed array in Reading.
Appendix 1 contains data on the monthly outputs for both Reading and Benin, for comparison.
Table 2 shows that an identical array located in Benin, Nigeria, will have a much greater annual yield. This is due to the greater number of hours of daylight at this latitude. Appendix 2 shows the solar paths at these two latitudes - Benin has a much higher number of hours of daylight per year, and the intensity of the incident sunlight (Wm -2) is also much greater nearer the equator. The value of kWh/year/m 2 is accordingly much greater for Benin.
The monthly output patterns for both locations are quite different. The graphs in appendix 2 show how the incident sunlight varies greatly over the year. Reading sees a peak in summer and a trough in winter, while Benin has two small maximums and two small minimums - the minima occur during high summer and midwinter, when the sun is furthest from the equator. Benin is only a few degrees north of the equator, and sees maxima at about the times of equinox.
The array costs are the same, but the cost of energy from the Nigerian PV array will be much lower due to the greater energy output. The Benin array would therefore earn much more money, if all the electricity was sold to the grid at a price of 10p/kWh.
The previous analysis was based on an array comprising mono-crystalline PV cells. This type of cell is more efficient than polycrystalline or amorphous silicon cells, however it is also more expensive.
Table 3 compares the outputs of the proposed array in Reading using different cell types.
Thin film cells are the cheapest, however they are not as efficient, and so the nominal power output and estimated annual yield is much less than for mono-crystalline cells, at 2128 kWh/yr. Similarly, polycrystalline cells are also cheaper but less efficient.
The lower output of the thin film cells is not outweighed by their reduced cost, and so the cost of the electricity produced is much higher for thin film cells. The lower energy output means that the potential money to be made from selling the electricity is also much lower.
If the budget can accommodate it, it would be a better option to use mono-crystalline cells.
Funding is available for this sort of project, from the government's Low Carbon Buildings Program. The maximum grant available is 30,000, to cover 50% of the total cost of the scheme, however there is a monthly budget available for funding schemes of this type and so funds for a particular month may run out.
More information can be found at
Mono-crystalline silicon cells from BP Solar, type BP495, were chosen for the proposed array. These modules have an individual power rating of 95Wp. 60 of these modules will cover an area of 37.8m 2, and if connected in 6 parallel strings of 10 series connected modules will give a nominal output of 5.7kWp, at a maximum current of 19A, and maximum voltage of 279V.
The inverter chosen to match these modules is the Fronius IG 60EI, which has an operating voltage range of 150-400V and a nominal power of 4.6 kWp. This is less than the nominal power output of the cell array, since this means that the inverter is working at high efficiency for a larger proportion of time than if it were to match the array maximum output. The array is only likely to produce maximum power on a few bright summer days, and so it is more efficient to have the inverter match a more average array power output.
More details of both the cells and the inverter can be found in appendix 3.
The cell layout would be as shown in figure 3.
A low number of parallel strings ensures that the currents in the system are low, and equivalently voltages are high. A low current means that there is less resistive loss of power in the system. However having a few parallel connections is beneficial, since a shaded cell will affect the output of the other cells in the string. If there are a few separate strings, the total array output will not be affected by shading of one part of the array, since the output of unshaded strings will be unaffected.
The total annual output of the system is estimated at about 4.47 MWh/yr.
The loss diagram in appendix 3 shows how power losses occur at several stages in the PV system, mainly from irradiance levels being too low, and from the inverter.
Several other combinations of cell types and inverters were considered. It is possible to achieve similar power output for a similar size area using other cell types and inverter types. If budgeting allows/restricts, cell and inverter types could be changed to reflect this, as the more efficient and more powerful cells are likely to be more expensive, and vice-versa. Another problem to consider is fitting the cells to the roof dimensions. This would be easier to achieve with a greater number of smaller cells, and this is also something to consider.
The presence of a tree in front of the PV array will have some negative effect on the system output. A simulation of the shading effect of the tree was run using PVSyst.
The tree top is 4m above the roof height, and the tree stands 2m in front of the PV array. A model of this setup is shown in figure 4.
Depending on the time of day and time of year, the amount of shading caused by the tree will vary. In the summer when the sun is high, shading is minimal. In the winter, a large proportion of the array could be shaded.
For the cell and inverter choice as proposed, the annual power output with the shading is estimated at 4.09MWh/yr, a reduction of about 0.4 MWh/yr from the simulation without shading. The shading effect is greater in the winter than the summer. As well as the direct effect of shading (loss of irradiance on the cells) there is also a knock-on effect from the inverter - it will be receiving lower voltages, and so there will be greater power losses due to the inverter's operating efficiency decreasing with voltage.
The proposed scenario was also investigated using the RetScreen software. This program allowed the choice of location, array slope and orientation, and choice of type and number of PV cells. However the program did not allow choice of inverter or manipulation of series/parallel connections between the cells. RetScreen did not have the same range of cell types offered by PVSyst. The BP modules chosen were not available, so the next closest thing was chosen: BP Solar modules BP590F, with a rating of 90Wp (compared to the 95Wp used above). 60 of these modules give a nominal power output of 5.4kWp, and cover an area of 37.8m 2, same as before.
RetScreen estimated the annual array output to be 4.45 MWh/yr, similar to that estimated by PVSyst for the 95Wp modules - this would seem to indicate that RetScreen will tend to give higher estimates of annual yield than PVSyst.
RetScreen offers less choice when putting together a PV system, and does not produce graphical output. It also does not offer the opportunity to investigate shading of the array by other objects.
However, RetScreen has far more comprehensive financial assessments, allowing costs to be studied in detail. It also contains a section to estimate the possible reduction in greenhouse gases from converting to solar energy. For the proposed array, there would be a possible reduction of 4.56 tonnes of CO 2 per year if the solar power were used instead of electricity from a coal powered power station. The CO 2 savings are dependant on the original source of energy.
The proposed PV array to be erected at the Reading School will not produce the maximum amount of power possible at this latitude due to its slope and orientation, however the reduction in power is not large and the site is still a good choice for a PV array. It is recommended that if the budget allows, that mono-crystalline PV cells be chosen. These will give much higher power outputs, and so the cost of the energy produced by the array is lower than that from an amorphous cell array despite the higher cost of mono-crystalline cells.