During the period, even before conception, weigh is an important factor should be considered. How much weight you should gain depends on your current weight. If your Body Mass Index (BMI) which can be calculated in the follow formula:
If your BMI is more than 120, I suggest you gain 7.5 Kg during the pregnancy, if your BMI is between 80-120, I think 9 Kg is a desirable weight you should gain. And if your BMI is less 80, you need about 13.5 Kg during the pregnancy. More or less weight you gain is harmful for you and your baby. Due to the reason is that during the pregnancy, extra energy is needed which is recommended 150 Kcal per day in the 1 st trimester and 350 Kcal per day during the 2 nd and 3 rd trimester for your body metabolism and the foetus growth. More weight gain will increase risk of gestational diabetes, pre-eclampsia, large babies, high blood pressure and long term obesity. If the weight gain is lower than 65 Kcal that may lead the low weight baby which associated with higher incidence in adult life. Such as high cholesterol levels, type 2 diabetes.
No. Although during the pregnancy, mothers need more energy and nutrients to supply individual metabolism and for the foetus that is widespread layperson's idea that the mother should "eat for two", actually it means mother should eat for herself and the foetus and it does not indicate mother intake double meal, too much energy intake may increase the incidence of risk of gestational diabetes, pre-eclampsia, large babies, high blood pressure and long term obesity. Current estimated average requirements (EARs) for energy intake in pregnancy is pulsing 200 Kcal/ day on the value of normal energy intake. So what you can do just increase energy intake or reduce physical activity during the last trimester.
Generally you need extra iron intake, but before I give the advice I have to know you have iron overload family history? If the answer is yes, I suggest you take less Fe supplement than normal. Because if you can iron overload, the excess Fe may increase the risk of series diseases, such as liver cirrhosis, hepatocellular cancer, pancreas diabetes. If you have not iron overload family history, the supplement of iron during pregnancy is needed. The effect of pregnancy on iron metabolisms which are associated with plasma volume, red cell mass is important to women reproductive years. The net additional iron requirements during pregnancy are estimated to be 1040 mg. Availability from different food sources is a key issue. Cereal and meat is recommended for iron supplement.
Yes, Vit D, Vit C, Vit A, folate and thiamin and riboflavin are recommended during the pregnancy. Vit D has the property that can be synthesized via sunlight, but the pregnancy women may reduce the activity outdoor. Improved via A status can improved fetal growth and reduced xerophthalimia. The major role of folate is one carbon unit metabolism, a key process in the synthesis of the purine and pyrimidine bases of the nucleic acids.
Yes, you should avoid eating raw fish, liver, soft eggs and unpasteurized cheeses during pregnancy which may contain the parasite and bacteria. Fish containing accumulated levels of mercury in their fatty tissues, such as shark, swordfish, king mackerel, and tilefish, when a pregnant woman consumes large amounts of mercury, her baby may suffer brain damage resulting in developmental delays (for example, delays in learning to walk or talk). Remember, everything before or during pregnancy should be done in moderation.