The average weight gain in British women is 12-13 kg. Of which, around 7.2 kg results from the maternal physiological adaptations (e.g. increase in uterus weight, fat, breast) and the rest is from the products of conception (e.g. on average 3.3 kg foetus, amniotic fluid). But the weight gained is also varying with the pre-pregnant weight, i.e. if under weight: 12.5-18 kg, if over weight: 7-11.5 kg and if obese: at least 6 kg weight gain. Your weight gain is also associated with your baby birth weight. Gaining more than 6.5 kg could reduce the risk of having a Low Birth Weight baby (weight<2.5 kg). But gaining too much weight may result in many conditions afterwards such as prolonged labour, birth injury, pregnancy-induced hypertension or obesity in the mother.
No, you should not. Although there may be an increase in the amount of diet taken but the word 'eating for two' is exaggerated. Pregnant women can eat as normal until entering week 29 th of pregnancy onward that the energy needed will be an extra 200 kcal/day. However, this extra increment is mainly for non-protein diet (e.g. carbohydrate); because the normal protein intake in western women is exceeds the requirement for pregnancy. Moreover; there are physiological adaptations and behavioural changes that will recompense the increased requirement of energy needed.
If your iron status is normal prior to conception, the answer is no, you do not. Although, during conception, there is an increasing in the amount of your plasma by 1.5 L, thus diluting your haemoglobin concentration (which could leads to iron-deficiency anaemia), and leads to an additional 900 mg (2-4 mg/day) iron, but this increment could be met by the maternal adaptations i.e. utilization of maternal iron stores, increase in the efficiency of small bowel iron absorption. The cessation of menstruation also contributes to iron conservation as well. In addition, there are evidences that iron supplementation could alters the shape of the red blood cells so lower their oxygen binding capacity but rise the blood viscosity eventually reduce the rate of placental perfusion, thus affect the nutrients sent to the baby.
Yes, you do. Although many vitamins are suggested extra increment, most of them can be met by normal intake and maternal adaptations except the three, which are vitamin D (10 g /day), vitamin C (extra 10 mg/day) and folic acid or folate (extra 100 g/day).The appropriate amount of Vitamin D is crucial for Ca balance and absorption in bone. Normally, people do get enough vitamin D by body synthesis from 7-dehydrocholesterol in their skin when exposed to sun light but the reduction in pregnant women activities may decreases the chances of sun exposure and leads to the necessity of supplementation. Though vitamin C deficient is scarce in pregnancy, supplemented is preferred as the foetus uses vitamin C from maternal store, mainly during the final stages of gestation. Many births are affected by neural tube defects (NTDs), a group of conditions that brain, spinal cord, skull and vertebral column fail to develop properly during the foetal embryonic period. This risk can be reduced by supplementation of folate. Some research shows 72% protective effect of folate supplementation against NTDs. The extra in take of folate also assists in foetal new tissue formation as well.
Alcohol, retinol containing food (e.g. liver, pt), soft cheese and non-pasteurized dairy products. Alcohol consumption could leads to Foetal Alcohol Syndrome (FAS) which causes babies to become small, facial abnormalities, mentally retarded, immunodeficient and possibly slow growth after birth. Large amount of retinol intakes causes the malformations of the embryo or foetus and eventually birth defects. Pregnant women are vulnerable to Listeriosis than normal people. This disease is caused by Listeria monocytogenes, which is detected in soft cheese and unpasteurized milk products. The complications include blood infection, meningitis in mother and many detrimental effects to the baby (e.g. miscarriage, premature birth, blood infection, meningitis and death). Even though fish is very nutritious but the particular group of fish should be avoided which are marlin, swordfish, shark, tuna (including canned) due to the methyl mercury contamination, which can be absorbed across the placenta to the foetus, resulting in many severe symptoms e.g. sensory problems and mental retardation.