To develop an understanding of the principles underlying cheese making processes.
Cheese is the generic name for a group of fermented milk-based food product. Various definitions are given to them, for example, the FAO/WHO defines cheese as 'the fresh or matured solid or semi-solid product obtained by coagulating milk, skimmed milk, partly skimmed milk, cream, whey cream, or butter milk, or any combination of these materials, through the action of rennet or other suitable coagulation agents, and by partially draining the whey resulting from such coagulation' (Walstra et al., 1999). It is essentially a concentrated product of fat and protein in the milk varying between 6 to 12 fold depending on the variety, thus considered highly nutritious Production steps for the majority of cheese varieties can be divided into two steps i.e. the manufacturing which is carried out within the first 24 hours and the ripening period; although some manufacturing steps such as salting and dehydration may continue over a long period. Soft cheese is one type of cheese characterized by high (>40%) moisture content (Fox, 1993). The basic steps in soft cheese manufacturing are coagulation (clotting), dehydration (removal of the whey), shaping (put into mould), further draining of whey and finishing. Soft cheese is different from normal cheese production in that it can be consumed fresh without ripening period.
The important step in producing cheese before start clotting milk is the selection of the milk. Pasteurised milk is common due to the safety aspect of the finished cheese as some pathogens can survive the condition of production. After the milk has been pasteurised, comes the coagulation step. However, since the pasteurization killed most of the microflora in the milk, a starter culture of selected bacteria, e.g. consisting of Lactococcus lactis subsp lactis and/or Lactococcus lactis subsp cremoris and Leuconostoc mesenteroides, are often added prior to the addition of enzyme to attain desired acid production and flavour characteristics. Fox (1993) stated that acid production can influence:
Clotting of the milk for production of soft cheese is often achieved by a combined acid and rennet coagulation (since starter culture is added prior to the addition of enzymes) (Walstra et al., 1999) A gel is formed due to casein particles aggregating into a network entrapping fat inside, separating the milk into curd and whey serum. In enzymatic clotting, chymosin acts on the kappa-casein molecule at a specific site, i.e. between amino acid Phe 105 and Met 106, resulting in the splitting of kappa-casein. The casein micelle will then be split into 2 parts: the released hydrophilic caseinomacropeptide into whey serum and the paracasein (containing the other part of kappa-casein called para-kappa casein which remains attach to the micelles). Because the disappearance of the hairy structure of kappa-casein which is the principal factor stabilizing the casein micelles, the casein micelles thus could not disperse in milk. Instead, they attach to each other and eventually coagulate. In addition, the decreased electronic charge on the casein molecules, brought about by the reduction of pH by acid producing bacteria, cause micelles to aggregate. At pH near isoelectric pH of the casein i.e. ~4.6, the repulsion between casein micelles is reduced allowing close contact between micelles and eventually coagulation occurs.
The coagulation of the casein starts when about 70% of the hairy region has been split. By van der Waals attraction, the attraction of casein occurs. However, this force alone is insufficient thus the necessary of Ca 2+ ions which reduce the electrostatic repulsion by neutralizing the negative charge on the micelles and forming bridges i.e. both negative-negative and negative-positive salt linkages between charged sites on the paracasein micelles.
After the addition of enzyme and starter culture, the milk is then incubated at 33 to 35 C allowing chymosin to work and bacteria to grow. The gel is formed. The removal of whey which is resulted from syneresis of the gel or the curd is enhanced by cutting the coagulum. The resulting curd makes up about 10 to 30% of the original volume of milk (Walstra et al., 1999). All the steps promoting gel syneresis are characterized as a dehydration step. Stirring and salting after formation of the curd improves whey lose from the curd by means of osmotic pressure differences. Finally, shaping and pressing of the curd further improve whey removal. In some traditional soft cheese production, large lumps are cut from the coagulum, put into molds, where syneresis occurs resulting in high water content cheese. During these stages, a variety of cheese based on the moisture content can be made as a result of the different degree of dehydration. Because salting is an essentail step of cheese manufacturing, most cheese contains added salt of 1% - 4%. Addition of salt into the cheese has various advantages which are
The syneresis of the curd is one critical phenomenon in determining cheese's final result (Walstra et al., 1999). It is defined as the process of gel contraction or shrinkage after it is being formed leading to the flow of the whey through the gel networks. The process is not a persisting action of rennet since no additional caseinomacropeptide is removed from the micelles shortly after the gel has formed. For high-moisture cheese, the syneresis should be slowed down or stop after a certain time though this is far less important in low-moisture cheese. Walstraal. (1999) summarized the factors affecting syneresis as follows:
Refer to the methods describing in the practical handout.
Analysis of milk and whey composition revealed the differences between them. From table 1, the fat content in whey is reduced because the majority of fat molecules are entrapped in the casein gel during milk clotting step which is attributed to the coagulation of casein micelles. Similar reason applied to protein content i.e. in whey the protein content is lower compared to that in milk because most protein in milk (~80%) is casein which is coagulated after the addition of enzyme. The protein content in whey, 0.93%, is probably ~0.6% whey protein plus the rest ~0.3% from casein and other small peptides. On the other hand, lactose is slightly higher in whey. This is because other major components in milk i.e. fat and protein were removed from whey serum thus lactose is more concentrated (higher proportion), though the amount should be similar in both milk and whey. TA is the measuring of buffer capacity in the solution. In whey, as >70% of protein is removed so the buffer capacity of the solution decreased (since charges on protein molecules contribute to the buffering capacity). Consequently, the TA is slightly lower in whey.
In acid coagulation, Table 2, the higher acid addition led to higher degree of aggregation of the micelles. The mechanism is that casein becoming insoluble at pH around its isoelectric pH. This facilitates the aggregation of protein due to less repulsion between individual molecules. As pH approaching an isoelectric point (~4.6), higher degree of clotting was observed. Moreover, at lower pH, the Calcium ion activity also increases hence stimulate the clotting process. However, if pH is further reduced below 4.6, the texture of gel is lost i.e. more viscous and harder curdling.
Temperature of 35 C, slightly higher than normal incubating temperature, was used in rennet coagulation in order to speed up the reaction. From Table 3, it is clear that CaCl 2 addition promoted gel formation best. The reason is probably due to the improved cross-linking of calcium ions between casein micelles. Gel formation in 'stirred' and 'refrigerated' are both very less since the stirring action disrupted the gel structure and low temperature inhibit the activity of chymosin (a minimum temperature of 20C is required fro rennet coagulation (Fox, 1993)). But this effect is reversible i.e. as the temperature in the 'refrigerated' condition was increased to 35C, gel formation eventually occurred (table 4). Boiled milk prevents coagulation process since heat denatures the complex protein structure, exposing thiol group of kappa-casein molecules. As a result, -lactoglobulin, a peptide in whey serum, will bind to the exposed thiol group. The steric hindrance conferred by this attachment impairs the ability of chymosin to attack at the specific site. Thus coagulation could not take place. The effect of oxalate in milk clotting resulted from its affinity to calcium ions. Oxalate strips out free calcium ions, preventing them from participating in coagulation process.
From the experiment, it is clear that the important factors contributing to coagulation of milk are the temperature as to allow enzyme to work, the presence of calcium ion which participate in gel forming and the presence of other agents capable of reduces the calcium ion concentration in the milk.