Robot football provides a fertile environment for development of artificial intelligence techniques. One of most interesting but in the same way the most demanding technique is designing strategy for football robot team. In order for a robot team to actually perform a soccer game, various technologies must be incorporated including: design principles of autonomous agents, multi-agent collaboration, strategy acquisition and real-time reasoning. Match is a task for a team of multiple fast-moving robots under a dynamic environment.
Aim of this project is to investigate strategy for team of football robots. And potentially investigate Bluetooth communication between robots.
The idea of creating robots is as old, or even older than all computer science. Artificial people, iron people, androids, etc are as frequent in ancient myths ( eg. myth of Pygmalion ) and fairytales (eg. "The Wonderful Wizard Of Oz", L Frank Bum) as their next of kin - robots are now. But what does a word robot mean? It comes from the Czech word robota, industrial labour. The word has first appeared in Karel apek's science fiction play R.U.R. (Rossum's Universal Robots) in 1921, and has probably been invented by author's brother, painter Josef apek. According to Internet encyclopaedia Wikipedia:
The last paragraph treats on the same kind of robot which I will investigate in my project. The Miniature Intelligent Autonomous ro BOT - Blue Tooth (MIABOT BT) is a fully autonomous miniature mobile robot. It uses bi-directional Bluetooth communications, which provides a robust frequency hopping wireless communications protocol at 2.4GHz. By usage of this feature, MIABOT communicates with central computer which makes decisions based on the video analysis.
To make it even more complicated my project will be not about one but about 3 robots playing in one team against other 3 robots. The idea is pretty easy: create a team of robots capable to play football. It was initiated by Jong-Hwan Kim, KAIST, Korea in 1995 from International Organizing Committee, and previously was named: Micro-Robot World Cup Soccer Tournament. It finally changed name in 1996 to Federation of International Robot-soccer Association (FIRA). Since then the concept evaluated and 6 tournaments has been played all over the world. Depending on robot types tournaments have been classified into 7 categories:
The MIABOT BT, which I will be developing, belongs to MIROSOT, what means it is nit more than 7.5cm x 7.5cm x 7.5cm. Some academic research about this robot soccer prototype is made under supervision of Dr. Olivier C.L. Haas from Control Theory and Application Centre (CTAC).
My project is only a small part of whole research but it is also one of most significant. My first aim will be to declare how a single robot should approach the ball and how it should behave in reaction with environment. My final target will be to develop strategy for entire three-robot football team. Most of my work should include programming in C++. Without the written software robots are not be able to cooperate or even move. The aim is to create a tightly-collaborative and successful team of three separate robots. And finally it will make a truly autonomous system of 3 MIABOT's which should be able to play robot football without any human supervision.
Before coming into details of my project I would like to introduce the reader to the robot and the system itself. System is relatively easy to understand:
Objectives of this project are to: