Allowing for the rapid growth of the brain during the first months of life, the open sutures and thin bone of an infant cranium results in a malleable material also susceptible to influence through congenital condition, disease or intentional modification. Should the skull of the baby be fused and immobile, the infant could not pass through the narrow birth canal of the mother. Upon delivery, the skull is often elongated but returns to a natural profile within hours or days (McPherson 2004, ) although the cranial sutures remain open to a certain degree into adulthood.
For thousands of years, the temporary condition of the infant skull has been exploited for aesthetic, cultural or possibly religious purpose; adults through the use of deforming apparatus, such as bands and cradle-boards, artificially modified the cranial vaults of their children or those in their care (Blackwood & Danby 1955: 173). Possible examples of this practice have now been identified to Shanidar Cave in Iraq, around 45,000 years BP (Trinkaus 1982 & 1983) and eyewitness accounts have been recorded since the time of the Hippocratic Corpus. Hippocrates, following witness of a people with deformed heads living on the shores of the Euxine (Knox 1863: 271), in the areas of the Black Sea (Babcock Gove 1993) stated the unique heads of the "Macrocephali" were achieved by the application of bandages and devices to the crania of the neonates to elongate the profile (Chadwick & Mann 1978: 161). The purpose in this case was apparently one of status identification as Hippocrates recognised the longest heads were those of the most noble individuals (ibid); a similar stimulus could be found in upper-class Chinese women who would have their feet bound to restrict the growth both by length and width (Ortner & Putschar 1981). Other influence for the adoption of this practice may possibly include as an ethnic marker (zbek 2001) or religious observance (Hrdlika 1919). In other cultures, the modified skull has become one of aesthetic pleasure (Blackwood & Danby 1955; Ortner & Putschar 1981; Trinkaus 1983); there is record of the disappointment of a woman with mild deformity in New Britain, Papua New Guinea, that her mother had not pulled the bandage tighter, therefore increasing the modification (Blackwood & Danby 1955: 175). When observed by an outsider, the affect is often displeasing and results in descriptions such as "a very ugly deformation of the head" (de la Vega 1966: 486).
The method of modification, the final shape of the head and the decision on how long the deforming apparatus remains in place may be dictated at various social levels; by the 'tribe', the family or by the opinion of the midwife (Hasluck 1947: 130). For whatever reason cranial modification is undertaken, the practice is worldwide and spans prehistory through to historic periods. The methodology involved in cranial modification in addition to ethnographic and archaeological examples will be provided within this paper.
Pathological conditions can result in various forms of modification from mild, benign deviation from the mean to severe deformation incompatible with life. It has long been recognised that a child sleeping on a resistant surface may lead to occipital-parietal flattening (Hrdlika 1919; Ortner & Putschar 1981); possible examples have been recovered including an asymmetrical female with mastoid deformity from Paucarcancha, Peru, (MacCurdy 1923). The Classical Greek author Pliny reported a "monstrous birth" was considered a portent (Rackham 1942: 529). Physical characteristics were at the time thought to have occurred due to sights, sounds or thoughts at the time of conception (ibid).
Synostosis or premature fusion of sutures of the cranium will lead to various degrees of deformation dependant on the quantity and location of the sutures involved (Resnick 2002). Some genetic conditions can result in cranial deformity and chromosome disorders incorporate many symptoms and/or deformities occasionally including modification of the skull, for example Trisomy 13 and Down's syndromes (ibid). In addition to such conditions, there is evidence that diet can factor into cranial deformity; vitamin and/or mineral deficiency or alcohol abuse may result in conditions including microcephaly (Martin 2005; McPherson 2004, ). The conditions and severity of pathological cranial deformity are vast, some of which will be addressed within this paper.
When examining human remains for pathological conditions, differential diagnosis should be considered. To accept an initial interpretation may result in evidence being overlooked, misdiagnosis and neglect in considering an alternative condition. This paper will describe the process undertaken during artificial head modification and pathological conditions resulting in a similar appearance; through the examination of ethnographic and archaeological evidence, similarities in cranial shape and size will be identified and possible differential diagnosis will be examined.
Upon recovery of crania displaying values deviating from the average human skull, several points must be addressed. Firstly, care should be taken to ascertain whether the deformity is intentional or unintentional; determination between unintentional cradle-boarding and head-binding can be difficult (Anton 1989: 254). In addition, characteristic similarities suggest pathological conditions could be mistaken for intentional modification and such occurrences should be avoided.
Hominid species other than Homo sapiens resulted in misinterpretation during early work, for example Knox (1863) description of a skull recovered from Neandertal, Germany. Prior to the classification of the Neandertal species, Knox was correct when he described the skull as round with prominent brow ridges and having "the resemblance to the chimpanzee, but not a gorilla" (Knox 1863: 272) and suggested the cranium was not deformed "by mechanical means or otherwise" (ibid); however, misinterpretation did occur upon the examination of the long bones; the robustness was attributed to retained foetal characteristics (ibid).
The recovery of a lone abnormal skull from a cemetery of average crania suggests a benign origin rather than intentional modification (Wells 1967: 6); conversely, recovery of both artificially modified skulls from the same cemetery as unmodified crania may suggest the presence of two distinct cultures within the region (Knox 1863: 272) or alternatively, a race that has desisted in using such methods.
Finally, differences between individual cases of artificial modification need to be carefully considered. Defining factors include the duration and position of the deforming apparatus on the cranium (Blackwood & Danby 1955; Trinkaus 1983;), the tension and material density of the bands (Stewart 1941; Hasluck 1947), unintentional movement and the width of the band (zbek 2001), and the healing response of the bones of the individual (Stewart 1941: 344). These elements will not only affect the shape produced but the level of deformity visible in the adult (Trinkaus 1982). The degree of resulting deformation has been graded by different authors using various terminology; in this paper, for the purpose of clarity, the grades of unmodified, modified and extremely modified have been adopted.
The frontal flattening with excess curvature of the occipital bones of Neandertal remains recovered from the upper levels of Layer D of Shanidar Cave, Iraq, suggest artificial cranial modification has apparently been undertaken since at least 45,000 years BP (Trinkaus 1982; 1983). Similar treatment has been identified throughout the world and in geographical regions with the adoption of artificial cranial deformation, the occurrence rate appears to be high; in analysis of 1515 skeletons from Mexico, Guatemala and Honduras, 88.65% displayed evidence of modification by the use of cradleboards (Tiesler 1999 . mesoweb.com/features/tielser/media/headshaping.pdf). The flat-headed race identified by Hippocrates extended from the ancient shore of the Euxine to central Europe (Knox 1863); this may suggest migration of modified individuals (zbek 2001) and/or adoption of the fronto-occipital deformation practice by observers.
The motivation behind the practice varied and apparently included symbols of status, aesthetic pleasure (Blackwood & Danby 1955), religious symbolism (Hrdlika 1919) and possibly tribal identification (de la Vega 1966: 485). An unintentional combination of multiple factors can be recognised; although attributed to aesthetics, the Greeks and Vlachs preferred round heads, while the Konia Turks would flatten the forehead and increase the height of their naturally large crania (Hasluck 1947: 130), coincidentally providing a cultural marker. The process of modification begins soon after birth, possibly immediately following the postpartum bath, usually by a woman, most commonly the mother or another person present at the birth (ibid; Hasluck 1947).
Evidence suggests in some cultures the practice is a custom involving predominantly female children, possibly including the Chalcolithic people of Deirmentepe, Turkey, based on tentative sex determination of children (zbek 2001), however, others have an even divide between the sexes, such as the prehistoric Peruvian Ancon (Cheverud et al 1992) and some Mayan civilisations (Tiesler 1999 ). In groups where both sexes have undergone modification, variation can still be seen; examples recovered from New Britain suggested the females underwent head-binding for a longer period than the men due to the greater deformity seen in the specimens (Blackwood & Danby 1955: 187).
The act of binding was possibly significant in the early life of the child; anthropomorphic figurines musical instruments used during pre-Hispanic rites suggest the process of head-shaping was perhaps commemorated ceremonially (fig 1) (Tiesler 1999,  shaping.pdf). Symbolic meaning may explain the burial of an individual with in-situ deforming apparatus including a child from Moquegua, Peru (fig 2) (Ubelaker 2000) and the occasional adult (Aufderheide & Rodriguez-Martin 1998).
The process of head-binding appears similar worldwide; bands of various material encircled the head of the neonatal infant, evidenced by the remains of the Moquegua infant (fig 2), occasionally with the addition of small boards or hard pads (de la Vega 1966; Aufderheide & Rodriguez-Martin 1998). The position of the bands did not dictate the final shape. The tightness of the band, which appears to have been adjusted daily (ibid; Aufderheide & Rodriguez-Martin 1998), and the overall length of time the apparatus remained in place would affect the appearance into adulthood (zbek 2001), however, minimal deformation would be visible after only one day (Blackwood & Danby 1955). Some children would be head-bound until the desired shape was achieved, for a year or until they could walk (Trinkaus 1982), up to three years (Aufderheide & Rodriguez-Martin 1998), or until the child possessed the ability to remove the band (Blackwood & Danby 1955; Trinkaus 1982).
The people of New Britain would 'paint' the infant's head with a black mixture of charred magas wood and water prior to the application of the band; this was said to make the binding more effective (Blackwood & Danby 1955). Following any initial preparation, all cultures apparently began the head-binding process with a band encircling the head, from the frontal bone at a level above the orbit, over the parietal region to the occipital bone (zbek 2001). The ears were carefully flattened against the head; the band would cover the entire ear of an infant or just the tips of an older child (Blackwood & Danby 1955). The band itself was of various materials although can be identified as flexible due to a lack of flattening (Trinkaus 1982: 199; 1983:147); the cultures of New Britain would generally use a bark-cloth bandage, a strip of which was removed from the loin cloth of the men, however, one man wore a silk loin cloth, having obtained the fabric while working as a labourer in Rabaul; this too was utilised for the bandage of his child (Blackwood & Danby 1955).
A Chalcolithic infant from Deirmentepe, Turkey, of only 6-7 months of age was identified as having undergone modification with the use of one band (zbek 2001) (fig 3). Additional bands were often added to the first phase single band as the child grew or when the head reached the desired volume, often after the child reached 12 months old (ibid). Individuals who have undergone multi-band modification can be identified through the bulge that developed between the bands (zbek 2001) and included the Poroi Vlachs who occasionally secured a second band beneath the chin and over the crown to shorten the face (Hasluck 1947). An example of the dual-banding form of modification, recovered from Deirmentepe (ibid), displays the intra-band bulge. The infant, approximately 18 months old, was apparently head-bound with two bands passing over the frontal bone and lower portion of the parietals and occipital (fig 4A), resulting in a superior-posterior projection of the superior portion of the parietals and upper part of the occipital: the circular form of modification, also known as circumferential or Aymara type, (fig 4B) (ibid). These two infants provide valuable evidence of the stages children underwent during the process of modification.
The preferred shape of the modified cranium would differ from region to region. Within the culture of the Maya, the people of the various regions would shape the heads of their infants slightly differently; in the Lower Usumacinta region, the resulting profile was oblique; in the highlands, an erect shape (Tiesler 1999 ), again although possibly unintentional producing a cultural marker. Within the Mayan city of Copn, Honduras, internal variation rather than indicating social status, identified the integration of individuals into society; Patios A, B and C of a housing complex revealed a predominance of mimetic and oblique shapes; conversely, Patio D, on the periphery of the site apparently inhabited by outsiders, showed a preference for the erect type (ibid).
Blackwood and Danby (1955) state when categorising artificial cranial modification, to name the deformed bone or to which pressure is applied is insufficient. The overall result is dependant on the position of the apparatus above or below the greatest angle of the bone, together with individual growth patterns and diet (ibid).
Within this paper, in addition to the practice of cradle-boarding, three forms of binding will be discussed. The apparatus and spatial arrangement used during each method of modification will be described and graphic examples provided where possible
Fronto-occipital flattening (Cheverud et al 1992)/anteroposterior deformation (Anton 1989)/flat-head type (Hrdlika 1919), the most common form of modification (Ubelaker 2000), produced flattening of the frontal and occipital bones and bulging of the parietals, producing a tri-lobed (Anton 1989) appearance (fig 5) and a taller, wider face. The overall rounded appearance of the various bones affected by this deformation suggests the apparatus employed were flexible bands or a specially designed headband (fig 6), restricting growth at the anterior-posterior area and also in the region of the sagittal suture. The Peruvian Ancon, between AD60 - AD1450, employed the fronto-occipital flattening method of deformation on both men and women, although with a high degree of asymmetry (Cheverud et al 1992), as did the people of Chavina, Peru (fig 7) (Ortner & Putschar 1981).
Circumferentially deformed skulls, including the Aymara (Anton 1989) and circular (zbek 2001) types were produced through the elongation of the frontal, temporal squamae and portions of the parietal and occipital bones without lateral bulging, with compensatory superior-posterior bulging of the upper occipital (Hrdlika 1919; MacCurdy 1923). This form of modification, probably through the use of bands (Hrdlika 1919), produced a long, narrow superior appearance (fig 8). An extreme example of this form of modification was that of a female, around 30 years of age, from Patallacta, Peru (fig 9) (MacCurdy 1923). MacCurdy found a reduction in the dimensions of the foramen magnum in deformed crania, 3.3cm long x 2.7cm broad, to that of undeformed examples, 3.7cm long x 2.9cm broad (1923: 230); evidence suggests this form of modification restricts growth of the foramen magnum and could result in the constriction of the spinal cord as will be discussed later in this paper.
Through localised pressure on the posterior cranial vault, the securing of an infant to a cradle- board (fig 10) produced a cranium with either unilateral or bilateral flattening to the occipital or lambdoid region (Kohn et al 1995) and have been used by the people of Albania to produce their characteristic flat heads (Hasluck 1947). Growth restrictive pressure in the region between the frontal and occipital bones induced by the use of a cradle-board results in fronto-occipital reshaping and compensatory growth of the parietal in a mediolateral direction (Cheverud et al 1992). The cradle-board, use of which was widespread throughout the American south-west (Kohn et al 1995), may also have produced compensatory posterior lateral growth (Cheverud et al 1992).
Care should be taken on examination of presumed artificially modified skulls as mild although frequent pressure on the occipital bone from a cradle-board could result in values equal to hyperbrachcephaly (Blackwood & Danby 1955).
Occipital or lambdoid deformation resembles that of accidental occurrence (Hrdlika 1919; Ubelaker 2000), such as infants sleeping with their heads on a resistant surface, for example the Navahos, or with the assistance of apparatus in ancient Peru, (Hrdlika 1919). The appearance is that of a fronto-occipitally shortened but broadened skull with a high forehead (ibid) and vertically elongated occipital (Ubelaker 2000). An extreme example such as that found in a south-west American Pueblo cemetery must display intentional modification opposed to unintentional deformation due to the severity of the deformation (fig 11).
Children have been reported remained strapped to their cradle-board until they were three years old (de la Vega 1966) and developmentally there seems to be little or no affect on the child through the use of a cradle-board; this may be connected to the belief of some North American Indians, including the Navahos, that cradle-boarding and the immobility induced (Hudson 1966), produced a strong child, a plausible explanation when considering the affects of isometric, resistance, exercise (Hudson 1966), alternatively that it encouraged straight growth (Kohn et al 1995). The Songish North American Indians of Victoria, British Columbia, adopted the cradle-board and pads as the apparatus utilised during cranial modification (Cheverud et al 1992) and may have held similar beliefs. European cradle-boards allowed movement (Hudson 1966) and therefore did not provide similar resistance; future research into skeleto-muscular development of children displaying evidence of cradle-boarding may identify a difference between the North American tribes and European examples.
Contraindications against the use of artificial cranial modification have been suggested to include the increased risk of cerebral disease and/or mental retardation (Blackwood & Danby 1955). A trained nurse who had worked in the British Solomans prior to a transfer to the Arawe district, known for the practice of head binding, noticed an increased incidence of meningitis, cerebral malaria and severe headaches amongst the cranially modified individuals. In contrast, a medical missionary of similar experience in the same regions had not noticed the correlation and did not attribute such disease to head-binding (ibid). However, excessive tension of the deformer could cause necrosis of the bone and continued use beyond the synostosis of the sutures may result in constriction of the brain (Aufderheide & Rodriquez-Martin 1998), therefore, the opinion of the nurse should not be dismissed.
Despite evidence that the cranial volume can be reduced slightly by modification, 3.7% in the case of bilaterally modified Hopi crania when compared to non-modified (Kohn et al 1995), early work in the field identified artificial cranial modification and the resulting shape change of the brain did not apparently affect mental function (Knox 1863; Blackwood & Danby 1955). Although the profile of the brain is modified, all areas are present and undamaged and therefore, normal activity remains unaltered, evidenced by the elaborate carvings and painted designs produced by the people of New Britain (Blackwood & Danby 1955).
Studies on the affect of artificial head modification on the shape of the bones of the base of the cranium or those of the face have produced inconsistent results (Cheverud et al 1992) and the sutures of the skull are apparently not affected anatomically but spatially (Blackwood & Danby 1955). Extreme modification would be expected to affect the bones of the cranial base and face (Hrdlika 1919) and upon analysis of the Ancon series, data showed considerable shape change to the cranial base and lower facial bones, however, similar examination of Songish crania from British Columbia showed little significant change to the face (ibid). This difference can be explained by the Songish adoption of the cradle-board opposed to the Ancon use of a headband. There is however, evidence that modification can affect the size and location of foramen of the skull (Blackwood & Danby 1955); pressure on the spinal cord as a result of the relocation or distortion of the foramen magnum has been linked in pathological conditions such as achondroplasia, dwarfism, to apnea and sudden death (Resnick 2002: 4451). Cradle-boarding in its nature appears to have little or no affect to the face. Modification is apparently restricted to the occipital or lambdoidal regions with asymmetric size difference without affecting the cranial base or face (Kohn et al 1995).
Hippocrates considered over time the artificially altered cranial shape had become an inherited characteristic, in addition, with the increased contact between populations the practice was eventually rendered obsolete (Chadwick & Mann 1978). Missionary influence further reduced the occurrence of modification. Contact with outside influence caused fathers working away from their villages to reconsider their actions; on their return they would articulate their opinions to the women of the village, who having little outside contact would prefer to remain with the traditional methods. The fathers considered the cranially modified children would possess reduced intelligence (Blackwood & Danby 1955); the opinion of decreased mental ability, argued by several authors (ibid; Knox 1863), has been discussed elsewhere in this paper. Finally, British colonialists in the area of the Songish Indian Songhees Reservation may have discouraged the use of the artificial modification due to lower frequency in the area than similar ethnic groups (Cheverud et al 1992). During more recent historic periods of cranial modification, although continuing during the mid-twentieth century, governments have not interjected, however, the practice reduced in frequency (Blackwood & Danby 1955).
Pathological and congenital conditions causing deformity have in the past included proposed causes such as God's wraith and imagination, however, hereditary or accidental illness and narrowness of the womb (Ambroise Par, 16 th century French surgeon, cited by Anderson 2000) are not unacceptable suggestions; as previously discussed, constriction within the birth canal does cause temporary deformation. Burial practices may suggest the relationship within society a sufferer of deformity may have experienced (Anderson 2000) as pathological conditions can produce a variety of deformities from the mild benign deviation from normal to extreme deformities incompatible with life. Some of these deformities could be mistaken as various forms of artificial cranial modification therefore, some forms will be briefly discussed here and examples provided where possible.
Craniosynostosis, the premature fusion of one or more sutures of the cranium, results in deformation of the skull, and includes plagiocephaly, asymmetry caused by the unilateral premature occlusion of sutures (Resnick 2002). Scaphocephaly, an abnormally elongated skull as a result of premature fusion of the saggital suture (fig 12) (Hrdlika 1919; Aufderheide & Rodriguez-Martin 1998; Children's Hospital and Health Center [sp], San Diego nd,  11005.cfm), has in the past been common among Afro-Caribbeans (Hrdlika 1919), without affect on the face or cranial base (Kohn et al 1995). Also known as sagittal craniosynostosis, this condition may have limited the artificial cranial deformation of the Aymara type on a male recovered from Torontoy, Peru, (fig 13) (MacCurdy 1923); this may also explain the bulge anterior to the crown, however, dual-bands could equally be the origin. In opposition to craniosynostosis, there are archaeological examples of adults with unfused sutures, including the frontal, parietal and occipital bones of an Akkas pygmy female from Central Africa (Flower 1889).
Congenital hydrocephaly, possibly induced by multiple vitamin deficiency (Bamforth & Baird 1989), can be difficult to differentiate from trauma, infection or tumour induced (Brothwell 1967); however, a true example was recovered from a Middle Saxon Christian cemetery at Naeingbury, Essex (Putnam 1978). The partial adult male was recovered without the vertebrae, therefore, it was not possible to confirm if the individual suffered from spina bifida, a common association with hydrocephalus (ibid; Bamforth & Baird 1989). Hydrocephalus can be a symptom of chromosome disorders such as Trisomy 13 (Knowles 1986), however, of the additional associated conditions including blindness, mental retardation and cleft palate (Bamforth & Baird 1989), only the latter would be visible in the archaeological record.
Anencephaly, the absence of the cranial vault, has a 75% mortality rate at birth, although some sufferers may survive for up to seven days (Aufderheide & Rodriguez-Martin 1998); this condition is commonly associated with vertebral abnormalities (Knowles 1986) including spina bifida (Aufderheide & Rodriguez-Martin 1998). Ethnicity may be a key to increased occurrence of this abnormality in Eastern and African populations (ibid). An example was described by an Albanian mother who recalled her many children all of which, died at or soon after birth, all except one (Hasluck 1947: 131). With echoes of the Classical Greek opinion that the parents hold a bearing on the appearance of the child, she blamed their father's evil life for the fact they were all "born with their heads open" (ibid). The one survivor was born at the end of the First World War, with the assistance of an American doctor with the Red Cross; the doctor was able to sew up the deformity (ibid), although no mention was made of the life span of the child; when examining medical examples one wonders how a child could survive such affliction, despite medical intervention (fig 14).
Although there are numerous conditions resulting in various forms and severity of cranial deformation, constraints restrict the detail in which they may be covered in this paper. The attempt has been made to describe the forms of similar characteristic to artificial modification and those discussed in historic text.
Post-depositional distortion, when occurring in children, may result in soil seeping through the open sutures into the cranial cavity causing bulging and therefore a hydrocephalic appearance; analysis of the entire cranium should clarify the situation (Wells 1967: 6) as hydrocephalus occurs in individual with open sutures. An example of misdiagnosis was recovered from Windmill Hill, near Avebury in Wiltshire. This unsexed child, affectionately known as Charlie, was considered to have suffered from hydrocephalus, however, this has been revised to that of post-depositional pressure causing distortion to the cranium (pers. comm. Dr Ros Cleal, Alexander Keiller Museum, Avebury). Post-depositional deformation can also mimic scaphocephaly, premature closure of cranial sutures producing a long and narrow skull; examination of the sutures and the fact such damage usually manifests as asymmetric (Wells 1967: 6) should therefore, be obvious as inadvertent damage; the small amount of subterranean pressure is unlikely to produce the more severe forms of modification (Trinkaus 1982). The asymmetric appearance of post-depositional damaged crania (Wells 1967) could result in an incorrect diagnosis of plagiocephaly. Conversely, premature multiple suture closure can result in a clover-leaf deformity (Aufderheide & Rodriguez-Martin 1998; Resnick 2002) and due to the similar mis-shapen appearance, possibly a misdiagnosis of fronto-occipital flattening. Such deformity can result in hydrocephalus and retardation (Resnick 2002).
Microcephaly, defined as a cranium less than 42cm in circumference at full growth (McPherson 2004, ), has several causes; these include infection, severe malnutrition or drug use (ibid), atelencephaly, congenitally deformed bones of the skull (Siebert et al 1987) opposed to absence such in anencephaly, and cretinism, caused by a thyroid related hormone imbalance and iodine deficiency (Roberts & Manchester 2005). The latter condition is triggered in-utero when the expectant mother fails to maintain normal thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) levels (hypothyroidism), affecting the iodine uptake (Kumar & Clark 2002); as cranial growth is triggered by the development of the brain, retardation is not inevitable but common, especially in this form. Microcephaly and artificially restricted growth of the cranium may cause confusion during examination.
An alternative form of modification will confront archaeologists of the future. Children are now undergoing modification with the use of orthotic devices to correct certain deformities, including unintentional parietal flattening causing plagiocephaly due to their supine sleeping position. Recent research and a belief babies should sleep on the backs to reduce the risk of sudden infant death syndrome or cot death, resulted in an increased incidence of flattening of the parietal bone (Resnick 2002: 4507). Although this should be a temporary condition while the skull is still malleable the child will turn while sleeping, therefore reducing the pressure on one area of the skull, the device can be applied into the second year of the child's life, applying pressure to the area of abnormal growth while allowing normal development (Littlefield et al 2000, ). Early cases have shown correction can take as little as 7.5 months (fig 15) (ibid), however, radiographic, imaging or post-mortem analysis could identify evidence of the medical modification induced on the cranium.
Several pathological conditions bear similar characteristics to artificial modification and differential diagnosis should, therefore, be carefully considered during skeletal analysis. In many cases examination of the axial skeleton will clarify the situation through recognition of additional symptoms; in contrast, a lack of additional pathology may suggest the presence of artificially modified crania.
Artificial cranial modification has been practiced for thousands of years for a variety of reasons. For a period of time, spanning a few weeks to several years, the head of the newborn infant would be bound with flexible bands alone, with the addition of small boards or pads or the child could be strapped to a cradle-board. Dependant on the position and apparatus used, the resulting modification may be minimal and possibly invisible under the hair, as in the case lambdoid deformation of the male recovered from a Pueblo cemetery, to severe deformity including the fronto-occipital flattening such as practised by the Ancon. Deliberate modification was one practiced by the community and continued for generations for the purpose of ethnic marking or aesthetic pleasure. The same grades of modification can be seen in pathological conditions; under these circumstances, the individual may have been a social outcast, possibly reflected in their mode of burial.
During examination of unusual skeletal data differential diagnosis should be considered as artificial modification and pathological conditions could manifest with similar deformity. Medical advancement has now created a modern form of modification for a therapeutic use; despite the medical benefits, this treatment could unfortunately cause some confusion to future archaeologists.