The Avebury complex (figures 1 & 2), including the henge, avenues, Silbury Hill, Windmill Hill and numerous long and round barrows, has been of continued interest for hundreds of years since the prehistoric importance of the area was first recognised by the antiquarian John Aubrey during the 17 th century. More significantly, during the 18 th century, William Stukeley created a record of the region including invaluable illustrations and descriptions of numerous monuments, many now partially destroyed, others completely lost.
During the 20 th and 21 st centuries, the area has undergone sporadic excavation and non-invasive research by many including Harold St George Gray 1908-1922, followed by more intensive work by Alexander Keiller, 1925-1939. Following purchase of lands in and around Avebury, Keiller systematically excavated, recorded and in some instances, restored the monuments to such a high standard that following her own excavations, in 1965 Isobel Smith published Windmill Hill and Avebury: Excavations by Alexander Keiller 1925-1939. At the time of publication, Smith's work, as well as publishing her own findings, summarised Keiller's excavations and interpreted the evidence in the convention of the day; although now out of print, this work is still much in demand and invaluable during re-evaluation of the evidence and the complex.
Since the publication of Windmill Hill and Avebury, further excavation has been conducted, advances have been made in scientific methods and alternative hypotheses have been reached regarding the location, design and the materials of the monuments. Instead of an in depth description of the Avebury complex or the components therein, this paper will summarise some of the work completed since the publication by Isobel Smith in 1965; discuss some of the many advances made within the Avebury region in the last forty years, together with the implications this may have on the interpretation of the rest of the British Isles.
The earthwork of Avebury henge is 365 metres in diameter, divided into quadrants by four entrances, and encloses the remains of an outer stone circle, two inner stone circles, a cove and a multi-stone 'feature'. In 1950, Stuart Piggott defined stone circles as "open sanctuaries" of the early Bronze Age, mainly of the British Isles (Piggott, 1950: 104). Piggott writes of Stukeley's recordings of the complex and the fact that he either could not or would not stop the destruction during the 18 th century (Piggott, 1950: 112). Therefore, the monument that Keiller excavated, recorded and restored in the 1920's and 30's was in a post-destructional state. Three features recorded by Keiller in the north-east quadrant, internal to the outer circle, were presumed to be stone-holes of an earlier monument, underlying the bank and ditch. Excavations undertaken by Piggott in 1960 opened a series of trenches in the area of these features in an attempt to prove the existence of a third inner circle, 105 metres in diameter (Piggott, 1964). Following the excavation of 450 square metres, Piggott concluded that although the westernmost of the three, stone-hole A, had at one time contained a stone evidenced by the compaction of the packing-stones into the chalk bottom of the hole, the remaining two, stone-holes B and C, bore no similarity to the first in either dimension and basal content (Piggott, 1964: 203). No explanation was offered for these features; therefore, one is left with Piggott's suggestion that stone-holes B and C are of medieval origin (1964: 28). Unfortunately, during research for this paper, no further investigation regarding these features has been identified.
Smith (1965) suggested the size of Avebury henge indicated the population of the area and a pooling of manpower during the construction of the henge and avenues, possibly facilitated by the direction of a priestly hierarchy (1965: 253). This writer finds Smith's ideas on the additional manpower required for the gathering of raw materials and the supply of food interesting. She identifies the need of the populous to produce excess food and labour above the level of subsistence required to produce such monuments (Smith, 1965: 253). Other than detailing the characteristics of the henge and the internal features, Smith does not offer a hypothesis regarding the henge.
During the years following the excavations by Keiller and Smith, due to preservation, little invasive research has been conducted. On occasion, a watching brief or rescue excavation has been undertaken due to a threat to the site. In 1982, building extensions caused such a threat and three trenches were opened (Harrington and Denham, 1986). Site 232, adjacent to the workingmen's club, produced 1 st-2 nd century Roman evidence in the form of pottery and a dog burial together with medieval and post-medieval pottery. Site 237, behind the gift shop, consisting several pits and a post-hole produced some medieval pottery, although, a majority of evidence dated to the post-medieval period, including earlier structural alterations. Site 238, however, produced tenuous prehistoric evidence. Two pits, behind a brick-built house, produced flint nodules, charcoal, chalk rubble, mudstone and animal bone fragments. This trench also revealed post-medieval pits and a brick-lined well (ibid). Despite a lack of pre-medieval evidence, this rescue excavation revealed further medieval and post-medieval activity in the southern half of the henge and shows the benefit of limited excavation on a protected site.
Since Smith's work, scientific procedures have assisted in the interpretation of the site. In 1985, molluscan analysis identified the pre-bank environment of Avebury. Snails recovered from the natural surface beneath the henge bank were grassland species, indicating either ungrazed or lightly grazed, dense, vegetative cover (Evans et al, 1985: 310). Five samples of charcoal, animal bone and antler from the henge bank, old land surface and primary fills of the henge ditch were collected from evidence recovered during the excavation by Keiller and radiocarbon dates of 2504 84 BC were produced (Pitts and Whittle, 1992). The combination of these two scientific techniques not only provides accurate dating for the construction of the henge but also the environment at the time. Despite Iron Age intrusion into some samples, a reliable radiocarbon date was obtained from a pig bone from stone-hole 44 of the outer circle. This date identifies the construction of the outer circle approximately 600 years after the henge, 192090 BC, making the outer circle late Neolithic/early Bronze Age in date (ibid).
In 2001, Aaron Watson, amongst others, approached the study of monuments from an aesthetic perspective; the visual, auditory, tactile features of Avebury henge were discussed. Providing cognitive meaning, Watson suggested the location of sarsens in the landscape and their inclusion in the monuments was important, as was utilisation of axe polished stones (Watson, 2001). The excavation of middle and lower chalk for use as packing with the stone-holes "invested it with a different kind of significance or value", as may the dark brown soil excavated from pits within the vicinity of the proposed Obelisk (2001: 301).
Having previously undertaken research on the acoustics of monuments, Watson understandably commented on the audiological significance of the henge. He stated not only would the bank retain any noise within the henge but also absorb sound from outside (Watson, 2001), therefore, creating an isolated space. Also, due to the broader stones of the inner circles compared to elsewhere in the monument, these areas were likely to create "intense acoustic spaces" (Watson, 2001: 308). Watson suggested the axe polishing marks of the stones are more easily found through touch than by sight (ibid), leading neatly to the concentration of his work.
A majority of the approach by Watson focused on the visual effects of Avebury. He indicated the ground level of the enclosed area of the henge is uneven and noticed the dimensions of the stones diminished beneath the visual level of the viewer. Watson suggested the inner circles are so positioned as the only location with the henge where both Windmill Hill and Silbury Hill are visible simultaneously and that the internal subdivision of space may have physically or visually limited access (Watson, 2001). Regarding the henge itself, the decrease in the height of the bank, Watson says, accentuates the size of the stones of the inner circles, while the symmetry between the bank and the distant hills provides a surrogate at points within the monument where the bank is hidden (Watson, 2001: 302). A similar effect can be witnessed at the Stones of Stenness, Orkney, a large rock-cut henge with a single entrance, from which animal bone provided the radiocarbon date c3100-2775 BC (Burl, 2000: 211). The henge, together with a second, the nearby Ring of Brodgar, is located in a natural bowl created by distant hills (Richards, 1996: 203); this local topography is reflected in the bank and ditch of the henges.
Watson confirmed the lack of astronomical alignment (ibid), however, caused this writer to consider the orientation of the four entrances. In a prehistoric monumental world seemingly concentrated on astronomical alignment, for example Stonehenge, or an east-west orientation such as long barrows, why do so many henges, including Avebury, possess entrances off the cardinal points? During brief research, it was found of eight henges examined, totalling 25 entrances, only four entrances, 16%, were aligned on cardinal points (appendix 1). The remainder fell between the points with a majority on a south-east or north-west alignment, often occurring in the same monument; however, marginally over 50% occur in the northern range. Harding depicts the north-east causeway of Stonehenge is centrally aligned with the northern lunar limit, however, is off-set to the midsummer sunrise and midwinter sunset (2003: 46). The exceptionally low number of cardinal alignments suggests deliberate location of the entrances but to what end? This brief research has left the writer intrigued and one hopes further research has unknowingly been undertaken or will be undertaken in the future.
Due to the 'ownership' of Avebury henge and other associated monuments by the National Trust, little excavation has been permitted within the complex. This has not precluded non-invasive procedures, however, has resulted in scientific analysis of old samples and interpretation through observation within the landscape, resulting in calibrated radiocarbon dates, environmental reconstruction and aesthetic interpretation.
Since the work of John Aubrey during the 17 th century and William Stukeley in the 18 th century, their work has often been re-evaluated. Despite fairly accurate descriptions, mistakes have been recognised such as Aubrey's descriptions of 'The Devil's Coytes', now known as The Longstones, south of the henge opposed to their correct location to the west, as corrected by Rev. Bryan King (1879: 378). King posed the question of why so few, if any, of the stones survived of the "presumed Beckhampton Avenue" (1879: 381-382). He summised that due to a lack of structures along the route of the West Kennet Avenue, the stones had not been broken and used as masonry opposed to the numerous structures to the west of Avebury, including cottages, walls and bridges, "more than sufficient, to absorb all the stones of the Beckhampton Avenue " (ibid). Upon investigation, King found the broken stumps and chips of sarsen along a half-mile length of the suggested route of the Beckhampton Avenue (King, 1879), improved the validity of Aubrey's work.
Stukeley was also of the opinion that a second avenue ran westwards towards Beckhampton, which he named 'Bekamton Avenue' [sic], formed the tail of a 'serpent', linking some of the monuments of the Avebury region (Piggott, 1950: 126). He believed a second stone circle would have stood at the terminal of the Beckhampton Avenue to balance the Sanctuary and sketched an estimation on an early plan of the complex in 1723, naming the proposed monument as the Temple of the Infernal Regions, before later scoring it out (Piggott, 1950). Unfortunately, apparently due to land reclamation and the need of building materials, the Avenue had all but been destroyed by 1800 (Burl, 2002: 217). Smith, however, included further details of Stukeley's observations in her work. Contrary to the conclusion of Piggott that the proposed Beckhampton Avenue reached no further than the Longstones (Piggott, 1950: 114), Smith states of Stukeley's work, that the Avenue apparently continued south-westerly, terminating in a valley to the west of Beckhampton and equalled the length of the West Kennet Avenue (Smith, 1965: 216). The fact that only ten percent of the stones present were standing is said to represent the remainder as natural recumbent sarsens, however, Smith does accept that some may have been "artificially placed" (1965: 217). On examining King's work, discussed earlier, Smith concluded that there was strong evidence for the existence of a second avenue, however, the "full extent and precise relationship with the Longstones" was not fully explained (Smith, 1965: 217).
As early as 1969, the possible length of the Beckhampton Avenue had been extended following the discovery of a buried, partial sarsen stone west of Beckhampton roundabout (Vatcher, 1969:127). Further work was undertaken in the late 1980's and 1990's in the form of geophysical survey and aerial photography. Although geophysical survey in 1989 produced inconclusive results including possible pits and buried stones, aerial photographs in 1997 identified a flattened oval enclosure adjacent to the standing stones, which may have once been part of a cove (Gillings et al, 2000: 2), promoting further investigation and ultimately excavation in the vicinity of the Longstones (Burl, 2002: 219-220). In 1999, following the discovery of medieval ridge and furrow, several trenches were dug on the circumference of the ditch, which enclosed an area of three and a half acres. The excavations identified a ditch up to 2.10 metres wide, with varying depths reaching a maximum of 0.80 metres, suggesting a series of smaller ditches, separated by causeways, which were later removed (Gillings et al, 2000: 4). In addition, six features were uncovered, forming two parallel lines running north-east to south-west, aligned on the Longstones. Of the six features, three contained buried stones, one was empty, and the remaining two contained stone destruction debris in the form of charcoal and sarsen flakes (ibid). The proposed avenue enters the enclosure through a wide entrance on the eastern side; the easternmost Longstone falling within the boundaries, the western stone beyond the boundary. Both stones are on the alignment of the Avenue possibly representing stones of the Avenue (Gillings et al, 2000).
The backfill of the enclosure ditches consisted of chalk rubble and various soil types, together with limited finds including animal bone and pottery, one sherd of which was provisionally identified by Dr Ros Cleal of the Alexander Keiller Museum, Avebury, as early Neolithic (Gillings et al, 2000: 4). Subsequently, animal bone was radiocarbon dated to the mid 3 rd millennium BC, a date supported by Grooved ware from the base of the ditch (Gillings et al, 2002: 255). The rapid backfilling and silting suggests the closure of the monument is possibly contemporary with the construction of the Avenue, however, the lack of datable evidence from the stone sockets makes it difficult to determine whether the West Kennet and Beckhampton Avenues are contemporary, although a date of 2500-2300 BC is expected (Gillings et al, 2000).
Conversely, Gillings and his co-authors of 2000, questioned whether the Avenue continued beyond the Longstones to the south-west as suggested by Stukeley (2000: 7); no reference was made to the discovery of the buried stone uncovered during a watching brief of the late 1960's.
A later digging season of the site in 2000, produced possible evidence of temporary settlement. Once the topsoil had been removed and the chalk weathered, in an area of 10 metres x 10 metres to the south-west of the westernmost Longstone, 200 stake-holes were revealed. Although the distribution was non-random, no structural pattern was revealed, therefore may represent a palimpsest of dwellings and fences (Gillings et al, 2002: 255).
The location of third and fourth stones between the Longstones were identified confirming earlier theories of a cove-like structure similar to that of the Northern Inner Circle of Avebury henge, although rectilinear in design rather than a three-stone open structure (Gillings et al, 2002). Backfilling and silting of stone sockets suggests the two outlying stones were removed and the cove was erected on a different alignment, possibly to commemorate the earlier enclosure (ibid). Pit F.52 to the west of 'Adam', the westernmost of the Longstones, produced re-deposited chalk and soil, fragments of iron, including an Anglo-Saxon spearhead, pieces of shield-fitting and part of a knife blade, probably from a nearby disturbed 7 th century Saxon inhumation (Gillings et al, 2002: 254); this shows continued activity in the area, conversely of a period absent in the archaeological record of Avebury henge.
Since Smith, 200 metres of the Beckhampton Avenue have been excavated, although the full extent and any possible monument at the terminal, as sketched by Stukeley, have yet to be identified. During the process of excavation further archaeological features and earlier monuments have been located and identified. Despite structural hindrance, perhaps investigation on the areas to the north and east of Avebury henge will eventually locate further avenues of the complex and therefore identify the reason for four entrances to one henge. Possibly similar work at other monuments will reveal similar structures, for example, local legend suggests the Stones of Stenness and Ring of Brodgar, Orkney, were linked by a stone avenue, however, no evidence has been found to prove this hypothesis (Richards, 1996: 199).
In 1723, Stukeley produced a plan of a double-ringed stone circle, approached by the 'Kennet Avenue', and named the monument the Temple of Eartha; however, in 1724 the site was renamed the Temple on Overton Hill (Piggott, 1950). In a letter to his friend Roger Gale, Stukeley likened the Avebury complex to the form of a snake, the avenues forming the body and Overton Hill the head (ibid). Although the sketches by Stukeley depicted an oval structure, following excavation in 1930 proving the monument to be circular, Piggott (1950) suggested this was to produce a snake with a naturalistic head.
In a later publication, briefly commenting on the Sanctuary as it became known, Piggott claims that the post-holes of the structure, whether it be a single or multiple phase construction, would represent a roofed timber-framed building. Due to the location within a wider monumental landscape, together with the deposition, organised or otherwise, of pottery, flint implements and animal bone within the post- and stone-holes of all but the earliest phase, possibly representing ritual feasting, Piggott suggests the timber building was more than a secular construct (Piggott, 1962: 75).
Isobel Smith suggested the Sanctuary was of several phases spanning around 500 years, and was possibly completed around the same time as the southern end of West Kennet Avenue, around 1600 BC (1965: xxviii). Although the Sanctuary lacks the bank and ditch profile of a causewayed enclosure, due to the internal, concentric pattern, Smith suggests the two are comparable (Smith, 1965: 249). The first phase, Smith suggested, was that of a roofed timber hut slightly in excess of 4 metres in diameter, dated by pottery to 2000 BC. The second phase, constructed due to adverse effects of the weather, was an eleven-metre diameter 'protective' timber structure. A circular timber temple, almost 20 metres in diameter, was followed by a fourth and final phase of an outer stone circle, almost 40 metres in diameter, which incorporated tow stones, perpendicular to the rest and aligned with the West Kennet Avenue (Smith, 1965). Of the numerous finds recovered from the different 'phases', none were recovered from the original structure, the evidence for which is known as the 'F-ring'. Smith suggests this to mean all finds related to the later structures, although the G-ring, adjacent to and on the same circumference as the wall of the original hut was also barren of finds, suggesting the finds were deposited around the exterior of the structure but not within (Smith, 1965: 245).
Pollard suggested a marginally earlier date for the Sanctuary; based on relative dating of the pottery and comparison of the monument to similar timber constructs, a date of 2500 BC was suggested (Pollard, 1992: 213). The phases of construction are tentatively reduced following the re-evaluation to only two phases; one of timber, one of stone. The arrangement of the posts produced an internal cruciform pattern of equally spaced aisles, comparable to Mount Pleasant site IV (Pollard, 1992: 214-215). At this time there was continued belief the structure had been roofed due to the oblique angle of the post-holes and molluscan evidence of freshwater species suggested reed thatching may have been in place (Pollard, 1992: 216). Due to the internal arrangement, movement within the monument would no doubt have been restricted. With difficulty, it may have been possible to negotiate a path between the posts; perhaps more likely, passage was restricted to the open aisles of the monument (Pollard, 1992: 222-223). The internal organisation also revealed a spatial deposition of flint and arrowheads in the north-east quadrant; a similar pattern was recognised in the eastern half of Woodhenge (Pollard, 1992: 222). Perhaps this is evidence of cardinal alignment, as discussed earlier, and further research on organised deposition within henges is required.
The Sanctuary, positioned 170 metres above sea-level, is located on a high point of the immediate area surrounding Avebury, however, rudimentary examination of an Ordnance Survey map shows that the monument is surrounded by higher peaks reaching a maximum elevation of 295 metres 3.75km to the south-east, near the reservoir on Milk Hill. This examination reinforces Watson's hypothesis that opposed to the artificial bank and ditch of Avebury, the Sanctuary draws upon the natural topography of the surrounding landscape, as does Silbury Hill, the summit at 187 metres creating a restricted area, the partially surrounding hills enclosing the space (Watson, 2001: 307). In contrast, few peaks surrounding Arbor Low, Derbyshire, equal or exceed the elevation of 370 metres. Despite encircling hills, only three hills are of comparable height; a peak approximately one mile to the south equals the elevation; a mile to the south-east the hill known as Lean Low reaches 393 metres and a steep hill near the town of Taddington peaks at 414 metres. The placing of a monument at a high elevation surrounded by superior distant hills is apparently not a countrywide phenomenon.
Although the Sanctuary has not undergone further excavation, the quality of early excavation and recording has allowed continued re-examination of the evidence. Re-interpretation has reduced the monument from a multi-phase structure to that of only two phases; comparison of the structural layout has identified a strong resemblance to that of the slightly larger Mount Pleasant in ground plan; and the use of the natural topography surrounding the monument has been suggested as producing an enclosed area. For a monument that has remained unexcavated for many years, it has proved invaluable in the hypothesis proposed during re-evaluation.
Despite regular discoveries of pottery, worked flint and animal bone, firm evidence of Neolithic settlement within the Avebury complex has yet to be discovered. Neolithic pottery has been found on every excavated site in the Avebury area and suggests a large population in the immediate vicinity, concentrated in the lowland region due to a reduced frequency of lithic finds in the uplands (Smith, 1984: 106). Various pits and holes have produced evidence, some of which will be discussed here.
In 1913, during the digging of a pipe trench, a Neolithic pit was discovered. Following excavation the artefacts recovered from the pit were briefly discussed by Maud Cunnington in the same year, however, were then put into storage and were apparently not re-examined until 1955 by Nicholas Thomas. Nineteen sherds of pottery, 41 flint implements and a sarsen hammer stone were discussed by Thomas (1955), who failed to discuss the relevance of charcoal and various animal bone briefly mentioned by Cunnington (1913: 14, cited by Thomas, 1955: 167). Although quantities were not discussed, the presence of charcoal together with animal bone, some of which had been burnt, is evidence of a meal. A small quantity may suggest a temporary settlement, a large quantity possibly a more permanent settlement or large feast. Despite the lack of full evaluation of the evidence, Thomas concludes there was probably a Neolithic settlement on Waden Hill and recognition of a Neolithic settlement in the Avebury region is imminent (1955: 171).
During excavation by Keiller, a proposed Neolithic settlement was detected adjacent to the West Kennet Avenue. Keiller exposed a series of pits and holes, which he later described as clay-lined hearths without prehistoric comparison (Keiller et al, no date/?unpublished: iv). In 1965, Smith described the two pits and ten small holes with their contents. The pits were 1.20-1.50 metres in diameter, 0.30-0.60 metres in depth, and contained pottery sherds, flint and sarsen nodules, arrowheads and animal bone. The holes, however, were oval in plan, varied in diameter from 0.30-0.90 metres and were funnel shaped (Smith, 1965: 212). All the pits and holes included charcoal and all but two contained flint nodules. Both pits produced animal bones and teeth, however, only one hole, number 9, contained animal remains, in the form of an ox tooth. The charcoal was of twigs and small branches of hazel, blackthorn and hawthorn (ibid), therefore, due to the relatively small nature of the timber, would unlikely be used for construction. As the stone from the pits and holes showed no evidence of heating, Smith disputes Keiller's hearth hypothesis and suggests the charcoal was deposited from nearby hearths rather than in-situ burning (ibid). Later analysis of three samples of antler and bone from the pits and holes produced a radiocarbon date of 282387 BC (Pitts and Whittle, 1992:205). In the time between excavation and publication of Windmill Hill and Avebury, the possibility of organised deposition within areas, ditches or pits was not considered. The brief analysis of the evidence undertaken during research for this paper revealed the arrangement of materials and a degree of formality within the pits and holes of the Neolithic settlement adjacent to West Kennet Avenue; future research is planned to determine whether such organisation exists.
Environmental research has produced evidence of prehistoric agriculture in the Avebury region. South Street long barrow, long synonymous with early agriculture having produced ard marks from the buried land surface, has also provided evidence of the farming practices during prehistory. Following the initial ground preparation, two phases of cultivation by hoes and spade were separated by fallow and pastoral periods (Smith, 1984: 109), suggesting knowledge of the benefit of allowing the soil to rest between phases of cultivation. Evidence of manuring (ibid) may suggest the application of manure either from storage or directly during post-harvest grazing, improving the nutrient content of the soil (Holgate, 1988: 123), and the breakage of sarsen and burnt stubble evidences burning (Smith, 1984: 109), probably for post-harvest clearance. Pollen recovered from a tree-hole at South Street showed the area was heavily wooded during the forth millennium BC, with some openings evidenced by molluscs (Smith, 1984: 113). Bracken apparently colonised the area 2810130 BC, prior to the construction of the long barrow (Smith, 1984: 117). The erection of a sterile long barrow, containing no inhumations, on cultivated land may have meaning; perhaps reference to the fertility of the land. Research in the areas surrounding other sterile long barrows may produce further evidence of agriculture.
Non-invasive research should continue within the Avebury region; due to the concentrated dispersal of pottery, flint and animal bone, the discovery of a local settlement, perhaps similar to that of Barnhouse, Orkney, is increasingly likely. Areas of concentrated monumental construction, such as Thornborough, Yorkshire, a site consisting of three henges in close proximity, should also be examined; early farmers, and the probable manpower involved during construction, would have lived locally, possibly in small, supportive communities, hopefully leaving settlement and prehistoric agriculture evidence in the landscape.
Recently, Dr Ros Cleal of the Alexander Keiller Museum in Avebury examined a pottery sherd, unearthed by wildlife, close to a field boundary, to the east of Faulkner's Circle. She saw a resemblance in the fabric to a fragment in the archive, which had been recovered in the same area during 1935 by a member of the public. When the two sherds were compared, there was a striking similarity in the dark grey clay with flint inclusions, and double, linear impressed dot pattern, approximately 10mm below the rim; Dr Cleal considers the two to have originated from the same vessel (pers. comm., 15/12/05). This discovery has prompted speculation of settlement evidence on the eastern side of West Kennet Avenue.
In the 18 th century, Stukeley sketched a stone circle at Winterbourne Bassett, north of Avebury (fig 3); unfortunately, the monument has been lost, possibly due to land clearance or use as masonry. The location has been plotted on Ordnance Survey maps for many years at grid reference SU 0936 7552 (fig 4), although the position has been estimated with reference to historical material (fig 5).
Little reference was made to this monument by Smith (1965) other than to comment on a possible Neolithic "system of belief" and the proposed correlation between monoliths and fertility rites (1965: 250). However, the inclusion of Winterbourne Bassett in the discussion was based on the work of A.C. Smith in 1885 (ibid), who produced a plan of stones surrounding a central monolith; the accuracy has been questioned due to the absence of a central stone in Stukeley's sketch (David et al, 2003).
Recent geophysical survey, cast doubt onto the location of the stone circle. Data recovered from the presumed position proved disappointing (fig 6, A); however, several anomalies were located in the field south of the Winterbourne Basset to Clyffe Pypard road, suggesting a revised co-ordinate for the monument at SU 0930 7535 (David et al, 2003: 203) (fig 6, B). A comparison of the sketch produced by Stukeley was made to that of the supposed position of the structure. As landmarks of the Avebury landscape, were in the background of the plan, including Silbury Hill and St James church, it could be estimated where Stukeley was positioned during production of the sketch; however, the topography did not match. As the sketch depicted the double stone circle from a slightly elevated position, it was possible to estimate the location from which Stukeley viewed the monument; a position correlating with the positive results obtained from geophysical analysis. Future research was proposed, although the size of the task was suggested as daunting (David et al, 2003).
A
B
In 2004, James Gunter, a post-graduate archaeology student, living in the Avebury area, conducted further geophysical analysis as part of a masters dissertation, and achieved positive results in the area suggested by David and his fellows (2003). Through excavation, the area proposed as the location of the 'lost' monument, has now been confirmed as the actual position of the stone circle, as sketched by Stukeley in 1724 (James Gunter, pers. comm., 15/12/05 & Ros Cleal, pers. comm. 29/12/05). Following the award of a distinction for the dissertation, Gunter hopes to publish his results.
Following the recognition of the prehistoric importance of Avebury by Stukeley, antiquarians and archaeologists have frequently recorded, excavated and interpreted the monuments of the complex. Since the publication of Windmill Hill and Avebury: Excavations by Alexander Keiller 1925-1939 by Isobel Smith in 1965, scientific methods and alternative hypothesis have allowed re-evaluation of the Avebury complex and occasional excavation has provided new evidence and located 'new' monuments. Pollen and mollusc analysis has reconstructed the environment prior to the construction of South Street long barrow and Avebury henge during the first half of the third millennium; procedures not conducted during the original analysis of the evidence. New hypotheses have suggested the location of monuments was possibly influenced by the topography of the landscape, which may be mirrored in the monument itself; acoustic analysis has revealed affects within the Inner Circles and Avebury henge itself; and cognitive meaning behind the use of certain materials in the construction of the monuments has been suggested. Through aerial photography the line of the Beckhampton Avenue has been identified in association with a previously unknown Neolithic enclosure and the 'lost' stone circle of Winterbourne Bassett has been relocated initially through geophysics and confirmed by excavation.
Although excavation within the Avebury complex is rarely permitted, the research that has been completed has been extremely successful. In conjunction with Windmill Hill and Avebury, new evidence has allowed frequent invaluable reinterpretation of the region, providing new or alternative hypotheses that can be applied to comparable monuments within the rest of the British Isles.