La Place is a piece of work, of biographical intent, targeting the narration of the life of the father of Annie Ernaux. The narrator wishes to depict a portrait of her father's life which is objective and does not suffer from bias or which becomes subjective or sentimental - a flaw she readily points out of accounts of similar intent: 'Pour rendre compte d'une vie soumise  la ncessit, je n'ai pas le droit de prendre d'abord le partie de l'art, ni de chercher  faire quelque chose de "passionnant", ou d'"mouvant". ' This piece, however, fails to be scientific and non-emotive throughout; it becomes instead one filled with auto-reflection and removed from the intended narrative into a meta-narrative. This is partly due to the fact that Ernaux transforms herself as the narration progresses and realises that she herself is split between two social classes. The fact that she fails to remain audit throughout is one of the key pessimistic views in the book, as she has failed this because of the class divisions. The themes of social conditioning and class divisions are, therefore, paramount throughout 'La Place' - the title itself hints at the importance of one's 'place' in society - and there are many examples in the text of alienation, guilt and schism to prove that the narrator's views on these issues are, on the whole, pessimistic.
Western civilisation is one geared towards consumption under the aegis of capitalism and, therefore, in every similar society, a class structure will inevitably emerge. Social conditions and external forces - such as peer-pressure, create a certain social model or "norm" to which one feels compelled to abide by. There are many examples of the pressure on people to follow these artificial criteria in 'La Place'. The father of the narrator is portrayed as desperate ensure that his daughter is educated into a higher social class, perhaps so she will never feel as uncomfortable in the company of the bourgeoisie as he often does. He becomes increasingly more distant from his daughter but wishes to ensure her elevation nonetheless: 'Il me conduisait de la maison  l'cole sur son vlo. ' The social conditions are so strong that the father actually, in this example, takes her daughter to a place which he knows will distance him further from his daughter. This is a pessimistic view. The idea of being educated into a higher sector of society, mirrors those of Bourdieu - a French sociologist who outlines 'linguitic and cultural capital as significant as economic capital'. This is mirrored in La Place: 'Tout ce qui touch au langage est dans mon souvenir motif de rancur et de chicanes douloureuses, bien plus que l'argent. ' Bordieu also expresses the difference between the 'classes dominantes / classes domines' which Ernaux also outlines and shares a pessimistic view of.
Ernaux outlines further pessimism as regards to social conditioning and the concept of a class structure, by explaining that people who attempt to move from one sector to another become alienated. This indeed happens to the narrator herself; she, who has moved into the bourgeoisie, has a resulting split-personality. That is to say that she feels alienated from her family and her previous social class as well as herself. This is shown when she goes back to the caf and reports to feel almost like an impostor. Another example of La Place being a pessimistic view of class divisions and social conditioning is the point that her father does not fit in and even feels embarrassed when speaking to, or in the company of, those from a higher social class. Because of the class divisions and language barriers which coincide with them, he can never be himself in certain groups and this is how a person's identity is partly lost. He is always compelled by 'La peur d'tre dplac, d'avoir honte. ' he feels always out of place and, because he has become a marchant, is afraid of making mistakes and being found out of being a paysan - 'devant les gens qui parlaient bien il se taisait,...toujours parler (parlait) avec prcaution...il dtestait aussi les grandes phrases et les expressions nouvelles'. The pessimistic view put forward here is that the presence of a different class ensures that the father has always to be on his guard, he is separated from them and his daughter as he belongs to a different sphere of knowledge. The point of language further alienates her father as we discover that her mother is somewhat different; in that she is 'soucieuse de faire volue, qui osait experimenter, avec un rien d'incertitude, ce qu'elle venait d'entendre ou de lire' as opposed to him who 'se refusait  employer un vocabulaire qui n'tait pas le sien. ' He is, therefore, portrayed as being left completely isolated.
The social conditions and the very fact that a class structure exists cause the narrator to feel guilty. She feels guilty when coming back to the caf and also when she meets her former pupil who says to her she has failed. The narrator cannot even remember the woman and feels she has failed in some way. '"Le C.E.T., a n'a pas march."... Mais j'avais oubli pourquoi elle avait t envoy en C.E.T. ' The arrogance of the librarians is another pessimistic view concerning the class divisions; when the father asks for some books one of the librarians 'a choisi  notre place, Columba pour moi, un roman lger de Maupassant pour mon pre. ' These are both non-challenging pieces. The appearance of exclusivity evoked by the librarians of the educated, higher class is a negative one.
Whilst everyone is trying desperately to fit in to a place where their identity is contradicted, people become isolated. This occurs in each generation in the book. It seems also, that the targeted ideal is actually never reached by anyone.
However, there are some themes in the book which one could interpret as not pessimistic of social standing and class divisions. The father, although uneasy in certain situations, never suffers any real hardship so it could be argued that pessimism is too strong a word. The narrator is part of these class divisions and social conditions and helps to judge them, being a teacher. It is unlikely therefore that she would speak with total pessimism.
Another example is that one could interpret the class divisions and indeed the social conditions as being the reason for people - such as the narrator - to become educated and want to better themselves. Although the reasons for this (the want to fit in with a higher society) may not be entirely just or ideal, a population filled with such sorts - those who strive to be educated - can surely only be beneficial to a society. Therefore, in this situation such class divisions and social conditions can hardly be viewed as pessimistic. The narrator indeed speaks highly of her education throughout.
In conclusion, therefore, although there are a small number of examples which could be interpreted as contradicting to this statement, due to the portrayal of guilt but mainly alienation and pressure, La Place is a pessimistic view of social conditions and class divisions.