Over recent years the conception of the early Neolithic pattern of settlement has changed. Traditionally, until the 1970's, a dispersed settlement pattern of rectilinear structures accommodating extended family groups were thought to have adopted stable mixed farming practices, domesticating animals and crops. Archaeological investigation now shows the settlement of the British Isles was more diverse than previously thought, with a variety of domestic and task related buildings and farming techniques. This essay will address many of the practices involved in the colonisation of an area including immigration, settlement and subsistence.
Immigrants have traditionally been cited as the origin of farming and their contact with the indigenous population would have led to the diffusion of new ideas. Alternatively, the aboriginal population of the British Isles, having first observed the annual progress of the environment, may have chosen to embrace the natural resources.
Case suggested there was a tendency to explain the settlement of Britain and Ireland by large-scale immigration or invasion from western Europe (1969: 176). Transhumance may have included 'communal' movement relocating the entire system, including people, stock and resources, to a fairly local site; or 'seasonal' expedition by a few individuals over greater distances (Case, 1969: 178).
It was suggested despite the establishment of a farming system using primitive transport and equipment (Case, 1969: 176), contact with the homeland would have continued for many years (Case, 1969: 180). Following seasonal exploration of foreign lands, the potential immigrants would have transported their animals to Britain for summer grazing, however, over-wintered in their homeland (ibid). This seasonal migration continued with the addition of crop cultivation (Case, 1969: 180) and eventually permanent settlement was established.
Why should the development of new techniques and technology require the introduction of a new culture? Evolution of lifestyle from temporary camps to a sedentary but scattered community (Malone, 2001: 45) can be undermined by evidence of settlement in the Thames Basin by hunter-gatherer communities prior to the Neolithic period (Holgate, 1988: 150). Transhumance, possibly seasonal migration, would enlighten the Mesolithic population to areas of the landscape with the greatest number of resources. Following settlement in a fertile area of numerous resources, providing both food and raw materials, the passing seasons would have revealed the process of wild crop germination and maturation. Advantage could be taken of nature eventually leading to the cultivation of crops, which in turn would require tools of specific purpose, compelling alternative production techniques and technology not previously carried in a mobile existence. Could the early Britons have not brought themselves technologically into the Neolithic?
Whatever the origin of these changes, a low population density resulted in dispersed settlements with no pressure on land or resources (Schofield, 1987: 75). The landscape was a mosaic of settlements, with areas of woodland clearance, regeneration and farming activity (Healy, 1988: 105), requiring sturdy structures for the inhabitants and their stock.
Early interpretation suggested the early Neolithic British Isles was settled by numerous dispersed small farms, consisting of one to three rectilinear houses, the material of which was dependent on local availability, inhabited by extended family groups (Bradley, lecture, 28/10/03). The scarcity of structures in certain areas could be explained by erosion, such as the tidal destruction of a midden dating to the fourth century BC at Mannin, Co. Galway (McCormick, 1995: 12), or "flimsy and temporary dwellings" (Thomas, 1996: 2) leaving little or no evidence in the archaeological record. Malone, however, suggests this dearth may be due to a lack of recognition or failure to look for the evidence (Malone, 2001: 48); for example, a unique Neolithic enclosure perhaps exists at Garton Station, Yorkshire, as no trace of a burial mound was found as evident over surrounding Iron Age enclosures (Stead, 1987: 236). As Malone states, the best Neolithic settlement evidence is located in "the least fertile, inhospitable areas" due to the possible destruction of sites through ploughing in the more agriculturally rich areas, including East Anglia and the chalklands of southern Britain (ibid). In contrast, recent and continuing excavation, particularly of Ireland, suggests the Neolithic Britons lived in substantial houses coalescing into villages. Archaeological excavation at Mullaghfarna, Co. Sligo, revealed what was originally interpreted as a cluster of enclosures (Grogan, 1996: 54), is actually a Neolithic 'village' of approximately 120 houses (Bradley, lecture, 11/11/03). Caution should be taken when examining the possible remains of a village: the rotation of a farmstead around a single point could potentially be misinterpreted as a larger settlement (Holgate, 1988: 114).
In contrast to Thomas' view, many of the recognised Neolithic structures of Scotland and Ireland are far from flimsy. Some of these structures were well planned and the individual houses often included external areas, annexes, possibly for storage or sheltering of animals and internal storage areas.
Excavation of a Neolithic farmstead at Knap of Howar, Orkney (fig 1), has revealed two rectilinear structures, of double skinned dry stone walling with a midden core of domestic rubbish, apparently joined by a passageway (Ritchie, 1983: 42-43). The larger of the two, House 1, interpreted as a dwelling, consisted of two rooms with a stone partition and partially paved floor; a probable secondary context of a massive trough quern suggested at least two phases of occupation (Ritchie, 1983: 42-43). A central ash filled hollow represented a hearth (Ritchie, 1983: 48) and the location of House 2 to the north would provide some shelter from the elements.
House 2, incorporating three compartments, was interpreted as a workshop or storage structure due the inclusion of five recesses in the walls (Ritchie, 1983: 43) and the addition of shelves (Ritchie, 1983: 51). Phases of occupation were recognised through a number of features including a doorway to an adjoining passage with House 1 was sealed in a secondary phase following a partial collapse (Ritchie, 1983: 51); and a surviving low stone bench may have replaced an earlier timber structure, evidenced by grooves in the clay surface (Ritchie, 1983: 50). Animal bone collagen suggested a 500-year occupation during the third or fourth millennium BC (Ritchie, 1983: 57). Abandonment did not occur in haste: no artefacts were recovered from the storage facilities, suggesting the evacuation was planned (Ritchie, 1983: 51). The conclusion reached was the site probably represented a single, extended family farmstead (Ritchie, 1983: 58), supporting the early view of Neolithic settlement.
Waddell suggests the substantial timber buildings of the fourth millennium BC represent some degree of permanent settlement (Waddell, 1998: 30), however, construction was restricted to areas supporting substantial trees or importation of suitable material would be required. The sub-rectangular house at Ballygalley, Co. Antrim (fig 2) was presumably constructed of timber evidenced by an absence of structural remains, excluding the foundation trench (Waddell, 1998: 32), however, decomposition is not necessarily the case as the house may have been dismantled (ibid). A slightly curved annex from the north-west corner, visible in figure 2, may have provided shelter for the cattle from a northerly wind.
Circular Neolithic structures are also known (Waddell, 1998: 30), for example, Lough Gur, Co. Limerick, Site C, has produced three houses of circular plan (fig 3), probably dating to the third millennium BC (Waddell, 1998: 34). Two of double-ring construction, possibly with an organic fill, contained a hearth and at least one pit for storage or rubbish (Waddell, 1998: 34), and may represent a secular building of the 'village'. The third was possibly for storage suggested by the flimsy construction of a single ring of posts, possibly supporting walls of wattle and daub (Waddell, 1998: 34).
Within the same 'village', Site K consisted a low wall of double-skinned boulder construction with an earth and rubble core. The enclosure contained a sub-rectangular house (fig 4) and external pit (Waddell, 1998: 34). The size of the enclosure probably denotes a house of special status opposed to defence, however, the artefacts found within consisted of everyday objects including leaf-shaped flint arrowheads and plain round-bottomed bowl (Waddell, 1998: 34); nothing associated with status.
Comparison of the houses of Lough Gur identifies a difference in design, although, if they represent people of various status or structures of specific purpose remains uncertain. The identification of hearths in two of the three smaller round houses does suggest they were inhabited, however, Site K apparently lacks a hearth (Waddell, 1998: 34). In contrast, Site K produced albeit modest artefacts compared to a total absence in Site C (ibid). If the houses of Site C were dwellings, the inhabitants either lacked possessions or made a planned abandonment reminiscent of Knap of Howar, or these were not dwellings but storage or processing buildings.
In permanently waterlogged conditions, organic material is well preserved, including structural remains. In the Somerset Levels wooden trackways, including the Sweet Track, have been preserved in remarkable condition. The raised path, of pole and plank construction, linked Westhay Island in the reed swamp to the Polden Hills to the south (Malone, 2001: 64) replaced an earlier version, the Post Track (Coles & Coles, 1986: 45). The Post Track, situated slightly lower and to the right of the later structure (fig 5), possibly represents a former access during construction (Coles & Coles, 1986: 46) or a changing level in the water table.
Dendrochronological examination of an oak plank from the Sweet Track provided a felling date in the winter of 3807/3806BC (Hillam et al, 1990: 214) and studies of hazel used for repairs shows the track was used for at least ten years (Coles & Coles, 1986: 56). The connection of the dry islands within the swamp to the mainland supports the view the inhabitants of the area must have settled on dry land (Coles & Coles, 1986: 63) and the pathways probably indicate access to resources, possibly reeds for thatching purposes.
Contrary to the early view of Neolithic houses, the plans and reconstructions of sturdy buildings detailed above show various designs. Far from the dispersed but uniform rectilinear plan of family farmsteads, some structures are grouped into rudimentary villages, possibly displaying differences in status. The sedentary Neolithic population of Britain and Ireland were capable of erecting substantial structures, but were they farming the surrounding land?
The Neolithic has traditionally been viewed as being based on a mixed farming economy (Thomas, 1999: 7), however, further archaeological investigation now suggests periods of successful farming followed by a collapse in the economy due to the unstable relationship between the population and the natural resources (Thomas, 1991: 8). Changing farming methods may have been adopted in the attempt to overcome these imbalances as demonstrated by a changing pollen record between stages A and B of Ballynagilly, Co. Tyrone (Pilcher et al, 1971: 560); evidence suggests forest was cleared in favour of cereal cultivation with a subsequent increase in plantain, probably a period of pastoral activity, before regeneration of woodland (ibid). Molluscan evidence from Ascott-under-Wychwood, Oxon, may support this hypothesis as, although the long barrow was situated on the edge of arable land (Evans & O'Connor, 1999: 206), woodland regeneration occurred between two phases of occupation (Holgate, 1988: 111), possibly reflecting a collapse in the local economy and an abandonment of the land. This instability may have influenced the location of settlements, the development of farming techniques and animal husbandry, although, the early Neolithic still appears dependant on wild resources to supplement any domestic production.
A majority of early Neolithic burials have been recovered from long barrows or cairns and the examples found on the periphery of the Marlborough and Berkshire Downs (Holgate, 1988: 114) may have held some territorial purpose; a hypothesis possibly supported by regional variation identified in the burial monuments of Wiltshire where to the north earthen long barrows were constructed, opposed to the stone chambered tombs of the south (Thomas, 1999: 203). The fourth millennium earthen long barrow of West Kennet in North Wiltshire contains five chambers, allowing segregated organisation of the bodies of the deceased by age and sex (Thomas, 1999: 204). Various styles of pottery, predominantly Peterborough ware, show the burial tomb was in use over a long period (ibid) prior to closure by huge sarsen blocking stones. The location and continued use of this tomb shows the reverence shown to the ancestors; an inconsistency in the number of bones shows the possible removal (Thomas, 1999: 207) and ritual exploitation.
Although there are no chambered tombs on Knap of Howar, the neighbouring island on Holm of Papa Westray, to the east, accommodates two, possibly three, tombs (Ritchie, 1983:59). In contrast to other communities who are believed to have worshipped the ancestors, the inhabitants of Knap of Howar may have separated themselves from the dead; alternatively, there may be a correlation to the rising sun in the east, perhaps a belief in rebirth.
The erection of huge monuments for the inhumation of the dead denotes respect. The generally highly visible location of the tombs evidences respect, possibly including ancestor worship or territorial rite, or both.
Due to the excavation of substantial houses and the introduction of new environment techniques, a re-interpretation of early Neolithic settlement patterns has been forced. Rather than stable mixed farming, flexible farming practices were adopted in an unpredictable economic climate; no longer are the houses seen as flimsy rectilinear structures accommodating an extended family; instead the realisation the early Neolithic Britons constructed sturdy villages has been accepted; the reliance on local raw materials has been disproved by the identification of imported products, both from within the British Isles and from the continent; and the continued reliance on wild resources in addition to raw materials resulted in the introduction of territorial markers. The early Neolithic pattern of settlement was far more complicated than previously thought.