The evidence for prehistoric hunter-gatherers comprises the large floral and faunal assemblage, technology and architecture. These remains enable archaeologists to reconstruct the subsistence of these ancient communities. Through osteological refuse hunting methods and site function can be identified, and technology indicates the activities on site. This evidence also assists in the recognition of simple hunter-gathering groups and the more complex societies. However, the accuracy of these interpretations can be questioned and on occasion re-evaluated. The following essay will approach the study of hunter-gatherer subsistence and, with the inclusion of case studies, evaluate the evidence involved during interpretation.
A simple hunter-gatherer community may be identified by the recognition of a small, highly mobile group with little material culture (Henry, 1985). These groups were probably seasonally mobile, relocating to areas of predictable resource, possibly moving from the grasslands, rich in steppe fauna and wild cereals, into forested areas, for the harvesting of autumn maturing fruits and nuts, and onto the coastal fringes, to rely on the multi-seasonal supply of fish and other marine resources. Although highly mobile, these groups would remain in one area for a period of time or an entire season. The architectural remains are few but indicate lightweight habitats and shallow hearths, with little or no storage facilities.
The waterlogged site of Star Carr, in the Vale of Pickering, Yorkshire, has been and continues to be, one of the most re-evaluated sites of prehistoric Europe. At the time of occupation, 9488 bp (Legge and Rowley-Conwy, 1988), Star Carr was a lakeside settlement. A birch wood platform was constructed on a reed bed, flattened by probable human traffic, supporting an argument of occupation during the period of growth (ibid). No traces of structures have been found at the site, although the excavator, Graham Clark, suggests only the lower levels of the platform, having remained permanently waterlogged, were preserved (ibid).
Structural evidence was discovered at the waterlogged Kebaran site of Ohalo II, Israel. Semi-subterranean huts, one of three successive floor layers, were found constructed of plant material, still visible during excavation (Nadel, 1995). The western most feature of the site was the lone grave of an adult male, orientated north-south, with stones positioning his head so he faced east, into the settlement. There were no grave goods associated with the burial. To the east, a small stone feature, measuring only 45 cm in diameter, had been constructed in the area between the grave and the dwellings; however, there is no evidence of association between the stone feature and the grave (ibid). A series of hearths throughout the site varied in ash and charcoal, colour and size, and contained a wealth of flint and organic remains. The changes may represent different activity areas, although not all the hearths were contemporary (ibid).
More permanent dwellings were uncovered at the site of Lepenski Vir in the Danube Valley, Yugoslavia. These riverside huts, occupied by sedentary hunter-gatherers between 7750 and 6250 BP, were trapezoidal in shape, the wide end towards the river, and varied in size from 5 to 30 metres square (Mithen, 1994). Limestone plaster floors were surrounded by postholes indicating a probable wooden structure and large sub-rectangular hearths were lined with limestone blocks (ibid). Sandstone sculptures resembling half man/half fish images, found within the huts, may have had a ritualistic purpose, possibly connected with fishing practices.
The evidence for these settlements, amongst other remains, is the surviving architecture. At the proposed temporary hunting camp of Star Carr (Legge and Rowley-Conwy, 1988), limited water logging has allowed only the lower levels of the platform to be preserved, rendering interpretation of the structures impossible. A slight improvement of preservation at Ohalo II resulted in the organic remains of the huts to be preserved. The location of this waterside site, suggests occupation may have been for longer periods through the year, with easy access to alternative resources, both aquatic and terrestrial. Lepenski Vir appears a more permanent settlement, as great effort had been taken to make plaster floors with sunken hearths. Again, this riverside position would provide access to a number of resources.
Through the time and effort invested in the construction of hunter-gatherer settlements, archaeologists are able to establish whether the site was permanently occupied or a transitory camp. The surrounding resources probably dictated the location; careful planning would ease access to a number of environments, allowing a varied, multi-seasonal diet.
The age and season of death of an animal can indicate the season of occupation, species specialisation and even hunting strategies. Mammalian teeth display growth zones and wear patterns, which can indicate the age and season of death. Through the examination of teeth eruption and wear, or through the examination of individual bones, the age and diversity of species present on site can indicate whether animals were hunted individually or in groups. An attritional pattern, with an elevated number of individuals in the youngest and oldest classes, may reflect the relative ease in hunting the inexperienced or infirm (Pike-Tay and Bricker, 1993). A catastrophic pattern, displaying the highest number of individuals in the youngest category reducing down to the oldest, may indicate a drive style hunting strategy or a natural death resulting from a catastrophic event (ibid).
A majority of the osteological evidence from Star Carr suggests a spring to mid-summer occupation of the site. This conclusion was reached by the examination of roe deer and red deer tooth eruption, in comparison to modern animals, identifying the season or even month of death. A juvenile red deer maxilla contained milk teeth with wear indicative of a five-month old specimen, a probable spring birth would suggest a summer kill (Legge and Rowley-Conwy, 1988). However, one elk mandible resembled the stage reached by most animals in the October of their second year, although this would be dependent on the date of birth (ibid). If the elk had been born in the spring, death during October would cast doubt on the season of occupation.
The presence of absence of antlers on the skull also identifies the season of death but does not necessarily identify the season of occupation. The skulls of red deer with shed antlers indicate death occurred in spring, around April or May (Legge and Rowley-Conwy, 1988), possibly suggesting the period of occupation. In conflict with this evidence was the discovery of red deer frontlets with the antlers still attached. Assuming modern red deer display the same habits as those present during the Mesolithic, the animals were killed between mid-October and late April (Thomas, 1979). This conflicting evidence may be explained by the importation of raw material, in the form of antler, for later processing for worked bone tools, and the frontlets are commonly interpreted as ritual objects. There is a suggestion Star Carr was a hunting camp from which the meat was transported to the base camp (Legge and Rowley-Conwy, 1988). This proposal could be acceptable, although the absence of pelvis and spine from the site would indicate butchery occurred elsewhere, possibly at the kill site (Darvill, 1987). Through the study of the faunal assemblage, Star Carr is currently accepted as having been occupied during spring and early summer with a possible seasonal migration to a coastal site (Legge and Rowley-Conwy, 1988).
Storage of resources can distort the interpretation of seasonal occupation. When hunters were on expedition, the likelihood is stored food would have been transported from the base camp or collected from stores in the landscape. Depending on when the vegetal food was gathered or the animal killed, the food refuse may indicate a particular season, when the hunters occupied the site at a different period of the year (Champion et al, 1984).
Osteological evidence can reveal the season of occupation and the purpose of the site; however, re-evaluation can uncover conflicting evidence. Changes in the habit of animals should also be considered. Although modern red deer carry their antlers through the winter into the spring, ancient animals may have displayed different patterns. A similar problem in changing habits may arise in the study of tooth eruption. Altered nutrition may cause modern animals to erupt their teeth at an earlier age, therefore casting doubt on the ages of animals within the archaeological record (Rowley-Conwy, 1993). Although studies of modern animals in comparison to medieval individuals suggest this is not the case, tooth eruption, as a seasonal indicator, may be problematic (ibid).
Species representation within the faunal assemblage may identify preference in the diet or the abundance of a particular animal. At the Final Magdalenian site of Limeuil, south-west France, reindeer are the dominant species in the faunal assemblage, with horse as the second preference (Boyle, 1993). Reindeer were an important part of the subsistence strategy and there is ample butchery evidence in the form of recognisable cut marks (ibid). Reindeer remains, although the primary taxa, display less intensive processing than the secondary taxa, including less cut marks or fragmentation. Of the reindeer remains, only 5.63% display evidence of processing in comparison to 34.71% of non-reindeer (ibid). The greater frequency of butchery marks on the secondary species may indicate increased processing for greater yields, possibly to warrant the effort of hunting a less abundant animal.
The species representation in the archaeological record of Ohalo II indicates a diverse diet, and, when examined in conjunction with the presence of characteristic tools, suggests a Kebaran culture. Although at 1500 square metres, Ohalo II is much larger than the average 200 square metres of most Kebaran sites (Henry, 1985), other characteristics reaffirm the identity. Artefacts are few, restricted to beads of the Mediterranean shell dentalium, and flint and bone tools. The diet, however, is varied as the faunal assemblage contained tortoise, birds, hare, fox, gazelle and deer (Kislev et al, 1992). Thousands of fish bones were also recovered, although the pattern of deposition was uneven, common in places, scarce in others. Fish, a multi-seasonal resource, is highly nutritious and obviously of great importance to the site economy (ibid).
Osteological analysis can identify many aspects of hunter-gather subsistence. A dominant species in the diet may indicate preference, however, it may also suggest abundance. The age profile of the faunal assemblage can signify the hunting method adopted by the population, whether they hunted individual animals or employed a drive strategy. However, osteological analysis as a seasonal indicator is fraught with problems; the importation or storage of resources can distort the result.
As the climate warmed at the end of the Pleistocene, around 10,000 BP, the diversity of plants in the landscape increased and spread to areas previously too cold for colonisation. The prehistoric hunter-gatherers were able to collect an increasing variety of grasses, fruits and nuts over a wider area, eventually developing storage techniques to preserve the excess for scarcer periods. The observation of the growth patterns of wild grasses would later provide knowledge invaluable during early agriculture (Henry, 1985).
During the British Mesolithic, two phases of occupation are identified at Star Carr as indicated by the charcoal found during pollen analysis. The first phase coincided with the construction of the platform, around 9488 BP, lasting 70 years and the second phase lasted 120 years but falls into a period of anomalies within the pollen record. The occupants of Star Carr were extremely restricted in their vegetal diet. The local woodland and waterside allowed the collection of bog bean, fat hen and nettle, all of which were represented in the pollen record of the site, but there was no evidence any were actually eaten.
Settlements in the Near East fared better in the plant community. The warmer climate allowed the growth of various fruits and nuts not available in the cooler west. In the spring, the forest surrounding the site of Ohalo II produced edible grasses, including wild varieties of barley and emmer wheat (Kislev et al, 1992). In the autumn, the inhabitants were able to gather fruits and nuts including almond, olive, pistachio and grapes (ibid). Evidence of all of the listed varieties was found on site, however, although they would have grown in abundance, no evidence was recovered to suggest the harvest was stored in vessels or pits (ibid) and there has been no discussion of plant processing technology.
The intensive collection, processing and storage of cereals, indicates the presence of a complex hunter-gatherer society. The organisation of the harvest, followed by intensive processing, required man-management (Henry, 1985), probably requiring delegation by a person of status. This exploitation of storable resources including wild cereals and nuts by the Natufians, may have led to a sedentary lifestyle (ibid). The Natufians possessed processing equipment including querns, pestles and mortars and storage pits, and the abundance of cereals and other plants led to the expansion of the culture towards the highland Negev (ibid).
The warming climate allowed the spread of edible plant species, providing the hunter-gatherers with a predictable food source. Not only did plants vary the diet and introduce vital nutrients, they provided a resource suitable for storage.
The value of plant evidence within the archaeological record is immeasurable. Radiocarbon dating can provide a date for the site, and the diversity of plants will assist in the reconstruction of the environment and diet.
The technology available to the prehistoric hunter-gatherers was in the earlier periods limited, and is identified by, and in most cases restricted to, lithic assemeblages. Mobile hunter-gatherers would carry only simple and portable technology and complex groups would store cumbersome objects at the base camp (Rowley-Conwy, 1983). Although changing technology and the introduction of new tools can date a site, the possibility of trade must be considered. Exploitation of a migratory species can result in a high kill rate, providing enough food for immediate consumption and also for storage, possibly required during sparse periods (ibid). Rowley-Conwy (1983) suggests non-migratory species may be utilized during these sparse times to bulk out the stored resources.
During the Palaeolithic, a period known as the Early Gravettian, around 30,000 - 28,000 BP, is characterised by Gravette points and microgravettes, both of which have been recovered form the site providing the name for the period, La Gravette, France (Pike-Tay and Bricker, 1993). There was a dominance of maintainable lithic tools and organic technology was rare (ibid), however, the environment may not have been favourable for the preservation of organic material. Star Carr produced a lithic assemblage consisting of many thousands of microliths and flint tools, dominated by burins and scrapers (Legge and Rowley-Conwy, 1988). A wealth of organic technology was recovered from the waterlogged conditions, including barbed antler points in such a number they may represent a cache for later use (ibid). A change in the characteristics of the antler points may represent at least two phases of occupation (ibid), which, if radiocarbon dates tally, may coincide with the phases indicated by the charcoal layers. In addition to rolls of birch bark, possibly used as containers, and heavy elk antler mattocks, a partially decayed wooden object was recovered. The purpose of the artefact has not been identified, but suggestions include a digging tool or a paddle, although no evidence of a boat survives.
As a multi-seasonal food, fish have always been an important resource. Shallow water fishing probably produced wrass, ling and saithe, the latter representing 95% of the fish bone evidence recovered from the shellfish middens of Oronsay, Argyll (Renfrew and Bahn, 1996). Examination of fish otoliths can estimate the size and age of a fish at death, and growth rings can reveal the season. Cod remains from Morton on Tay, Fifeshire, occupied between 7950 and 5950 BP, reveal the fish measured in excess of one metre in length and must have been caught in deep water, presumably from a boat. The Erteblle site of Tybrind Vig, Denmark, is a Mesolithic settlement producing a wealth of fishing evidence. Two canoes and decorated paddles were used to row out on to the water. Large stones were used as ballast, a small fire, associated with eel fishing, burned (Mithen, 1994) and bone hooks and leisters, double fishing prongs, were used to catch small cod, spurdon, seals and porpoises (Whittle, 1996). A Mesolithic fish spear was recovered from peat dredged off the Leman and Ower banks, 30km off shore in the North Sea. The spear was associated with pollen dating to a reduction of pine in favour of trees that preferred warmer conditions, around 8950 BP (Flemming and Masters, 1983).
Fishing strategies, like hunting, can alter depending on the environment or the season. The Finnish site of Askola produced an informative pattern of seasonal food. Within the faunal assemblage, the remains of ringed seal were recovered and analysis disclosed the means by which they were caught. From the autumn until the spring, the seals were hunted using harpoons or clubs, but as the year progressed into the summer months, the preferred method was harpoon or spear, and as autumn approached the seals were caught using nets (Matiskainen, 1990). The reason for the changing strategy has not been explained but may result form changing weather patterns or animal behaviour.
The multi-seasonal availability of fish and other aquatic species provided much needed nutrition during sparse periods. The introduction of boats and fishing technology enabled the fisher-hunter-gatherers to venture out onto deeper water and even on to the islands. Organic preservation within the technological record allows radiocarbon dating, or pollen analysis can identify the period by the changing environment. The appearance of new technology, or the improvement of existing tools, provides a dating tool for other sites and allows the archaeologist to reconstruct the activities on site.
The evidence for prehistoric hunter-gatherer subsistence is varied in type and reliability. Osteological evidence may indicate seasonal occupation and species availability but changing habits of the animals must be considered and may result in re-evaluation. The changing climate at the end of the Pleistocene encouraged colonisation by grasses, fruits and nuts into areas previously unsuitable for the different vegetation. The annual collection of wild grasses by the hunter-gatherers exposed them to the cereal growth patterns, which would prove invaluable during early agriculture. Technological breakthroughs introduced an increasing and diverse marine diet, possibly to supplement the sparser winter periods. Organic evidence, dependent on preservation, can provide a radiocarbon date but the transportation or trade of resources can distort the evidence. Although there is a wealth of evidence for the subsistence of prehistoric hunter-gatherers, with the development of new theories and scientific methods, re-evaluation is inevitable and necessary.