This essay will approach the subject of the climate of the period ranging 200kyr - 30kyr BP, the methods in which the climate is reconstructed and the possible adaptation of Neanderthals as considered by archaeologists and palaeoanthropologists. Although this adaptation would probably have included subsistence strategies, this paper will focus on the possibility of skeletal morphology. Neanderthal anatomy and the reason or purpose for such unusual characteristics has been the subject of debate since the initial find in the Neander Valley in Germany in 1856. Original propositions included the possibility of deformity but quickly altered to climatic adaptation through skeletal morphology. Since the first discussions in the late 19 th century, many scholars have reconsidered the adaptation hypothesis; some of these proposals will be summarised and a personal interpretation proffered.
To gain an understanding of possible morphological changes in the anatomy of Neanderthals in response to the environment, one must first be aware of the changing climate over the period of their existence. The climate of the Neanderthal age can be reconstructed through several methods; however, two remain more accurate and widely used. Although oxygen isotopes 16,17 and 18 were originally regarded as a record of the water temperature due to the elevation of the lighter isotopes into the ice sheets, they are now generally agreed as indicating how much water is locked up in the glaciers (Aitken 1990). By examining the isotopes, principally the heavier O18, with a high-precision mass spectrometer, it is possible to identify the concentration of this isotope in the ocean, reflecting the global climate at that time (ibid). These isotopes can be found in both deep-sea cores and ice cores, both of which are highly studied and provide a continuous sequence of climate record, spanning hundreds of thousands of years.
Deep-sea cores are a form of absolute dating in that the substance itself can be dated rather than an associated object. The core consists of terrigeneous sediments and organic matter, accumulated at a rate of around a few millimetres a century (Aitken 1990), therefore a core of ten metres in length, as is the norm, will cover a period of several thousand years. The terrigeneous sediments, formed by the erosive action of tides and currents, possess a weak magnetic field, which can be analysed to identify magnetic pole reversals (ibid). These reversals take place over a period of decades but occur only every few hundred thousand or million years, so can be used as a dating technique, although it must be used in conjunction with other methods (Lewin 1999).
Ice cores are drilled through the remaining glaciers of the Arctic or Antarctic though concentration is currently placed on the Greenland ice cap. Information is provided on the annual climate displayed as layers built up each year with the addition of new ice. These cores can be thousands of metres deep and the Vostok core from East Antarctica was the first to provide data spanning thousands of years; now a core from Summit in Greenland is used for the same purpose (GRIP 1993).
Through the combined oxygen isotope analysis of deep-sea cores and ice cores, a continuous sequence has been produced (fig 1). Concentrating on Neanderthal occupation for the purpose of this essay, the Late Saale, described by Dansgaard (et al 1993), falls into the earliest period, oxygen isotope sequence 6 (OIS 6). The environment was described as less cold and variable than the Late Weichsel, spanning OIS 3 and OIS 4, with a few spells of extreme warmth in the Early Saale (ibid), OIS 6 and OIS 7a, the period prior to the focus of this essay.
Oxygen isotope sequence 6, approximately 185kyr BP - 130kyr BP, was a very cold, open landscape. Van Andel and Tzedakis describe the corridor between the Alpine and Scandinavian ice caps as incorporating elements of both tundra and steppe environments, including grasses and sedges amongst other vegetation (1996). Around 132kyr BP the isotope-temperature relationship indicates a 10 maximum reduction in temperature. This occurrence, described as Event 2, lasted approximately 8kyr, with the entire atmospheric shift completing within 30 years (GRIP 1993).
OIS 5e, the last interglacial, known as the Eemian, dates to 130kyr BP - 118kyr BP. Lasting only 10-15 years, this sequence included five sub-stages of varying ice volume, resulting in relatively short periods of mid-glacial temperatures (Gamble 1999). Solar radiation led to a temperature increase of 10-15, resulting in temperatures slightly higher than today, allowing the spread of dense deciduous forest and a retreat of the ice sheets, roughly to their present position (ibid).
The following early glacial period, spanning 118kyr BP - 75kyr BP, fluctuates in climate with glacial and interstadial phases. To this end, the sequence has been split into sub-divisions. Two interstadials identified as peat horizons in a lake core from Ascherslebener See, Germany, known as the Knigsaue profile, fall in the fifth sequence. These interstadials are separated by fossil ice wedge casts identifying permafrost conditions found between horizons. ISO 5d and 5b are identified as possessing large ice volumes with summers in northern Europe 5-10 cooler than today (Gamble 1999). The horizons were separated by ISO 5c and 5a, longer interstadials of a forested, temperate climate. Around 115kyr BP, the temperature decreased by a maximum of 14 as indicated by the isotope analysis; Event 1 as it is known lasted approximately 70 years. The dust signal suggests a shift in atmospheric circulations completed in only 10 years (GRIP 1993). Around 75kya BP, the Toba eruption in Indonesia may have resulted in a volcanic winter, possibly triggering the early onset of the next sequence, the Pleniglacial (Gamble 1999). Eruptions as powerful as Toba can be identified in the ice cores due to the energy of the volcano expelling ash into the upper atmosphere, allowing the transportation of particles around the globe, eventually settling in the cooler climate of the ice caps.
The Pleniglacial, OIS 4, 75kyr BP - 60kyr BP, was a full glacial leading to the rapid expansion of glaciers (Gamble 1999). The Knigsaue profile shows increased ice wedge formation during this sequence without any significant interstadials. Deep-sea cores show higher ice volumes resulting in lower sea levels, with no major continental glaciation (ibid). The Monticchio core of southern Italy produced a variable record of tree, shrub and vine pollen to herb pollen. This herb pollen identifies a colder open landscape with little tree cover in northern Europe (ibid). This evidence is invaluable as the pollen records of this period are often blank due to the types of vegetation and the arctic-style peat resulting in poor preservation (van Andel & Tzedakis 1996).
The final period of the Neanderthal occupation, OIS3, known as the Interpleniglacial, dates to approximately 60kya BP - 28kya BP, the period of focus for this paper. The Summit ice core from central Greenland identified five interstadials lasting 2-4kyrs each (Dansgaard et al 1993). Comparison with the Monticchio pollen profile provided revised dates for the expulsion of icebergs into the North Atlantic between 64.2kyr and 14.5kyr BP. This led to a significant effect on the climate of Europe corresponding to a high ratio of herb pollen, again indicating cold, open conditions, with extensive woodland around the source lake of the Monticchio core at 50-42.5kyr and 40.7-37.6kyr BP (Gamble 1999). These results produced a picture of a relatively mild climate with reduced glaciers and recent work suggests an increase in temperature of 5-8 over a period of five years - this would have effected the vegetation within the landscape.
The oxygen isotope analysis of both the ice and deep-sea cores reconstructs a fluctuating climate with extremes of temperature. The vegetation within the landscape would have altered depending on the ambient temperature and aridity. To this end, the hominids occupying the region must have adapted to survive. Whether this adaptation was physical or based on subsistence is a subject of much debate, however, this essay will focus on the skeletal evidence.
The anatomical features of the Neanderthals have long been the subject of debate. The possibility of skeletal morphology in response to an arctic environment has been proposed and continues to be a focus for much attention. Many anthropologists have published papers and proposed arguments regarding skeletal adaptation and this section will chronologically summarise these arguments.
In 1927 the Bohemian physician and physical anthropologist Ale Hrdlika was offered the Huxley medal, the highest British award for anthropology. During his acceptance speech, Hrdlika proffered his opinion on the evolution of Neanderthals into human beings (Trinkaus & Shipman 1993). Although the hypothesis of Hrdlika on Neanderthal evolution was at the time dismissed (ibid) and has now been disproved, he spoke of his results following examination of Neanderthal occupation and how the number of open-air sites had decreased in favour of cave positions. This, he thought, was evidence of a worsening climate, a thesis supported by the Croatian palaeontologist Dragutin Gorganovic-Kramberger (ibid). Hrdlika proposed the unusual Neanderthal features were also representative of the changing climate and the various specimens from around the world fell into alternative categories. The original Neander Valley specimen from Germany, the fossils from Spy (Belgium), Le Moustier (France) and La Chapelle-aux-Saints (France) were described as a robust, primitive species, opposed to the more modern-looking examples from Krapina (Croatia), La Ferrassie (France) and La Quina (France). He suggested this variable population was as a result of exposure to glacial conditions and subsistence in such environment would preserve only those suitably evolved to survive (ibid).
A new understanding of evolutionary processes prompted F. Clark Howell to begin work in 1951 in an attempt to explain Neanderthal morphology as a result of genetic isolation in addition to glacial adaptation (Trinkaus & Shipman 1993). He identified the large-browed, stocky Neanderthal as synonymous with western Europe during the early part of the last glacial period. Although there was some concurrence, there was also difference of opinion with division of sites to alternative types of Neanderthals as proposed by Hrdlika, in addition to fossils found in the intervening period. Howell associated fossils including La Chapelle-aux-Saints, La Ferrassie, Le Moustier, Spy, Monte Circeo (Italy) and Feldhofer (the Neander fossil) with animals adapted to cold environments (ibid). Those of Krapina, Saccopastore (Italy), Tabun (Israel) and Teshik-Tash (Uzbekistan) he concluded, dated to an earlier warmer interglacial period, preceding the last glaciation and suggested the shorter skulls would have possessed smaller brains and faces, and the limbs appeared less robust but also straighter than their later counterparts (ibid).
Howell emphasized the difficulty of survival in glacial areas without proper clothing and equipment and a scarcity of resources. He speculated the isolation imposed by glacial barriers would have created evolutionary developments or restricted the gene pool (Trinkaus & Shipman 1993), resulting in a concentration of unusual characteristics. Howell recognized an abrupt end to the trend that coincided with the end of the early glacial period (ibid), possibly following a reduction in the glacial barrier. He observed the early Neanderthals of western Asia and western Europe possessed less pronounced features, and a warm period during the Wrm glaciation would have removed the geographical barrier allowing more modern looking humans to spread from the east to the west.
Carleton Coon, an American physical anthropologist and expert on race and racial differences, compared man to non-human animals and produced evidence of man's adaptation to the surrounding environment (Trinkaus & Shipman 1993). Coon had examined living races and the fossil record looking for such adaptation and had reverted to Bergmann and Allen's rule regarding heat conservation - a generally larger body mass with shorter limbs than similar species from warmer climes (ibid). Eskimos, native to arctic conditions, for example, will have shorter necks and extremities and possess a heavier build; the Maasai, however, living in much warmer climes, are taller, of slighter build with long limbs (ibid). Coon saw an adaptation to cold in the Neanderthal fossil record, a compact form similar to the Eskimos (ibid), a hypothesis supported by Stringer and Gamble in the same year. He recognised the Neanderthal nose as a dominant but important feature possessing a large nasal aperture, a prominent bridge, producing a pronounced mid-face. This has become known as the 'radiator theory' following the explanation of Coon for the need of "warming and moistening of inhaled air" (Trinkaus & Shipman 1993, 317). He continued remarking on the proximity of the nasal passages to the blood vessels and the importance of maintaining the brains temperature in a society lacking equipment suitable for glacial conditions (Trinkaus & Shipman 1993). Although this was seen as a step forward in the search for explanation of Neanderthal morphology, during the 1950's Sherwood L. Washburn, another American physical anthropologist, declared the radiator theory partially incorrect "but a credible and useful first attempt at understanding Neanderthal anatomy as a function of an environmental adaptation" (Trinkaus & Shipman 1993, 321).
An alternative hypothesis regarding the forward thrust of the Neanderthal face was proposed by C. Loring Brace IV, an iconoclastic physical anthropologist. In contrast to the belief of others, Brace suggested the dimensions of Neanderthal faces and teeth were as a response to tasks performed using the mouth as an extra hand (Trinkaus & Shipman 1993). The later reduction in the features was possibly as a result of the introduction of specialized tools - the decline in use led, over time, to less powerful facial muscles and lighter skeletal structure (ibid). Approximately a decade later, Milford Wolpoff, a modern American physical anthropologist continued the belief of Brace in his study of prehistoric stone tools, in conjunction with an American archaeologist, David Brose. Wolpoff believed the specialized tools Brace hypothesised, would date to the Middle Palaeolithic, as tools of this period were of a more specific function than previous periods (ibid). This would date the tools somewhere between 250,000 - 35,000 years ago, coinciding with the age of the Neanderthals.
The 'current' view of Trinkaus and Shipman in their 1993 publication was Neanderthal characteristics were indeed evidence of a harsh environment: that their compact bodies, limbs and digits were adapted to conserve heat in near-arctic conditions; their large noses had evolved to prevent moisture evaporation in the cold, dry conditions but would also allow heat dispersal during exercise. They identified the fact that although the Neanderthals possessed the ability to clothe themselves, find shelter and create fire, their subsistence strategies were unequal to that of later humans (Trinkaus & Shipman 1993).
During the process of research for this paper, it has been observed a majority of Neanderthal fossils derived from Europe and few from the Near, Middle and Far East. A comparison was proposed of contemporary fossils from both the east and the west, in the attempt to prove or disprove the climatic adaptation hypothesis, however, difficulty arose in identifying two fossils of the same date. The original fossil from the Neander Valley, dating to 40-50kyrs, was chosen as the basis of comparison, due to some 'classic' Neanderthal skeletal traits. As Tattersall suggests faunal evidence proves the Neander specimen and others including Kebara are contemporaneous (1999), the Kebara 2 fossil, found on Mount Carmel, Israel, was introduced as the Eastern example.
The Neander Valley specimen (fig 2) includes bones representing almost the entire skeleton. A long, low upper cranium displayed the prominent brow ridges of a 'classic' Neanderthal, however, the lower cranium and mandible were missing. The robust skeleton possessed bowed long bones with large joint surfaces and well developed muscle attachments (Johanson & Edgar 1996), possibly relating to a strenuous lifestyle (Tattersall 1999).
The Kebara 2 fossil (fig 3), missing the cranium, right leg and lower left leg, was found in association with tools of the Levallois technique and burnt flint, allowing dating using thermoluminescence (Johanson & Edgar 1996). There is contradiction between Johanson & Edgar (1996) as they report this individual was less robust than other examples from the Near and Middle East, opposed to Tattersall (1999), when he suggests Kebara 2 is the heaviest built Neanderthal fossil. At 1.7m, Kebara 2 is certainly one of the tallest Neanderthal fossils, taller than the average European Neanderthal (Johanson & Edgar 1996); the 'classic' retromolar gap was, in the absence, evidence of a forward movement of the mid face; and the chin was minimal. Unusually, the hyoid bone, used for muscle control required for speech, was recovered, leading to further discussion on the communication skill of Neanderthals.
Both fossils display a common skeletal trait of the 'classic' Neanderthal: the heavy bones. At this point, partially due to the absence of many bones, the similarity diminishes. The Kebara male was tall, the Neander specimen shorter; the Eastern fossil long bones were straighter than the bowed examples of the German individual, who also possessed larger joint surfaces; and observation of the long bones identifies the Neander example to be heavier, although both are more robust than those of an anatomically modern human.
Evidence suggests that both the fossils of Neander and Kebara were adapted to the cold. The German fossil, in such close proximity to the glacier (fig 4), had developed a step further than the Israeli example, from the relatively warmer climate of the Middle East, reflected in his increased height. Due to the absence of the mid-face of both fossils, this paper has not discussed the possibility of the 'radiator theory' as proposed by Coon, however, it is considered a plausible explanation and should not be discounted.
Gamble observed the fluctuations in climate during the last interglacial (OIS 5e) occurred within a single lifetime, suggesting hominid adaptation was less likely during the period 300kyr-60kyr BP (1999). During this particular sequence the climatic oscillations were relatively short but when compared with considerably longer periods during other sequences, the possibility should be reconsidered.
The frequent oscillations in the oxygen isotope analysis of the Neanderthal period show a fluctuating climate of one extreme to another; temperatures fell dramatically over a fairly short period, and then rose to exceed the current climate. Neanderthal communities were likely to have adapted their subsistence strategies to survive, however, examination of their fossil remains provide evidence that nature intervened. The increased robusticity of the bones is evident in both the Eastern and Western fossils, although the taller stature of the Kebara remains, reflect a slightly warmer climate in the Middle East. In conclusion, it is my belief that the Neanderthals did indeed adapt skeletally to survive a harsh climate, however, improved subsistence strategies must also have been implemented. Unfortunately, neither secured their future.