As Europe entered the Neolithic, a megalithic culture emerged. From c.4800 BC to c.2300 BC calendar years (Renfrew, 1976) monuments incorporating large stones were constructed across the landscape from Southern Scandinavia in the north to the Mediterranean in the south (Chapman, 1981). Many of these structures were utilized as burial mounds; however, this may not have been their sole or primary function.
Since a nineteenth century survey assisted in the recognition of similarities in form (ibid), the interpretation of these monuments has varied from the symbolic display of power to the ritualistic meaning. This essay will detail the main approaches, their strengths and weaknesses, and will provide case studies from across Europe.
The study in search of shared beliefs or cultures within the megalithic population, examines evidence for similarities in the form of monuments and tracing the migration of people across the landscape. There has been past discussion on whether local variants should be studied or only the original form, however, restricting the study may overlook vital factors.
The migration of people across the European landscape, possibly in search of land suitable for agriculture, led to the spread of ideas and beliefs, possibly including the introduction of megalithic monuments. A subsistence pattern based on agriculture will rely on dedication to the land over the generations, involving the clearing of the landscape, preparation of the ground, sowing of crops followed by harvesting and storage, resulting in the continued success of the community. This reliance on previous generations could be the foundation of ancestor worship.
The complicated treatment of the dead and the monuments constructed to them have been connected with ancestry (Whittle, 1996), however, a lack of visible monumentalism should not indicate the lack of ancestral ties as the community may have employed domestic shrines (Chapman, 1995). Alasdair Whittle suggests the large passage graves of Co. Meath, Ireland, may have been erected as shrines to the dead ancestors and "were the central point of a cult focused on the fusion of past and present" (Whittle, 1996: 248). Apparently preceded and surrounded by approximately 17 smaller passage graves, Knowth, one of the three large passage graves, was built around 3000 BC (Whittle, 1996). These three monuments are an element of a cluster of 40 structures, in an area of only 3.5 by one kilometre. The earlier monuments of Knowth were raised around an open area, possibly already a sacred place, with their passage entrances facing the clearing. This area appears to have been the location of early activity, having produced artefacts and the remains of structures. The chambers of the tombs also contained artefacts together with cremated human bone. The graves may represent the individual or a lineage; the later construction of the larger mound may signify the introduction of a form of control over labour and ritual (ibid).
Although studies may be focused on the model form of megalithic monuments, it should be realised there will be inevitable variation from one example to another. When examining a possible territorial model, Renfrew suggested a particular set of Atlantic conditions could have prompted the construction of these monuments on the north-west coast of Europe (Renfrew, 1976). This would account for the clusters of monuments along the coastal regions (ibid), however, local factors may dictate the form of the monument and as the culture diffused, local adaptations would occur.
Diffusionism of a belief will create distorted reflections of a single culture amongst the settlements of adoption. The local communities may incorporate new ideas but dilution by pre-existing beliefs would likely have created an individual form of the original.
Although Glynn Daniels suggests this approach should be restricted to the study of the individual form, examination of the variants could reveal aspects of the local community. Evolution is an important part of archaeology and affects the development of both the living and the structures they produce. To ignore these variants could deprive archaeologists of data.
In his work of 1976, Colin Renfrew suggested the European megalithic monuments were linked by a single process and could be traced back to a single area of origin. There was a proposal that only early Minoan Crete, the early Bronze Age Cycladic Islands or Bronze Age Western Anatolia, could claim a strong argument as the origin of these structures (Renfrew, 1976). However, the passage grave of Knowth has been radiocarbon dated to 3000 BC (Whittle, 1996) and Renfrew himself states the early Minoan round houses, of which the examples of Mescra were thought to be the inspiration for communal burial, cannot be dated prior to 2800 BC (Renfrew, 1976), disproving this hypothesis. From this area of origin, it is believed possible to trace the diffusion of the original idea through the changing forms of the various megalithic monuments (Chapman, 1981). The Bandkeramik long-houses are said to have influenced the form of the unchambered long-mounds, mimicking the shape, orientation and internal design. These structures were adopted by the epi-Bandkeramik settlements as the central point of their dispersed communities, and later developed into chambered tombs (Bradley, 1998; Sherratt, 1995). There is further suggestion the construction of these monuments is contemporary with the colonisation of prime agricultural land (Sherratt, 1995). Liden examined the agricultural hypothesis by conducting a diet study of human remains from two Swedish passage graves, searching for evidence of a change in diet from a hunter-gatherer subsistence to one based on agriculture (Liden, 1995). A chemical analysis of stable carbon and nitrogen isotopes revealed the dietary patterns of the populations of an inland site at Rssberga, Vstergtland, and a coastal site, Resmo, land. Over time, a lowering nitrogen value would indicate an increase in plant protein in the diet; however, this was not evident at the two sites under examination. Results indicated during the Mesolithic, the Resmo diet was high in terrestrial protein, specifically sheep or goat and cattle, with a minor contribution, 20%, by marine animals, increasing to 80-90% during the Neolithic. The population of Rssberga, however, relied entirely on a terrestrial based diet, with no marine input, suggesting a pastoral based economy. Liden concluded the introduction of megaliths coincided with a change in diet towards agricultural and pastoralist products, although, he suggests, cereals may have been a luxury or ritual item in the form of bread or beverages (ibid).
The spread of megalithic monuments may be due to the migration of Neolithic farmers in north-west Europe. There is a change in diet, albeit not the agricultural change expected by Liden, and there are a cluster of monuments along the Atlantic fringe and North Sea coast, reaching no further than 300km inland onto the European mainland (Renfrew, 1976). However, the hypothesis of a single Mediterranean origin is questionable as some dates of Irish structures undermine Minoan sites as the basis of the megalithic monuments. Renfrew does not discount the possibility of a single origin but he advises it should no longer be assumed (Renfrew, 1976).
Through the examination of the European megaliths, social inference can be drawn. The size of some of the monuments is testament not only to their individual importance but also the manpower involved in their construction. The size of the monument could be interpreted as the representation of status competition or social relationships, and segregation within burial chambers can reveal the acceptance of children as part of the community.
It may be assumed a great deal of organisation would be required during the building process and labour may have been gathered from outside of the community.
Swedish megalithic monuments were unlikely constructed by 'band societies' due to the nature of this highly mobile society (Sjogren, 1986). 'Big Man' societies, however, through alliances and exchange policies would be able to summon adequate manpower required for such a project. If the labour was not volunteered, 'Big Man' would possess sufficient authority to take by force what he needed, in the form of tributes or labour, possibly resulting in a slave society (ibid). An increase in available labour would allow the construction of larger monuments, using larger stones, demonstrating the importance of the community in the form of status competition (ibid).
Sjogren analysed the correlation between chamber and roof slab size, requiring greater man-power to manoeuvre larger blocks of stone, and produced a possible interpretation of building principles as larger tombs possessed smaller, but more numerous, roof slabs (Sjogren, 1986). He deduced, when examining larger chambers, roof slabs are not a good indicator of the labour force involved (ibid). A high correlation was found between the mound and chamber size, however, and Sjogren concluded the labour force of the middle Neolithic societies of western Sweden were gathered through descent lines (ibid).
The greater necessity of labour during construction of these large monuments is generally accepted as having been pooled from the surrounding populations. This labour force would have been required to retrieve materials from source as well as erect them. During the construction of the passage grave of Knowth, a tremendous volume of earth was moved for the construction of the mound, and river stones were transported from the Boyne (Whittle, 1996). Generally most megalithic blocks of stone appear natural in shape and more effort obviously went into transportation than the processing of the material, symbolizing the community effort involved in the construction (Sherratt, 1995); however, the later Neolithic monuments, such as the Ring of Brodgar and the Stones of Stenness on Orkney, were beyond the labour and skills involved in the construction of the earlier tombs (Renfrew, 1976). Sjogren believes megalithic monuments should be viewed as representing a social or descent group (Sjogren, 1986) and although sedentism is a major factor for developing social complexity, Liden believes megaliths occurred in areas with a pre-existing complexity (Liden, 1995). Neither considers, in great detail, the possibility of forced labour resulting in a monument to slavery.
It is commonly held that certain cultures, both prehistoric and modern, do not consider children to be part of the community until they have completed their rites of passage. These beliefs can be continued after death as reflected in their exclusion from some forms of collective burial. The passage grave of Rssberga contained human skeletal remains in both the passage and the chamber. Preliminary osteological analysis of samples gathered from the chamber revealed 16 males, 17 females, only 5 sub-adults but no children. In contrast, the roughly contemporary passage grave of Resmo, 300km to the south-east, produced the remains of approximately 30 individuals, including at least 5 children (Liden, 1995). The segregation of children appears to be a belief held by the population of Rssberga that is not reflected throughout the region amongst contemporary sites.
Megalithic societies can be partly reconstructed during the examination of their monuments; manpower can be estimated and building practices proposed. However, the possibility of slavery and segregation within the community are areas worthy of further study.
Colin Renfrew first produced the 'territorial model' in 1973 during examination of the distribution pattern of megalithic monuments on Arran, western Scotland, amongst other sites. Thiessen polygons were used to define roughly equally spaced territories around a single tomb, however, Liden disregards division into territories as these areas are not always easy to identify or of equal size (Liden, 1995). Examination in this manner can disclose the catchment area for individual territories but the purpose of the monuments remains unclear.
The construction of a megalithic monument as a territorial marker may have roots in different meanings. There is a possibility those roots belong to ancestry and the tombs may be purposefully located adjacent to the settlement or at the centre of the territory so the ancestors are ever present in the lives of the descendants. Alternatively, the monuments were possibly to identify the control over local resources. Megalithic territories of a uniformly organized group commonly include several resources such as water, arable land, pasture, woodland and possibly marine resources (Sjogren, 1986) and a territorial marker might have established ownership rights to the region. However, due to the location of some tombs on the shore of what was a probable lake during the Neolithic in Vstergtland, Sweden, and the dearth of arable land in the surrounding environment, Sjogren rejects the interpretation of megaliths as territorial markers, suggesting this hypothesis is not applicable to west Sweden (ibid). A possible strain on resources may have triggered a stronger emphasis on territoriality (Renfrew, 1976), resulting in the construction of markers possibly in the attempt to control access to the land.
There is a further possibility of monument use as territorial markers due to the distribution of the community. A dispersed segmentary society could consider a megalith as the centre of their territory, or of their world (Renfrew, 1976). It need not necessarily be for burial, it may be the location of feasting or gift exchange (ibid). The location of Irish passage grave cemeteries across the centre of the country, studied as phenomenology, could possibly be a form of communication between the scattered population (Sherratt, 1995).
It should be considered that when examining megalithic monuments as territorial markers, many examples have either been destroyed or remain undiscovered. A lack of intensive farming on the island of Arran has preserved a majority of the examples allowing intensive study, knowing the current distribution is representative of the Neolithic pattern (Chapman, 1995). However, due to the drainage of the peat, it is only now that megalithic monuments and Bronze Age barrows are being revealed in the Fenland of East Anglia (ibid). The discovery of more tombs may cause a re-consideration of the pattern of distribution and therefore the purpose of these monuments.
One of the most highly studied yet vague approaches to megalithic monuments are that of ritual activities. The vast subject of ritual seems to cover all aspects of life, death, burial and post-burial activity. Ritual not only involves the disposal of the deceased, it also incorporates ceremonial activities.
The process of inclusion or exclusion from ritual is commonly discussed. The tightly spaced megaliths forming Stonehenge produced a ritual enclosure not easily visible from the outside. The surrounding Class I henge, with a single entrance, may have formed a boundary, to keep the public at such a distance they could not hear internal activity, completely excluding a majority of the population from the ritual performed within. In comparison, the henge of Avebury, Wiltshire, encloses an area of 365 square metres and incorporates four entrances. The largest internal stone circle, one of three, was constructed around the periphery of the enclosure with wide spaces between the stones. This open design probably included the public in the rituals conducted within, or at least permitted observation. The clear difference between the two sites would suggest different ritual activities for separate divisions of the population; the closed site of Stonehenge was possibly utilised by a religious order, the open site of Avebury probably expected a large congregation of people, possibly for trade or ceremonial activity.
The use of megalithic monuments as places for disposal of the dead does not limit their function. There was no abandonment of the passage grave of Knowth following the onset of decay during the 3 rd millennium BC, as the tradition was continued by the construction of large circular enclosures (Whittle, 1996). Although the long barrows of Britain were not open for more than a couple of generations, after they were sealed they probably continued use as the location for ritual activity, either religious or feasting, at their impressive facades. Skeletal analysis of the burials often shows an anomaly in the ratio between the minimum number of individuals and the total bones recovered. It is not uncommon to find bones missing from the assemblage, although missing hand or foot bones could be explained by defleshing elsewhere after which the small bones were missed during collection, they may have completely decomposed. However, this does not explain missing skulls or long bones. The probability of their use as relics during ritual activity must be considered and there is also the possibility of exchange.
A common consideration in the setting of megalithic monuments is the possibility of astronomical alignments. The construction of a monument with consideration to the heavenly bodies may suggest an annual activity (Sherratt, 1995). The significance of the sun rising or setting behind a particular stone, or shining down the passage of a grave on a particular day, is mere speculation, but may be connected to rebirth.
Great emphasis is placed on art in the ritual activities of megalithic monuments. During the Neolithic the importance moved from exterior decoration, such as that of the menhirs, prehistoric monoliths, which accompanied the long barrows of Brittany, to interior art within passage graves, only visible to those permitted within the tombs (Sherratt, 1995). The presence of decoration on the backs of eleven of the 123 kerbstones surrounding the great mound at Knowth, however, remains unexplained (Whittle, 1996). Whatever the meaning of this form of art, it would not have been visible, even to those involved in the ritual activities.
Megalithic monuments are often interpreted as sites of ritual activity. Although some burial sites are only in use for a short period, their use may continue, involving repeated visits over many generations. Ritual activity covers numerous aspects of life and death; however, much of it is supposition with no hard evidence, and therefore ritual cannot be proved or disproved.
The approaches involved in the interpretation of megalithic monuments are varied. Through the search for shared beliefs or cultures, worship of the ancestors may be indicated by the location of tombs within an agricultural landscape; and similarities in the form of tombs may assist in the trace of migration across the landscape, however, distortions in the model may effect interpretation. Tracing the form of the tomb across the European continent could also suggest the origin of the megalithic culture and similarities between Neolithic long houses and the long barrows are evident. Monument size is often accepted as a representation of the manpower involved in the construction of the tomb and therefore an indication of the social complexity; however, the possibility of slave labour should be considered. Although many accept the 'territorial model', believing the structures to be a marker in the landscape, the discovery of additional monuments may distort the pattern of distribution, resulting in re-evaluation. The subject of 'ritual activities' covers numerous areas of life, death and burial and although attracts much interpretation, still results in supposition.
The presence of these monuments in the landscape has interested scholars since the nineteenth century and has resulted in many different approaches in their study. Each approach has merits, however, a blinkered approach will only lead to restricted interpretation. The variations in form should be considered to gain a greater understanding in the migration process across Europe and the adaptations made during diffusion of the megalithic culture.