The purpose of this paper is to describe the process of molluscan analysis of samples recovered following coring and preparation of soil samples of Ufton Green, Berkshire. After the production of a histogram incorporating all of the samples examined, the data will be interpreted to provide palaeoecological reconstruction of the period covered by the entire core. Raw data and charts are included for reference purposes and ease of interpretation.
Molluscan analysis has been undertaken since the 18 th/19 th century. Although early work concentrated on taxonomy, more recent analysis has utilised the data for palaeoenvironmental reconstruction due to the sensitivity of snails to environmental change and present habitat preference of various taxa, leading to an ability to identify local dominant vegetation and water volume and conditions (Lowe & Walker, 1997); this assumes the habitat of the molluscs has remained unchanged over time. Due to the calcium carbonate of the shells, unlike pollen and Coleoptera (beetles), land snails are recovered from a wide range of oxidised conditions, specifically on chalkland, including pits, ditches and buried soils; in non-calcareous areas, the shells of molluscs are thinner and therefore are not well preserved (ibid). Some specimens are large enough to be recognised in the field, although collection under laboratory conditions is preferable due to the possible bias towards larger species (Lowe & Walker, 1997).
Following soil sampling, in this case by core, the sample is air dried then immersed in water, possibly with the addition of a dispersive agent, usually hydrogen peroxide, to assist in the removal of organic matter. The resulting froth is put through sieves of various diameter, 2mm, 1mm and 0.5mm, for ease of sorting (Lowe & Walker, 1997). These procedures had occurred prior to the class analysis.
During field walking of an area in Ufton Nervet, 11km south-west of Reading, Berkshire, worked flint displaying characteristics of Mesolithic industries warranted further investigation of the site. Excavation of the area at Ufton Green, near the River Kennet, produced tightly packed flint flakes and was interpreted tentatively as a knapping area; a lack of pottery, charcoal and pit features suggests this was a production site and not a settlement (Allen & Allen, 1994-7). The floodplain was cored for environmental purposes and following standard preparation described above, master's students examined core 50, taken 100 metres to the south-west of the Mesolithic site.
With the use of a light microscope, the samples were separated into test tubes of different materials, either with the use of a moistened paint brush or by hand with the use of tweezers, dependant on the size of the object; as the sample examined by the writer weighed only 27 grammes, this took little time.
The material types were counted individually and noted for reference purposes. Due to the morphological characteristics of the single spiral displayed in the shells of land and freshwater snails, it was possible to identify the gastropoda to species level; each species was allotted a test tube, although the bivalves were counted as a group and divided by two to account for possible duplication within the assemblage. Within the class, fragments of shell lacking the apex were disregarded on this occasion due to the difficulty in identification, although examination under a high-powered microscope could reveal microsculpture and possibly identify the species (Lowe & Walker, 1997: 204).
The quantity of each species of mollusc was entered on a table and together with the non-molluscan assemblage, was produced as an Excel document of class data (appendix 1). Following adaptation of the data within Notepad, the data was transformed, via the use of the Psimpoll program, into a histogram suitable for interpretation (fig 3). Unfortunately, due to the volume of data, the histogram spreads over three pages.
Through microscopic examination and referral to reference data, it was possible to identify all molluscs present within the assemblage recovered from 179-181.5cm to species, with the exception of the bivalves, which have been considered at family level only. Few had incurred heavy damage and of the gastropoda all retained the apex of the shell, the fundamental characteristic required during molluscan analysis.
Due to the extremely low number of molluscs recovered from the small organic sample examined by the writer, 27 grammes, the percentage of ecological groups and species, and the production of the pie charts is for illustrative purposes only and should be interpreted with caution.
A pie chart clearly displays the distribution of ecological preference among the species (fig 4). The bivalves, at 47%, dominated the freshwater molluscs at a depth of 179-181.5cm. Thirty-five percent of the molluscan assemblage was of moving water species and 18% were of the ditch group As the bivalves were not identified to species during the exercise, these were entered as a catholic group due to their various ecological habitats (appendix 2).
Within a freshwater mollusc assemblage, species distribution can reveal the nature of the water body. Of particular interest within the assemblage of 179-181.5cm (fig 5), was Valvata macrostoma. Unfortunately, despite best efforts, vegetation adhered to the example from the collection of this depth could not be removed for fear of damaging the shell, nonetheless, the sculpturing is visible in figure 6. Rare even in the fossil record, this mollusc inhabits ditches with slow moving or stagnant water with diverse vegetation (Kerney, 1999: 28). The species is on the decline and has not been reported in the Oxford region since1965 (ibid). However, the similarity between this and other species, notably Valvata piscinalis, has resulted in some mis-identification (Kerney, 1999: 28); both possess deep sutures and regular ridges. The latter species also dwells in slow moving water, although prefers a silt content to the water. Valvata piscinalis is still common in England and Ireland, although lower in number in Wales and Scotland (Kerney, 1999: 29). Digital photography clearly displaying the morphological characteristics of this species is difficult due to the depth of the shell; the apex may be clearly seen, however, the body whorl, at a different focal length, will be out of focus (fig 7).
The remainder of the assemblage consisted Bithinia leachii, a lowland taxa mainly restricted to the eastern half of England, Bithinia tentaculata, a common species favouring silty situations, and bivalves, all of which are potentially moving water species. On this evidence, one could tentatively suggest that the environment at the time of deposition was that of slow moving water. With the exception of Valvata piscinalis, all the identified species of gastropoda prefer diverse vegetation, suggesting dense foliage within the water body.
Non-molluscan data recovered from the sample consisted a relatively large quantity of floral evidence: 73 pieces of plant remains; 5 small seeds, including Chenopodiaceae (goosefoot) and immature Carex (sedge) - both potentially marginal plants, reaffirming the wet environment; and 13 pieces of macrocharcoal. As natural burning is unlikely in the British Isles and even more improbable in a wet environment as suggested by the molluscs, this probably suggests local human acitivity. The faunal assemblage was limited, nevertheless included a Coleoptera appendage fragment and 38 worm granules. The only remaining objects of interest were 42 unworked flint fragments.
Despite such a small sample, a vast quantity of evidence was recovered. As the origin of the core is in proximity to the River Kennet (figs 1 & 2), floral and molluscan evidence suggests diverse vegetation within a subsidiary channel or, due to the low elevation (50 metres), possibly a water meadow.
Throughout the sequence of core 50 (fig 8), freshwater species dominate principally of Valvata macrostoma, suggesting near constant water-logging or a water body. The preference of moving water species (fig 9), dependant on the assumed habitat of the bivalves, and the underlying but near constant presence of Bithynia tentaculata with a preference to an oxygen-rich environment, suggests slow-moving water with diverse vegetation.
Some molluscs remained constant throughout the sequence. The sample at 181.5-190cm, the earliest deposits, was one of the lowest in molluscan content. Only 48 shells were recovered, 70% of these were freshwater species, dominated by Valvata piscinalis and Valvata macrostoma. This, together with the shade loving species Zonitoides nitidus, which inhabits areas colonised by marginal plants (Kerney, 1999: 148), represents a water body, probably a ditch of flowing water. Later in the sequence at 75-86cm, correlation can be noted between Zonitoides nitidus and Arianta arbustorum, a species of the catholic group inhabiting the tall, rank vegetation, possibly growing waterside. The highest representation of Valvata macrostoma occurs in this sample and together with Bithynia tentaculata suggests a moving water filled ditch. Conversely, a high proportion of Vallonia excentrica at this depth suggests areas away from the waterside wereopen country or possibly grazed.
With the exception of the sample 179-181.5cm, examined by the writer, all of the sample depths contained a proportion of open country species (fig 8); these marginally outnumbered by shade loving species for the majority of the earlier period but predominate in the latter half of the sequence, probably due to climate change and therefore vegetation. The quantity of shade loving species, together with a near constant underlying presence of catholic species, suggests a presence of open woodland or dense herbs.
Having examined the land and freshwater molluscs separately, a decline in molluscs was noted at 181.5cm. Following a predominance of freshwater species, the overall quantity of snails reduced sharply followed by a steady increase in quantity and ecological representation from 173cm; the sudden change in the assemblage suggests a short but dramatic change in the climate.
The non-mulluscan data of the entire Ufton Green core 50 sequence is diverse and varies in quantity throughout, with the exception of the samples at 173-177cm and 130-151cm where there is an absence. The earliest sample, at 181.5-190cm, produced 486 worm granules, the highest quantity within the sequence and indicated a well-sorted strata. Forty-one worked flint fragments were recovered from 151-173cm; evidence of human activity. Further evidence of a human presence was found at 115-130 where 81 fragments of macrocharcoal were identified; as natural burning in the British Isles is unlikely, the presence of macrocharcoal indicates intentional burning in the local area - microscopic charcoal particles could be carried on the wind.
Similarities in the molluscan assemblage found during comparison of Ufton Green core 50 to deposits examined and dated from Holywell Combe, Kent, indicate the site of Ufton Green can be tentatively dated from the Mesolithic 8700BP until AD43.
Through examination of molluscan data, and comparison to a dated site, it has been possible to reconstruct the environment surrounding the origin of Ufton Green core 50, from the Mesolithic to the Roman occupation. The increase in the mollusc assemblage over time suggests an improving climate following the end of the last glaciation. The dominance of freshwater species identified throughout prehistory and beyond, indicates the site has remained waterlogged, perhaps a water meadow, possibly at times a stream flowed, perhaps feeding, or a subsidiary of, the River Kennet. The plant life was diverse and included waterside, grassland and woodland or heavy herb growth. Unfortunately, due to the area travelled by molluscs during their life-time, this reveals only the local environment; further study would reveal the character of the wider landscape.