Language can "distinguish the 'human' from the animal" suggests Iain Davidson (1991: 39); if Neanderthals were non-verbal, does this place them in the animal bracket? Chase and Dibble observe only indirect evidence has been preserved and therefore there is no definitive answer (1987), however, a development in the skeletal morphology might have been required to allow a greater range of sounds (Davidson, 1991). Cerebrally speaking, Steve Mithen finds it difficult to believe the early human brain could be equivalent in size to, or in the case of Neanderthals in excess of, modern humans but produce a hominid incapable of speech (1996). Is it possible to identify a spoken language in the Neanderthal fossil record and through their material remains? This essay will approach the subject by examining articles detailing fossil evidence, neurological interpretation and the function of verbal communication, attempting to identify whether Neanderthals were capable of speech.
Examination of fossils has revealed as evidence for and against the possibility of language among Neanderthals and reinterpretation has identified some inaccuracies in earlier work. The presence and absence of the hyoid bone, necessary for muscle control required during speech, has also caused much debate, together with the position of the larynx. Here, the work of several individuals will be summarised, providing evidence for both sides of the argument.
In 1983, the discovery of the Kebara 2 fossil in Israel renewed discussion on the possibility of Neanderthal speech. The skeleton was incomplete, however, the hyoid bone, located within the cartilage surrounding the larynx, was recovered (fig 1). Although Johanson & Edgar (1996) describe this small bone, required for speech, as identical to modern examples, Trinkaus and Shipman depict the bone as a "slightly enlarged version of a human hyoid and nothing like an ape hyoid" (1994: 391). The discovery of the Kebara fossil caused reassessment and proposed the morphologically modern bone was capable of a modern range of sounds (Johanson & Edgar, 1996), a hypothesis supported by Mithen (1996) when he submitted, assuming the presence of a cognitive ability, there is no reason a full range of sounds could not be produced. However, Lieberman and his colleagues suggested the dimensions of the Kebara hyoid could not distinguish the fossil from that of a modern human or pig hyoid and even suggested that Neanderthals may have oinked instead of spoken (Trinkaus and Shipman, 1994). However, the recovery of the hyoid bone and the comparison to that of a modern human does not assist in the interpretation of the remaining components of the vocal tract - what did the unpreserved soft tissue look like and did it allow speech? The pharynx, a tube connecting the oral cavity to the throat, is also partly responsible for the ability to speak; without a long pharynx, the range of sounds is limited, as this soft tissue moderates the vibrations at the larynx (Tattersall, 1999).
Previous arguments have proposed the low position of the larynx in the human throat allowed a wide range of sounds; interpretation suggested the high position of the Neanderthal larynx produced a limited range, for example, Lieberman's reconstruction of the Neanderthal vocal tract of the Chapelle-aux-Saints fossil suggests an inability to produce the vowels [a], [i] and [u] (Tattersall, 1999). There has been suggestion that the position of the Neanderthal larynx has less to do with the capability of speech and more to do with climatic adaptation; Tattersall (1999) considers the possibility the high position allowed the warming and humidification of cold dry air before reaching the lungs.
In their work of 1993, Stringer and Gamble also considered the position of the larynx, and how the larynx descends in an infant. The newborn human larynx is positioned high in the throat, enabling the infant to suckle and breath simultaneously without choking. As the child grows, as their language skills develop, the larynx descends to the adult position, enabling a wide range of sounds. This descent coincides with a change in skull shape from the flat base of a newborn to the angled skull of an adult. Some correlation has been found between the flattened shape of the infant skull and that of some Neanderthal fossils, possibly evidence of an underdeveloped vocal tract resulting in an inability to produce a modern range of sounds (Stringer & Gamble, 1993). This proposal should be considered together with the possibility of misinterpretation. On examination the skull of the Neanderthal from La Chapelle-aux-Saints had been pieced together and glued by Marcellin Boule. Later cleaning and reconstruction produced a rounder shape to the skull - more human-like (Trinkaus & Shipman, 1994). This misinterpretation of shape may have led to a reconstruction of the Neanderthal vocal tract, by Lieberman and Crelin, resulting in a hominid with the inability to talk, swallow or even open the mouth (ibid). Pre-Neanderthal fossils, including examples from Steinheim and Petralona, show a modern morphology to the skull. The smaller brains may have resulted in less sophisticated behaviour than the later Neanderthals, however, they may have been capable of speech. The Neanderthals possessed flatter skull morphology and a larger brain, yet are suggested as being incapable of speech - Stringer and Gamble find this unlikely (1993).
Houghton (1993) provided an interesting critique of the work of Lieberman (1989) when discussing the possibility of Neanderthal speech. Lieberman had assessed the
dimensions of the hard palate and the epiglottis and suggested a position of the larynx
low but within the neck (fig 2). Lieberman claimed there were similarities between the supralaryngeal tract of Neanderthals, chimpanzees and newborn humans, resulting in a restricted speech capability. Houghton disagreed with this hypothesis, saying the interpretation of the oral cavity was incorrect and the tongue would occupy 90% of the oral cavity; this, Houghton suggested, was too much and proposed the examination of several features of the Neanderthal skeleton, including the superior genial tubercles and the length of the palate, allowed successful reconstruction of the Neanderthal oral cavity and an appropriate sized tongue to be applied. This reassessment allowed a suitable position, only obstructing the oropharynx, part of the pharynx between the soft palate and the hyoid bone, during the acts of swallowing and breathing (fig 3). This reconstruction produced a vocal tract similar to that of modern Homo sapiens, although possibly with a facial extension in the anterior direction (the characteristic forward movement of the Neanderthal mid-face), resulting in a proposed capability of speech (Houghton, 1993).
Recent work has examined the correlation between the size of the hypoglossal canal and the capability of speech. This canal contains the nerve supplying the tongue; it was proposed the varying canal size indicated the size of nerve and reflected the speech capability of modern humans in contrast to the linguistically impaired non-human primates (Kay et al, 1998). The study concluded the canals of Neanderthal fossils were comparable to those of modern humans and therefore Neanderthals were physically capable of speech, as were other members of the genus Homo, by at least 400,000 years ago (ibid). A re-evaluation of data and a later publication by others was prompted by the discovery of numerous non-human primates with a hypoglossal canal comparable to that of modern humans. The conclusion was that there was no apparent correlation between the size of hypoglossal canal and the nerve it contained, and therefore does not reflect linguistic capability (Degusta et al, 1999).
The presence of a vocal tract capable of speech is not evidence of language in itself; the brain is responsible for the creation and comprehension of language (Stringer & Gamble, 1993). Some palaeoanthropologists and archaeologists, including Mellars (1996), suggest a neurological evolution may have resulted in the introduction of language, probably prior to the beginning of genus Homo (Johanson and Edgar, 1996); however, Johanson and Edgar (1996) are quick to counter this argument with the observation brain evolution continues, indicating a single mutation is unlikely to have caused the initiation of speech. Neurological studies have been attempted over the years to explain the introduction of language; here, some early work and more recent data will be summarised.
Of the fossils currently known, preservation has not allowed the examination of a Neanderthal brain, although the study of endocasts of the inside of the cranium, revealing the peaks and troughs on the brain surface, has allowed the study of various early hominids. Experts look for asymmetry in the brain hemispheres and structures linked to language competence, including Broca's area and Wernicke's area (Johanson & Edgar, 1996), searching for reasons behind linguistic communication problems.
Working during the nineteenth century, French anatomist Paul Broca conducted an autopsy on a mute, revealing a lesion or defect on a particular area of the brain. Broca deduced this area was responsible for muscle control required during speech (Trinkaus & Shipman, 1994), however, recent data, including brain scans of humans, suggest several areas contribute to the control of speech and Broca's area may be responsible for motor function including limb control (Johanson & Edgar, 1996). Examination of non-human primate brains has found the presence of Broca's area, although under-developed compared to humans, resulting in the interpretation of the pre-evolutionary Neanderthal brain as capable of only limited speech or possibly a complete absence (Trinkaus & Shipman, 1994); however, Tattersall (1999) believes the examination of the contours of the brain will not disclose linguistic ability.
More recent studies in the effects of Alzheimer's disease have reaffirmed the possibility of speech impairment if there is an under-development of the brain or if damage is present. An underdevelopment of the left hemisphere of the brain may restrict the ability of language as evidenced in the study of aphasia, conducted by Kempler in 1993. Lesions on this area were found to cause symptoms including problems in formulating and understanding spoken language; the same area of the brain is responsible for motor functions, possibly resulting in disrupted movement of the limbs, a symptom of apraxia (Kempler, 1993). Damage to this hemisphere could cause speech and/or motor function impairment; this may suggest an underdevelopment would have the same effect; therefore, early hominids, including Neanderthals, prior to evolution, may have been unable to form a complex language due to cerebral impairment. This possible impairment may also explain the limited range of lithic tools recovered from Neanderthal sites; their restricted motor functions may have prevented them from making technological advances. Further neurological research may produce more evidence to prove or disprove the ability of Neanderthal speech.
It seems likely that some verbal communication would have been required to pass on knowledge of hunting strategies and lithic tool production; however, although Neanderthals may have been physically capable of speech, did they, and for what purpose? Having approached the physical possibility of speech, here the purpose will be discussed.
Although speech as we know it may not have evolved, language of another form may have been present. Non-human primate calls possess some meaning (Dibble, 1989) and the same could apply to a system of communication reliant on a series of grunts within an early hominid culture; the only requirement would be a "consistency with their way of life" (Tattersall, 1999: 173) and may even have provided a bond within the group (Johanson and Edgar, 1996). A gestural language would be successful providing there is mutual understanding between at least two individuals (Davidson, 1991) as evidenced by sign language for the deaf. However, a non-verbal system of communication could be open to misunderstanding; errors between the provider and receiver may result in misinterpretation and may restrict the number of possible gestures within the language, possibly resulting in the evolution of a spoken language (Nowak & Krakauer, 1999).
Several individuals have discussed the restricted geographical movement of early hominids over the years. Feblot-Augustins traced movement between resources and found Eastern Europeans travelled further, repeatedly, than their French counterparts. This movement would provide not only a wide range of resources, but also an increase in human contact (1993); this may have led to an increased use of language, whether gestural or vocal. In contrast, Foley and Lee found little or no geographical human movement and observed the distribution of resources would shape the social unit (1996). This would possibly lead a sedentary lifestyle, with no human contact outside of the group, resulting in a local dialect if any language was present. Stringer & Gamble observed the lack of cross-oceanic movement by 'the Ancients', including the Neanderthals, led to a lack of colonization of the Asian interior; this simple society, they suggested, would also possibly have had no purpose for a complex language (1993); there has been suggestion the production of non-utilitarian objects and the boats required for the colonization of Australia, probably prior to the glacial maximum of around 20,000 years ago (Fagan, 1998), are the first evidence for the presence of language (Davidson, 1991).
The production of lithic tools is a specialised task and became increasingly complex through the Palaeolithic evidently requiring instruction (Dibble, 1989). However, this does not necessarily identify a language based communication system; the simplistic tool types in the Lower and Middle Palaeolithic may reflect the lack of a complex language (ibid), although, this in itself does not determine a total lack of language. Tattersall (1999) suggests the development of tool-making techniques may be contemporaneous with the evolution of language and regional dialects: one possibly prompting the other. However, the possibility of observation and imitation must also be considered during the spread of lithic technology (Davidson, 1991), although Davidson is quick to counter this argument by suggesting the skill would be lost in a newly-colonized region in which the traditional materials could not be obtained (ibid). Johanson and Edgar (1996) observed there appeared to be no technological advancement in the production of stone tools around the time of the proposed introduction of language; it was during the Upper Palaeolithic that there was a diversification of materials, design and function, possibly contemporary with the introduction of art (ibid); the pre-language cultures may not have required art for ritual activities or needed it for social identification (Stringer & Gamble, 1993). The production of any form of lithic tool requires substantial cognitive ability, reliant on sufficient neurological evolution. It has been suggested that tool-making and language involve similar cognitive processes (Chase & Dibble, 1987); again one triggering the other. Continued neurological studies, related to the disorder apraxia, may reveal the beginnings of tool use and the communication systems for their continued production (Kempler, 1993); the techniques applied require skilled motor control and advanced planning (Davidson, 1991) and Mithen argues the Levallois technique may be too difficult to acquire through observation alone, without verbal instruction (1996).
As language is a form of 'displaced reference', where symbols, on this occasion words, are used to refer to objects in their absence (Davidson, 1991), it proves invaluable when planning for the future. The evolution of language resulted in the ability to communicate "potentially life-saving information" about the environment in which early humans lived (Johanson & Edgar, 1996: 106). Animal movement patterns, hunting strategies and gathering techniques could be relayed to assist survival in a hostile environment; Mithen suggests such tasks would be difficult to organize without the ability to verbally communicate (1996). An evolution in communication systems would potentially lead to success as a culture (Davidson, 1991); if this is so, and the Neanderthals were capable of speech, why did they die out? Lieberman argued the better adaptation of modern humans for verbal communication might have a link with the extinction of the Neanderthals (Trinkaus & Shipman, 1994).
Early arguments of whether Neanderthals could speak relied on the skull shape and reconstruction, although, loose interpretation, of the vocal tract. The discovery of the hyoid bone of the Kebara 2 fossil was initially accepted as proof of vocal communication, however, there has since been evidence to suggest little difference between the early human fossil, the vocal tract and the oral cavity and that of members of the animal kingdom.
Some researchers have considered specific areas of the brain responsible for speech; others also assign motor function to these areas, possibly explaining the diversification of stone tools around the same time of the proposed spread of a complex language. The spoken language may have developed as a more reliable form of communication to aid the transmittance of information, possibly to improve the way of life through hunting, gathering and tool-making techniques.
Following this research, it is difficult to believe survival skills could be passed on in any other way than verbally, however, the physical ability of speech in Neanderthals does not necessarily prove the cognitive ability. Unfortunately, the question of whether Neanderthals were capable of speech remains unanswered.