Areas of the prehistoric environment containing a concentration of monuments have often been described as 'ritual landscapes'. Such areas include the Stonehenge and Avebury regions of Wessex, the Boyne valley in Co. Meath, Ireland, and the Stenness-Brodgar-Maeshowe complex of Mainland, Orkney. The term 'ritual landscape', however, implies the segregation of the secular areas of everyday life. In contrast to this, excavations during the last thirty years have produced the remains of settlements and/or evidence of industrial activity in relatively close proximity to these monuments. This essay will approach the subject of 'ritual landscapes' and the use of the term in the light of recent discoveries.
The traditional view of a prehistoric monumental concentration has been described as a 'ritual landscape'; a cluster and possible dominance of non-domestic monuments with a segregation of the secular world (Malone, 2001: 165; Thomas, 1991: 26). When examining plans and maps of antiquarians, including those of William Stukeley, the source of the misinterpretation of a landscape apparently devoted entirely to ritual and devoid of everyday life is understandable. The presence of the magnificent monuments in and around Avebury attracted much attention during the 18 th century (fig 1), however, evidence of settlement was not so easily recognised. Only since systematic excavation and possibly scientific analysis has been introduced have the settlements of the communities responsible for the construction of the monuments been located.
Possibly the term 'ritual complex' would be more applicable when describing these areas. Clusters of monuments were erected in an occupied landscape, interspersed with settlements: ritual without the exclusion of domestic - these large monuments formed the focus of the larger populations of the later Neolithic (Malone, 2001: 165). Thomas suggests environmental evidence could ascertain the location of monuments on marginal land; however, the likelihood is the inclusion of the monuments within the farmed landscape of the fertile chalk uplands of Wessex (Thomas, 1991: 26). The area surrounding Avebury in Wiltshire still lacks evidence of major settlement during the later Neolithic, however, numerous sherds of late Neolithic pottery, including both fine and coarse Beaker ware, and Beaker type scrapers have been recovered from the ditches and pits of Windmill Hill (Keiller, 1965: 80). In addition, Keiller recognised a series of pits and holes adjacent to West Kennet Avenue as an occupation site (fig 2), producing an abundance of late Neolithic flint tools and pottery sherds, (1965: 210). The holes also produced evidence of feasting in the form of burnt ox and pig bone, red and roe deer antler, an ox tooth and charcoal (Keiller, 1965: 215). Keiller initially interpreted the charcoal and associated flint and sarsen 'packing' as the remains of post-holes; analysis showed the charcoal represented only twigs and small branches of hazel, blackthorn and hawthorn (1965:212), which, due to the relatively small nature of the plants, would unlikely be used for construction. Unfortunately, although numerous pits and holes were excavated, no visible trace of the settlement remains on the surface, as evidenced by aerial photography (fig 2).
The henge monuments and stone settings of the Ring of Brodgar, Stones of Stenness and the passage grave of Maeshowe, have long been recognised as ritual sites (fig 3). The relatively recent discovery of the settlement Barnhouse at the centre of the monumental complex allowed comparison of contemporary structures, of both ritual and domestic origin, and the organisation of the landscape (Richards, 1992: 445).
The village, located on the shore of the loch of Harray, founded c3200BC, consisted of phases of construction as the stratigraphic sequence revealed new houses were constructed so the foundations overlaid those of the old (Richards, 1992: 446). The exception to this was House 2, which remained in use throughout the occupation of the settlement before the eventual abandonment (ibid). A central area of the occupation site produced evidence of flint knapping, pottery and bone tool production, indicating an industrial area; commonly recognised as a focus of gathering and working (Richards, 1992: 446-7). Sherds of grooved ware recovered from the site, was found to be identical to a sherd recovered from the ditch surrounding the Stones of Stenness, 150 metres to the south-west (Richards, 1996: 445); this evidence indisputably links the domestic site of Barnhouse to the ritual site of Stones of Stenness.
A similar pattern of occupation/ritual land use can be seen in the Boyne valley of Co. Meath, Ireland; the major monument of this complex, the passage grave Newgrange, was constructed c2500 bc (O'Kelly, M.J.,1983: 2). The cairn, measuring eighty-two metres in diameter (ibid), possessed three adjacent satellite mounds and a possible stone circle of later construction, possibly the Bronze Age (O'Kelly, M.J., 1983:5-9). As the cairn fell into a state of disrepair, a domestic settlement was established on an area of partially collapsed revetment (O'Kelly, M.J., 1983: 5). The eastern area of excavation revealed a large hearth, although there was a total absence of charcoal and ash; this was interpreted as an external hearth and, following abandonment and lengthy periods of disuse, the wind dispersed the charred evidence leaving only heat-cracked stones and oxidised soil (O'Kelly, M.J., 1983: 15). Stone and flint tools were recovered from this area together with various pot sherds (O'Kelly, M.J.,1983: 43-4), suggesting everyday activities, possibly a communal work area; adjacent pits and a trench produced various types of pottery including Beaker ware, undecorated bowl and coarse flat based domestic ware. Charcoal from each has provided an average radiocarbon date of 2025  34 years (O'Kelly, M. J. 1983: 15), however, no evidence remained of any structures. There was, however, evidence of a building in the far western area, where two parallel lines of post-holes suggested the presence of a six-post structure, possibly enclosed by wattlework (O'Kelly, M.J., 1983: 35); a concentration of oxidised soil in the immediate area suggested this structure had burnt to the ground (ibid). Excavation produced few artefacts: only an axe chip and three stone beads or pendants (O'Kelly, M.J., 1983: 44): the absence of domestic or industrial tools suggests a ritual purpose to the building. The identification of both domestic and ritual areas adjacent to monuments implies the presence of a settlement; the lack of structural evidence could be interpreted as a lightweight design, leaving no archaeological trace; whatever the purpose of this site, it remained in use over several centuries.
Many Neolithic communities have adopted the use of both stone and timber during the construction of their ritual monuments. Does local availability factor into the equation? Is there a preference of one material over the other? Does the incorporation of specific resources into the structures represent ritual meaning?
The use of particular materials during the construction of specific monuments may hold meaning; alternatively, the communities responsible may have utilised locally available resources. West Kennet, primarily known for the long barrow and Avenue, revealed evidence of two palisaded enclosures. Both sites were of concentric ditch design, having previously contained a post built palisade, and produced two antler samples, providing the average radiocarbon date of 1765  50 bc; the post-holes produced an abundance of charcoal, grooved ware and antler (Whittle, 1991: 257-9; Thomas, 1991: 218) and the size of the holes implies posts of a diameter of between thirty and fifty centimetres, indicating primary woodland (Whittle, 1991: 261). These sites, possibly late Neolithic settlements (ibid), are contemporary with the stone phases of Avebury (Thomas, 1991: 217) and yet, in contrast, are constructed entirely of wood. The local woodland may have also been the source of the mature oak posts used for the wooden phase of the Sanctuary on nearby Overton Hill (Burl, 2002: 123).
There has been suggestion of a correlation between material and the purpose for which it is used; for example, timber for house construction - for the living; stone for burial monuments - for the dead (Bradley, lecture, 2004, 10 Feb). The Sanctuary casts shadow over this hypothesis due to the proposed development of the site from that of a timber mortuary house at the beginning of the later Neolithic (Burl, 2000: 311; Burl, 2002: 120; Malone, 1989: 84) or the freestanding post structure proposed by Maud Cunnington (Burl, 2002: 136). In addition, Woodhenge in Wiltshire was constructed during the period 2480 - 2039 BC (Thomas, 1991: 181), contemporary with Avebury and West Kennet Avenue. The henge, containing six concentric rings of posts, was of ceremonial purpose (Burl, 2002: 126) evidenced by the segregation of deposits: pig bones to the perimeter; cattle bones centrally (Burl, 2002:137) and the remains of a probable female child, apparently sacrificed and buried close to the centre of the monument (Burl, 2002: 223). Again this structure, associated with death and burial, contemporary with substantial stone structures, was constructed entirely of wood.
Opposed to the hypothesis of material of choice, the material used may be due to local availability; studies show some correlation between stone circles and henges in an area abundant with the corresponding material (Bradley, 1998: 118). In Shetland and Orkney, although trees were present during prehistory, they were few in number; therefore, evidently stone was favoured during construction of monuments.
The use of unusual or foreign materials in a settlement or construction of a monument may have some special significance; for example, the incorporation of local materials may mirror the surrounding landscape. Knowth, one of three large passage graves of a group numbering around forty within three and a half square kilometres of the Boyne valley, was built around 3000 BC (Whittle, 1996: 245). During the construction of Knowth and Newgrange, a tremendous volume of earth was moved for the construction of the mounds and river stones were transported from the Boyne (ibid). During the third millennium BC, Knowth began to decay, although the area surrounding it remained the focus of attention as Beaker pottery has been found in association with a small timber structure of circular plan constructed at the passage grave to the east of the main mound (Whittle, 1996: 247). In opposition to this, the importation of exotic stone to the region may have also transferred the essence of the foreign land to the monument; for example, rather than glacial action, the Bluestones of Stonehenge are now generally agreed to have been moved by human transportation (Childe, 1955: 281; Thomas, 1991: 177-8).
The greater necessity of labour during construction of these large monuments is generally accepted as having been pooled from the surrounding populations. This labour force would have been required to retrieve materials from source as well as erect them. Most megalithic blocks of stone appear natural in shape and more effort obviously went into transportation than the processing of the material, symbolizing the community effort involved in the construction (Sherratt, 1995: 246). Why would the population of Neolithic Europe choose to adopt stone as their preferred material for construction instead of the lighter wood, a resource probably more abundant in the landscape? Improvements in technology may explain the change: transport to move large and heavy objects over greater distances and the tools required for processing the material; however, the availability of new technology may not have altered the techniques involved in the processing itself and many ritual sites did not relocate over the generations.
By examining the landscape around major monuments of the later Neolithic, an impression of continued use of the same region emerges. In the area surrounding Avebury, the earlier Neolithic sites of Windmill Hill and West Kennet long barrow were superseded by the henge, Silbury Hill, West Kennet Avenue and finally the stone circles (Malone, 1989); an unexplained bend in the essentially straight Avenue may be explained by an alignment with the entrance to an earlier timber phase (Ros Cleal, pers.comm. 1999). A similar pattern can be seen by the development of Stonehenge again from a timber phase, through the early construction of a henge and the post-filled Aubrey holes, followed by the erection of the Bluestones in a semi-circle (probably an uncompleted circle). This was followed by a period of remodelling of the site, involving the dismantling and re-erection of the Bluestones, the positioning of the sarsen trilithons and finally, enclosure by the lintelled sarson circle (Renfrew, 1973: 540; Burl, 2000: 349-352). Both Avebury and Stonehenge, amongst other large stone circles, were constructed in such a position to be surrounded by early Neolithic long barrows; possibly due to a dearth of construction stone on Salisbury Plain (Burl, 2000: 352), the Stonehenge long barrows were of timber and earth construction, typical of the Wiltshire and Dorset cemeteries (Renfrew, 1973: 544). The skills obtained during the construction of monuments may have been passed on to the descendants, as Burl believes carpenters erected the timber structure at Stonehenge (ibid); this inherited knowledge would also explain the use of carpentry techniques including mortise and tenon joints in the construction of the lintelled sarsen circle at Stonehenge.
Early Neolithic burial monuments appear to be the focus of continued activity as evidenced elsewhere in the British Isles. The passage grave at Knowth in the Boyne Valley was apparently preceded and surrounded by approximately 17 smaller passage graves (Whittle, 1996: 245) and examination of the local Ordnance Survey map shows the hilltop stone circle of Arbor Low in Derbyshire is surrounded by later round barrows, predominantly located on adjacent peaks, although they appear to cluster to the south and west (fig 4).
Specific areas of the landscape remained the focus of ritual attention over thousands of years; as new forms of monument were developed and adopted, they were incorporated into the existing monumental landscape. What factors initiated the development of new monuments and why were they sited in their specific locations?
The resemblance between the plans of certain monuments and their surrounding landscape has long been recognised. The passage grave of Maeshowe (fig 3), located at a slightly higher elevation is most clearly visible from the settlement of Barnhouse to the north-west (Richards, 1996: 196). Chronologically overlapping the occupation of Barnhouse (Richards, 1996: 201), the cairn is of cruciform plan and the central chamber incorporates four corner buttresses, creating recesses and reflecting the plan of House 2 of the settlement (Richards, 1996: 195-6). The central buttresses may originate as a dismantled stone circle which has been recycled into a new monument; these standing stones are thought to be in excess to the requirements of the structure (Richards, 1996: 197), and are therefore presumably only for the purpose of representing House 2; this could be interpreted as a reflection of the domestic in the ritual site or vice versa. South-west of Barnhouse are the Stones of Stenness, surrounded by a large rock-cut henge with a single entrance, from which animal bone provided the radiocarbon date c3100-2775 BC (Burl, 2000: 211); Richards suggests the arrangement of the internal space of the henge may reflect the world mirrored in the house and passage grave plans (1996: 199). The lochs of Harray and Stenness surround the Stones of Stenness, together with the Ring of Brodgar, and both are located in a natural bowl created by distant hills (Richards, 1996: 203); this local topography is reflected in the bank and ditch of the henges. Waterlogging has preserved organic remains within the ditch, and Richards suggests during long periods of the year, the ditches contained water (Richards, 1996: 324) and the enclosing ditch of Maeshowe may also have been water filled (Richards, 1996: 203); if the flooding was human induced rather than a natural collection in the rock, the process of crossing water may be connected with purification when entering a ritual site and/or a separation from the secular world (Richards, 1996: 204). A mirroring of the local topography can also be seen at Avebury; the henge is surrounded by distant hills. If the hypothesis of the construction of monuments to reflect the landscape is followed, does this explain the recumbent stone circle of Arbor Low? When the local Ordnance Survey map is examined, one can see the henge in question is located 370 metres above sea level (fig 4). A majority of the surrounding hills fail to reach or exceed this height with few exceptions. Approximately one mile to the south, a tumulus crowns a peak reaching only 370 metres; the same distance to the south-east, the hill of Lean Low exceeds that of Arbor Low at 393 metres and is topped by a tumulus; and 3 miles to the north, close to the town of Taddington, a steep hill reaches 414 metres, however, there is no tumulus, possibly due to the incline. With so few hills exceeding the height of that of Arbor Low, this may explain the supine posture of the stones. The Neolithic adoption of farming may have prompted a respect for the land to such a degree the surrounding fertile landscape was reflected in the monumental architecture.
There is a feeling of inter-ceremonial visibility at Avebury; the mound of Silbury Hill, reaching a height of forty metres (Barrett, 1994: 29), is visible at certain locations within the henge (Barrett, 1994: 31), as it is from West Kennet long barrow and other monuments of the Avebury region. This implies the possibility various ceremonies or rituals were undertaken throughout the landscape simultaneously and the monuments were located so visible to each other.
The location of so many monuments within a relatively small area and the construction of processional routes linking these monuments, suggests a ritual complex. Local myth suggests the Stones of Stenness and Ring of Brodgar were linked by a stone avenue; there is no evidence to prove this hypothesis (Richards, 1996: 199) and without a lower level of the loch, the avenue would have to traverse the waters. The avenues of Avebury, probably originating at the Sanctuary, pass several important monuments of the Neolithic these include, to the east, Silbury Hill, West Kennet long barrow and to the west the Beckhampton Avenue past the Cove and on to the long barrows of Beckhampton and South Street. Malone describes the avenues as having increased the importance of the complex by expanding the ritual landscape (1989: 88). These monuments have been positioned in such a way as to be revealed in sequence rather than simultaneously (Thomas, 1991: 217), however, as previously discussed, at certain locations along the route more than one ritual site can be seen from a single point. A cursus and second avenue, albeit of bank and ditch construction, have been located at Stonehenge; antler from the primary silts of the ditch of the avenue have produced an average radiocarbon date of 1749  69 BC - contemporary with an antler from the pit of stone 56 of Stonehenge, one of the inner trilithons, which produced a date of 1720  150 BC (Barrett, 1994: 67). From Stonehenge Bottom, the avenue is on a west-south-west alignment but turns to the south after half a kilometre. After crossing King Barrow Ridge, north of a series of Bronze Age barrows, it turns again to the south-east, between two pre-existing round barrows, on approach to Stonehenge (Barrett, 1994: 47). At this point, the stone circles provide excellent screening of the activities within the enclosure (Barrett, 1994: 43). Once again, the avenue has provided a processional route, observing pre-existing monuments, before arriving at the centre of the contemporary ritual world.
The respect shown for pre-existing monuments and the formality of design possibly reflects ancestor worship. Whatever the reason for reusing house and tomb design and the imitation of the surrounding landscape, the concentration of monuments does suggest a ritual complex.
The purpose of this essay was to ascertain the definition and contemporary use of the phrase 'ritual landscape'. The origin of the phrase described a concentration and possible dominance of monuments in a landscape to the detriment of everyday life; however, recent excavations have located settlements and industrial areas within visual distance of these ritual sites. The clustering of monuments and their connection by way of processional routes implies the use of the entire landscape rather than isolated sites; this may include showing respect to ancestral monuments or their incorporation into contemporary rituals. Although the term 'ritual landscape' is now unpopular, and the term 'ritual complex' is little better, there appears difficulty when trying to describe an inhabited area with a concentration of monuments without implying a total absence of settlements; perhaps the phrase 'ritual settlement' is more applicable.