This practical aims to assess the best method for determining the saturation vapour pressure (SVP) of water over the temperature range 268.2K - 313.2K (-5C - +40C).
The formulae referred to throughout the practical are shown in Appendix 1.
All exercises were carried out using MATLAB 7.0.4.
A MATLAB script was created to calculate the values of SVP derived from the theoretical and empirical formulae for a given temperature range, and compare these values to measured values of SVP. The script is shown below. The output was written to a text file, which is included in Appendix 2.
The data generated by the aforementioned script (and shown in Appendix 2) was used to plot a graph in MATLAB. This graph is shown in Figure 1.
The two data sets derived from the theoretical and empirical formulae generally show a good correspondence to the measured data. However, there does seem to be some divergence from the measured values at higher temperatures (above ~ 300K).
To determine which of the formulae represented the best approximation to the measured values, the measured value of SVP was subtracted from the corresponding value given by the theoretical and empirical formulae. These differences were then plotted using MATLAB (see figure 2). In this graph, y = 0 may be regarded as representing the measured values of SVP, whilst the lines represent the difference between the measured values and those derived from the formulae.
The empirical formula for deriving saturation vapour pressure appears to correspond closest to the measured values over the temperature range from 268K to 313K.
The kink in the empirical SVP line at ~311K in figure 2 is the result of an error correction made to the measured SVP data in a previous exercise. The presence of this feature suggests that the corrected value of measured SVP is not completely accurate, and may be slightly too low. However, since this feature does not significantly distort the data, it may be considered a negligible error within the context of this assignment.
It is possible to derive another formula to calculate SVP (see Appendix 1). As with the theoretical formula previously discussed, the new formula is derived from the Clausius-Clapeyron equation. However, whereas the theoretical formula assumes that L (the latent heat of condensation of water) is constant, the new derivation accounts for the fact that L varies with temperature. Therefore a relationship must be established between T and L. Figure 3 illustrates this relationship, assuming L is a linear function of temperature. The data was taken from the Department of Meteorology data sheet.
A best fit line fitted to this data specifies the approximate relationship between temperature and the latent heat of condensation of water. Of particular interest is the value of the gradient (-0.0024 J kg -1 K -1), which approximates the rate of change of L with temperature. This value may be used in the new Clausius-Clapeyron equation for SVP.
The Clausius-Clapeyron SVP values were calculated using this value, and the difference from the measured values was determined by the same process used to generate figure 2. These results were compared with those for the empirical formula, currently the best approximation available to the measured values. This comparison is shown in figure 4. As in figure 2, the line y = 0 represents the measured values.
Figure 4 indicates that accounting for the variation in L with temperature has little effect on improving the accuracy of the theoretical SVP derived from the Clausius-Clapeyron equation. The empirical data remains the best approximation to the measured data available for the range of temperatures considered.
The empirical method for deriving SVP has been shown to correspond better to measured values of SVP than the formulae derived from the Clausius-Clapeyron equation across the entire temperature range. This is not surprising since, as its name suggests, the empirical formula has been derived from empirical (observed) data.
The inaccuracies of the Clausius-Clapeyron based formulae lie in their mathematical handling of the latent heat of condensation of water (L). The theoretical formula assumes L to be constant across the range of temperatures considered (dL/dT = 0). As figure 3 demonstrates, this is not the case. However, even when dL/dT  0 is accounted for by a refined Clausius-Clapeyron derivation of SVP, the approximation is still relatively poor (figure 4). It is possible that this results from oversimplifying the relationship between L and T by assuming it to be linear. Improved approximations may be achieved by better defining this relationship, at the cost of a more complex formula defining SVP for a given temperature. There appears to be little practical use for such a formula, given the accuracy of the empirical version.