Before introducing a more detailed classification of the forms of address, it is important to distinguish between bound forms (integrated parts of a sentence) and unbound forms (syntactically free forms; preceding, succeeding or being inserted into the sentence). The most part of pronouns of address tend to appear as bound forms and carry a syntactic function of subject or object, while nouns of address occur as free forms.
To a certain extent, the term vocative can be considered a synonym of unbound form (including also unbound pronouns). Vocatives share many properties with unbound items. They are not integrated into the structure of the clause, which explains their variable word order (vocatives may precede, follow or interrupt a clause). They are also independent from a prosodic point of view (they have a separate intonation profile). Only their meanings and their functions within the social event of conversation are not totally independent.
According to a specific social component, there are rules that systematically govern the choices speakers make and the meanings receivers attribute to these same choices. This social component consists of information about the dyad, namely speaker-addressee relationship, speaker evaluation of addressee (and situation), and speaker's social background as expressed in the use of a given form of address (Braun, 1988).
A substantial contribution to the studies of vocatives is given by Zwicky (1974). In his paper the author point to the role of vocatives in getting the addressee's attention (call vocatives), and in maintaining or emphasizing the relationship between speaker and addressee (address vocatives). He goes on underlining two important properties of vocatives: idiomaticity and sociolinguistic markedness. In his opinion, vocatives convey much additional information, namely the general attitude of the speaker toward the addressee, the speaker's estimate of her status, the degree of intimacy between the participants, the level of politeness, the level of formality, the speaker's judgments about the addressee, the speaker's belonging to a particular subculture, social class, geographical dialect.
Since the context of use and the social characteristics of the participants to the conversation play such an important role in selecting the appropriate address form, it is not easy to define meanings and functions of a term of address in a definitive way. The same problem exists also for a classification of vocatives.
A complete and detailed classification is proposed by Biber [et al.] (1999), who identify eight classes of terms of address in English. The eight classes described by the authors can be grouped into four more general groups: proper names (first names, last names, nicknames, etc.), kinship terms, titles and occupational terms (honorifics, social titles, medical and academic professional titles, etc.), endearments and terms of friendship.
In this study I will point the attention to the last group. The principal characteristic of these vocatives is that they cannot be defined only by formal or semantic features. They are nouns and adjectives which convey general ideas of affection or friendliness and their literal meaning is only the starting point in the definition of their sense. An exhaustive description of these forms can be proposed only relying on the context of use and on the function they serve. In other words, their meaning is conventionalized to a certain extent, but it is the way they are used (and the information inferred by this use) which each time defines the exact meaning. Another difference between this group of forms of address and the other (at least kinship terms and titles) is the great productivity of the former. Endearments and terms of friendship can be considered an open class of items, in which linguistic creativity and individual imagination play an important role. The group of endearments and friendship terms include words and expressions like angel, baby, boy, buddy, dear, doll, duckie, dude, feller, honey, kid, lad, love, lovely, mate, my darling, pal, sweetie, etc. (Dunkling, 1990).
The main problem associated with the great heterogeneity of these vocatives is the halo of vagueness in meaning which surrounds them and the difficulty in defining whether a term is an endearment or a friendship term.
The gender of the speaker and of the addressee seems to be a determinant dimension. Kramer (1975) affirms that women and men have different repertoires of address forms. In fact, women tend to use terms of endearment, which are considered 'sweet' terms, to express fondness and affection, while men are more likely to address each other in a 'rough' manner, using friendship terms which convey a sense of camaraderie and male solidarity.
In this section I will give a closer look to a form of address in particular: the vocative mate. The main properties, functions and patterns of use of this vocative will be presented, relying on two dictionaries: the  Oxford English Dictionary 2ed. on CD-ROM version 3.0 and A Dictionary of Epithets and Terms of Address by L. Dunkling.
The entry for mate in the OED describes its referent as "a habitual companion, an associate, fellow, comrade". The definition is completed with a statement which is very important for this study. Here the OED says: "Used as a form of address by sailors, labourers, etc". The main idea conveyed by the OED about this form of address is its reciprocal use among people from the working class.
From his part, Dunkling (1990) provides an analysis oriented more on usage and social meanings, pointing out information about uses, connotations and variations.
Biber [et al.] (1999) in the Longman Grammar of Spoken and Written English considers mate a marker of familiarity in British relationships between speaker and hearer.
Before proceeding with the corpus analysis, it is worth giving a brief summary of the main characteristics and patterns of use of the vocative mate found in the relevant literature:
Mate is a term of friendship, in particular a camaraderie form, and it conveys the general meaning of 'companion', 'friend', 'comrade';
Mate is used mainly by men addressing other men amongst working-class speakers (sailors, labourers, colleagues, etc.) ;
Mate has the function of maintaining and reinforcing the relationship between speaker and addressee;
Mate appears frequently in informal contexts (service encounters, small talks, etc.);
Some variants are possible, adding the suffix -y for diminutive forms ('matey') or the suffix -s for plural forms ('mates', 'mateys').
In the following section the vocative mate is analyzed more thoroughly through linguistic data provided by the British National Corpus through the Corpus Query System 'Sketch Engine'.
The BNC is a sample corpus of about 100 million words collected from both written (about 90%) and spoken texts (about 10%). For the aims of this study, data were collected taking into account only occurrences from spoken texts to describe the spontaneous use of the term amongst English speakers in Great Britain. A first selection within the Query Results was made in order to rule out homonyms. All the occurrences in which the word mate is used as verb or as common noun have been removed whereas the cases in which mate is used as a vocative have been retained. The total number of occurrences considered is 323, from 77 different texts. Texts were recorded from 1990 to 1994. The great deal of contextual information provided in the text headers allows us to consider characteristics of both speakers and texts in the discussion along the social dimensions of gender, age, social class and level of formality. In what follows the main functions and patterns of use of mate will be pointed out.
The more striking result of the study is the difference between the uses described in previous literature and the present uses of the vocative as recorded in the BNC. Two main reasons may be suggested for the observed discrepancies. The first refers to the work by Dunkling (1990), who examines the vocative in more details and gives information about meaning and patterns of use. In this case the incongruity is probably due to the fact that the author describes the term of address drawing on English novels written in the 1950s, which are very distant from the effective use captured in the texts of the BNC, recorded in the 1990s. The same is true for the essays published in the 1970s and in the 1980s, which may depict social habits (and linguistic behaviours) very different from today.
The second reason could be traced back to the  Oxford English Dictionary providing a diachronic description rather than a detailed synchronic one.
The results point out that the usage of the vocative mate tends to be less socially marked than before, especially as far as the dimension of gender and status are concerned. This does not mean that the term is used in the same way by men and women or by speakers from different social classes, but it is evident that a clear-cut distinction no longer exists.
Moreover, the vocative plays an important role in conversations amongst students, serving the function of 'social cement' and acting as an effective in-group marker. Finally, it is important to notice the spreading use of mate amongst colleagues in business settings, while previously the vocative was reported to be limited to conversations within the lower working class. This may also be considered a signal of the increasing informality in social relationships.