Les Liaisons Dangereuses is a deliberate attack on the futility and wickedness of sexual immorality and Laclos infuses the text with both blatant and subtle ironies in order to highlight the dangers of this evil. These ironical aspects are both evident in the plot and in the relationships between characters, whilst simultaneously being imbedded in the structure of the text.
Les Liaisons dangereuses is written in the form of a series of letters and this status as an epistolary novel serves to immediately introduce an element of irony into the text; enabling Laclos to highlight the dichotomy between the proximity of the 'dangerous acquaintances' and the distance suggested by the form of the letter. The act of writing a letter implies an intimate and deeply personal relationship, yet this notion is subverted by Laclos, who explores the ways in which this form of expression can be corrupted and used perversely. This is apparent in la marquise de Merteuil's correspondence with Madame de Volanges, in which she advises her not to grant her daughter permission to marry Danceny on mercenary grounds, stating 'Soixante mille livres de rente dont [Cecile] va jouir ne sont pas dj tant quand on porte le nom de Danceny." In a letter to Valmont, however, her true feelings are revealed and her desire to destroy her confidante is exposed, writing 'faisons-en, de concert, le dsespoir de sa [Ccile's] mre et de Gercourt'. This highlights the ironic transformation of the letter from an intimate document expressing genuine emotion, into an instrument of deception. The order and time that the letters are received imbues the text with an additional source of irony. This is particularly evident in letter 126, in which Madame de Rosemonde praises la prsidente de Tourvel for resisting the advances of the vicomte de Valmont. Whilst it is possible that this letter would have prevented the liaison between them, it is received by la prsidente only after she has succumbed to Valmont's advances. The letter is therefore denied the ability to facilitate a change in la presidente's actions and is used by Laclos as a symbol of impotence and dramatic irony.
One of the reasons as to why Merteuil and Valmont behave as they do towards other people is that they are jealous of each other's exploits, yet 'seek each other's admiration and plaudits." Letter 10 is one such example where la marquise includes a lengthy description of her satisfaction with her new lover Belleroche: 'j' avais rsolu que tout ce temps ft pour lui galement dlicieux' this is answered with a description by Valmont of a night he spent with milie in letter 47. This rivalry of lovers continues throughout the novel and characterises their relationship. It is all the more ironic that, whilst they 'consider each other as the only audience whose applause is worth having, so that they depend on each other for praise which they are both equally reluctant to give', they become fierce rivals by the conclusion and succeed in destroying each other.
It appears a safe assumption that Valmont is in love with la marquise and throughout the novel he constantly tries to impress and seduce her. The irony lies in the fact that Valmont, in order to be rewarded with one night with la marquise, attempts to seduce la prsidente de Tourvel but ends up falling in love with her. The resulting confusion for Valmont paves the way for his downfall. The scapegrace's basic tenet is that falling in love leads to a loss of control, a langour to which he will never succomb; he and Merteuil are 'non susceptibles de passion qu'ils considrent comme une faiblesse... Valmont projette de lui-mme l'image du Don Juan idal en quelque sort, celui pour qui la chair est pouvoir, mais qui garde la tte entirement froide. ' This becomes all the more ironic as Valmont is destroyed at the end because of his attempt to exploit human emotions whilst attempting to remain immune to those of his own.
It becomes almost immediately obvious that Laclos is writing not entirely about true love but about the dangers of seduction as well. It could be contested that the sentient characters, ironically, are not bound merely by love - but almost by duty. La prsidente wants to alleviate Valmont's malaise and le chevalier Danceny uses claims of distress on his beloved Ccile. In letter 77, Valmont skilfully uses reversal of reality to manipulate the truth and also la prsidente thoughts, making him the victim and portraying her as the aggressor. He employs such verbs as 'punir...rfuser...dtourner...abuser'
to describe her behaviour and his sentiments include 'tendre...l'amour...l'amiti'. This is an effective technique and Madame de Tourvel genuinely wrestles with her conscience and eventually capitulates which leads to her perfidy.
There are also smaller yet equally deliberate incongruities in the novel: whilst Madame de Tourvel is portrayed as completely innocent - 'diffrente des "autres femmes" qui se laissent sduire par la passion... [elle est] fire de son... systme de valeurs', she arranges Valmont's actions to be watched, which is 'not an action beyond reproach' and eventually commits adultery. The ironic treatment of relationships includes Danceny's assistance to Valmont in seducing his beloved Ccile, writing to persuade her that Valmont is on their side and 'la seule personne qui puisse nous [Ccile and Danceny] rapprocher l'un de l'autre'. Perhaps the main sardonic relationship is that Ccile believes Madame de Merteuil to be her closest and most veracious confidante, whereas in la marquise's eyes Ccile is but a 'subsidiary intrigante worthy of only secondary roles... an object, a pleasure machine." Madame de Volanges only shows great concern when it is too late and her daughter has already been seduced by Valmont.
The ending of the novel and the punishment the characters receive from Laclos is ironic in itself. Although he has punished the vice of his libertins, Laclos, paradoxically, does not reward virtue, the death of la prsidente is not a moral one and in the last line of one of the final three letters in the novel Madame de Volanges explains: 'Je vois bien dans tout cela les mchants punis; mais je n'y trouve null consolation pour leurs malheureuses victimes. ' Indeed, considering her punishment, convention would suggest that Merteuil would not succeed; yet, ironically, she does. La marquise controls everyone in the novel, and militates even against Valmont: 'She has experimented with counterfeiting emotions and has discovered that she can mislead others." Whilst Valmont's egocentric image is that of complete control, shown perhaps through his self directed usage of heroic images - such as his donation to save the troubled family who gathered round him exclaiming: 'Tombons tous aux pieds de cette image de Dieu... [and Valmont thought he] ne ressemblais[t] pas mal au hros d'un drame'. Despite this la marquise 'knows his vanity and alternately flatters and teases his delusions of grandeur to goad him into action." It is ironic, therefore that she succeeds at all but she does destroy Valmont - 'le seul homme qu'elle ait sans doute jamais aim
' - as he faces Danceny in a duel and Gercourt never marries Ccile who is forced to take refuge in a convent. Such is human nature, the reader does not hate Merteuil or Valmont until the end of the novel as 'they appeal to an aspect of our own personality which...we feel we ought to suppress'. This is ironic and Laclos here deliberately manipulates the reader's emotions to shock him with the novel's dramatic conclusion.
It is ironic; therefore, that Merteuil is destroyed as well. By punishing her more than Valmont, Laclos stresses that she placed too much confidence in her own abilities. Losing her lawsuit and having letters 81 and 85 circulated in Paris is not enough for the author and 'physical retribution is exacted through her contraction of smallpox, and her consequent disfigurement is emblematic of her moral corruption." Yet more ironic is that it is her own 'act of single folly' which destroys her; that of implicating Valmont to Danceny which allows Valmont revenge as he passes on to him their correspondence. Indeed it is the height of irony that one who boasts so much of her 'supriorit sur vous [Valmont]', sees herself as invincible; as larger than life and 'est la premire femme qui ne soit pas soumise  l'homme...affirme son independence, revendique et exerce ses droits' should 'ragit par sa jalousie, et... dtruit elle-mme par ses reactions impulsives le success de son enterprise. ' As a reader one feels also that a similar situation with Valmont could have arisen if he had only admitted to himself that he was in fact, in love with la prsidente.