Second Language Acquisition (SLA) can be defined as the process by which "people learn a language other than their mother tongue, inside or outside of a classroom" (Ellis, 1997: 3). Describing and explaining how people acquire a second language is a fascinating challenge for researchers in many disciplines, not only from a theoretical point of view but also from a practical one. For instance, a deep understanding of learning mechanisms can assist teachers in adopting the efficacious methodology, or it can help learners in developing effective strategies for learning a second language.
In approaching this question, I shall be focusing on the role of input, output and formal instruction according to the main theories on acquisition, relating them to my experience of learning Persian and pointing out the main reasons that led me to a failure in mastering the target language.
In this last section of the essay, I shall be describing my learning experience of the Persian language, trying to relate it to the theoretical framework presented above. The value of input, output and formal instruction will be evaluated and the main reasons of failure in mastering the target language will be outlined.
The learning experience has been developed on a period of ten weeks and it has been almost entirely based on self-study through a guided textbook and audio cassette. Three additional one-hour sessions of classroom practicing with a native speaker have been scheduled.
From the analysis of the experience of learning modern Persian, it emerges that interaction played a crucial role in the process. Conversations among learners and native speakers gave valuable contribution, encouraging the production of comprehensible output and enhancing the noticing of structures of the target language through comprehensible input. Furthermore, the presence of a native speaker was an important source of positive and negative feedback, which effectively assisted learning. Nonetheless, interaction and practicing in the classroom were limited to three hours and the learning experience heavily relied on the textbook. From its part, the text provided samples of natural language through dialogues recorded on audio cassettes, but the overall organization of exercises, based on formal instruction according to the traditional approaches of synthetic syllabi, prevented the learner from developing an autonomous mastering of the target language.