The social variables of class and gender are two concepts which are paramount in many of the concerns of today's society. The link of language to class and gender is a common one. Language is a central issue in our lives thus it is natural to link the way we speak to the society we live in. The very things that determine our gender and class are created by the place we live in, the roles that we assume are linked to these social variables. They are socially created. I think that the issue of class and gender can be significantly linked together, particularly if you look at the role of prestige. The way we speak is often linked to prestige through the sound of an accent and the use of standard English. It is thought that those who speak with a higher use of standard English are likely to be of higher class. Assumptions about the way we speak and gender are often made. In this essay I am going to concentrate on the role of prestige and how this affects the way we speak. I think that class and gender can be linked through prestige. Following the work of Trudgill and Labov I can see how it can be supposed that women seek overt prestige which can be seen through their speech. I intend to look at the issues of class and gender separately and then to try and support the idea that the two are indeed linked. I want to look at to what extent it is true that women are more class conscious than men and to see whether this can be seen through language use, thus showing a link between gender and class.
I am first going to look at the issue of gender. The gender debate, (why the differences in the way men and women speak occur) is an ongoing discussion. There is no definite answer on this issue and the debate remains, as linguists are still unsure as to why women use certain forms and men use others. Gender is a socially constructed term. I am not looking at the biological differences when I use the term gender I am looking much deeper. Gender differences include not just features of behaviour but extend to a whole way of regarding ourselves. They include questions of gender role, (ways of behaving) and also of gender identity (relating to ourselves and others). Pitch for example is a biological difference between males and females even though it is as not as pronounced as one might think. However the connotations of pitch have become a social construct. Different cultures associate pitch with gender according to their particular social norms. When I look at gender I am looking at the sexual identity of a person in terms of the life they lead and what makes them female. This is a difficult category as it is near impossible to define what a male or female is without talking about the physical differences. This is when it becomes clear gender is a social construction. The gender debate began through Otto Jesperson in the 1920's when his theories of gendered language became known. His theories were unfounded yet became the basis for many stereotyped views on language. Lakoff was one of the earliest linguists to deal with the issue of the differences between male and female language. Again her theories were not supported by factual evidence. This has meant some of her views have been criticised, however her work is still viewed with high regard and has been the basis for many other linguists. These linguists have then been able to develop her points and back them up with evidence however many of the approaches still have their flaws. Lakoff and Cameron look at the issue of power struggles between males and females. In society, despite there being significant developments, women have been seen as inferior to men. It has been suggested that males assert their domincnace through speech thus women resort to certain forms in order to regain some status. This links to the idea of prestige and may suggest why females tend to use covert prestige forms.
I think it is clear that there is a link between gender and class when the issue of prestige is discussed. The phrase Standard English has meant that society has created the view that any other variety is considered to be 'incorrect'. Prescriptivists believe that there is a right or wrong way to speak thus any variation in the form of a dialect is wrong. Linguists however take the stance that language has many varieties and can see that most varieties are reliable. Trudgill believes that as long as a dialect has rules to govern it then it can been seen as being linguistically correct. 'It follows that value judgments concerning the 'correctness' and purity of linguistic varieties are social rather than linguistic' Trudgill pg.8. The gender differences in language have often been associated with standard and non standard forms.
The differences between men and women's speech has been well documented over the years and much research has been done to assess what differences there are and why they occur. To begin with the research that occurred was done primarily by men which meant that male linguistic behaviour was assumed to be the norm. Any deviation from this was therefore considered to be a departure from the norm. It has only been recently that close scrutiny of the previous findings had been done. This was mainly due to the feminist movement whereby women began to question the stereotypes that had been made about them. One area that had been questioned was whether women tended to speak more 'correctly' than males. This is when the issue of class and gender can be fully linked. Society has created a label whereby standard English has come to represent the 'correct' form. It is suggested that those who speak other varieties are therefore inaccurate. Linguistically this is not the case as we have seen through the discussion of accent and dialect. We know that any variety can be linguistically correct if it is led by a set of rules. The issue of whether females use more standard forms than males has been directly linked to the issue of prestige. It has been suggested that women are more prone to hypercorrection. Hypercorrection is when in formal settings people over produce socially favoured patterns of pronunciation. For example received pronunciation forms. Much research has been done in social settings to see if indeed women do use more standard forms than males. Macauley (1977) looked at the contrast in speech between lower middle class males and lower middle class females in Glasgow. The results suggested that women were 40% more likely to avoid using the vernacular form, the glottal stop than the men. This links to the works of Trudgill and Labov in their variationist approach. They noted that women across all classes preferred to use the standard form. 'women are more sensitive than men to prestige forms; lower middle class women showed the most extreme form of this behaviour; (Labov 1972:243).Women from upper classes used the same forms that women from lower classes would use. This links to the idea of prestige. It suggest that all women seek overt prestige, this could link to the fact that women may have felt they had no other way of acquiring status, their language use was the only way. The work of Lesley Milroy (1980) looked at the issue of social networks in working class Belfast. The men here were part of a closed network, as they all worked together. They had more networks as they worked with their friends and had more social bonds. This meant they were more prone to using the vernacular form. Women however stayed at home and had fewer connections. This meant their language use tended to be more standard as they weren't part of a close community. However a separate study was done on an area called Clonard where unemployment was high. Here the social networks were reversed. This suggests that perhaps females do not necessarily seek to use overt prestige forms but of are affected by the level of employment. A study by Nichols (1983) showed that age had a lot to do with the use of vernacular forms and it was not necessarily all women that seek overt prestige forms. Here the older women and men both tended to stick to the Creole form of English. The younger women rarely spoke to the older women in the same Creole form, instead they would use more standard forms. This was linked to the fact that the younger women had spent more time in education where they had been surrounded by prestige forms. The older women had spent more time at home and the men had had manual jobs. This suggests that the prestige forms do occur more in female speech but age, occupation and the time spent in education are also important factors.
The research of Trudgill however is key when we consider whether the prestige forms used by males and females is conscious. Trudgill found that women claimed to use more prestige forms than they did, also men claimed to use less prestige forms than they did. This links to the idea that men seek masculinity. The use of non-standard forms thus can be seen through society to represent masculinity.
I think what can be seen through the research that has been done is that there is a clear link between class (incorporating status and prestige) with gender. I think it is apparent that there is no definite answer as to whether females are indeed more class conscious through their language use than men, but indeed there are some situations which suggest this. I think that it is important to look at other social variables to be able to fully assess whether gender and class alone affect speech. The work of Viv Edwards (1986) for example showed how education was an added factor towards sex differences. Through the work of Nichols it can be seen that age is also a factor, the lifestyle and outside influences are also key in considering what affects the way we speak. The topic of gender and language is an ongoing debate thus it is impossible to state solid facts on this issue. In my opinion the issues of the gender and class have a definite link. I think the effects they have on language are indeed clear but I think that to conclude firmly is an impossible task whilst the debates continue.