In order to determine how words are stored and retrieved from within the mind psycholinguists have undertaken many experiments in an attempt to establish how closely connected words are.
Aitchinson (2003) suggests that words are related to each other in the form of 'a multi-dimensional cobweb in which every item is attached to scores of others' (2003:84). Early research concentrated on meaning networks and 'finding out the strength of a link between one particular word and another' (2003:84), suggesting that links between words were formed by 'habits'. When certain words were frequently associated with each other they were thought to 'develop strong ties' (2003:85). A way to test these theories was through 'word-association tests'. In these experiments subjects are asked to respond with the first word that comes into their head when faced with certain stimuli. Moss (1996) describes the motivation behind these studies as the belief that 'word associations provide a direct window onto the underlying structure of semantic memory' (1996:1). Emphasis was placed not on the individual but in the general responses for large groups. Results showed that different people generally gave rather similar results. Aithcinson (2003) noted that 'the consistency of the results suggested to psychologists that they might therefore be able to draw up a reasonably reliable 'map' of the average person's 'word-web' (2003:85). I will be conducting the same experiment to see which relationships are most frequent among my subjects. I will then assess how reliable this experiment is in determining which words are connected in the lexicons of my subjects.
I chose a mixture of nouns, adjectives and verbs as my stimuli. In each word class I chose a selection of frequencies, i.e. high and lower frequencies. For example; 'hair' and 'love' had a similar high frequency, and 'sing' and 'bread' had a similar lower frequency. This ensured that all subjects would have a similar familiarity with the selection of nouns, verbs and adjectives. It also ensured that the experiment took into account that the words we encounter vary in frequency. In order to assess if we map all words in a certain way it is important to look at whether specific relationships are more common in a variety of types of words. For example: do people respond with coordinates for the majority of their answers despite the frequency of the word. I will therefore be look at the relationships between the words compared to the stimulus. I will also be looking to see if there are any significant differences between the younger and older participants. I chose two 20 year old females, and two 50 years old adults, one male, one female.
The word-association test is useful in that it shows that humans tend to generate similar results, Moss (1996) also states that the test is useful as 'a simple measure of relatedness between two words', however the results produced are not very conclusive about how words are stored within the mind as a whole. Aitchinson (2003) suggests the main problem with word association tests is that 'they cannot tell us about the probable structure of the human word-web' (2003:85). She identifies the fact that as participants are only required to give one response this cannot 'fully reflect the variety of semantic links that would presumably exist in their semantic memory' (cited in Moss 1996:2). When participants are asked to give the first word that comes into their head there is a slight delay between what the person thinks and what they actually say. Before the participants give their answer they are making a quick decision as to what word they wish to choose. De Groot (1989) found that even when asking participants to respond quickly they take about one and half seconds to respond. This shows there may be a decision making process occurring before responses are given.
Aitchinson also notes that the responses are also multifarious. The top responses for most words are semantically similar but some connections are stronger than others. Aitchinson gives the example of butter which is linked to bread, yellow, soft, cream, eggs, milk, cheese. Bread is linked to butter as you eat the two together, whereas yellow and soft describe butter itself. Cream, eggs, milk and cheese are other kinds of dairy food. Therefore although the most people tend to respond in the same way the answers do not help us to determine how words are linked within the lexicon.
The test in itself is considered to be unnatural due to the fact that the words are presented on their own. Normal speech would involve the stimuli being surrounded by other words therefore the process of retrieval would no doubt be different. Equally the surrounding words can have an effect on the meaning, Aithcinson (2003) concludes that 'if a word's associations can be changed so easily by the context then it is possibly wrong to assume that we can ever lay down fixed and detailed pathways linking words in the mental lexicon' (2003:85). This I suspect would be the case with one of the some of the stimuli that I chose, particularly 'chips'. If this word occurred in a sentence, or in a different order, it may well have elicited more expected connotations.
It is evident through my results that there are definite commonalities among participants. Moss argues that this is often because certain words are more commonly linked, for example 'cat and dog'. Aitchinson also notes that 'two types of link seem to be particularly strong: connections between coordinates and collocation links' (2003:101). This was true with my results although antonyms featured highly. Although it is undeniable that there are patterns in the responses of participants it is important to note that these findings merely help to provide 'a general framework' (Aitchinson, 2003:101) of how words are linked within the lexicon. Perhaps more useful is the technique of priming which looks at how closely words are associated within the lexicon. Priming measures how quickly participants notice words which are/are not associated with the sentence. Field (2003:17) uses the example 'We saw a camel at the zoo .... fosk - bank - lidge - hump'. The participant has to press a button every time they see an actual word. The reaction time to 'hump' will be quicker than 'bank' because it has already been triggered by the semantically related 'camel'. This test is more useful than word association as it looks at how closely words are associated before activation occurs and also how long the activation lasts. This gives a deeper insight than previous word-association experiments.