Saussure proposed that our perception and understanding of reality is constructed by the words and other signs that we use' (cited in Bignell, 2002: 6) In this semiotic analysis I will attempt to identify the predominant view of reality by looking at the symbolic and photographic codes used in a selection of beauty adverts. By identifying the signs in the adverts it will be possible to identify the predominant ideologies behind the adverts.
This analysis will look mainly at two contrasting adverts from the current beauty industry taken from mid-price magazines. Both the 'Dove' adverts and the 'Nina' perfume adverts have also been televised on primetime television. The intended audiences are both female and of a similar economic status although the products vary. This analysis will look at areas in which the versions of typical feminine beauty are challenged and where they conform. In order to do this I will look at the following areas; symbolic codes such as- colour choices, appearance of human beings, background/setting, photographic codes- such as lighting/editing and linguistic codes- such as captions/brand names.
Perfume is a particularly difficult product to advertise, as Cook suggests, 'a smell has no denotation, no component which distinguishes it from another'(1992:107), it therefore relies heavily on the connotations associated with the product in order to sell. Danesi suggests that 'advertisers rely on a handful of hedonistic themes-happiness, youth, success, status, luxury, fashion and beauty- to promote their products' (1999:182). Advertisers therefore make specific and calculated decisions when selecting which symbolic codes are used in certain adverts. This links to the theory of Barthes (1973) who suggests that signs do not operate singly or on their own but that they are usually combined together in groups to make meaning. The signs in adverts are selected because of the connotations they ignite when combined. The 'Nina' advert places great emphasis on the theme of 'beauty', specifically 'femininity'. In order to create this image of feminine beauty many techniques are employed.
Colour is one of the main features used in advertising. In the adverts that I have chosen to look at the image is the central feature of the text and these images are further enhanced by the choice of colour. Williamson suggests that the 'use of colour is simply a technique, used primarily in pictorial advertising, to make correlations between a product and other things' (1978:24). The colours are chosen specifically because of the connotations associated with them. In the 'Nina' advert the colour pink is prominent. This is featured primarily on the girls dress. This colour is associated with sexual purity and romance. White is also crucial in the advert symbolising innocence and purity. The use of these two colours are gentle and clean, but also very feminine.
The 'Dove' adverts also place emphasis on the colour white, perhaps suggesting that the women in these adverts are equally feminine. Bignell suggests that 'femininity is not a natural property of women but a cultural construct' (2002:60), as both adverts rely heavily on the use of such light colours associated with women it therefore suggests that such cultural constructs are dominant. Despite the fact that the 'Dove' advert is claiming to disassociate itself with typical views of beauty and display 'real beauty' it does rely on traditional associations with femininity, namely the use of white. Bignell suggests that 'the iconic signs denoting women in the media very often perpetuate oppressive ideological myths about real women' (2002:35). The 'Dove' advert claims to overcome these ideological myths by using 'untypical' women in their adverts.
Goffman suggests that 'the females depicted in commercially posed scenes have straighter teeth and are slimmer, younger, taller, blonder and 'better' looking that those found in most real scenes' (1979:21) and this is certainly the case in the perfume adverts I have selected. In the 'Nina' advert the figure is a young girl/ woman, very slim, tall, fair and almost certainly a model. In the 'Lovely' perfume advert the model is Sarah-Jessica Parker who is renowned for her good looks and style after starring in the show 'Sex & the City'. These two adverts support the dominant ideology of what equates to feminine beauty. The 'Dove' adverts seek to overrule this dominant ideology. The models chosen go against the 'typical' woman as Goffman (1979) described above. The first advert depicts an mature woman and places emphasis on her age by focussing on her wrinkles. This contrasts with the majority of beauty adverts which use young models unless they are emphasising the role of the product- for example: anti-aging cream. This emphasises the impact of the 'ideological' view of women in that despite most women use perfume the models used to advertise it are all of a similar age. It does however show the power of ideology, Bignell suggests that 'the perfume became a sign of feminine beauty, so that buying the product for ourselves seems to offer the wearer of the perfume a share in its meaning of feminine beauty for herself' (2002:34). This suggests that women seek to be a part of the ideology that is being advertised, as Williamson suggests 'to possess the product is to buy into the myth and to possess some of its social value for ourselves' (1978:31). Williamson also suggests that 'you do not simply buy the product in order to become a part of the group it represents; you must feel that you already, naturally belong to that group and therefore you will buy it' (1978:47). This is particularly evident in the 'Dove' adverts whereby they are aimed at a wide audience. By creating a range of adverts incorporating different age ranges, body types, skin colour and hair colour the campaign addresses a range of women. This is clever in that women may feel inclined to buy the product as they feel they are part of the group that it 'represents'. It is also clever as it widens the ideology if what equals 'feminine beauty'. By using a range of models it is likely that you, as the audience, will relate to at least one of them. Danesi suggests that 'advertising exalts and inculcates lifestyle values by playing on hidden fears- fear of poverty, sickness, loss of social standing, and unattractiveness'(1999:183), and this is exactly what the 'Dove' adverts do. The Dove adverts seek to glamorise the women used by suggesting that they too are as beautiful as the 'typical' model. They seek to prove that there is no 'typical' woman. The perfume adverts do however do also rely on the 'hidden fears' that Danesi mentioned but in a different way. The perfume adverts present a woman that the audience almost aspire to.
The Dove adverts use photographic codes in an attempt to further suggest that the women in their adverts are 'real', thus implying typical models are 'fake'. This is particularly interesting as both sets of adverts are creations in themselves and thus not 'natural'. Barthes suggests that photographs are carefully altered and edited in order to affect the way a person responds to the image. On first appearances it would appear that the 'Nina' adverts have been subjected to more of this editing. The photographs contrast in many ways. The main difference is that the perfume adverts seek to tell a story, with the exception of the 'Lovely' perfume which relies on the famous face to sell the product. These stories are told by the connotations of the other signs in the images. The 'Nina' perfume uses the image of apples and a castle which on the surface conjure up images of fantasy and enchantment. The apple appears to be particularly significant as they connote feelings of temptation, as in Genesis and Snow White. In the bible Eve is tempted by an apple, as is Snow White in the fairytale of the same name. The apple is therefore associated with wickedness but also implies sexuality. The images combine to tell a story which indirectly help to sell the product. In the 'Nina' advert the emphasis is on magical enchantment, almost implying buying the perfume will have the same effect on the consumer. This links to the view of Cook who suggests that 'all descriptions create qualities for the perfume by fusing it with something else, and with the (variable) connotations of something else' (1992:108). By giving the perfume a magical like quality it gives a further appeal to the consumer. The 'Dove' advert however uses a contrastive approach. Whereas the perfume adverts seem to enter a fantasy world the 'Dove' adverts place great emphasis on the role of 'reality'. As well as the text emphasising the 'real' women being shown, the use of a white background seems to imply that the women used are natural. The blank background does not attempt to tell a story of any kind and places emphasis on the women. By doing this is attempts to create the idea that the photograph is natural and 'real'. However it is important to note that, as Goffman suggests, 'A 'real' photographic portrait may be one that strikes the viewer as bad in various ways: it may be unflattering... or be badly composed, lighted, printed and so forth' (1979:17). Therefore, although the Dove adverts appear to be natural and not as posed as the perfume adverts, at no point in their viewing would you consider the picture to be 'bad'. The women, although unconventional, (by current ideologies), are still photographed in a flattering manner, the lighting is professional and the composition is appropriate. This photographic style is clever as it looks natural and supports 'Doves' claim that these are real women and not part of a fantasy world. It is important to note that there are similarities between the two styles in the perfume and Dove adverts. All the women in the adverts are not entirely 'natural' in that their hair and make up has been done and it would be expected that the photographs have been touched up to meet professional standards. Both adverts also use 'symbolic signs' (Pierce 1958) to further enhance the feminine qualities of the women in them. By dressing the women in certain clothes there are cultural connotations which affect how we as the audience interpret the image. The women in the Dove advert are photographed in their underwear, this symbolises sexual attractiveness. The perfume adverts 'Nina' and 'Lovely' both dress their women in ball gowns, these symbolise femininity and luxury. These 'symbolic signs' are combined with 'indexical signs' (Pierce 1958), smiles, which indicate happiness. By portraying this emotion the adverts draw in the audience and help to suggest that it is the products they are advertising that do this to the women. The women in the Dove advert appear confident which further emphasises that breaking the typical myth of feminine beauty is not necessarily a bad thing.
The perfume adverts appear to offer unattainable worlds which Eco (1986) termed 'hyper-real'. The hyper-reality stems from the desire to achieve something that appears unattainable. The 'Dove' adverts seem to attempt to reverse this tradition by suggesting that beauty is attainable as previous beauty ideologies are outdated. Barthes proposed that myth serves the ideological interests of a particular group in society which he terms 'the bourgeoisie' (Cited in Bignell 2002:24). This suggests that current ideologies are controlled by those in power and those with the most influence in society. Because of this it is important to note that 'the dominant ideology of society is subject to change' (Bignell 2002:25) depending on who has the most influence during different time periods. Most ideologies become so embedded in society that they remain the same as they are unchallenged they seem natural to the untrained eye. Danesi suggests that 'unravelling the meanings of the ad's subtexts and intertexts is perhaps the only way to become truly immune to any effects advertising might have on human consciousness' (1999:186). To an extent the 'Dove' adverts have exposed the typical ideologies and suggested an alternative way of looking at beauty. Bignell suggests that 'the myths which are generated in a culture will change over time and can only acquire their force because they relate to a certain context' (2002:22). It is important to note that the connotations that do exist, exist because of the cultural and social factors surrounding them. The ideology of 'feminine beauty' has changed gradually over the years and it may be that the Dove adverts illustrate another social change in the way beauty is viewed. Danesi suggests that 'advertisers are not innovators. They are more intent on reinforcing lifestyle behaviours already present in the system of everyday life than in spreading commercially risky innovations' (1999:185). This suggests that although Dove appears to be groundbreaking in that it does challenge current ideologies, it is not the only company to be doing this. The L'Oreal make-up advert advertises its product for a wider clientele by showing the range of foundation shades available. Although the women in these adverts are models and are all young the brand does have products which appeal to mature women also. In current advertising a lot of emphasis is placed on creating products which appeal to different age ranges, so although there are a range of products created they appear to be more personal and thus more specific. This is also something that the Dove adverts attempt to do. By attempting to distance themselves from established ideologies the adverts aim to personalise their brand, and do so by using a range of models. They also personalise the brand by the use of linguistic codes.
The perfume adverts often rely solely on the name of the perfume to connote the main themes of the advert, for example 'Lovely', however as Cook suggests 'even when a perfume is given a simple manufacturer's name this carries connotations of its country of origin or other products of the same manufacturer'(1992:108). This is the case with 'Nina'. The brand 'Nina Ricci' is well established particularly in Paris. The brand name differentiates it from other products and is associated with elegance and rich flawless craftsmanship. By wearing a perfume named after the found of the company gives a sense of importance and worth as if you too are worthy of wearing the perfume. The Dove adverts are not advertising specific products but are using the brand name in the same way as 'Nina' does. The use of brand names often have associated meanings with them, it is important to note that 'these meanings are entirely constructed by society' (Myers 1999:18). The dove bird is associated with peace, and this feature extends to the product by implying that the products can help you relax and are gentle. The brand 'Dove' is associated with affordable luxury, and this is mainly due to previous advertising campaigns. The brand is widely available and affordable. This is one of the reasons why the Dove campaign has been successful in that it has also attempted to personalise its consumers. By having a range of women representing different ages, sizes and skin colours it likely that there will be one of the women that you as a consumer would relate to. This is supported by the text accompanying the images.
The text in the Dove campaign uses the form of questions. This is particularly personal as it invites the reader to answer a question, this involves you directly and asks your opinion. The language used is also personal, the use of the word 'your' is directly aimed at you, and the word 'society' involves you as it suggests you are part of it. The use of the adjectives 'real' and 'true' are also interesting as they directly appear to question established ideologies. The ideologies in question are the idea that feminine beauty is in young, slim and busty women. The success of the Dove campaign is that it seeks to expose the traditional ideology of feminine beauty and alter it.
This semiotic analysis has enabled us to make explicit the signs that advertisers combine in order to create mythic meanings thus influencing consumers and drawing them into established ideologies. As Danesi suggests 'Semiotics ultimately allows us to filter the implicit meanings and images that swarm and flow through us every day, immunizing us against becoming passive victims of a situation' (1999:21). The Dove adverts appear to expose the implicit meanings in established adverts and make consumers aware of the ideologies that exist in society and culture, however in doing so they attempt to create their own mythic meanings. By suggesting that there are different features of 'femininity' the Dove adverts are in turn creating their own ideology. It is also important to note that the adverts although claiming to be innovative actively use recognised codes - especially photographic codes- to promote their advertising. This enhances the power of the codes in use and further emphasises the importance of semiotic analysis as a tool to unravel the components of texts and thus 'create structures of meaning' (Williamson 1978:11).