Libben (1996) describes the study of aphasia as 'by far the most important tool in the investigation of language in the brain' (1996:424). In general it has been noted that the extent of a language deficit depends on how much the brain has been damaged and the area of damage. Certain theorists claim that particular locations of errors result in specific language deficits such as production and comprehension. I am going to look at whether research into aphasia proves or disproves these claims. I will be looking at the viewpoints of the antilocalizationists in terms of lesion location, selection of patients and briefly a comparison with normal speakers. I will also attempt to determine if generalizing group studies is reliable, finally I will consider the role of the right hemisphere in language.
Interest in the location of language in the brain began in the 19 th century when the first scientific studies on the brain were undertaken. The work of Paul Broca was innovative. Broca's worked stemmed from the ongoing phrenological theory that 'the moral, intellectual, and spiritual faculties of man were each the result of particular portions of the brain' (Caplan 1987:43). By the time Broca had begun his work in 1861 most of the phrenologists claims had been refuted however the claim that language was located in a specific area of the brain remained. Broca undertook an in-depth and ongoing case study of a patient who had a severe language deficit. His patient appeared to have good comprehension but their only verbal output consisted of the syllable 'tan'. Upon the death of the patient an autopsy showed a severe lesion to the frontal lobe of the brain. Broca's findings were innovative in that they claimed to have located a particular language function to an area of the brain. Broca claimed that 'the expressive apparatus for speech is related to a small area of cortex' on the frontal lobe (Caplan 1987:46). Broca also put forward the theory of lateralisation in that 'the left hemisphere of the brain is dominant for expressive language'. He also discovered that the human brain worked via 'lateral asymmetries' (Caplan 1987:46) in that the right side of the body was controlled by the left side of the brain and vice versa. The work of Broca concluded that language was localised in the frontal lobe and thus this area of the brain became known as Broca's area. Shortly after Broca published his findings Carl Wernicke put forward a set of contradictory ideas when he discovered that 'other aphasic syndromes related to lesions elsewhere in the brain' (Caplan 1987:47).Cases of aphasia were discovered which had lesions elsewhere in the left hemisphere and 'cases came to light of patients whose autopsied brains showed lesions of Broca's area, but who had not had disorders of language in life' (1987:49). In 1874 Wernicke suggested that as there had been discoveries of sub-types of aphasia in the brain resulting from lesions in different areas; 'different areas (of the brain) accomplish different tasks' (Caplan 1987:50). Wernicke's case studies showed patients who's speech was fluent and plentiful but were unable to make sense.
These approaches to aphasia dominated the field until recent years. Anatomical diagrams of the brain label Broca's area and Wernicke's area as crucial in the location of language within the brain. Broca's area has been associated with the ability to produce language and Wernicke's solely with the ability to comprehend language. There are however some criticisms to these particular findings.
The anti-localizationists disagree with the theory that language functions can be localized within the brain and suggest that 'evidence for widespread cerebral activation in higher functions has been accumulating physiologically and anatomically' (Kertesz 1983:3).
One of the main problems with limiting the localisation of a language feature to one area of the brain is the fact that in the majority of cases there is a 'co-occurrence of symptoms' (Caplan 1987:33), that is that most if not all of aphasic patients have more than one language deficit. One explanation as to why this could be is due to the anatomical structure of the brain. For example, 'agrammatism', the omission of grammatical words, is often accompanied by 'dysarthia', a disturbance of articulation. It is suggested that the reason these two disturbances occur together is due to the fact that 'the neurological areas responsible ....partially overlap, or are in close proximity in the brain' (Caplan 1987:34). Thus in most cases a lesion in the brain will affect both these features of speech, however it is also important to note that on occasion a 'lesion will spare enough of one region to allow one of these functions to escape without disruption' (Caplan 1987:34).
Another problem with the localizationists is that one of their main arguments claims that the site of a lesion will cause the exact same language problem in all individuals. Basso et.al (1985) suggest that this is not always the case. The research of Basso et al. focussed on the correlation between lesion location and the type of aphasia experienced by the patient. Their findings suggested that not all patients omitted expected results. For example: Three of the subjects were classed as 'non-aphasic' but had lesions in the classic speech area. There were also two patients that were aphasic but had lesions outside the classic speech area. There were also patients that had been diagnosed with global aphasia but had lesions that spared Wernicke's area. The researchers admit that the number of published cases is 'too small to consider as 'exceptional cases'' (Bassoal. 1985:225) and that more research is necessary offer a 'satisfactory explanation' (Basso et al.1985:226). However their findings do suggest that the theory of localization is not as clear cut as 'current tenets would have them' (1985:227). Cappaal. (2000) suggest that the diagnostic labels of aphasia, Broca's aphasia in particular, are too broad and that they should be replaced by 'more detailed linguistic and neurological descriptions of the clinical cases' (2000:27). This suggests that the 'characteristics' of Broca's aphasia are not as clear cut as originally implied and that 'Broca's aphasics...show a highly variable pattern of impairment' (2000:27). This supports the work of Ulman (2000) who claims that the ideas of localizationist Grodzinsky (2000) are 'hampered by problems of patient selection'(2000:53).
Grodzinsky, fundamentally a localizationist, published a paper claiming that the function of Broca's area was more localized that had originally been thought. Testing patients regarding their comprehension skills primarily takes the form of assessing the ability of subjects to understand sentences both in the active and the, more difficult, passive form. This comprehension skill is classified as a syntactic ability. Grodzinsky (2000) claimed that Broca's area was responsible for syntactic ability, as this was affected by damage to this area. Bastiaanse & Edwards (2004) however found that the same function was also evident in patients with Wernicke's aphasia. This suggested that the localisation of syntactic functioning is not necessarily located in one specific area of the brain.
Ulman (2000) further criticized Grodzinsky's (2000) claim by suggesting that 'conclusions regarding the function of Broca's region would be less problematic if patients were selected solely on the basis of their lesions' (2000:52). Ulman (2000) suggested that the patients upon which Grodizinsky's claims were based had additional lesions outside Broca's area, and 'even worse, have no reported lesions at all' (e.g. Friedmann & Grodzinsky 1997).
The selection of subjects has proven problematic in the study of aphasia. Edwards (2005) notes that diagnosis is a fundamental issue in that individuals may diagnose patients differently depending on experience in the field. Aphasics can also be diagnosed via non-aphasic testing. Equally certain methods can be interpreted differently, Kerschensteineral. (1972) for example found that the fluency continuum was problematic in diagnosis as six aphasic speakers remained unclassified. Although there are standard characteristics associated with the different types of aphasia these can overlap or may not be evident under limited testing sessions. Research into localization suggest that patients experiencing certain symptoms will have lesions which correlate. For example: Non-fluent speech correlates with Broca's aphasia. However making generalisations into the localization of all language is limited by taking into account the selection of subjects. In order to limit the variables in research, patients are selected according to certain specific criteria. However as Basso et.al (2000) note as the patients are 'essentially right-handed, unilingual, literate adults who speak a language without tonal oppositions and write with an alphabetic or kindred code' (2000:202) they only represent one-fourth of the human population. However as humans have language and their brains are ultimately the same it should be presumed that the location of language would also be the same. Therefore if localisation theories are to be accepted they should be expected to include bilinguals, illiterates and populations who speak tone languages but Bassoal. (1985) suggest 'there is reason to doubt these concepts apply in toto' (1985:227).
There is also criticism that the localisationists' research fails to compare to normal speakers. Young & Hutchinson (2000) suggest that there is no assurance that all 'neurologically normal competent speakers would perform ideally' (2000:54) to the tasks that aphasics struggle with. This suggests that the research of localising language functions within the brain pays little attention to normal functioning brains. Dick & Bates (2000) suggest that when research has been done on normal brains evidence has shown that 'Broca's area itself is involved in many different linguistic and non-linguistic tasks' (2000:29) This could explain why diagnosing the specific features of Broca's aphasia is difficult as it is suggested that the area performs many functions. This weakens the localisationist argument that specific language functions are solely located in this area of the brain.
It is also important to look at how group studies and individual studies can inform our knowledge about the localisation of functions within the brain. The argument adopted by the functional analysis approach claims that 'agrammatism' is a result of the 'dysarthia' because the patient simplifies his speech purposely. This is so as to produce the fewest words possible as pronunciation is difficult for them. It is important to note that if the functional account of the co-occurrence of symptoms is correct then 'the symptoms in question should always co-occur because both are a consequence of the same functional disturbance' (Caplan 1987:35). If we look at group studies the symptoms should in theory be universal across everyone. Thus all damage to that particular area of the brain should result in the same language deficiency. In practice, matters are much more complex. Caplan notes that often published studies do not 'show consistent groupings of symptoms or subjects' (1987:152). It is often possible to find explanations for 'exceptions to symptom groupings' (1987:35). Caplan (1987) notes how individuals may be exceptional in the way their cognitive functions are organized thus the disturbances they experience may lead to different overall disturbances. For example; a person may speak by accessing purely motor representations bypassing auditory memories of the sounds of words. Therefore a disturbance of permanent memories for the sounds of words might lead to a disturbance in comprehension with disturbances in spontaneous speech. This indicates that although we can map certain language processes within the brain it is sometimes difficult to generalize as there are exceptions to how individuals may function. The patient you are looking at could either be an exception or representative of many. However, it is therefore interesting to note that 'there are very few examples of associations of symptoms which hold reliably across any number of patients' (Caplan 1987:36). Inter-individual variability suggests that making inferences about groups of patients is difficult, as there can be exceptions which weaken the exact theory of localization.
Broca's original findings suggested that lateralisation of the brain meant that the left hemisphere was dominant for language use. This was originally hypothesised by Broca when after his patient's death he discovered damage to the left hand side of the brain. His patient had paralysis to the right hand side and severe language problems. Therefore Broca concluded that language was controlled by the left hemisphere. This has been further proven by experiments such as the dichotic listening task. This test found that most of input into the right ear goes to the left hemisphere of the brain and this became known as the right ear advantage. However recent research has claimed that suggestions that the left hemisphere is exclusive in language representation are 'no longer sustainable' (Cappaal. 2000:27). It must be noted that speech can still be understood via the left ear too. There are two key reasons as to why this is; firstly 'the auditory pathways to the brain are not completely crossed' (Libben 1996:424) and secondly information between the two hemispheres can be transmitted across a 'bundle of fibres'(1996:424) known as the corpus callosum. Studies on 'split-brain' individuals whereby the corpus callosum is severed show interesting findings. Libben (1996) concludes that from the behaviour of split-brain patients 'that although the right hemisphere does show some language understanding, it is mute' (1996:424). For example when blindfolded the patients could name an object in their right hand but not when it was placed in their left hand. This showed that 'the right hemisphere, which receives information from the left hand, knows what is there, but it can neither put this into words nor transfer the information across the severed corpus callosum to the left brain' (1996:424). Both the above experiments supported Broca's theory of lateralisation. However more recent research has placed more emphasis on the role of the right hemisphere on language. Although the left hemisphere is seen to be the more dominant side in language the right side contributes more than was originally thought. Libben (1996) for example notes how in some adults the removal of the left cerebral hemisphere results in most 'but not all of their linguistic competence' (1996:417). This shows that the right hemisphere does play a role in language and that certain language features could be localised in the right hand side of the brain. It is suggested that the right hemisphere has a distinct role in the normal language use of humans as those with damage to this side of the brain 'exhibited difficulty in understanding jokes and metaphors in everyday conversation' (1996:419). Patients with such damage were only able to take the literal meaning of a figurative sentence. Cappa et.al (2000) claim that neuroimaging work has shown 'right brain involvement in both language comprehension and production' (2000:28). These findings suggest that language functions are located across the brain and may not just be limited to the left hemisphere. Having said this it is important to note that it is generally agreed that complex grammar skills are localized to only one hemisphere (Lustepal. 1995).
Research into the location of language within the brain is ongoing. Using aphasic patients to help locate specific language functions within the brain has helped to suggest certain theories. Over the years it has become more clear that although the left hemisphere is dominant in language the right hemisphere does have a role to play. Lesions to particular areas of the brain do for the majority of the time cause specific language deficits however it is still unclear as to the 'precise topography and extent of cerebral damage required to produce Broca's aphasia' (Levine & Sweet 1983:185), thus it is difficult to make associations between lesion location and lesion damage. As I have discussed, findings have shown that there can be 'exceptions' as to where the lesion is located and the type of aphasia found. Although these findings are limited to single case studies and may be down to inter-individual variability they provide enough doubt to suggest that localisation of specific language functions within the brain is not as clear cut as originally thought.