The teaching of reading involve two main routes, the lexical route and the sub-lexical route. The lexical route involves a teaching of words as a whole. Goodman (1996: 91) who supported the whole-word theory of reading suggested that 'an efficient reader uses only enough information from the published text to be effective'. This has been disputed by many who place more emphasis on the 'graphophonic system' (Gough and Wren, 1999:67) and the individual role of letters and words rather than whole texts. Adams (1990:105) suggests 'the single immutable fact about skilful reading is that it involves relatively complete processing of the individual letters in print'. This theory places more emphasis on the sub-lexical route whereby decoding via grapheme-phoneme correspondence is vital.
Goodman's (1967) most significant claim was that reading was a 'guessing game'. His theory suggested that skilled readers use context to anticipate the words in a text therefore do not need to decode every word. Contrary to this theory is the more recent idea that a skilled reader is someone who can decode automatically without being conscious of it (Field: 2003). This theory also suggests that 'less skilled readers rely heavily on context' (Perfetti 1999:43) as a substitute for poor decoding skills.
It has been claimed that reading involves a dual-route, combining both the lexical and sub-lexical routes. This essay will seek to identify to what extent readers rely on decoding and to challenge the misconceptions of the role of context. These misconceptions include the varied uses of context amongst skilled and less skilled readers, eye movements in reading and the demands on working memory.
The extent to which a reader relies on context depends heavily on the readers level of skill. Recent research has discovered that 'context aids poor readers more than good' (Nicholson:1991 cited in Gough & Wren: 1999:72) and that it is used by less skilled readers as a support for weak decoding skills. Perfetti suggests that 'less skilled readers are slower in identifying words, because they lack basic word identification skill; thus they are able to benefit from the additional boost of context' (1999:46). This emphasises the importance of decoding. In the case of an unskilled reader external sources can be used to help give clues to work out what a word is likely to mean.
Once readers have mastered the skill of decoding context can be used in order to interpret the meaning of the text. Perfetti suggests that 'the hallmark of skilled reading is fast context-free word identification combined with a rich context-dependent text understanding' (1999:46). Stanovich (1980) suggests that to a skilled reader context can be used to 'enrich understanding' (cited in Field 2003:121). Yuill and Oakhill (1991) expand on this by suggesting that 'skilled readers adjust their reading goals, makes inferences, use the context, and monitor their comprehension during reading' (cited in Perfetti 1999:44). Context is a necessary component of understanding but unlike Goodman suggested it is not an effective substitute for decoding skills.
Goodman's (1967) theory that reading is a 'guessing game' suggests that readers do not need to decode every word as they can use context to anticipate them. This implies that readers can skip over words. Research on eye-movements in reading, however, suggest that this is not the case. In order for the eyes to gain information they must be at rest, fixated on a specific region of the text. When the eyes move in rapid saccades there is no information gained. Perfetti suggested that the 'idea that skilled reading involves a strategy of sparse sampling words coupled with a heavy use of context' (1999:44) cannot be supported.
Rayner and Pollatsek (1989) demonstrated the limits of peripheral vision in actual reading. They suggested that the eyes can only make out 4-6 spaces to the right of the eye's fixation. This suggests that readers can only make out one word and possibly the first couple of letters of the following word. The idea that context can be used to guess words is therefore unfounded. Perfetti concluded that 'readers must read lots of words in order to read effectively' (1999:45).
However it is important to note that the readers technique can be affected by the purpose of reading. Reading for gist, for example, can involve fewer eye fixations than reading to answer questions (Just and Carpenter, 1987). Oakhill & Garnham suggest that 'skilled readers are therefore people who can get information that they want from a text efficiently' (1988:7).
It has also been found that there are shorter fixation times for predictable words, (Ehrlich and Rayner, (1981) however unlike Goodman suggested 'this context effect does not extend to skipping words' (Perfetti 1999:45). Despite being predictable, words still have to be read.
As it has been discovered fixations are necessary in order for information to be gained from a word. Interestingly both skilled and less skilled readers appear to make the same number of fixations, however, as Field notes 'what marks out less skilled reading is a much higher level of regression' (2003:75). Regression is not only used more by less skilled readers but it is also used for a different purpose. Field suggests that regression in skilled reading is often associated with building higher-level meaning, regression in unskilled reading however 'usually serves to check that words have been correctly decoded'. (2003:75). This again supports the idea that decoding is paramount in the process of reading.
Goodman's (1967) key argument was that readers use context to predict the words they are reading. There are two main problems with Goodman's argument. Firstly is the idea that very few words are predictable. Fischler and Bloom (1979) suggested that predictability must be near 0.9 before context can assist a word's recognition, however very few content words reach this level. A study by Gough and Wren (1999) suggested that only 40% of function words and 10% of content words could be correctly anticipated. This is a very low figure and the authors concluded that 'it would be a waste of the reader's time to try and predict them; he or she is better off simply recognising them' (Gough & Wren: 1999:73). Ellis goes on to suggest that certain words may not necessarily be predictable but more familiar 'some words are recognised more easily than others' (1993:14).
The second problem with Goodman's argument is that using context makes more demands on the reader. Context use is 'more under the conscious control of the reader... because of this, they make considerable demands upon Working Memory' (Field, 2003:25). Baddeley (1986) suggests that the capacity of the Working Memory is known to be strictly limited. Because of this Goodman's theory does not hold much strength as it has been found that skilled readers make less use of context. Decoding is highly automatic in a skilled reader 'this means that they make few demands upon Working Memory, leaving capacity for higher level processes such as building overall meaning' (Field, 2003:25). This suggests that the aim of a skilled reader is automatic decoding. Perfetti's (1985) 'Verbal efficiency theory' suggests that 'with less skilled readers the decoding process is more controlled (i.e. conscious), the burden upon Working memory is greater leaving fewer resources for meaning building'. (cited in Field, 2003:121). He goes on to suggest that the slow decoding in unskilled readers results in smaller amounts of information being supplied to Working memory. 'This leads to a focus upon local rather than global meaning relations' (cited in Field 2003:121. This supports the idea that context is used in less skilled readers to support them when their decoding is weak.
Stanovich proposed that 'word recognition by skilled readers dealing with common words that are clearly written is so fast and automatic that contextual priming is unnecessary' (Ellis, 1993:20). This supports the idea that in skilled readers the ultimate aim is quick and efficient decoding. This can been seen through two tests (Appendix 2). The first test, the stroop test, challenges the reader to overpower the automatic decoding they have been trained to do as a skilled reader. When asked to name the word (not the colour) the reader will often struggle. This is the same with the second test whereby upon closer inspection the shapes of the letters are similar. The 'H' resembles an 'A' but reader can still recognise the intended phrase. This shows how reading processes have become automatised. Such automatic processes make few demands on working memory.
Gough and Wren (1999) disputed the findings of Goodman (1973) in their own miscue analysis task when they found very few miscues in their own results. They suggested that 'the fact seems to be that skilled readers, reading a text like those they usually read, do so very accurately' (1999:63).
By conducting a miscue analysis on 3 students I attempted to see if my findings supported the theory of Goodman.
All three students were considered to be 'skilled' readers as they had no learning problems. They were all competent readers and had to regularly read university level texts as part of their degree courses. None of the students were familiar with the linguistic/scientific text I asked them to read.
All three appeared to have difficulty with the two words 'sulci' and 'gyri', technical terminology for parts of the brain. All three pronounced the words differently and paused before them. The fact that the students pronounced them differently suggested that they were using analogy to read the words.
For example:
Apart from these words there were very few errors. The students made a total of 3 false starts and occasionally paused before unfamiliar words.
The most interesting errors came when the reader misread an unfamiliar word, replacing it with a familiar word. For example: 'automatically' for 'anatomically'
Or made consistent errors, for example 'cerebal' or 'cerebrial' for 'cerebral'
These errors seemed to me to occur because of the less frequent letter combination of 'ral' compared to 'al' or 'ial'. This supported the idea that automatic decoding can become so strong it can be difficult to overrule.
Few of the words in the texts could have been predicted using the context despite the readers level of skill. The findings of this small test showed that the readers used analogies in order to read unfamiliar words.
Goodman (1967) also supported his 'guessing game' argument with a test by Gollasch. His subjects read a text containing 6 errors (see Appendix 3). Despite being told that there were errors in the text very few were able to relay all the errors. Goodman suggested that since the readers did not report the errors, those errors did not affect their reading or understanding of the text. Gough and Wren however dispute this suggesting that 'while they are still able to see past (or through) these errors and arrive at a correct interpretation of the story these errors do make meaning construction more difficult' (1999:68). They came to this conclusion by looking at reading-time data, sentences containing errors were read slower. This again helps to suggest that decoding is an important part of reading, more so than context.
Context is clearly important in gaining an overall understanding of a text but it has been suggested that Goodman's account of reading 'more accurately characterises beginning readers than skilled readers'. (Oakhill & Garnham 1988:33). It is important to note that 'the use of context decreases as reading skill increases' (Oakhill & Garnham, 1988:86). Crucially the way context is used also varies depending on the readers skill. Oakhill and Garnham suggest that 'context is more important for ambiguous words', for example, 'bug' could refer to an insect or a spy/surveillance (1988:13). The role of decoding therefore seems to be more important in current reading theory. Automatic decoding means that readers can identify words with little effort and fewer demands on the working memory. When this skill is mastered context can be used to enhance understanding, Perfetti suggests 'the hallmark of skilled reading is fast context-free word identification combined with a rich context-dependent text understanding' (1999:46). It can therefore be concluded that decoding is an essential part of reading and that context has two roles, depending on the skill of the reader.