System identification is a way of constructing mathematical models for dynamic systems from experimental data. Recursive identification is useful for adaptive control, adaptive estimation and adaptive signal processing. The examples of this are pattern recognition, linear prediction, adaptive filtering, monitoring and fault detection. In control and system engineering, system identification techniques are used to obtain appropriate models of systems. Recursive identification plays a vital role in many control systems such as aircrafts, missiles, automobiles and ships. Dynamic characteristics of such system depend on many factors such as speed and loading, which might change over time. Adaptive control is the area concerned with design of controllers and regulators in order to adjust controlled parameters. This report relating to the use of least squares system identification is separated into three parts corresponding to the questions given and a condition to summarise the report. In part A, a test system is created by producing MATLAB code which can perform the recursive least squares system identification for any given input and output data. Some real data has been given in part B and this data is used to identify the system parameters for a mechanical "master" robot of a master/slave telemanipulator. Part C is the extension of the existing RLS algorithm by including Instrument Variables or a PLS noise model which is based on the moving average model or pseudo linear regression.
In this assignment, the use of least squares system identification was presented. Recursive least squares algorithm was used for the tasks. The test system in part A demonstrated the ability of these algorithms to ensure that the program will work appropriately with the given real data collected from a mechanical "master" robot of a master/slave telemanipulator. Each model was then tested with the same two data sets so that each model can be compared in the same data sets in part B. In general, the test results illustrate that recursive least squares algorithm is effective in parameter estimation and modeling. Determining the appropriate model structure and model validation can be achieved by using the loss function or the Mean Square Error. Based on these results, it seems that Model3 using ARX model is optimal model for model representation of this dynamic system. In part C, the algorithms was implemented by using RLS algorithm including either Instrument Variables (IV) or a Moving Average noise model based on Pseudo Linear Regression in order to improve parameter estimation. The Model3 which seem to be appropriate model in part B was compared with all models in part C called IV model, ARMAX1 and ARMAX2 model. The result of this is that the IV model may do well on an increase in the rate of convergence, but it is difficult to see a noticeably improvement in performance. Pseudo linear regression for ARMAX model and instrumental variable method may overcome the problems which the disturbance v(t) is not white noise. To check this, autocorrelation and cross-correlation test should be implemented, but such tasks are beyond the scope of this assignment.