Over the last several years, many chemists worldwide have tried to form desired products by stimulating chemical reaction. Traditionally, control agents used in chemical synthesis are microscopic variables. They change such variables like pressure, temperature and concentration or combine reagents in such a process. These stimuli cannot yield products by changing such thermodynamic variables and the combination of reagents also forms unwanted byproducts (Dahleh et al., 1996). One possible way to deal with this problem is to control the motion of molecular in chemical reaction. Since the invention of ultrafast laser technology, it is possible to control the motion of atoms, molecules, nuclei or even electrons by using the laser pulse shaping techniques. The duration of the shortest pulse changed from the nanosecond regime to the femtosecond regime. The reason for this is that the maximum speed of electronic light modulation device limits direct shaping in time to nanosecond regime (Krumpert, 2004).
Currently, femtosecond laser pulses can be generated directly from an optically pumped Ti:sapphire Kerr lens mode-locked laser oscillator (Krumpert, 2004). With the advancement in femtosecond laser technology, a large number of scientists attempt to develop optical methods which use coherent light source or laser radiation to manipulate and control the outcome of chemical reactions in the gas and liquid phase by mean of controlling the behaviour of atoms and molecules. To achieve this, chemical bonds on a microscopic level can be broken or made suitably without harmful byproducts. The optimal approach using in this process is the computer-controlled femtosecond laser pulses shaping combined with learning algorithms in feedback loop or a self-learning loop. These algorithms called evolutionary algorithms are used to optimise the shapes of such laser pulses with durations on the same time scale as the motion of the atoms or molecules.
Evolutionary algorithms (EAs) are a set of global, parallel, search and optimization methods, which mimic the biological process of natural evolution. The term of evolutionary algorithms was adopted to describe the algorithms like evolutionary programming (EP) by Fogel, Owen and Walsh, evolution strategies (ES) by Rechenberg and Schwefel, genetic algorithms (GA) by Holland, genetic programming (GP) by Koza and classifier systems (Michalewicz and Fogel, 2000). Evolutionary algorithms are inspired by the idea of evolution using the principles of natural selection. These methods are robust tools, which is able to tacking the problems that cannot be solved by using conventional means. The main benefit of this optimization method in molecular control is no requirement of priori knowledge of the mechanism of the complex system. This essay will describes in what way the evolutionary algorithm methodology has been applied to molecular control. Fundamental of evolutionary algorithms will be firstly described and then evolutionary algorithms in adaptive femtosecond pulse shaping as well as optimal quantum control will be described later.
Evolutionary algorithms are a class of search methods with noticeable balance between exploitation of the best solutions and exploration of the search space. This methodology combines elements of directed and stochastic search. They are, therefore, more robust than existing directed search methods (Michalewicz, 1999). Evolutionary algorithms simulate the natural selection process by using a number (population) of random individuals (potential solutions to the problem) to evolve through certain procedures. Each individual within the population is represented through some form of genetic code as a string of numbers (bit strings, integer, or floating point numbers) in similar way with chromosomes in nature. Each individual's quality within the population is represented by a fitness function tailored to the problem to be optimised. In other words, a fitness value expresses how good the solution to the problem is.
Evolutionary algorithms begin to work by generating randomly the initial chromosome population with their genes taking values inside the desired constrained space. Each individual's fitness function is then evaluated after Initialisation of population. A set of stochastic genetic operators, manipulating the genetic code is used to perform evolution. Such operators are applied to the population, simulating the according natural processes. These operators are selection, recombination and mutation, which are used to provide the next generation chromosomes. The recombination known as crossover operator creates new chromosomes (offspring) by the exchange of genetic material between chromosomes (parents) or different potential solution to the problem. Two randomly selected chromosomes are divided in the same (random) position, whereas the first part of the one is connected to the second part of the second one, and vice versa. The mutation operator creates new chromosomes by a small change in a randomly selected gene of a chromosome. This operator is used to introduce some extra variability into the population. The process of a new generation evaluation and creation is successively repeated, providing individuals with high values of fitness function.
A lot of research in the field of quantum control was developed remarkably, resulting from the implementation of femtosecond laser pulse shaping, combined with learning loop. Femtosecond Fourier-domain laser pulse shaping has been developed by Weiner and his colleagues (Weiner et al., 1992) and refined by Wafers and Nelson (Wafers and Nelson, 1995). Fourier transform pulse shapers using spatial light modulators, based on spatial masking of the spatially dispersed optical frequency spectrum, play a vital role in controlling the waveforms of ultrafast optical pulse (Weiner, 2000). Several different types of spatial light modulators have been used for femtosecond laser pulse shaping, including liquid crystal modulator arrays (LCMs) (Weiner et al., 1992; Wafers and Nelson, 1995), acousto-optic modulator (AOM) (Hillegas, 1994) and deformable mirrors (Garduno-Mejia et al., 2004).
The experimental implementation of the design of laser sequences which have the ability to drive a reaction into a desired final state has been difficult to achieve. This is because of the complicated nature of molecular Hamiltonians. The theoretical approach using optimal control theory to solve the problem of quantum control of chemical reactions requires precise knowledge of molecular Hamiltonian. Currently, the molecular Hamiltonian can only be calculated to solve Schrdinger's equation for small model systems which contain up to two or three atoms. This approach, however, limits for chemically relevant larger or more complicated molecules because the accuracy of such calculated or measured molecular potential energy surfaces is not sufficient. Another problem is the uncertainties of experimental apparatus; hence, it is not technically feasible to generate the complex laser fields exactly the same as laser fields which is demanded by the theory. This may cause the errors of laser pulse generation. The design based on an approximate Hamiltonian may not be robust. A solution to this problem was proposed by Judson and Rabitz in their work called 'Teaching Lasers to Control Molecules' (Judson and Rabitz, 1992). This technique includes the output of the experiment in the optimization algorithm as closed loop feedback system in a learning algorithm. The basic idea of this technique is that the quantum control system itself guides an automated search, via a learning loop, for a suitable coherent light fields or optimal laser field. Such a methodology can iteratively improve the shape of the applied laser pulses until an optimum is reached by using the system itself to solve its Schrdinger's equation under the given constraints or laboratory conditions in real-time. Their approach use genetic algorithms to search for the optimal laser field in iteration loop.
As a result of this technique, Baumert and his colleagues suggested a novel experimental methodology to reduce the effort to find the optimal laser pulse (Baumert et al., 1997). This research emphasizes on femtosecond laser pulses compressed by a computer controlled pulse shaping apparatus using an evolutionary algorithm with feedback loop to control a programmable liquid crystal spatial light modulator based on the design of Weineral. (Weiner et al., 1992). This technique requires no previous knowledge of intensity or phase profile of femtosecond laser pulses. Such a technique is extremely useful in the field of short pulse microscopy, two photon microscopy, ultrafast soft X-ray generation, in particular ultrashort spectroscopy such as femtosecond quantum control of chemical reactions. Another example of femtosecond laser pulse shapers with learning algorithms used for automated pulse compression is reported by Brixner and his coworkers (Brixner et al., 1999). In this experiment, a femtosecond laser pulse shaper based on a liquid crystal display spatial light modulator together with a feedback-controlled evolutionary algorithm was used to optimise complex phase-modulated laser pulses. This leads to bandwidth-limited amplified laser pulses. Feedback-controlled femtosecond laser pulse shaping has been developed later by Brixner and his colleagues (Brixner et al., 2000). The combination of a frequency domain phase shaper with an evolutionary algorithm and different pulse characterization methods can compensate for any phase deviation. In the design of arbitrary laser pulse shapes, an evolutionary algorithm can be employed to optimise generation of arbitrary laser pulse shapes.
Quantum systems and quantum-mechanical wave functions are three-dimensional objects, but conventional pulse shaping accesses only the scalar properties of ultrashort laser pulses. The control of the vectorial properties of the electric laser field by the use of polarization as active agent can access the three-dimensional dynamics of quantum-mechanical wave functions (Brixner et al., 2001). A novel computer-controlled femtosecond pulse shaping technique was, therefore, introduced. In this methodology, the polarization state of light, the temporal intensity and the momentary oscillation frequency can be manipulated as a function of time within a single femtosecond. This research uses a pulse shaper with a 256-pixel two-layer liquid-crystal display inside a zero-dispersion compressor to modulate the degree of polarization ellipticity and the orientation of the elliptical principal axes within a single laser pulse. Brixner and his coworkers also demonstrated the generation and complete characterization of polarization-shaped femtosecond laser pulses (Brixner et al., 2002). In this experiment, the light polarization, the temporal intensity and the momentary frequency were arbitrarily changed within a single pulse. The generation and analysis of polarization-shaped femtosecond laser pulses was then combined with the optimization algorithm within a learning loop and the experimental feedback (Brixner et al., 2003). This experiment uses second-harmonic generation (SHG) to serves as a feedback signal in the learning algorithm. An evolutionary algorithm is used to iteratively improve the phase-modulated and polarization-modulated laser pulses. Two optimization strategies were compared in this experiment: phase-only shaping and polarization shaping. The optimization results of polarization shaping are better than that of phase-only shaping. The experimental implementation of shaping of femtosecond polarization profiles within an adaptive learning loop raises the possibility of generation of femtosecond light field in which the scalar and the vectorial properties are optimised automatically. This methodology can be also applied for adaptive polarization quantum control experiment with the feedback signal taken from quantum system itself.
There is a large amount evidence of the progress in using evolutionary algorithms for optimal quantum control in order to control the molecule in chemical reaction. Feedback quantum control of the electronic population transfer in a dye molecule is one of such evidence. Traditionally, time domain quantum control needs the calculations of quantum dynamic to find the optimal laser field. This method requires knowledge of the molecular potential energy surfaces, whereas feedback quantum control in a molecular system uses a computer program based on genetic algorithms to analyses the experimental output from detector in order to optimise population transfer from ground to first excited state and then control an acousto-optic pulse shaping device in order to excite fluorescence from the laser dye molecule IR125 in methanol solution (Bardeen et al., 1997). The advantage of feedback quantum control is no requirement of a priori knowledge of the molecule's potential energy surfaces. Another advantage of such an approach is that the optimal solution given constraint can be automatically found by a control computer with optimization algorithms. This feedback control approach might be extended to several physical and chemical processes.
Some research, however, shows that the achievement of the optimization without dealing with the electronic population transfer within the parent molecule is possible. Assion and his coworkers, for example, introduced the automated optimization of coherent control of independent chemical reaction channel using a computer controlled femtosecond laser pulse shaper including an evolutionary algorithm as well as closed loop feedback system from the femtosecond laser-driven photodissociation reaction output (Assion et al., 1998). Femtosecond laser pulses in their research are modified in a computer-controlled pulse shaper based on the design of Weineral. (Weiner et al., 1992). An evolutionary algorithm was also implemented to optimise the spectral phase of the femtosecond laser pulses. In addition, a reflectron time-of-flight (TOF) mass spectrometer was used to record ionic fragments from molecular photodissociation and then feed feedback signal directly into a control computer together with an evolutionary algorithm. Two substances: Fe(CO)5 (iron pentacarbonyl) and CpFe(CO)2Cl (dicarbonychloro(5-cyclopentadienyl)iron) were chosen to perform experiment. The results show that a change from electronic population transfer to direct control of different reaction channels can be achieved by optimizing final product yields in the photodissociation reactions of two different organometallic molecules without prior knowledge of the molecular system of the sample substance. This may be the advance in the synthesis of chemical substances together with reducing unwanted byproducts.
In addition, Bergt and his colleagues carry out their research on active control of the femtosecond photodissociation and ionization reactions of Fe(CO)5 (iron pentacarbonyl) in the gas phase (Bergt et al., 1999). Their research used the combination of an evolutionary algorithm and feedback loop in femtosecond laser pulse shaping system to investigate the Fe(CO)5/Fe branching ratio, the possibility of using second- harmonic generation (SHG) between the output of a 800 nm pulse shaper and the molecular beam apparatus to optimise dissociation reactions with 400 nm phase-shaped laser pulses and the adjustment of the balance between the optimization of the desired branching ratio and the optimization of the absolute photoproduct yields. The evidence shows that Fe(CO)5 dissociation reaction cannot be describe as intensity-dependent. This is because a completely different behaviour results from different types of intensity variation. In other words, the change in intensity by the variation of pulse duration leads to a behavior opposite intensity alteration by the variation of pulse energy. This is called 'problem of inversion'. Furthermore, second- harmonic generation (SHG) can be used after the output of a 800 nm pulse shaper to implement 400 nm phase-shaped laser pulses automate coherent control experiments. Finally, tuning automated coherent experiments from an optimization of mainly the photoproduct yield ratios toward optimization of the absolute mass signal can be achieved by a suitable choice of weighting factors in the fitness function. It can be said that evolutionary laser pulse shaping is a very useful to the processes of photoinduced chemical reactions.
All demonstrations as mention above have highlighted the control of the outcome of photoinduced chemical reactions in which molecules are identical. Brixner and his coworkers report on controlling mixtures of different molecules, which is 'photoselective adaptive femtosecond quantum control in the liquid phase' (Brixner et al., 2001). Two methodologies were investigated in this experiment. These schemes are the use of single parameter quantum control schemes involving variation of wavelength, pulse energy and linear chirp, and also the use of many parameter adaptive quantum control using a femtosecond laser pulse shaper to generate complex pulse shapes by spectral phase modulation. This research show the achievement of chemically selective molecular excitation in liquid phase by many parameter adaptive quantum control without using knowledge of molecular properties in optimisation procedure. Such a technique may be applied to chemical analysis, bimolecular reaction control or multi-photon fluorescence microscopy. Moreover, not only is an evolutionary algorithm also used for adaptive femtosecond quantum control experiments in molecules in which using specific optimisation goals within a given system, but it is also used to investigate if the optimised laser fields are specific to a certain molecule. Bergt and his coworkers report their work on 'Time-resolved organometallic photochemistry Femtosecond fragmentation and adaptive control of CpFe(CO)2X (X=Cl, Br, I)' (Bergt et al., 2002). This experiment shows that adaptive femtosecond pulse shaping is sensitive to discover and exploit the difference in the investigated metal complexes. Adaptive control can also find pulse shapes which are specific even for chemically very similar molecules.
In the development of optimal quantum control, there is some experiment relating to adaptive femtosecond quantum control in a liquid-phase environment. Such experiment apply femtosecond adaptive pulse shaping of 800-nm laser pulses to control over the multiphoton charge-transfer excitation of a [Ru(dpb)3](PF 6)2 (where dpb =4,4'-diphenyl-2,2'-bipyridine) coordination complex dissolved in methanol using adaptive femtosecond pulse shaping within 128-parameter search space (Brixner et al., 2003). Their research show that the dominant intensity dependence of the multiphoton excitation process can be removed from adaptive quantum control experiments by using second-harmonic generation (SHG) as a general "reference" signal. Hence, specific properties of molecular systems can be made visible. This technique might be very useful in many applications such as multiphoton microscopy, chemical analysis and in the preparation of specific reactants for photocontrolled bimolecular reactions.
There is some advance in manipulating light-matter interaction in three dimensions using complex polarization-modulated laser pulses. A new level of the control of quantum system is introduced by Brixner and his colleagues. In their work, quantum control by ultrafast polarization shaping was carried out (Brixner et al., 2004). This experiment use flexible and automated polarization and phase shaping of femtosecond laser pulses in combination with an evolutionary algorithm to control molecular dynamics and maximize ionization of potassium dimmer molecules (K 2) from a supersonic molecular beam. Two types of adaptive control experiments to maximise the K 2 + yield: spectral polarization-and-phase laser pulse shaping as well as phase-only shaping were performed. The comparison of optimisations of K 2 + yield shows that polarization laser pulse shaping is superior to phase-only shaping. This is because the vectorial electric field is able to adapt to the time evolution of the polarization-dependent transition dipole moments. In this way, quantum control in a molecular model system may be achieved. Furthermore, some evidence shows that adaptive femtosecond pulse shaping is able to control isomerization reactions of a complex molecule in the liquid phase by optimizing the ratios of the cis and trans isomers in a multi-parameter optimal control experiment (Vogt et al., 2005). This seems to be a first step towards controlled stereoselectivity in photochemistry.
This essay has presented the survey of evolutionary algorithms methodology and has sought to highlight the experimental application of evolutionary algorithms to molecular control. The evolutionary algorithms for molecular control have been proved to be a very useful tool in adaptive femtosecond quantum control. Many different scientific fields like physics, chemistry or biology can benefit from this methodology, in particular chemical reaction dynamics. Evolutionary algorithms are flexible optimisation tool for the experiment of adaptive femtosecond quantum control. The control parameters can be represented in a natural fashion, as can the performance specifications. The optimisation method can be tuned to a great extent to the problem at hand. Evolutionary algorithms have been proved to be significant and successful in the effective development of adaptive femtosecond pulse shaping and femtosecond optimal quantum control. There are a number of examples where the technique has been used for automated pulse compression, optimised generation and characterisation of arbitrary laser pulse shapes and also adaptive femtosecond polarization pulse shaping. In addition to this, there has been a growth in implementation of this technique for quantum optical control. A number of example have included control of molecular electronic population transfer, control of photodissociation product distributions, control of photoselectivity in the liquid phase, control of organometallic molecules in the gas phase, control of multiphoton charge-transfer excitation in the liquid phase, control by ultrafast polarization shaping and control of photoisomerization. Numerous quantum systems and particularly molecules undergoing chemical reaction in either gas or liquid phase have been controlled by the use of either a femtosecond phase-only pulse shaper or a femtosecond polarization pulse shaper in combination with an evolutionary algorithm as an optimisation algorithm in a learning loop with experimental feedback. These methods can be applied to many challenges in physical, chemical and biological research.
The future use of evolutionary algorithms for molecular control is ties fundamentally to general advance in evolutionary algorithms itself and the novel technologies of femtosecond laser pulse shaping and adaptive femtosecond quantum control. The continued progress in computer technology will permit further realization of the evolutionary algorithms method's potential. The main problem with evolutionary algorithms is the large amount of computation required to formulate a good solution. However, the increased availability of low-cost, high performance computing and the advancement in parallel architecture will be great advantage. The combination of an evolutionary algorithm with complementary means to create hybrid algorithms as a novel evolutionary algorithm for adaptive femtosecond quantum control is seen as crucial in order to create a fully effective tool. An example of this is that the use of genetic algorithm with differential evolution may provide the improvement of convergence rate. A novel adaptive femtosecond quantum control technique is likely to open the door to a number of new experimental schemes exploiting certain aspects in quantum system such as the generation of attosecond light pulses or stereoselectivity in photochemistry. Furthermore, evolutionary algorithms may play a vital role in the development of adaptive femtosecond laser pulse shaping for coherent control of complex biological and synthetic biomimetic systems in the future.