It could be argued that the films to be analysed are all, in their own different ways, effective vehicles of propaganda. This paper will firstly seek to establish an appropriate definition of propaganda, and to judge what makes good cinema propaganda. It will then go on to examine the specific "themes" of propaganda present in Kuhle Wampe, Hitlerjunge Quex and Triumph des Willens comparing and contrasting these portrayals and, in an attempt to establish how effective each work is as a vehicle of propaganda, examine what effect they would have had on a viewer during the Third Reich and the Weimar Republic.
Richard Taylor states that "propaganda is an attempt either unconsciously or part of a systematic campaign by an individual or group holding certain beliefs or desired ends, to influence others to adopt identical attitudes." It is an attempt to create a uniform system of beliefs or attitudes amongst a target audience and can be done through numerous ways be it visually, the use of the spoken word or a combination of the two. The systematic propagation of a doctrine or cause however, is useless without an audience; by far the most effective means of propaganda will play on the target's emotions and will often, but not specifically, be most successful paraded "under the disguise of "information"". The key to its success lies in the strength of the relationship between the subject matter and the audience. To determine whether propaganda firstly as general concept can be effective I will use the example of Nazi propaganda: towards the end of the Second World War after Hitler's defeat in his personal crusade to take Stalingrad, fanatical resistance was still being put up by the German populace, even when all appeared to be lost and "the fact that these wretches were made to go on fighting for a worthless, evil cause, in which Hitler himself no longer believed, was the lasting achievement of Nazi propaganda."
Goebbels regarded cinema as "one of the most modern means of mass persuasion." The strength of propaganda in the form of film is that it can incorporate the use of the spoken word and sound with the unique power of a visual image. Bramstead views film as a "major instrument of effective propaganda because of its four specific qualities: (1) subjective emotional appeal; (2) limitation of contents; (3) possibility of using it throughout to illustrate the fighting attitude and (4) continuous and uniform repetition." It is also noteworthy that the film genre would enable the crossing of boundaries of class and intellect unlike radio and newspapers respectively. The potential monotony associated with the sound of the pleonastic politician, for example, can be made much more interesting and the rhetoric more understandable when coupled with cinematic montage. The subtle propagandist should manipulate the appeal of film as an escape from reality for the masses and amalgamate art and propaganda to achieve persuasion.
Within the three films in question certain themes of propaganda can be found such as a portrayal of economic or social imbroglio versus nationalistic pride, hope, youth, family values, sacrifice, a call for action and a portrayal of an enemy. However, before examining the leitmotifs of the films themselves, it is important to acknowledge that there are differences in the structure and intentions of the works which also determine their affectivity. Perhaps the most obvious difference to point out is the fact that Hitlerjunge Quex and Triumph des Willens are Nazi propaganda whereas Kuhle Wampe is Communist. The appeals in the films are therefore completely different - whilst the Nazi films appeal to the emotions of the viewer, Kuhle Wampe pitches at a person's reason. However, Kuhle Wampe and Hitlerjunge Quex differ from Triumph des Willens in that they are under the pretence of being merely narrative. Both do deal with myths but whilst Kuhle Wampe is stylised and very much typical of Brechtian irony, Hitlerjunge Quex is portrayed as straight realism. Triumph des Willens is very much staged reality in that whilst it is a documentary most of all the events are staged for the camera - indeed the podiums and stages in the film were constructed with enough space for the camera tracks to run in front of them: "the preparations for the Party Convention were made in connection with preparations for the camera work." It is also significant to note that the events of the Nuremburg Rally are not chronological in the film which shows that it cannot be a true objective documentary and is, in reality, Riefenstahl manipulating the viewer and the events through editing. For example Hitler addressing the S.A. was actually on 9 th September 1934 whereas in the film it comes as the eleventh sequence and after the Review of the Army which was actually on September 10 th.
The structural difference between the two Nazi films can almost be personified using the models of Hitler and Goebbels. Hitler's basic tenet of effective propaganda was that it "must be limited to very few points and must harp on these in slogans until the last member of the public knows what you mean." This comes into play in Triumph des Willens. Goebbels, however, was much more interested in a covert approach and thought that politics and art "could be subtly mixed" as seen in Hitlerjunge Quex.
Perhaps the focus of Riefenstahl's work, as a propaganda tool, in Triumph des Willlens is the depiction of national pride. Indeed the film is a portrayal of might of the Nazi machine. The very title, which was devised by Hitler himself, is significant as it stresses not only the triumphant presence of the Nazis but also includes the 'will' of the nation: "The strength of the nation...[is] seen to lie in the submergence of the individual will in the will of the nation". This concept of nationality is depicted in the symbols of National Socialism; namely the swastika and the eagle, both of which are dominant features throughout the film. The first shot in the film is of the Nazi eagle coupled appropriately with Wagnerian style orchestral music by Herbert Windt. This serves two purposes: firstly the music serves to emphasise the titles by Ruttmann which are hard hitting and this creates the opening sequence to be one of considerable drama. This concept matches David Hinton's belief that "Windt's music plays a key role in forming the audience response to the titles. Beginning with sorrowful, mournful notes that underline the message of the titles." Secondly, Windt's music is chosen in particular to underline the change in tone which is to be introduced towards the next sequence in the film. The mood becomes slightly more positive and just as the titles describe the Reich as the "der deutschen Wiedergeburht" the music reflects this and becomes much more subdued.
The constant images of the two Nazi symbols serve not only to remind the viewer of the presence of Nazism but also to link the two entities of the party and the nation. One particular example is when Hitler addresses the S.A. to reassure them after the Rhm purge on 30 th June 1934 where at one point there is a shot which is completely filled with flags: "nothing can be seen but the flags, which move up, down and forward as if they have a mind of their own." This is an effective propaganda technique as the viewer is mesmerised by not only the number of flags by the movement they make, drawing them further into the film and at the same time further towards National Socialism. The film also ends with S.A. men juxtaposed on the image of a swastika and the fact that the film begins and finishes with Nazi images is significant as they convey a great sense of national pride to the viewer.
This is similar to Hitlerjunge Quex which also ends with the image of the flag and is coupled with the triumphant singing of "Unsere Fahne flatter uns voran". Another similarity between the two Nazi films is the presence of order and pride associated with National Socialism and this is perhaps best seen through the behaviour and dress of the Hitler Jugend (HJ). As in Triumph des Willens the male Nazis are, in almost every scene, shot in uniform with a swastika on their arm. This powerful technique again serves as a constant reminder of the presence of the party and gives the aura of all men proud to fight for Germany, taking her into the future and avenging the Treaty of Versailles. The Nazis in Hitlerjunge Quex are again often shot with flags of the swastika which again is significant as a propaganda tool as it "symbolises the party program, it is the visual epitome of Nazi ideology" which the young boys in Hitlerjunge Quex "understand so well."
In Kuhle Wampe, however, in direct contrast to the tactics of Riefenstahl and Hans Steinhoff, Brecht appeals to the reason not the emotion of the viewer and therefore uses negative images in order to depict the Weimar Republic such as unemployment, depression, abortion and suicide. The first few shots of the film are a montage of newspaper headlines, juxtaposed before the images become specifically the front pages. This would highlight the fact that the situation was becoming increasingly worrying - this is symbolised by the headlines becoming more dramatic and more dominating on the front pages. This montage is coupled with rapid staccato music and this erraticism mirrors the economic and social problems of the time. We see immediately the unemployment figures rising until one headline reads that there are now almost "fnf Millionen Arbeitslose." The issue of unemployment continues when we see the mass of unemployed people scrambling to get hold of a newspaper to see if there are any jobs; they are of course unsuccessful and the camera focuses on the faces of the young men to illustrate their resigned ness. One of the most powerful scenes in the film is that of the hunt of the boys for jobs on their bicycles. The use of close-ups here is particularly interesting; the focus is on the boys' feet and the pedals of the bike moving faster and faster. The music highlights the desperate attempt to search for work and it seems that the faster they pedal the more in vain their quest becomes. The power and effect this image would have on a Weimar audience would be especially strong as Brecht is dealing here with reality and the depression that Germany suffered from 1929 onwards.
It is not only unemployment which Brecht uses to illustrate his dissatisfaction with the Weimar system, many other negative images associated with industry and housing are also prominent throughout the film. All shots of factories in the film are with the camera looking up at black, dirty intimidating buildings - often with large gates preventing the job seekers from entering. The fact that the Bnike family has to live in tents because they have been evicted despite Anni's best efforts - all of which are appropriately in vain - further portrays the social problems associated with Germany in the early 1930s. This technique of Brecht depicting the difficulties of an individual is one of the main differences in propaganda techniques between Kuhle Wampe and the two Nazi films.
Although Kuhle Wampe takes an opposing stance as far as the theme of national pride is concerned, there are glimpses in the film of solidarity and unity. One depiction of this is through the sports festival in which the team members are working together for a common objective. This however, as noticed by Marc Silberman serves predominantly to highlight the censorship which is "camouflaged behind the relatively harmless allegory of mass sports races." Another important issue of solidarity in Brecht's film is the presence of the Solidarittslied and the workers are encouraged to move "Forwrts und nicht vergessen, die Solidaritt." When the song is sung the workers are moving in unison towards their goal but in comparison to the geometric patterns of the masses in Triumph des Willens they are nowhere near as effective. Whereas the workers in Kuhle Wampe appear to be slightly unsettled in their movement, the patterns of people at Nuremburg are mesmeric. Perhaps the best example to note is at the very beginning of the film where the mobility of Riefenstahl's camera work from the air coupled with the dreamy music of Das Horst Wessel Lied (the Nazi anthem) emphasizes the order of the Nazi mass as it moves in unison, snakelike on the streets below. There are also many static scenes of the mass in Triumph des Willens and Riefenstahl manipulates these through the movement of the camera to draw the viewer into the assemblage: "If the subject didn't move, then the camera had to be mobile." One such example is when Hitler S.A. Chief Lutze and S.S. Chief Himmler walk down the aisle between thousands of S.A. men towards the War Memorial, the cameras here were installed on flagpoles to emphasise the enormity of the occasion. Hitlerjunge Quex includes this theme of motion as a metaphoric depiction of the enemy, namely the Communists; one such example is at the fairground where the circular motion hints perhaps that they are not progressing in stark contrast to the linear advancement associated with the Nazis.
The idea of unity is also fundamental in Hitlerjunge Quex and is portrayed in one example through the HJ leader who, when talking to Herr Vlker, suggests that everyone born "in unserem Deutschland" should be as one in the quest for the avengement of German grievances. Here we see the importance of emotive and personal language as a tool of propaganda to inspire the viewer and more importantly to relate the film to them as an individual as part of the ideally portrayed aggregate. Another example is when the HJ leader is discussing with Heini's father what should be done about his future the winning argument comes from the leader who after asking Herr Vlker where he comes from says "Ja...in Deutschland - in unserem Deutschland. " The employment of the words 'uns' and 'wir' gives the viewer a real sense of a belonging to the National Socialism phenomenon and that it is a common goal to be fought for. The two Nazi films use language often as a tool for an appeal to the emotion of the viewer and his lust for patriotism. In Triumph des Willens the moments of demagoguery for the most part belong to Hitler - when thanking the S.A. and the S.S. for their loyalty Hitler vociferates: "Wir stehen zusammen!"
The theme of hope is also an important propaganda technique. In Triumph des Willens Riefenstahl uses the Frherprinzip as a call for action. Hitlerjunge Quex hints that National Socialism is the best means to combat the social deprivation associated with the Communists whereas Kuhle Wampe insists that solidarity among the disconcerted masses is the answer. Triumph des Willens is dominated by Hitler's demagoguery and was described by Goebbels as "a great cinematic vision of the Fhrer, here seen for the first time with a forcefulness which has not previously been revealed." Hitler when speaking always addresses large numbers of people and enjoys a fervent response. His language is also extremely inspirational and when coupled with his oratory is an extremely powerful propaganda tool. One feels part of the crowd when being asked by Hitler to unite and fight for Germany. Riefenstahl manipulates his special talent through her camera work and the Fhrer is often looked up at through the lens elevating him and making him all the more powerful. These low-angled shots and this technique can be traced back to "Renaissance aesthetics when statues were mounted on pedestals and viewed from below." He is seen as a man who enjoys greeting people and exudes "a benevolent paternal air." Everything is centered on him and this is best shown when he visits the HJ and the boys are on their tiptoes straining to get a look at him. Another amusing shot is a close-up of a cat that stops cleaning itself and looks up when he arrives. Hitler is always shot alone whereas the individual is submerged in the symmetry and order of the mass scenes.
Hitler at the beginning of the film arrives in a plane and the images of clouds and the soft music portrays him as a godlike figure looking down on his people below. Before we see Hitler we feel his presence; he is a saviour and has come to give hope to those who have recently suffered economic and social turmoil. The image of the Fhrer is used to give the viewer hope and the appeal of a strong leader playing on grievances already instilled in the German public would be a welcome sight for any viewer at this time. The natural force of fire symbolises the strength and hope the Third Reich will bring in the two Nazi films, the eternal flame is a simile for Hitler's promise of a "thousand year Reich".
Kuhle Wampe also gives the idea that if one works together it can lead to progression and this is perhaps best shown in the contrast between the scenes with the unemployed on their bicycles compared to those in the sports festival. When competing against each other no matter how fast they ride they never get anywhere whereas when working together with a common goal they can achieve this. They are "brilliantly organized... [the young people] have a political character, and the recreation of the masses has the mark of militancy." The singing of the working classes and the fact that they move in unison in the right direction also gives the viewer a hope that something better is to come.
In Hitlerjunge Quex the theme of hope ties in strongly with another issue dealt with in the three films; that of youth. Indeed the film is directed at the young and was subtitled "A film about German youth and its spirit of sacrifice." Indeed after seeing the film and the heroics of Heini and the display of discipline and purpose of the HJ it would be almost impossible, qua child, not to want to join. It is particularly noteworthy that Triumph des Willens and  Hitlerjunge Quex end very similarly. Riefenstahl juxtaposes the image of workers marching with the swastika in the background; this is significant as it leaves the audience with a great sense of hope. They are marching towards the sky which is where the film began. Steinhoff uses a similarly effective technique to end his film - that of the flag again with Heini's blood on it and then a similar montage of a division of HJ. The determination of the faces is similar to the depiction of them in Triumph des Willens whose Youth Rally ends with the HJ song as does Hitlerjunge Quex. These are Heini's last words and the faces of the HJ are almost being led by Heini's heroic face.
As with the theme of national pride versus a lust for the alternative, the portrayal of workers in Kuhle Wampe can be compared to that in Triumph des Willens. At the Introduction of the Labour Corps, Riefenstahl shows the workers as a mini army. They march in unison exactly like the military do and are given the same treatment by the Fhrer. This is undoubtedly because Hitler realised that to build the war machine capable of carrying out his global ambitions, Germany needed a completely new infrastructure. The solidarity of the military can be compared to that of the workers through Riefenstahl's use of close-ups: in the first sequence we see a group of S.A. men linked together and the camera zooms in to focus on the clenched fists around each other's belts. This is mirrored in the close-up of the workers fists gripping their spades. This not only stresses the importance of the unity of the two groups but also metaphorically the tools of the workers are just as important as the weapons of the military. This is a powerful technique as it explains that everyone has an important role to play in Germany's rebirth. This would appear to contradict the theory of Boguslaw Drewniak who argues that "Die Welt des Arbeiters werde darin zu wenig bercksichtigt".
Triumph des Willens has very few specific references to family values but there is perhaps one to be found in the opening parade sequence: when Hitler is arriving there are three camera shots in quick succession; one of a smiling young woman; one of a proud Aryan and then one of a small child with a toothless grin. Riefenstahl perhaps subtly hints at a strong German family here. One argument for Hitlerjunge Quex being ineffective as propaganda could be that it deals with the family in a way which would perhaps contradict the Nazi ideal of families being the building blocks on which a new Germany could maturate, as the family breaks up. However, it is the "traditional authoritarian structure of the German family" which is what Steinhoff wants to demolish. This antediluvian institution is replaced in favour of a new family; in Heini's case, "he has found a substitute in the fellowship of his new comrades"; the HJ.
In Kuhle Wampe the family is a place of conflict as seen in the first part of the film around the dinner table. Brecht also includes such anathemas as abortion and marriage as an option because is it the obvious thing to do. The theme of family values not being present in the Weimar Republic is made clear when Anni looks on longingly at school children before being brought abruptly back to reality realising that she is homeless, redundant and her brother has just committed suicide.
The issue of sacrifice is particularly important in Kuhle Wampe and Hitlerjunge Quex. Heini dies as a hero realizing that "he is one small cog in a much more powerful machine", saying to his pleading mother that "Alles ist nicht verloren... [es ist] nur der Anfang." The fact that he dies for the cause makes him a martyr and he is "das faschistische Ideal einer Jugend...den Geist der neuen Zeit." This is an effective technique of propaganda and can be compared to the suicide in Kuhle Wampe. Brecht implies that this is the "fate of an entire social class" because of the appalling economic climate. However, this is not as effective as the technique by Steinhoff whose death is one of heroism and climax, as "the audience will not even want to stop him [Franz]". Afterwards it is as if it does not matter anyway and one woman says it is merely "ein Arbeitslose weniger." Particularly significant is that Franz removes his watch before jumping, in an admission that it has great value and although he has failed his family can use it to attempt to survive in this world. He is shot through a suspended bicycle to relate the troubles directly to that of the unemployed seen previously. It is important for the propagandist to foster the sacrifice of the 'self' in favour of the majority and through close-ups in Triumph des Willens and emotion in Hitlerjunge Quex the respective directors succeed in bringing the viewer into the film recognising the importance of the 'mass', as a propaganda tool.
Although Kuhle Wampe briefly portrays an "enemy" as part of its propaganda technique, this enemy is not the National Socialists but the Social Democrats of the Weimar Republic and it is only in Hitlerjunge Quex where a direct contrast is used. Heini's father is an aggressive, antiquated Communist who is directly compared with the thoughtful and visionary HJ leader. Another method of comparison is the order and unity of the Nazis compared with the chaotic scenes given to the Communists who drink and smoke. Ulla is infinitely more disciplined than her Communist counterpart Greda who is associated with the opiates of the Communists and often uses her sexuality to her advantage. The use of light portrays Nazism as the future, bright and honest with the Communists always in the dark - metaphorically hinting at their evil intent.
To attempt to come to some sort of conclusion the possible affectivity of the three films will be brought into context using the arguments already made in this essay. It is important when doing this to disestablish oneself from the eventualities which are known to have occurred and the atrocities which stemmed form the Nazi vehicles of propaganda. Triumph des Willens has the advantage of being a documentary and therefore all the scenes that the viewer sees actually did happen; the Nazis realized that "the best way to tell lies was to use facts". Audrey Salkeld believed the film to be successful in "conveying something of the new mystique that Nazism claimed to introduce into all spheres of cultural life." It is also a film which will be remembered in terms of revolutionary cinematic techniques. However, unlike in Triumph des Willens, Kuhle  Wampe and  Hitlerjunge Quex have fictional characters increasing the appeal to the viewer. The work is clearly only staged reality and Riefenstahl "dokumentierte ...als den politischen Sinn des Parteitages." The film could become boring after the impression of the viewer with powerful oratory and the immense support for National Socialism had worn off.
Kuhle Wampe has the advantage of being a narrative and the viewer follows the fortunes of the Bnike family. Perhaps the biggest testimony to the film's intrinsic power as a piece of propaganda is that it was banned and 'only after substantial cuts were made was it released for general showing." However, it seems that Brecht asks quite a lot of a viewer and one needs to be thinking all the time to keep up with not only the irony but also the plot itself. The film was not even allowed to be shown in the Soviet Union as 'the Soviet audience could not understand the suicide of a worker who owned a bicycle and a watch' and 'Kuhle Wampe's impact as a model for Left-Wing political filmmaking was in fact negligible.'
The conclusion therefore to be reached is that Hitlerjunge Quex is the most successful film out of the three chosen films as a tool of propaganda. Not only did it win the highest Prdikat and later the Jugendwert, but it was extremely popular. It has a simple plot and the heroism is particularly gratifying and would have been particularly so for the younger section of the population it was geared to. The film gives "a certain realism to otherwise clichd ideas." It is the ideal mixture of art and propaganda and is the only one of the three who depicts the "enemy" in a successful way.