This report is aimed to provide an extensive overview of parasitic plants. This will be achieved by observing the different species, in particular the mistletoe families, and researching into how and why they paratisize their hosts. The distribution, human uses and ecological benefits of parasitic plants will also be looked at briefly within the report, in order to gain a basic understanding of their importance in different habitats and cultures. The different parasitic plant families are given in Appendix I.
Parasites are organisms that are reliant on hosts for the production of nutriments. There are two main types of parasites, as described in Table 1.
Parasitic plants either live in or on their hosts, penetrating through their roots or stems. However there are different types of parasitic plants, as shown in Table 2:
The majority of vascular plants, approximately eighty five percent [Hickman, Johnson, 2004], have mutalistic relationships with fungi, aiding with the absorption of nutrients from the soil. The relationship between plant roots and fungal hyphae is called mycorrhizae of which there are two main types: endomycorrhizae and ectomycorrhizae. Endomycorrhizae (Diagram 1) are the most common, however ectomycorrhizae (Diagram 2) are most common in temperate and boreal forest trees [Hickmanal. 2004]. The mycorrhizae create a larger surface area over which nutrients can be absorbed.
Root parasites take advantage of the mycorrhizae and insert their haustorium in order to absorb the nutrients. An example is the holoparasitic Indian pipe (Monotropa uniflora), a relative of heathers and rhododendrons, and found in coniferous forests (Photograph 7). It absorbs nutriments from the mycorrhizae of coniferous trees, and grows to approximately ten inches above the leaf litter [Attenborough, 1995].
Parasites rarely cause the death of their hosts, since the host is required for the very basis of survival, especially non-photosynthetic holoparasites that cannot generate energy and nutrients without chlorophyll. Therefore holoparasites generally have an immense range of hosts. Parasitic plants can, however, cause the host growth loss, but it may not be obvious until the parasite has infected a considerable amount of the host.
The haustorium is a chemotropic adaptation of the root system designed for parasitic plants to create a conduit, in order to transport water, carbohydrates and nutriments from their host. The developing roots (radicle) of non-parasitic plants generally grow in a downward direction due to gravitational forces and away from light. However the Viscum album radicle, for example, grows in the direction of the host, whether it is towards light or opposing gravity. Once the radicle has reached the host plant it then transforms into a haustorium and perforates into the host's tissue, until it reaches the cambium. The circumference then increases and cortical strands grow from the haustorium, parallel to the cambium. Sinkers then form on the cortical strands as they touch the cambium, penetrating the xylem (Diagram 3). The remaining cortical strands penetrate the phloem, allowing for a conduit through which nutriments and water travel from the host's vascular system to the parasite [Worral, 2005]. The haustorium gene is believed to have originated from either autotrophic, non-parasitic plants or from endophytic organisms, such as, bacteria/fungi [Penn State University, 2006].
Hemiparasites usually only penetrate the xylem to obtain water from the host, and photosynthesise to obtain nutrients for themselves. A method in which various mistletoes' are able to extract water from their host is to allow for continual transpiration to occur throughout the day. This process would normally, in non-parasitic plants, result in a considerable amount of water loss and as a result a wilting plant. However, by maintaining open stomata the mistletoe establishes a "steep water potential gradient" [Mathias, 1995], withdrawing a significant amount of water and nitrogen from the host.
The haustorium (Diagram 4) has a multitude of functions other than the penetration of the host to obtain nutriments via translocation. It also provides a structural support for the parasite given that it is the site of attachment to the host by means of hapteron, which "secrete a polysaccharide adhesive" [Mathias, 1995].
Monotropa uniflora (Indian pipe) is a root parasite that when flowers pushes through leaf litter to expose a white/transparent, bell-shaped head. This parasitic plant completely lacks chlorophyll and obtains it nutrients from the roots and mycorrhiza of coniferous trees.
Raffleisa arnoldii is an endoparasite, that lives completely inside the tissues of lianas (Tetrastigma) in the tropical rainforests of Borneo and Sumatra, although it erupts from the woody vine when flowering. The Raffleisa arnoldii produces the largest, single flower in the plant world. The female flower has five, thick and leathery orange/red petals that open to up to one meter in diameter. The flower is pollinated by insects, in particular flies, which are attracted to the redolence of rotting flesh. The male flower, however, is pollinated by small mammals and are much more abundant than the female flower [Attenborough, 1995].
Cuscuta spp. (dodder/witches hair) is an obligate parasite, with an unusual appearance, considering that it grows as a mass of string-like strands, engulfing anything in its path to lengths of up to half a mile. Cuscuta is very versatile and is therefore found in a variety of habitats, for example, Cuscuta marina is salt tolerant and is commonly found in and along salt marshes.
Pilostyles thurberi is an endoparasite, meaning that it lives in the stem of the host, apart from when it flowers. The haustorium is fibrous and penetrates the host's vascular tissue by means of a sinker.
Fungus melitensis (Maltese fungus) is a parasitic plant that spends the majority of its life underground obtaining nutriments from its host (usually tamarisk or sea lavender). In the summer months it obtrudes out of the ground and produces small flowers. Once pollinated by small flies it turns black. The Maltese fungus was extremely sought after during the medieval period due to its rarity and was used to staunch wounds, and to solve sexual problems [Attenborough, 1995].
Parasitic weeds can have catastrophic effects on crops worldwide, and for vulnerable populations in the semi-arid regions of Africa, and India, the lack of edible food crops may contribute to famines. North American contaminated crops and forage seed have contributed to the dispersal of dodder (Cuscuta pentagona) to most parts of the world. The spread of parasitic weeds have been helped greatly by human interactions, especially root parasites, for example the Cuscata and  Striga families. Therefore quarantine measures have been set up to prevent the spread of destructive parasitic weeds around the world. Witchweed (Striga) is most damaging to maize, sorghum and a number of other grasses, whereas broomrape (Orobanche) devastates tomatoes and beans and dodder is a particular problem on alfalfa, for example. Although quarantine measures are set up to help prevent the spread of parasitic weeds, once they have contaminated a crop it is extremely difficult to eradicate due to the minuscule seeds produced that are effectively distributed via the wind and persist in the soil.
Humans have used parasitic plants for a number of reasons over the centuries. Numerous parasitic plants have and are been believed to have medicinal properties and curative values. Others have been used as herbal teas, for example, Euphrasia and Pedicularis, [Pressal. 1995], or perfumes (sandalwood). However some parasitic plants prey on poisonous hosts, and therefore the possibility of alkaloids (organic nitrogenous, commonly toxic compounds) passing from the host to the plant is likely. Therefore care is needed before using parasitic plants in medicine and food.
The flower buds of Raffleisa tengku-adlinii, when boiled are said to induce the labour of pregnant women and to help mothers gain their strength after the birth.
A few root parasites accrue tannin (a substance in some plants used as a defence against herbivores and has a role in allelopathy) and subsequently have been used as anti-diarrhoeal remedies, for example, Prosopanche, has been used in Argentina, [Musselman & Cocucci unpublished, cited by Pressal. 1995 p.8] and Krameria has been used in Central and South America, [Simpson 1989, cited by Pressal. 1995 p.8].
Mistletoe has been used for many different medicinal cures all over the world throughout the years. In Africa, it was used as a cure for convulsive distempers, to relieve digestive distress in Canada, and as aphrodisiacs for the Mayans and in the Mediterranean. Not only have humans used parasitic plants for numerous medicinal reasons, but have also associated a number of folklores with them. The European mistletoe (Viscum album) has been used to symbolise good fortune, and pagan rituals. It is also used in Christmas festivities; when placed above doorways couples share a kiss when stood underneath. This tradition is believed to have originated from the belief that mistletoe aided the fertility of women, and was used when conception of a child was desired. European mistletoe was also believed to have been "sent to earth by Gods" and that the mistle thrush (Turdus viscivorus) was the "messenger" [Worral, 2005]. It was therefore believed to have healing powers and people drank it in tea and wore it as amulets. European mistletoe when grown on oak trees was believed, by the Druids, to symbolise "human dependency on God", and the oak tree represented "God". It was therefore used to scare away evil spirits, a good-luck charm and to create a warm atmosphere in the home within the winter months [Worral, 2005].
A few parasitic plants have also been used as a source of food for humans in different locations around the world, either as a staple part of the diet or when other food sources are scarce. Parasitic plants are also a source of food for other animals; for example, mistletoe can often provide deer and elk as a source of food in the winter months. Appendix I looks briefly at other uses of parasitic plants.
There is a diverse range of parasitic plant species found all over the world that live in a variety of habitats, and have adapted different ways in which to obtain nutrients from their hosts. Although parasitic plants may harm their hosts, they are very important ecologically, economically and socially. The provide food for a number of different species ranging from insects to humans. The root structures of parasites have provided an income for some indigenous people who create and sell the handcrafted woodcarvings. Parasitic plants have also provided a basis for local discussion derived from folklores, and festive traditions.