The word 'mythology' comes from Ancient Greece and using its derivatives it roughly becomes 'story-telling' in English. Although, myths are stories and many of them focus on the epic deeds of heroes, 'Greek mythology admits a plurality of approaches' and it would be foolish to ignore the importance of the characteristics and the symbolism of the protagonists and antagonists. The intervention of the Olympian deities in Greek myth is a recurring motif, and in many myths they play pivotal roles. Furthermore, the idea of virginity is a major theme in a fair number of ancient Greek myths. In particular, the virgin goddesses Athena, Hestia and Artemis feature dominantly in many of the virgin motif myths: Their sexuality and devotion to it is an antithesis to the Ancient Greek culture; where men dominated society and it was common practice for girls to be married as soon as possible. By paying particular attention to the virgin goddesses and using a variety of sources, in this essay I will explore the figure of the virgin and their relevance in ancient Greek myth.
The idea of virginity, or one of the ideas, is that of 'bodily integrity' and Loven states the word 'virgin refers to a girl or to a young woman who has not yet had sexual experiences' whilst maintaining that for males, the idea of celibacy is more appropriate than the idea of virginity. However, that is not to say that there are not male virgins in Greek myth, with the mortal, Artemis-worshipping Hippolytus being a perfect paradigm of a male virgin. Furthermore, there considered two types of virgin in ancient Greek myth; passive or active. A passive virgin is one who does not actively maintain their virginity. An active virgin is one who will defend, if need be, their virginity should anyone threaten it. The aforementioned three virgin goddesses are perfect models to enhance the distinction between the two types of virginity.
Artemis, goddess of the hunt and the wild, is arguably the best example of an active virgin, as she 'represents the impulse to asceticism and chastity." Not only does she defend her 'hallowed purity' numerous times, for example against Actaeon, but she also despises fellow goddess Aphrodite, a deity who is more than liberal when it comes to sexual relations. Greenwood says there is a 'mutual jealousy and hostility' between the two, a point which is easily comprehensible considering that the two deities are complete opposites. Michael Grant points out that 'she plays an inglorious role in the Iliad' and the reason for this may be down to the fact that 'she was, to the Greeks, the goddess of a conquered race." However, the fact there are at least four myths revolving around Artemis and the defence of her virginity, I feel, highlights how she was an important figure in ancient Greek society; as part of her duty 'she watches over women at childbirth' and 'the virginity of Artemis in her tenderest aspect makes her specially gentle to the very young maiden.'
If there is any median between active and passive virginity then that median is Athena. 'Next after Zeus himself in Olympian precedence comes Athena the Grey-Eyed', her virginity could be considered a surprising characteristic considering her pre-eminence after Zeus and as I have previously mentioned, ancient Greek society far from favoured women. However, it must be pointed out, that she was a deity and a powerful one at that so she was bound to be revered and worshipped beyond others. Although not as active as Artemis, Athena did defend her virginity against Hephaestus, the god of craft and smiths, who attempted to rape her. This could be seen as a reversal to the idea of male dominance in Greek society, however, Athena was a god of war, along with Ares, and Morford & Lenardon state that 'the masculinity of her virgin nature sprung ultimately not from the female, but the male." Although virginal, Athena had a particularly close relationship with Zeus and was a result was 'his favourite daughter' as well as being the patron of the hero Odysseus. I believe this shows how she was open minded, furthered by the fact that she merely ran from Hephaestus rather than kill him as Artemis would have done, unlike the aggressive Artemis and Hestia, who did her utmost to avoid men.
The passive example is the goddess of the hearth, Hestia. Unfortunately, there are very little remaining stories involving Hestia, and as such it is difficult to gauge the importance of her role as a virgin. However, we do know she, like Artemis, was not swayed by the works of Aphrodite and swore to retain her virginity. Furthermore, as every family hearth was her altar and she received the first offering of any sacrifice in a house she is arguably a pivotal god to Greek society.
Aphrodite, the goddess of beauty, love and marriage was in stark disparity to the virginal goddesses, a point which is reinforced with a reference to Harrison: 'In marked contrast to Athena stands... Aphrodite." In ancient Greek myth Aphrodite caused the death of Hippolytus; Hippolytus was a favourite of Artemis and he only worshipped her and as a result he refused to revere Athena as he led a life of chastity. As a consequence Aphrodite set in motion the events told in Hippolytus, which led to the brutal death of Hippolytus as a result of his rejection of Phaedra.
It is in Hippolytus, after the protagonist is told of Phaedra's love for him, that we can see an ancient Greek outlook on women, although admittedly, it is a strong view;
Furthered by the fact that Hippolytus, a male, is arguably the most famous mortal virgin in ancient Greek myth and that three prominent Olympian deities are virginal, it could be argued that the idea of virginity, which requires devotion, is generally an idea beyond that of the typical ancient Greek female, who in her culture was perceived as the lustful gender. As a result, it could be stated that the virginity of the goddesses acts only to further separate them from the mortal woman. However, Greenwood argues that is not Hippolytus' chastity that leads him to which 'his indignant horror is due. Union with his father's wife would be both adulterous and incestuous and all respectable Greeks' would see such acts as terrible offences. Even with this taken into consideration, Hippolytus' condemnation of women as a whole, not just Phaedra would surely render such a point obsolete.
In stark contrast with the ancient Greek cultural view of women as the 'lustful gender' is the fact that acts of rape more or less are always committed by males (aside from the rape of Anchises by Aphrodite, which once again reiterates her whorish nature). On the other hand, three serial rapists in ancient Greek myth are Zeus, king of the gods, Apollo, 'second only to Zeus' and Poseidon, 'the equal of either Athena or Apollo' whose acts have often been said to be symbolic of the notion of male dominance. At this point, it must be highlighted that an act of rape, although far from being positive, was not seen in same light of negativity it is today, which as a result meant that being characterised as a raping deity is no where near the unpleasant characterisation it would be today. Rape was the primary threat to the virgin figure in Greek myth; although never were the virginal goddesses successfully raped, which once again further separates them from the mortal woman, who was frequently the victims in ancient Greek myth. This point would also further support the idea of male dominance in ancient Greek culture.
To conclude, taking into consideration all the previously stated points, it is my view that the figure of the virgin in ancient Greek myth is a literary symbol used by the male ancient Greek writer to represent 'bodily integrity', or a level of 'purity' that cannot be attained, or maintained by the average ancient Greek woman. This point is supported by how the three most renowned virgins are all female deities and not mortals. A further condemnation of the ancient Greek female is shown by the threat of rape and in particular the threat of rape to virgins, which is, in my view as well as others, a symbolic motif subconsciously highlighting the ancient Greek cultural belief of the dominant male and the weaker female.