To many the word 'myth' will evoke the notion of stories of heroes and monsters, such as Theseus and the Minotaur; Stories which were intended to entertain, to scare and to thrill. However, it would be ignorant for a mature mind not to look at the importance of the characters: What was their role? Were they symbolic? Did they make up part of a larger motif? These are just a few of the questions that could be focused toward characters within myth; questions which, in this essay, I will ask of those hybrid creatures that feature in ancient myth.
Hybrid creatures were the predominant antagonist in many hero myths that date back to classical antiquity. It is interesting that 'in the neatly ordered Greek universe, which has reserved distinct compartments for the 'bestial', 'human' and 'divine'' there is no such compartment for those hybrid characters in myth. Even the word 'monster' is a vague description: The idea of 'the Monster is ubiquitous' and as such it remains unclassifiable, something which Lada-Richards argues is due to 'monsters' being 'culture-specific products.' I consider that, as there is no universal 'compartment' for the hybrid creatures in ancient myth, each and every crossbred character has been amalgamated into the manner they are because they are to be treated as individual cases. This point can be maintained by how the many of varying fusions represent a different challenge to a different hero; for example, the Minotaur is a creature of brute strength, whereas the Gorgon Medusa relies upon intelligence. On the other hand, in some myths hybrid creatures had another role, such as being symbolic of a social fear rather than playing the role of being the nemesis of the hero; the Sirens are an example of this.
Arguably one of the most famous of hybrids in ancient myth, the Minotaur, in the view of some, plays a far more complex role than that you would conclude from initial impressions. Even its birth, I feel, is an area for discussion; Pasipha, the mother and husband to King Minos, became physically attracted to a great white bull, which was a sign from Poseidon. Yet once Minos refused to sacrifice the beast, Poseidon sent Pasipha into a lust for the bull. Finally, through the help of Daedalus, Minos constructed a way for the bull to mount his wife, which ultimately led to birth of the Minotaur. On the other hand, the classical scholar A. B. Cook expresses the view that Minos, the king, and the character of the Minotaur are really the same individual in different outward appearances. Cook and the anthropologist J. G. Frazier regard the union between Pasipha and the bull as a sacred ceremony, relating to Minoan religion, in which the queen of Knossos wedded a deity in the form of a bull. The previous point aside, in the myth of the Minotaur, the unusual chain of events that led to the union between bull and woman can mean it is feasible to say that the Minotaur was a result of divine intervention. Furthermore, I would like to point out that the physical sexual attraction by Pasipha towards the bull led to the creation of the archetypal physical challenge for a hero, the Minotaur. Before the myth of Theseus and the Minotaur has even begun there is, debatably, a motif; trying to fool the Olympian deities, which will ultimately result in intervention from the Gods, is a course of action only for fools. Whilst asking for help from the Gods can lead to unexpected and unwanted results. If King Minos had honoured Poseidon by sacrificing the great white bull then none of the terrible events that followed would have occurred.
The Minotaur was used as an 'engine of vengeance', used by Minos in response to the death of his son, Androgeos; After signing a treaty with Minoan Crete Athens had to send 'seven Athenian youths and seven girls, children of noble families' as tribute to Minos, where upon the children were placed 'in the Labyrinth and devoured by the Minotaur'. Historically, it is true that the fledgling polis of Athens was under the both cultural and political influence from Minoan Crete and for this reason, some modern mythologists consider Theseus' slaying of the Minotaur as a Minoan adaptation of the Baal-Moloch of the Phoenicians and as such consider it a solar personification being symbolic of not only the ending of Athenian tributes to Minoan Crete, but the end of the dominating influence of Minoan religion over mainland Greece.
The myth of Theseus and the Minotaur is not the only ancient myth with symbolic connotations; the myth of Medusa and Perseus is another. With the rise of the patriarchal society all around the Aegean, the image of Medusa was far from acceptable. The image I refer to here is not the one of myth where she was a chthonic monstrous hybrid with snakes for hair: Instead, the image is one of a woman, who symbolised female intelligence and wisdom and who was worshipped by Libyan Amazons. However, she represented much of the qualities that patriarchal Greece did not want women to feel they had; intelligence, creativity and the power of destruction. Her most famous re-representation from patriarchal Greece is that of the snake-haired Medusa, one of the 'three Gorgons, of whom only Medusa was mortal,' and they 'were of terrifying aspect, and those who looked upon their faces were turned to stone." It is this Medusa, who in myth, was beheaded by Perseus. Similarly to the birth of the Minotaur, the events that led to Medusa's snake-hair also allow for interpretation. After Medusa had intercourse with Poseidon in Athena's temple, Athena turned her hair to snakes and made her face so unbearable to behold that any man would turn to stone if they saw it. It is here even more similarities can be drawn between the creation of the mythic Medusa we know and the birth of the Minotaur; interaction with the Gods, notably Poseidon in both cases, has resulted in dire consequences. This connotation aside, Medusa is arguably also an example of a punishment of what should happen if a mortal angers the Gods. It is worth noting that it in popular myth it is also Athena, responsible for the curse upon Medusa, who along with Hermes helps Perseus complete the challenge. This occurrence is rare in myth and is something which Morford & Lenardon point out; the fact that 'two gods should assist him [Perseus] is remarkable." Furthermore, the fact two powerful deities actively help Perseus on his quest deducts greatly from the challenge faced by Perseus and for this reason, I feel the myth of Medusa is certainly more emblematic than any other; the myth is not so much a story as it is a symbolic connotation of male dominance over the female, a connotation which is full of 'male bias'.
The role of Medusa in myth does not end with her beheading at the hands of Perseus. In fact, it is quite the opposite. From Medusa's neck springs Pegasus, son of Poseidon and Medusa, in the form of a winged horse; this is, by modern definition, another hybrid creature. Furthermore, Pegasus also later helped kill another hybrid creature, the Chimera; 'a thing of immortal make, not human, lion-fronted and snake behind, a goat in the middle, and snorting out the breath of the terrible flame of bright fire." Medusa's blood was drained and taken, and was later used to raise the dead. Furthermore, her head was also taken and kept by Perseus and he 'turned his enemy Polydectes to stone by means of Medusa's head.'
It is not only in the myth of Medusa that we see a hybrid creature representing the ancient Greek cultural and social fears of women and its condemnation of them. The sirens, described as 'enchantresses', a hybrid between women and birds, who have been allegorised by classical writers 'as representing the lusts of the flesh... the dangers of flattery', on the other hand there is another alternative existing view, which I agree with, that they are symbolic of the ancient Greek belief that women were trouble. In Homer's Odyssey the Sirens lived near Scylla and Charybdis, two dangers so equally grave that 'between Scylla and Charybdis' is seen by some as the progenitor of 'between a rock and a hard place'. Although Charybdis is not a hybrid, she was the 'formidable and voracious ally' of the hybrid Scylla, a 'fantastic monster with twelve feet and six heads'. It is noteworthy to state that they are both named as if they were female in gender. This, again, reiterates the social fear within Greek society towards women. This point is supported by how Scylla later became 'an alluring woman' in later ancient Greek iconography.
The aforementioned Chimera was another hybrid creature, from Lcyia, in Greek myth, yet unlike Medusa, Scylla or the Sirens, it did not have any underlying negative attitude towards the female gender. Its symbolism was completely different. One possible allegory, as Harry Thurston Peck says, is that the Chimera was used as a symbol of the volcanic nature of Lycian soil. On the other hand, Robert Graves puts forth the possibility that the Chimera was a symbol of the tripartite calendar, of which the lion (the Chimera was 'lion-fronted), the snake (the Chimera had a 'snake behind') and the goat (the middle of the Chimera was that of goat) are all seasonal emblems.
Although hybrid creatures were not always used as representation of social fears or as connotations to assert the notion of male dominance in society, for example the Satyrs, part man, part goat, were used as comedic uplifts in literature by the likes of Sophocles and Euripides. It would appear that in ancient myth, particularly the most renowned ancient myths such as Theseus and the Minotaur, Perseus and Medusa and all the myth of the creatures found Homer's Odyssey have an underlying message, on top of their primary role as a challenge, either physically or mentally or even both, for a hero. Unfortunately, despite the uniqueness of each hybrid we encounter in ancient myth it seems more often than not that they are used to condemn the female in Greek society. Even the physical lust of Pasipha that creates the monstrous Minotaur could be seen as a criticism of the female gender, which throughout classical antiquity was seen as the more lustful of the two genders.