This paper discusses the evolution in diplomacy in the Cold war period and analyzes the extent to which changes have occurred. It is necessary to start with a definition of diplomacy where we distinguish between the actors, the functions and the agenda of diplomacy. Then we proceed with a short description of Cold war diplomacy, as this will also provide us with a theoretical background for further arguments and comparison. An analysis of the evolution of diplomacy thus relies on aspects identified by the definition and aims to elucidate to what extent changes have occurred.
The paper discusses changes in diplomatic actors, developments of multilateral and regional diplomacy, evolution of personal diplomacy and public diplomacy, and the shifts in agenda of diplomacy. The most important development occurred in emergence of new actors, new style of diplomacy and evolution of new multilateral agenda. It seems that the major change is the emergence of transnational diplomacy. Where Cold war diplomacy reflected the interstate or intergovernmental negotiates and national interests, we can argue that the modern diplomacy involves a greater degree of complexity and we can meaningfully assert that major changes have occurred in the field. While Nicolson argues that "to talk about new and old diplomacy is to make a distinction without difference," (Monsieur Jules Cambon in Nicolson 1988: 29) there are good arguments maintaining that more than just the 'outward appearance of diplomacy' has gradually changed.
The three major sources of change identified in the essay involve the end of the Cold war conflict itself, advances of globalisation and integration of the global society, and the 9/11 attacks on USA.
Diplomacy refers to the manner of conducting one's relationship with other international actors, whereas foreign policy refers to the matter. (Evans 1998: 180) It can be further said that diplomacy is the instrument employed to put foreign policy into effect, uses negotiation and dialogue and is concerned with management and conduct of relations with other states. (Evans 1998: 129) It performs the function of a mean of communication and governments are the principal actors in the dialogue. (Watson 1982: 120)
When analyzing diplomacy, we need to distinguish between several things. Firstly, the relevant actors, as they are the agents who participate in the conduct of diplomatic communication and negotiations. Moreover, one needs to recognize the diverse themes and topics on diplomacy agenda and actors use distinct strategies or styles of negotiations.
Lastly, diplomacy fulfils several functions: negotiation, representation, identify and formulate state objectives and goals, establishing and renewing rules and procedures of the international system. (Evans 1998:129)
Cold war diplomacy has essentially been the same for the whole duration of the conflict, and the evaluation of the changes that have taken place in international diplomacy since the end of cold war has to recognize following distinct features. In terms of relevant actors, national government were the principal actors where bilateral negotiates behind 'closed doors' were the preferred. Ambassadors and foreign ministers as representatives of government played an important role in diplomacy decision making. International institutions predominantly served interests of the most powerful states and negotiations outcomes dependent on state's relative power. Agenda of Cold war diplomacy addressed mainly state security and violence.
There are several important developments in respect to actors of diplomacy in Post-Cold War period. The demise of the Soviet empire brought new independent nations into the world politics ands started a period of realignment. As the soviet iron curtain lifted, many states in the Russian sphere of influence were able to throw off the communist regimes, elect democratic governments and pursue independent diplomacy. Changing balance of power fragmented the rigidity and cohesiveness of old coalitions. This is best seen on the example of Warsaw Pact and NATO, where the former disappeared altogether and the latter is in the process of "reinventing" itself. Disagreements between EU and USA like the split on Iraq war were unthinkable in Cold Wart. It seems that the old rigid environment in which Cold War diplomacy operated has disappeared.
Secondly, Bayne (2003) argues that states as a consequence of advancing globalisation found their power fading away, while non-state actors (private sector and MNCs) gained power. Governments, as representatives of the states and principal agents in diplomacy, were forced to change their negotiation strategies as a result of their decreasing power. New actors were able to join and to a certain degree affect the diplomatic dialogue. This was partly initiating or at least encouraged by some governments as the new non-state, in particularly the private sector was supposed to share the burden of conducting diplomacy, while trying to stay as agenda setters. (Bayne 2003) Particularly in economic diplomacy businesses have been able to create various bodies and ad hoc coalitions to influence the diplomatic negations of powerful states. For example, Business and Industry Advisory committee to the OECD provided business views and input into the deliberations of OECD. (Bayne 2003: 59) American MNCs play an important role in formation of USA foreign policy. Businesses play an important role in economic diplomacy as they can have indirect impact on policy via lobbying or direct via market decision. (Bayne 200: 53)
The rising importance of NGOs in Post-Cold War diplomacy is best illuminated in McRay (2001) by what he calls The New diplomacy. Victory of democracy in the Cold War and advances of globalisation help to create a global civil society where NGOs are an important voice of world people. The Ottawa treaty banning land mines and Rome treaty on ICC are notable successes of the new diplomacy and prove "that a coalition of governments, NGOs, international institutions and civil society can set a global agenda and effect change." (Kofi Annan in Davenport 2003) In the Ottawa Process "NGO pressure was cited as the No. 1 factor in states' decisions to support the ban of land mines." (Davenport 2002) While states remain principal agents of international negotiations and sovereign of international law, the domain of diplomacy is a more complex domain with a greater number and variety of actors. "Perhaps, as one commentator suggested, we are entering a time of "poly-lateral" diplomacy, where major actors will have to balance and juggle a host of players and interests in shifting alliances." (Davenport 2003) This marks a major shift from superpower bilateral diplomacy of Cold war.
Multilateral and regional diplomacy have also evolved in the Post-Cold War era. One of the major factors here were the end of Cold War and advances of Globalisation. The end of the rigid alliance system and disappearance of the Soviet threat led to greater activity on multilateral and regional level. While the diplomatic negotiations was previously conducted within the alliances or between the two superpowers, several initiatives have been launched both on regional and global level which used old international institutions like the UN or refurbished old ones like GATT into WTO. On a regional level, Europe witnessed revival of EU in the Maastricht treaty and the Single European act, and North America concluded the NAFTA. (Barston 2006)
Whereas discussion platforms like the UN have been previously paralyzed by the Cold war hostilities, international organisations now have an increasing active role in the conduct of international negotiations. States are too small for new problems facing them, so they try to collaborate to promote their joint interests. The Kyoto protocol of 1997 on environmental protection is a multilateral solution to the international 'tragedy of the commons' conducted within the UN framework. Here we can also observe the appearance of new topics on the agenda of international diplomacy.
On the regional level, NAFTA, AFTA, African Union and EU are examples of increased activity in regional diplomacy. (Bayne 2003:97) The developments in EU are also affecting the multilateral level. The Maastricht treaty introduced the Common Foreign and Security Policy to the community, which is now represented by the Commission on a number international negotiations platforms (e.g. WTO), and this in turn affects the dynamics of international conferences. (Barston 2006:87) Greater reliance on regional institutions which are able to provide credible commitments in the negotiations process, for instance in the form of the ECJ, affects the manner of the diplomatic discourse. While Berridge (1995) argues that the number of international institutions in international diplomacy has declined, several example show that they play a greater role in the new diplomacy.
A peculiar development is the emerging EU diplomacy. Here we can contrast the diplomacies of individual states and diplomacy of the EU bloc as a whole. This development is particularly marked by the Maastricht treaty which established the CFSP in 1992. Since then the Commission has increased its importance as an international actor representing the block as whole in important organisations like the WTO. The Banana wars in WTO are a good example of a dispute when EU was represented by the Commission. Whereas international organisations played a limited role in the Cold war diplomacy, EU now fulfils the representational and negotiations function of several states.
One of the shifts in post cold war diplomacy is the increase use of personal diplomacy. Thanks to the advances of globalization, heads of state are playing an increasingly important role in making and implementing of foreign policy. Prime ministers and presidents are able and increasingly do get directly or indirectly involved in conduct of foreign policy. This could also be a reaction to the internationalization of domestic policies, where heads of state try to take charge of domestically increasingly salient foreign issues. Moreover, higher level of scrutiny and participation was possible through the technological advances where geographical costs are shrinking.
Rise of personal diplomacy is taken to undermine the role and influence of foreign ministries and related bureaucrats. (Barston 2006) As key figures of state decide to get directly involved or use "cabinet secretaries and private envoys for negotiations", they bypassing the traditional ways of communication which involve foreign ministries leaving them without current information or just outside of the centre of decision making on foreign policy. (Barston 2006:8) Greater scrutiny of foreign policy implementation leads to less freedom of action of foreign ministries. For instance, the Blair Bush meetings are the major determinant of UK foreign policy where Blair has been taking an increasing role in formation of and conduct of foreign policy. Also German chancellor Merkel engaged in the inter-EU diplomatic process and is playing a greater role in the EU policy making.
Public diplomacy is another form of diplomacy with growing importance and use. Public diplomacy differs from traditional diplomacy in that public diplomacy deals not only with governments but primarily with non-governmental individuals and organizations aiming to cultivate public opinion in other countries by communicating a particular image or about an issue. The 9/11 attacks has lead to particular importance of public diplomacy in US foreign policy. While important of this form of power has already been recognized before, ""winning the hearts and minds" of Arab and Muslim populations has quite understandably risen to the top of the Bush administration's agenda."(Hoffman 2002) In this sense
But winning the propaganda war isn't the only form of public diplomacy; soft power is an important form of power where public diplomacy has been used to nurture it. W can argue that "once the stepchild of diplomats, public diplomacy has only recently taken its rightful place at the table of national security." (Hoffman 2002)
Another important aspect of diplomacy where changes occurred is the agenda. Previously noted the New Diplomacy addresses the topic of human security, moreover, environmental problems and world poverty are new topics of the international agenda. The Kyoto Protocol, Rome treaty on ICC and treaty banning Land mines demonstrate that a growing group of actors of international diplomacy asserts an ethical dimension in the diplomatic discourse. The change in post cold war diplomacy is that in this traditionally realist realm, we can now make a distinction between an idealist camp and a realist camp of actors. (Davenport 2003) The new idealist agenda topics mark a serious diversion from Cold war. Advances of globalisation and integration of world increase influence of international politics on domestic issues and policies. But as the emergence of new idealist actors and the new diplomacy show, this works also vice versa as the domestic groups when united are able to set and promote multilateral political agendas.
A further phenomenon of the modern diplomacy is the transitional diplomacy. As the end of Cold war started a new period of realignment and removed the lid on many conflicts, several states have been disrupted by the internal conflicts. Transitional diplomacy refers to helping failed states or states torn by conflict to re-establish the peaceful process. This has been particularly popular within the UN framework and peacekeeping and peacemaking are both very good examples this. USA and member states of EU have been actively involved in mediating local disputes and rebuilding government structures to promote peace and stability, in countries like Rwanda.
The developments constitute a major shift from Cold war diplomacy to modern diplomacy. A major development is the emergence of new non-state actors and their ability to affect international diplomacy. As states try to cope with effects of globalisation and their fading power, they try to involve both sub-national actors as well as create new supra- or international actors which engage in diplomatic activities.
This is also reflected in states greater reliance on regional and multilateral diplomacy.
Several of the issues discussed can be summed up under the concept of transnational diplomacy. The New diplomacy is an example of cross-border relations between state and non-state actors in promoting multilateral political agenda and transitional diplomacy involves state actors in helping failed states. While the Cold war diplomacy invpolde interaction of states with other states, transnational diplomacy cuts across national; borders involves communication of state actors with non-state actors and intrusion of foreign states in previously domestic policy areas.
The rise of personal diplomacy where heads of state become actively involved in foreign policy decision making and conduct of diplomatic communication and increased importance of public diplomacy are major changes in diplomacy, as previously diplomacy was more confined to the foreign ministries and ambassadors. Also communicating with other actors indirectly by influencing the public opinion is a recent development associated with importance of the soft power. The widening of diplomatic agenda mainly reflects importance of public society and emergence of new actors. It could be argued that globalisation created a global civil society which introduced an ethical dimension to diplomatic activity.
Still the essential functions of diplomacy, i.e. actors of diplomacy use it negotiation, representation, identify and formulate state objectives and goals, establishing and renewing rules and procedures of the international system, remain valid even though they are fulfilled by new actors on a wider area and complicacy .