This paper assesses the explanatory value of the dependency theory and asks whether a theory looking at relations of dependency explain the severe inequalities in world economy. While as Special report on Global Economic Inequality suggests there is a level of contention regarding how to measure and assess inequality, there is a clear divide between the rich developed and poor developing countries in terms of distribution of global wealth characterized by severe poverty in the Global South. (Surin in Balaam 2006) The paper provides a synopsis of the argument associated with the dependency theory mainly based on the 1970 paper by Santos, addressing dependency relations as a source of the inequalities. The dependency relations are illustrated in a critical analysis of three key structures of international economy, namely trade, capital and technology.
Following is a discussion of how plausible the explanation is when confronted with developments in world economy. It is argued that dependency theory fails to explain a number of developments and makes wrong predictions in several cases. It would seem that the theory is a partial explanation of existing inequalities at best. A theory which limits the relevant causes to international level only does so at the cost of its explanatory value.
This section provides an account of the dependency theory by exploring how relations of dependency in key global economic structures lead to inequalities in the world economy.
The dependency theory introduces an interpretation of relations in international economy characterised by dependency which makes economy of one country "conditioned by the development and expansion of another country to which the former is subjected to." (Dos Santos 1970:231) This leads to the idea that underdevelopment in a country is a direct consequence of expansion or development in other country on which the former depends on. Proponents of dependency theory see structures and processes of world economy as having inbuilt biases leading to relations of dependency which directly cause the underdevelopment in the Third world. The inequality can be explained in terms of dependency relations in trade, finance and technology. "This system is a dependent one because it reproduces a productive system whose development is limited by those world relations which necessarily lead to development of only certain economic sectors, to trade under unequal conditions with international capital under unequal conditions, to the imposition of super-exploitation of domestic labour force with a view to dividing economic surplus this generated between internal and external forces of domination." (Dos Santos 1970:235)
One of the arguments behind dependency theory is based on account of the international trade with trade dependency relations leading to underdevelopment. "Trade relations are based on monopolistic control of the market which leads to transfer of surplus generated in dependent countries to the dominant countries." (Dos Santos 1970:231) In particular, developing countries have been forced to become mainly exporters of raw materials and primary goods, unable to compete with developing states in manufactured industrial products where developed states hold a comparative advantage, which has been further enhanced by the international trade regime bias in favour of developed states. Developing countries are disproportionately affected by the tariff barriers. While Uruguay round of WTO negotiations achieved substantial reduction of tariffs it has been more advantageous to the industrial countries as tariffs remain high on textiles, leather and agricultural commodities. (Woods 1999) The relative openness of the global market in manufactured goods undermines the ability of LDCs to develop their own higher value added industries with manufactured goods and thus have to rely on imports. Moreover, prices of the commodities and primary goods have been decreasing on the global market which has a negative impact on balance of payments of developing countries fur undermining their ability to develop. The unequal trade relations thus leaves developing countries dependent on developed countries, where the unfavourable terms of trade undermine LDCs prospects for development.
Dependency theory identifies financial dependency of LDCs as a further factor leading to global inequalities. "The financial relations are, from the view point of the dominant countries, based on loans and export of capital, which permit them to receive interest and profits thus their domestic surplus and strengthening their control over the economies of the other countries." (Dos Santos 1970: 231) As developing countries open their financial markets and integrate in the world economy, foreign capital is able to control their economic resources and rather than following developmental strategy it follows particular financial interests. This leads to both the transfer of profits and interest and loss of control over its productive resources. Consequently, reliance on foreign capital brings the risks associated with dependency.
Technological dependency relation also plays an important role in the theory's explanation of inequalities. In particular, industrial development in the periphery is taken to be 'strongly conditioned by the technological monopoly exercised by imperialist centres.'(Dos Santos 1970: 233) The global regime on technology transfer is more beneficial for the developed countries as it protects their interests and leaves developing nations dependent on their monopoly as it is too costly for them to develop the needed technology independently. International regime on patent rights severely limits the technology transfer and dominant states only deposit obsolete technologies in the dependent states generating a system of inherent industrial backwardness and dependency. This leaves LDCs relying on developing countries for new technologies as major "technological innovations and gains in productivity largely occurred in the developed countries and the LDCs found themselves lagging and unable to compete in areas of new product development and production." (Balaam, 2006: 336) Technological dependency leaves LDCs unable to move up the production and technology ladder and thus contributes to their underdevelopment.
One of the implications of the dependency theory is that countries which decide not to integrate in the world economy are better off than those who fully liberalize and open their economies. The extent to which this has been true can be judged when looking at relative success of countries which export-oriented growth and import-substituting industrialization strategies. "Export-oriented growth is willing to risk dependency to gain benefits of development. Import-substituting industrialization, on the other hand, views international market forces as threat and attempts to achieve development with less risk of dependency." (Balaam 2006: 340) While countries in Latin America have followed the latter, the East Asian countries which became to be known as the East Asian "tigers" (South Korean, Taiwan, Honk Kong, Singapore) and "Little dragons" (Thailand, Indonesia, the Philippines and Malaysia) have tried use the opportunities offered by the global market.
The Latin American approach was supposed to reduce its dependence on foreign capital, technology and markets by promoting home-grown industries, but in the end increased the foreign debt as deepening of import substitution required borrowing from abroad. Once the countries were unable to service the loans as their exports declined, devastating debt crises followed. Countries like Brazil and Mexico which adopted the ISI strategy overall experienced less growth, less stability and possibly greater inequality. (Balaam 2006) The East Asian approach relied on strong state guidance of economy, supporting manufactured export oriented industries and attracting foreign capital to finance the development. Contrary to prediction of the dependency theory, Asian countries which started as poor and underdeveloped have utilized foreign capital and trade to promote growth without experiencing underdevelopment. Taiwan presents the dependency theory with a paradox. It is both more integrated in world capitalism than the poor market economies and more developed. (Amsden 1979: 342) Export oriented growth strategy results were very strong in terms of success in creating income and growth.
These developments undermine the dependency theory in two ways. Firstly, dependency theory would suggest that countries which avoid the risks of dependence are more successful than developing states which liberalize and integrate their economies into the global system. However, Newly Industrialized Countries in East Asia have clearly outperformed the Latin American countries which experienced greater level of inequalities. Secondly, the success of NIC in achieving economic growth and eliminating national inequalities by relying on trade and capital relations with developed countries goes contrary to what would be expected by Dos Santos.
A development not predicted by the theory are the deteriorating prices of manufactured goods. While the theory only talks about the volatility of commodities and primary goods, with an increase of global competition the prices of manufactured goods have also decreased making it cheaper of developing countries to import. Thus the trade exchange of developing countries does not necessarily have to be negative based on imports from the developed countries. A major factor which affected the balance of payments balance has been the volatile and increasing prices of oil rather than imports of manufactured goods.
A particular related issue when addressing a question about dependency theory is the development of the gap between Global South and North. While World bank report talks about a positive net flow from developed to developing countries, Broad (1996) has suggested that once China and India are excluded majority of the 140 Southern countries are actually not getting closer to economic development levels attained by the North. Broad (1996) has argued that contrary to World Bank 1994 report, majority of LDCs have not been part of the narrowing gap phenomenon envisaged in the report. "The bottom line is that about a dozen countries have been doing well for the past few years, while the vast majority of the South is either slipping backwards, stagnating, or growing slower than the North." (Broad 1996: 9) It seems that it does come down to how we measure inequality. If developing countries GDP growth is taken as the primary sign then Broads point seems to be valid however this seems to ignore that majority of developing world's population is concentrated in the key emerging markets countries. As China and India are catching up so does the majority of world's population get richer and more equal. As previously suggested it does come down to how we measure inequality, but concentrating on the sheer number of countries and ignoring the extent of Chinese and Indian success seems to ignore an important aspect of worlds economy. Moreover, as the major success in the developing world has followed the liberal rather than dependency strategy, both countries [China and India] have consciously chosen to seize the opportunities afforded by the global economy, through both trade and foreign investment, the development of decreasing global gap makes the dependency argument less convincing.
The dependency theory does account for negative effects of integration into global financial markets and opening of domestic economy of developing countries to foreign capital. A number of economic crisis have resulted from the globalization of financial structures and opening of economies to foreign investment. This has had a particularly severe negative effect on the developing world. As suggested by Dos Santos, foreign capital, particularly the short term investments follow financial interests and thus not interested in a countries development. These investments have been highly volatile and unstable. The collapse of the Mexican peso in December 1994 led to the flight of around $10 billion in short term US funds from that country in just the last week of 1994. (Broad 1996: 15) As countries have relied on these investments to finance their development strategies, they have suffered serious negative effects when these funds have been withdrawn when a crisis emerged.
A particular case is the Asian financial crisis in 1997 which was partly caused by dependence on foreign capital. "Although some analysts have argued that the crisis was caused by unwise state intervention in the economy, others argued that rapid adoption of Washington consensus policies especially free capital markets was more to blame." (Surin in Balaam 2006: 345) In this sense, this case supports the dependency case as integrating into the global financial structure by opening and liberalising the financial markets in Asian countries did not take into account the level of development of financial institutions in the countries and made it more susceptible to financial crisis. Dependency on foreign capital has incurred considerable damage on the local economies. However, liberals have blamed the crisis on a number of different domestic factors and generally bad government policies. In this case, concepts like corny capitalism all help to explain the distortions of the market system which inevitably undermined the global market and led to the crisis. (Gilpin 2000: 311-2) Still, it seems that the dependency on foreign capital and premature liberalisation of the financial markets were major causes of the crisis. Surin suggests that many East Asian states have become increasingly reliant on foreign investments, especially portfolio investments which he views as producing the 'structural conditions', which brought about the Asian financial crisis which began in July 1997 in Thailand. (Surin 1998)
Another implication of the dependency theory is that developing countries which do not integrate in the global economy are better off than the poor integrated ones. In particular, if the developing countries which integrated go down the vicious circle of underdevelopment, then surely developing countries which do not integrate experience greater level of growth as their economic surplus is not transferred to the developed countries and they don't suffer from unequal trade relations. However, that would be an odd conclusion, given that sub-Saharan Africa's economies are so comparatively isolated from the rest of the world economy and yet they experienced the lowest levels of GDP growth with some of them being negative. During the disastrous decade of the 1980s, gross national product (GNP) per capita increased only by an average of 1% in the South and in sub-Saharan Africa, it declined by 1.2%. (Broad 1996: 8) If an explanation of underdevelopment relies purely on the global economy to provide causes for it and thus limits the explanation to make an account in terms of factors on the international, it fails to account for lack of development in countries which are not integrated or are have tried to avoid the dependency relations risks. Given the examples of success of countries which have integrated, e.g. China and India, the point could be taken even further and it could be argued that Sub-Saharan Africa suffers not from globalisation, but from lack of it. The dependency theory explanation of inequalities fails to account for underdevelopment where the international level of explanation is not present and thus at best only provides a partial explanation in a limited number of cases of underdevelopment.
The dependency theory introduces an interpretation of relations in international economy characterised by dependency which conditions development of one country on another and thus explains inequality with the concept of underdevelopment. The global regimes on trade, finance and technology transfers have a bias which favours developed countries over developing ones and leads to underdevelopment in the latter. This explanation however leads to a number of implications which are not confirmed by developments in world economy. Failures of the Import-substituting industrialization strategy and an immense success of export-oriented growth which relies on foreign trade and capital for development goes contrary to dependency argument. Moreover, as both prices of manufactured goods as well as the prices of commodities have been decreasing, the unequal trade exchange is not as convincing as it fails to predict this. Also the theory fails to account for the least developed countries in Sub-Saharan region as these are not integrated into the international economy. The argument is further undermined by the decreasing gap between North and South.
Still, dependency theory does account for the negative effects of unstable global finance and investment on the developing countries. However, this does not lead to development in the developed countries as the investors also loose in a financial crisis.
It seems that the theory can only provide a partial explanation of inequalities in global economy at best. By concentrating on the global level as a source of explanation it ignores the effect of domestic level on prospects of development. Global economy offers opportunities and risks where dependency theory only tries to account for the risks and even then overestimates their potential and effect.