This paper discusses the rise of regionalism in the international economy. In particular, the recent surge of regional trade agreements (RTAs):"about 162 RTAs are in force as of 2002 with over half of those coming into existence after 1995. The WTO estimates that over 300 will be in effect by 2007." The paper starts with defining the concept of regionalism and delineates the timeline examined. Following is a detailed discussion of causes of and motivations for regionalism. The main analytical part is divided into arguments about end of Cold war consequences, advances of globalisation and existing economic interdependence levels, globalization of structures of international economy, economic and political motivation, failures of multilateralism and domino theory of regionalism.
It will be argued that a variety of factors gave rise to the surge of recent regional projects and motivated states policies on this issue. While most of the regional projects are limited to economic integration resulting in limited institution building mostly with economic responsibilities, political factors and changes play an important role in the process.
There are several approaches when explaining regionalism. In particular we can distinguish between international level, which can be contrasted with domestic level where domestic interest groups play an important role rather than the structures and processes of international economy. As for theoretical perspectives, we can contrast neo-liberalism and neo-realism where each tries to explain regionalism in different ways. Neo-liberalism stresses the economic benefits and ability of institution to enable international cooperation. Neo-realism explains regional cooperation in terms of power distribution and national interests.
This paper defines regionalism as a process which promotes "an identified geographical or social space as the regional project." (Stubbs and Underhill 2006:72) It is manifested by political and /or economic integration of policies leading to creation of institutions at a regional level. It serves to fulfil specific shared interests of a group of states which decide to pool their power and sovereignty, in order to gain a greater degree of relative power. The integration is instrumental to fulfil a specific shared interest determined by collective decision making. Furthermore Deutsch (Laursen 2003) argues that regional integration has a security element as it creates a security community. Thus apart from economic and political integration we can talk of integration of security policies or at least a common regional security goal.
Regionalism can be contrasted to multilateralism which involves a multitude of various states whereas regionalism tends to be limited to a specific regional or spatial area. Regionalization, i.e. division of the international community into regions, is the product of the process of regionalism.
The most important examples of regional projects are European Union in Europe, MERCOSUR in Latin America, NAFTA in North America and the Association of South East Asian Nations in Asia. The paper will mainly examine and use examples since the end of Cold War.
This part of the essay discusses the various arguments which describe the causes and the motivations for rise in regional in international economy. End of Cold war contributed to the regional projects building in several ways. It acted as a catalyst as it induced changed in the international environment and state polices making regional projects more attractive and moreover, the disappearance 'Iron curtain' dividing line made regional projects possible on between states previously firmly aligned in rivalling camps. Post Cold war period can be characterized by changes in alignment and disappearance of previous rigidity in alliances and groupings of states. Changing balance of power initiated and also allowed for a rise in regionalism. As new power centres started emerging and old ones have declined, a number of states were no longer limited by the traditional spheres of influence and engaged in regional projects. This is particularly true for the 1992 and 2004 enlargement rounds of EU, where former Soviet bloc countries joined the regional projects started by Western European countries. The EFTAN countries like Austria were no longer limited by the need to preserve its neutrality and Eastern European nations were now free to decide their own policies.
Furthermore, End of Cold War brought the Cold War rivalry and ideological conflicts to an end and thereby contributed to the rise of regional projects. The conflict ceased to be the defining factor of in national policies. Whereas Cold war was dominated by security agenda, the post Cold war policy agenda became increasingly, at least in Europe, dominated by the objectives of political stability and economic growth.
New policy goal, namely political stability, is an important political motivation for the EU 1992 and 2004 enlargement and NAFTA. Both EU enlargement and NAFTA treaty were seen in the West as a project which would ensure political stability in both Eastern Europe as well as Mexico. Regional projects commit the states to collective decision making in limited areas of policy and issue linkage makes deflection and abrupt change in policy very costly. In this sense, new EU member states and Mexico were anchored to an established political system with a democratic and liberal tradition.
Moreover, US victory in CW made liberalist doctrine mainstream and the most attractive way of achieving economic growth. Consequently policies of economic integration and open economies in the form of were considered the best way to induce economic growth. Regionalism and associated projects can be seen as putting the liberalist doctrine into practice on a regional level, motivated by a recognition that economic interests are best served by regional integration.
The liberalist argument for regionalism is that regional economic integration and opening of markets leads to growth as it produces trade expansion, either in the form of trade creation or trade diversion, and static and dynamic efficiency gains. (Balaam and Veseth 2005) The main point here is that as states integrate their economies and markets with its regional partners, individual states specialize in production of goods where they have competitive advantage and creates economies of scale. Resulting efficiency gains also encourage trade creation as cheaper goods are more attractive abroad.
On the domestic level, we can identify several forces contributing to rise of regionalism. Regional projects and liberalisation provide domestic companies with increased market access; consequently companies which are able to benefit from economic integration will pressure the government to implement necessary policies. Economies of scale are particularly prone to pressure the government agencies for increased in market access. Support of big national corporations was an important factor both in single market project in EU and NAFTA.
Economic integration on a regional level has several other consequences which have motivated states to engage in the regional projects. It can be argued that economic regional integration creates a competitive advantage vis--vis non-members. As goods of members become more competitive, trade between members increases at the cost of previous trade with non-members. While economic regionalism tends to lead to more creation rather than trade diversion, regional integration offers a good way to gain a competitive advantage against non-members. For example, one of US motivations for NAFTA was to keep Japanese investment and products out of the country and the FTA provides preferential treatment of US companies in Mexico. (Balaam and Veseth 2005) The EU 1992 single market project can also be seen as a striving to make Western Europe more competitive on the global market in the face of strong competition. A European wide single market and monetary union decreases costs of business operating in EU, forces European companies to be more competitive and brings efficiency gains. This makes European companies more competitive on the global market and provides them with preferential treatment within EU against non member countries' companies.
Another factor which contributed to rise of regionalism are the failures of multilateralism. As state recognize the benefits of liberal policies and are unable to pursue their interests on a multilateral level, they turn to regionalism. Multilateralism in WTO has been particularly prone to breakdowns and government found it difficult to arrive at satisfactory agreement on further areas and higher levels of integration during the Doha and Uruguay round in WTO. Dissatisfaction with multilateral economic integration led to rise of regionalism, as regional institutions are provide greater flexibility, a more secure environment and regional arrangements are politically easier to accept at the domestic level. (Woods ed 2000)
Regional arrangements involve fewer countries which promotes greater flexibility both at negotiating the deal as well as at later collective decision making level, whereas multilateralism requires a great deal of consensus seeking. Countries find it easier to arrive at a favourable deal which comes closer to satisfying their original interests and are able to go deeper on specific areas of integration than multilateralism would ever make it possible. Regionalism "allowed countries to lower trade barriers among neighbours and political allies, while retaining flexibility over which sectors to liberalize and which issues to negotiate." The threat of exclusion is more potent at regional level as the integration goes deeper countries also face to loose more if they opt out. Furthermore, regional arrangements are easier to accept at domestic level than multilateral ones. In particular, the US executive found it a lot easier to get the NAFTA deal passed in the Congress than the multilateral treaties negotiated within the WTO. As the limits and failures of multilateralism became more evident in the Doha round, regionalism became a more attractive policy.
While economic motivations for regional projects played an important role in the recent rise of regionalism, it has to be understood in the context of advances of globalisation. Existing informal regional and global economic ties and interdependence had of profound impact on national economic policies and power in external and domestic environment. To a certain extent the loss of a degree of control over states ability to implement its policy objectives, marked by increased importance of translational relations and pre-existing levels of intraregional levels of trade led states to look for new forms of political governance. Regional institutions and projects can be understood as aggregating states ability to control and decide in policy areas where individual states lost part of it. By pooling their power, states gain a greater degree of relative power and in this sense external independence at least in relation to outside the region environment. Rise of regionalism is to a certain extent a response to the effect of globalisation on states ability to implement their policy objectives. In this sense, regional institutions like European Commission provide a regional level of policy output for member states and by representing the region externally is/are able to exert a greater level of relative power than single members. Individual member states thus gain more power in the international field. In particular, smaller states like Belgium and Cyprus gain power by joining powerful regional organisations with collective decision making like EU.
However, political institutions and integration of non-economic policies, e.g. in EU, are an exception rather than a rule as most of other projects are concerned mainly with convergence of economic policies. While economic motivation as explained above are important, globalization and global economic structures and markets make regional projects more attractive as a way to deal with global market and associated problems on a regional level. The Asian financial crisis of 1997 particularly illuminates the lacking global economic governance and regulations. ASEAN as a response to these started to develop institutions to prevent or at least tackle market failures. Development of a monetary union in EU is also motivated by states willingness to gain greater control over their monetary policies and avoid problems associated with weak and unstable currencies. Regional projects can be seen as providing the foundation of political governance to match the expanding force of the market.(Balaam and Veseth 2005)
Another factor contributing to the region projects is existing economic interdependence level between countries, as high levels of trade and volumes of transnational government create a high level of unregulated transaction where governments are unable to exert influence over these without inducing significant costs. Neo-functionalism argues that "the expansion of economic activity generates pressure on enhanced regional or international coordination by enabling such organizations to fulfil functions that states can no longer perform." (Mansfield and Milner 1997) This can be also seen in NAFTA where existing levels of trade between USA and Mexico created a level of interdependence between these two countries which made the trade agreement easier to accept.
Domino theory of regionalism (Baldwin 1993) presents a particularly interesting explanation of rise of regionalism. Regionalism here is seen as creating benefits for members involved and creating costs for non-members which makes membership particularly attractive. In this sense membership in a regional block creates a competitive advantage against non-members companies as it guarantee preferential treatment for members companies. Potential loss of competitiveness makes the option of remaining outside the block very costly as it can cause trade diversion, expanding trade between members at the cost of trade between non-members and members. As it is better to be in that out of the regional block, regional integration is naturally expansive. Once a group of countries decides on an economic regional project, it is rational for other countries to try to join the block or create one of their own (as seen with UK trying to create the EFTA). Two important examples conform to this theory. Firstly, creation of the FTA between Mexico and USA (NAFTA) led to other South American countries applying for membership and eventually led to creation of MERCOSUR as countries recognized the benefits of regionalism and possible costs of non-members. Creation of NAFTA led to creation of further regional projects. The Single Market initiative in the EU also started a domino effect in Europe. The EFTA countries recognized the economic costs of non-membership, decided to apply and most of the actually went to become full members of the EU.
In conclusion, several lines of argumentation were considered. In particular, the paper has tried to make a distinction between motivation for regionalism and changes which caused the rise of regionalism. End of Cold war and related consequence both enabled and motivated regionalism. Advances of globalisation, existing economic interdependence levels and globalization of structures of international economy in particular led states to engage in projects which try to deal with the forces of the global market. Both neo-liberal as well as neo-realist theories provide a perspective on the arguments about economic and political motivation. Furthermore, domino theory of regionalism is a theory which tries to build on existing theories and tries to explain the recent rise in regional projects.
It seems that international level provides a more important source of motivation for regionalism. Global changes and developments enabled as well as made regional projects more attractive for states seeking both greater political stability as well as economic growth.
Still it seems that regionalism reflects more the national interests of individual group members rather than a general broad liberalization.