This paper looks at the aspects of diplomatic methods of Russian foreign policy in the time period following the end of the Cold war. The question has two parts and this essay rather than answering it in two parts will address highlight the patterns in the diplomatic methods and try to look at the ways in which they reflect the domestic interests.
The first part illuminates the concept of diplomatic method which is followed by an examination of Russian diplomatic methods and of their motivation, especially in relation to domestic interests. I look at the role of coercion, both as a verbal threat and backed by economic tools, bilateralism in and diversification of diplomatic relations, role of personal diplomacy, cooperation with USA and EU and economic relations with a group of key countries.
The paper argues that Russian leadership does in a number of areas take the domestic political and economic interests into account or at least the policies are inspired by domestic context, however there are a number of other important factors and interests reflected in the diplomatic activity of Kremlin which come top on the agenda.
By 'the diplomatic methods' this paper understand the way in which a countries decides to use the tools it has, exerts its influence and implements the foreign policy goals. Diplomatic methods are varied and reflect much of countries available resources, its international environment as well as general FP style. An examination of the methods a country uses in its FP would look at how the country deals with other states and specific issues which confront it. Essentially an analysis of diplomatic methods looks at the 'how?' of foreign policy.
To reflect on whether diplomatic methods are drawn from the consideration of domestic interests, it is necessary to looks at whether the main motivation to use a specific method is based on consideration of domestic context and interests and whether the consequences of using a particular method are directed at a particular domestic actor or to deal with a domestic issue.
Use of economic diplomacy is one of the major patterns in FP of Russian Federation. The Russian administrative has used the economic tools available in a number of ways and with various motivations. Relying both on positive and negative effects of the diplomatic method. Russian has been engaged in active economic cooperation with the EU, and particularly its Western members. It has used a number of economic diplomatic methods to facilitate a greater level of cooperation with the EU. Bobo Lo (2003) argues that Russia tries to improve its position in the European affairs in two ways. It tries to developing strong economic ties in the energy industry, particularly the gas exports and increasing the trade volume with EU. The Baltic gas pipeline project 'Nord Stream' is set to bypass the whole CEEC block illustrates both Russian efforts to increase its share in energy market of EU and undermine the position of the Eastern countries in relations with Kremlin. The move with increase the reliance of EU on Russian energy resources strengthen the latter's position in negotiations with Brussels. Increased importance of Partnership and Cooperation Agreement in Russian FP also demonstrates the significance of economic dimension of EU-Russia relations.
Here the motivation for using economic tools to facilitate greater level of cooperation with Europe is pragmatic and power interested. Economic cooperation with Europe provides benefits for the Russian economy, namely market access which leads to higher levels of trade and attracts Foreign Direct Investment, and thus helps to increase the living standards in Russia. Europe is Russia's major business partner in energy commodities trade. "Energy exports, together with Russia's other extensive resource deposits, would be the foundation of its national revival. They would provide funds to renew its infrastructure, diversify its economy and develop technologies." (Dmitry Medvedev quoted by FT, 5th July, 2006) As Russia becomes a major economic player in Europe, especially as a major energy supplier, its gains more influence over the individual states and their economies and consequently a greater role in Europe as a whole.
Another aspect of Russian diplomatic methods are the economic ties with countries like Iran, Iraq, Syria, Eritrea, and Sudan. Barston (2006) Russia has been a major supplier of arms and nuclear technology to these countries, where its activity in the Middle East is particularly interesting. Russia established commercial relations with Iran and previously Iraq, where it supplied the rogue regimes with weapons and nuclear technology in spite of criticism and negative reactions from its Western allies. However, the commercial relations have their limits, mostly set by American tolerance levels. (Bobo, 2003) By establishing commercial relations, Russia has also improved its diplomatic ties with these countries in general.
The motivation for the economic relations reflects both domestic interests as well as a general Russian interest in increasing its influence on International affairs or at least stop its current decline. "By posing as the sole major power to take seriously (at least in public) Iran's protestations that its nuclear programme is innocent, Russia has gained both commercially and diplomatically." (The Economist; 2/10/2007) Kremlin has been able to sell arms and nuclear technology and thereby financing related domestic industries which would otherwise have it hard to find customers. Bobo Lo (2003) argues that commercial interests assume primacy in the economic relations and consequently Russia has tried to depoliticize this issue by following money rather than political interests. Moreover, commercial success in these countries is likely to attract more potential buyers.
Moreover, Russia's economic relations in Middle East have enabled Kremlin to increase its diplomatic influence in the region. "As for Syria and Iran, Mr Putin's policies have a logic, up to a point. With Iraq under new management, Syria is Russia's only real foothold to hoist itself into a seat at future Middle East negotiations. Iran offers Russia the chance to do what China does over North Korea: play up its own diplomatic influence by offering to broker a deal." (Economist; 12/3/2005) Trade with and technology transfer from Kremlin create a level of dependence on Russia which gives the latter more diplomatic influence. The increased importance of Russia as a consequence of its relations with Iran has been noted by the Economist (The Economist; 2/10/2007) following the Russian vote in favour of a UN Security Council resolution to sanction Iran. "Russia would like to think that the recent slight softening of Iran's public tone and the rising domestic criticism of its president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, may owe something to fears of losing its only legitimate outside source of nuclear technology." (The Economist; 2/10/2007)
Another general feature of Russian diplomacy is the reliance on coercion. Here we can distinguish between verbal statements and speeches, like Putin's 2007 speech in Munich, use of force or a direct threat of its use and use of economic tools.
While Russia is well aware of the limits on its military force capabilities, as illustrated by a number of statements on state of Russian army, Putin still considers at least use of force a tool of the FP. In the conflict with Georgia, where its territory has been used as a safe haven by the Chechen rebels, Russia has threatened to use force in order to convince the Georgian government does not deal with the rebels. In addition, Russian reactions to US decision to develop the ABM system in Europe and establish military bases in Poland and Czech republic have been marked by a an aggressive and even threatening tone. "In a speech that stunned most of the audience at an annual security conference held in Munich, Mr Putin also railed against US plans to build anti-missile defences in Europe, the expansion of NATO to include countries that were formerly part of the Soviet Union, and a host of other western policies." (Fidler & Sevastopulo, 2007) Poland and Czech Republic's representatives talked of Russian "blackmail."
Coercion using economic tools is a persistent method of Russian diplomacy when dealing with countries from the former Soviet sphere of influence, namely the countries in Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and Central and Eastern European Countries (CEECs). Using economic tools like trade and energy prices, it tries to incur significant economic costs and thereby muscle compliance in the target country. Russian relations with Georgia, Ukraine and Poland illustrate well this diplomatic method. "Last autumn [2006], the Russians imposed postal and aviation blockades, alongside the existing embargoes on Georgia's water, wine and fruit. Then, with winter approaching, they doubled the price for Russian gas--in theory for commercial reasons, but with the real aim of taming Mr Saakashvili." (Economist; 2/10/2007) By isolating a country economically and affecting its oil supplies, Putin hopes to force the Georgian president to listen more closely to Kremlin. In the Ukrainian case, Russia in 2007 has dramatically increased the energy prices and even resorted to a complete stop of supplies following the 'Orange revolution' which lead to a turn in Ukrainian FP orientation including the call for EU and NATO membership. In the conflict with Poland, Russia has introduced a ban on imports of Polish meat, as one way to have a negative impact on Polish economy. Russia has in a number of cases used its energy resources, particularly EU's dependence on Russian gas, and trade embargoes and their threat to influence countries FP.
Extensive use of coercive methods by Russian diplomacy reflects both a lack of alternatives and a continuation of the Soviet style. Russia lacks a 'soft power' infrastructure to support its diplomatic efforts and thus cannot rely on appeal of its ideas and ideology in general. Moreover, with Russian economic weakness, the country is unlikely to be able to offer significant economic benefits to affect others' FP. While lower gas prices are useful bargaining tools, countries like Georgia and Ukraine show that economic interests do not always come top on the FP agenda. As the military capability and utility of use of force declined, Russia has tried to rely on economic tools to back coercive diplomacy. Russia is a major energy supplier to much of the Soviet empire and increasingly also EU, which provides it with more power to influence states economy by affecting supply and prices of gas and oil. Coercive methods are also partly a continuation of Soviet diplomatic style where Russia's diplomats draw a considerable part of their experience and expertise from.
Russian diplomacy also heavily relies on personal diplomacy. The past events clearly demonstrated the importance of the head of the state in policy making and diplomatic negotiations. While Yeltsin's years were more chaotic and a number of actors have been engaged in Russian foreign policy making at the cost of its coherence and unity, recently it seems more appropriate to talk of Putin's foreign policy rather than a Russian one. The president takes an active role in major diplomatic events, like the EU- Russia meetings and negotiations, and his statements, particularly the recent speech from February 2007 in Munich, highlights his importance in shaping the tone and direction of Russian FP. Barston (2006:83) also mentions the increased importance of special presidential envoys. This development demonstrates the importance of the Foreign policy in Putin's agenda and Russian affairs. Personal diplomacy is a persistent feature of Russian FP with president's statements and visits as an important method to communicate Russian intentions.
The role of the Putin in Russian diplomatic activity reflects the importance of FP agenda in domestic affairs. It could be argued the managed democracy regime existing in Russia on the one hand gives him almost complete power over the FP, but on the other hand makes him personally responsible for the successes and failures. In this sense, personal diplomacy reflects more the importance of FP in domestic politics rather than the other way around.
Russia has in the post-2000 period developed bilateral diplomatic relations with a number of countries. Barston (2006) identifies key group of countries, France, Germany, India and China, where Russian diplomacy relied on bilateralism to improve the existing relation. High-profile visits by key officials and Putin were an important part in building up the relationships which were later institutionalized in treaties or other agreements. "Russian Federation-Chinese relations were upgrade to a strategic level, with the Russian-Chinese Treaty of Cooperation and Joint Statement and similar arrangements concluded with India." Russian state energy-giant Gazprom and major German companies (E-ON and BASF) have been working on an important joint energy project, namely 'Nord Stream', which links the two states more closely together. Barston (2006) has highlighted the role of cultural diplomacy in developing the bilateral relations, particularly the German-Russian cultural programme.
Russian efforts to establish a broader and deeper set of bilateral relations with key countries reflects both the pragmatic interests grounded in domestic economy as well as the significance of its diplomatic position. "Though it makes sense for a country with as many neighbours as Russia has to be on good terms with as many as possible, China included, Mr Putin knows that, if Russia is to grow strong again, it needs to link its future with the world's rich democracies--the folk around the G8 table--not the world's few surviving dictators." (Economist; 07/22/2000) Diversification of relations and allies can also reflect Russian interest in improving its diplomatic power by limiting its reliance on the West. "Russian officials warn westerners, with varying degrees of bad temper, that they have plenty of other friends--China, India, Iran, Iraq, former Yugoslavia--if NATO and the European Union again overlook Russia's interests in places like Kosovo and Eastern Europe." (Economist; 07/22/2000)
The role of soft power, or public diplomacy, in Russian diplomatic methods has been limited but the recent shifts signal the growing importance of this area. Soft power has been defined by Joseph Nye as the "ability to get what you want through attraction rather than through coercion" and which can "be cultivated through relations with allies, economic assistance, and cultural exchanges." (Nye, 2004) Russia has provided economic assistance to its closest allies in the CIS in exchange for their support of Russian FP. In particular this has mainly taken form of low energy imports prices, at least in comparison to the consumer sin the West. By providing economic benefits, Russia was able to maintain the pro-Kremlin orientation and general compliance with its policies in these countries. The 'carrots' have been withdrawn once the countries changed their political orientation, e.g. the case of Georgia and Ukraine after the 'Colour revolutions'.
"As a result of the 'colour revolutions' in Ukraine and Georgia, Russia's leaders learned that crude manipulation might not be enough to remain in power, that ideas matter and that NGOs can make revolutions." (Popescu, 2006:2) This negative experience has led Popescu (2006) to argue that Russia has recognized the importance of soft power dimension in diplomacy and the methods associated. "Russia-friendly and Russia-financed NGOs and think-tanks have emerged in many CIS states and even in the secessionist entities." (Popescu, 2006:2) Russians so far have a clear deficit in appeal of its ideas and Putin's doctrine of 'managed' or 'sovereign' democracy attracted a considerable critique. However, there is a clear perception and the need to address this in the Russian administrative. In Ivan Krastev words, the major objective of the Russian policy  "is to develop an efficient infrastructure of ideas, institutions, networks and media outlets that can use the predictable crisis of the current orange-type regimes to regain influence not simply at the level of government but at the level of society as well." (Ivan Krastev in Popescu, 2006:2) As already mentioned above, Russia also engaged in cultural exchange programs with Germany (Barston, 2006:84) to facilitate a change in its image.
Russia as a part of interests abroad has been trying to influence the political process in the CIS countries in a number of ways. Personal statements regarding the preferred candidate and visits to the country preceding elections have market Kremlin's involvement in the elections campaigns and politics in the CIS countries. "It may now be called the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), but their independence goes only so far. The Kremlin sends advisers to help its preferred candidates with election campaigns." (Economist; 5/22/2004) Particular example are the Ukrainian 2004 elections where Putin has made statements clearly supporting Russian-friendly Viktor Yanukovych. Russia by interfering in the elections has tried to shape domestic politics of the CIS countries in order to create more Russian oriented governments and increase its influence over the countrie's FP.
One of the major patterns in Russian foreign policy is cooperation with the USA following the 9/11 attacks. Putin's diplomatic efforts to bring Russia closer to US have relied on assistance in issues related to terrorism and diplomatic support or at least non-opposition on issues vital to USA. "Putin declared that Russia will assist the US anti-terrorism campaign in the following way: by providing information about terrorist bases, allowing use of Russian airspace for humanitarian flights in areas of anti-terrorist operations, accepting US use of Central Asia airfields for antiterrorist operations, and by supporting the Northern Alliance in Afghanistan." (Buszynski, 2003:20) Russia has avoided major conflicts on issues which are vital to USA. (MAcFarlane 2006:42) This was particularly visible in the run up to the Iraq war of 2003, RF did not want to state its position on future US actions and let other Security Council members lead the anti-war campaign. Yet the partnership has its limits as Russia competes with US on issues which are vital to it but USA considers less important. Putin's recent speech in Munich seems to be reconsidering the success of the US 'war on terror' and Russian support for US unilateralism in general.
Russian conception of world order is an important motivation for the diplomatic efforts. While Yieltsin tried to balance the influence of USA and its NATO allies, Putin has put Russian in a closer relationship with the West and has cooperated with US in areas vital to the latter's interest. As a consequence of Russian amiability, USA has supported Russian membership of the G8 which improves Kremlin's international standing.
As for the domestic interests, Bobo Lo (2003) notes that cooperation with USA attracted major opposition at home, especially in the legislative and military. While certain are domestic groups that oppose alignment and cooperation with West, Putin has acted this way in the context of Russia's military, economic and diplomatic decline. Russian economy has shrunk to half of its size following the break up of the Soviet empire. (Bobo 2003) The decline makes opposition to and competition with US too costly and unlikely too succeed.
Moreover, "Russia's orientation to the West satisfies a deep longing among democrats and liberals, but it also serves the practical purpose of deflecting Western criticism of Russia's campaign in Chechnya. (Buszynski, 2003:22) USA has in the aftermath of 9/11 and Russia cooperation minimized criticism of Russian campaign in the rebel province. The Chechen war is a domestically a highly salient as it has been one of the most important issues Putin was elected on in 2000.
This paper has examined various aspects of Russian diplomacy and discussed the motivation behind its diplomatic methods. Both domestic context and associated interests, and external environment affect Russian methods.
On the one hand, domestic limits what methods are available, as Russia lacks of soft power dimension and had limited success with carrot approach when trying to influence countries' FP. On the other hand, the utility of energy resources increases as Russia becomes a major exporter of gas to Europe. Relationship with EU follows both domestic economic interest and Russian effort to increase its influence.
Economic ties with other countries, particularly the axis-of-evil members, follow profit interests as well as it serves to increase Russian influence in the region. The importance of coercion with CIS and CEECs countries can be explained by lack of viable alternatives and large level of dependence on the Russia for energy imports. Russia has tried to influence the domestic political process in some of the CIS countries, as Russia tries to keep its neighbours in line with Russian Foreign policy preferences.
Putin has been able to secure virtual autonomy in FP decision making process which puts him in a better position to get away with ignoring the domestic interest. This has been also reflected by the role of personal diplomacy. Russian reliance on bilateralism to extend and deepen its relations with key players and emerging powers in International relations reflects Russian interest in developing its diplomatic influence. Having a more diverse set of relations can also make it less reliant on particular countries and improve its bargaining position. The relationship with USA again reflects domestic weakness, but is also motivated by the benefits USA has to offer. On top of that it makes the West less critical about Russian record in Chechnya and human rights record.
It seems that Kremlin's main objective is to enhance Russian diplomatic influence and power or at least stop the rapid decline. Domestic interests are reflected in the fact that Putin has recognized that Russia can only be a major player if it has a strong economy. Moreover, economic growth and rising living standards have an important influence on domestic stability and people's support for Putin policies at home and abroad. (Bobo 2003) In this sense, economic pragmatism in Russia FP reflects both domestic economic interests and interest to increase Russian international diplomatic role.
Moreover, there are good reasons for Russia to develop a soft power infrastructure which serve its' public diplomacy in future activities.