Since the introduction of the United Kingdom Biodiversity Action Plan (UK BAP) in 1992, 427 UK action plans for specific species was introduced, 34 of them relating to both oceanic and terrestrial mammals (Mammal Trust UK, 2005). This is because there has been a dramatic decline in the numbers of native UK species, including the red squirrel, pine marten, water vole and common dormouse. This is due to a change in agricultural systems affecting habitats and feeding site, competition with other native and non-native species, and previous hunting pressures over the previous two centuries. There is also a threat of hybridisation among species, and therefore merging of distinct species (eg. polecat and feral ferret) may occur in the future if no active management of species is to happen to the species. Some of these 34 animals are flagship mammal species that indicate the local health state of the environment. For example the presence of healthy bat species shows that European Bat Lyssavirus (EBLV), which can be transmitted to humans, is free from the environment (Battersby, 2005).
High profile UK BAP species include the red squirrel, dormouse, polecat and otter. The read squirrel used to be widespread throughout the British Isles until the introduction of the American grey squirrel in the 19 th century. The grey squirrel is better adapted at collecting resources when compared to the red squirrel, therefore, was more successful in the red squirrel's habitat. The grey squirrel is also immune to the squirrel poxvirus, and when the non-native species brought the virus to Britain, it resulted in a mass decline in red squirrel numbers. There is thought to be 161,000 red squirrels inhabiting mainland Britain, mainly in Scotland and northern England (Figure 1) but is reducing in fast numbers as the distribution of grey squirrels spreads from the south (Harris et al. , 1995). The prevention of grey squirrels populating Scotland is a high priority in keeping the red squirrel from being extinct in the UK. This can be achieved by culling grey squirrel if they are seen approaching habitats that are held by red squirrel. However, the Scottish Habitat Action Plan has set out guidelines that have aims to change coniferous forests and woodlands to broad-leaved species (Scottish Forestry Forum, 2002). As the red squirrel thrives in these coniferous woodlands, it is one step backwards on the survival for this native species.
One success case for the BAP is the re-population of England by otters in pockets throughout the country, mainly from Scotland. This suggests that waterways are becoming more habitable for this species since the UKBAP introduction. The 2006 update from the Tracking Mammals Partnership has stated that there is a significant increase of otters in the UK from the 2003 report by Jeffries which provided evidence of 9,470 otters in mainland Britain.
The BAP does not drive conservation work for some of the UK mammal species. These include the grey squirrel (as discussed), mole, fox, badger, non-native species of deer, rabbit and rat. This is because population numbers of these animals have either been increasing or are at stable populations (except rabbit numbers that are declining). These animals are regarded as agricultural pests that predate on poultry (fox), damage forestry, agriculture and biodiversity (deer, mole), and have correlations to health problems for humans and livestock (badger is believed to promote TB in bovine livestock, and the rat can transmit Leptospirosis to humans).
It is noted that many of the rare UK species are actually rare in mainland Europe. The red squirrel is more common in Europe, and it is these animals that have allowed the re-population of red squirrels in the UK. All of the British bat species are found in Europe, although some species, such as the Barbastelle and Bechstein's bat are rare through all of Europe. On the other hand, the UK accounts for 17% of the badger population in Europe, and the majority of Chinese water deer, which is thriving better in the UK than it's native Asia. This shows that comparisons between the UK and Europe must be taken into account when identifying species to help promote. If we were not to protect all non-native species, this would affect the biodiversity of the whole of Europe and the rest of the globe.
Biodiversity Action Plans are divided up amongst local authorities in the UK. Each individual authority identifies local priorities and determines the contribution they can make to the delivery of the national Species and Habitat Action Plan targets (UKBAP.org.uk, 2006). Berkshire, unlike the major counties that surround it (Oxfordshire, Hampshire, Buckinghamshire, Gloucestershire), doesn't enforce any Local Action Plans for certain species, including mammals. Instead the county is focusing on providing correct habitat areas that are suitable for the region. This will help all wild species indirectly by providing suitable sites to nest and provides adequate feed sources for them.
Using the information provided by Berkshires neighbouring counties, there is main focus on the establishment and stabilisation of populations of dormice, water voles, polecats, stoats and weasels. All species of bat that are found in southern England are also of a conservation concern. These animals, as well as the West European hedgehog, (an example of an insectivorous mammal with population data that is more extensive than other insectivorous species such as the common- and water shrew) are to be used to apply conservation practices at Sonning Farm.
Sonning Farm is located in the Wokingham district of Berkshire. It is a 180ha site, of which 110ha is pasture and 70ha is arable ground that grows oilseed rape and wheat. The farm also rears dairy herd replacement heifers and often fattens lambs ready for market. The River Thames runs to the north of the farm, which provides the area with water through streams and ditches. As the farm is located on the flood plain of the river, it is prone to flooding of the fields that provide silage, and flooding of the overgrown marsh area known as the Shacklefords. A map representing the farm in the current state is shown in Figure 2. At the current state there are isolated islands of wooded areas that can only sustain small population numbers of mammals, birds and insects. A few hedges line the edge of few of the fields, but are mostly of a couple of species of hedge plants, with wide gaps in between. As these are also isolated from each other, they can only provide a habitat for small numbers of populations as well. There are however, in-fill trees that provide suitable nesting sites for bats that hunt over the neighbouring fields at night. A ditch that caries excess water off the track is presently overgrown by bramble species. A permanent pond is also located in the centre of the farm and is overshadowed by trees.
In order to increase wild mammal numbers on the farm, you need suitable information on each individual species' habitat, breeding systems and food resources. An increase in populations will not occur if one of these factors is not provided. For the animals that have been chosen for conservation need to be able to travel in safety to the farm. This will most likely happen using hedgerows as corridors from neighbouring homes and fields. It is important to join up and maintain the hedgerows on the farm to provide a corridor for access to the central woodland areas. Many species will not travel far from hedges (except for species such as deer and badgers that travel freely across open fields). Bats also stay close to, and use hedgerows to travel. In-filling gaps with a variety of native species, especially those that fruit annually, will provide a range of different feed environments. Different plant matter will increase the species of animals and insects that eat the leaves. Having a larger range and number of insects will bring insectivores to the farm to predate. Examples include the hedgehog, dormouse and all the bat species where each individual bat can eat up to 3000 insects in one night (RSPB, 2007). Hedge species that fruit (eg. bramble and dog rose), provide food for small mammals such as the dormouse, and water vole (which eats fallen fruit). Five hedgerow species every 30m is sufficient to increase insect and small animal numbers. Creating a hedgerow that extends north-west and joins with the vegetation that lines the Thames will open up the possibility of a wider range of animals and insects to enter the farm, and hopefully stay. This is because many animals and insects use the fast flowing river to either feed or provide a habitat. Cutting hedges in rotation every two years enables part of the hedgerow to mature and provide suitable habitats for mammals to hide. Hedgerows require fences that prevent the large ruminants from grazing the undergrowth that would otherwise destroy habitats for voles, mice and shrews.
Cutting back on the bramble species that line the track will open up the ditch and allow access for maintenance. Properly dredging the site's ditches should allow better access for those species that inhabit the waters edge, such as the water vole. Also, reducing the numbers of ornamental plant species that are growing in the current hedges will remove the chances of animals eating any potentially poisonous plants.
Adjoining of the woodland islands using hedges and filling in the corner of the field currently used as set aside with trees and shrubs allows the habitat to support and sustain larger viable populations. This will lead to the introduction of the larger carnivorous mammals such as the weasel, stoat and polecat. As the field entrance is located in that corner that will be re-developed, making a new entrance east of the pond will ensure that animal species will not be disrupted by farm traffic. This woodland area also needs to be fenced to stop grazing by ruminants. Introducing scrub species (use tree guards to stop them getting eaten by rabbits etc.) in the woodland areas that separate fields 'straighthanger' and 'gravelpit' will introduce an understorey, providing better habitats for mice, hedgehogs and weasel family . Introduce woodland management schemes to start coppicing trees again. This will provide better habitats for dormice and other small mammals. Reducing the numbers of conifers may be of beneficial use to some animals and to create the right woodland habitat for the Berkshire Downs. However, dormice are known to live within them, so this isn't a main priority for conserving small wild mammals. Branches and standing dead trees provide a feed source for detrivorous insects, which in turn can be eaten by insectivorous mammals.
Coppicing the south-facing trees around the pond area will allow light into the pond, allowing for more plant life to grow, and provide habitats for flies and waterborne insects. The Daubenton's bat almost exclusively feeds over water sources (Battersby, 2005), so allowing enough manoeuvrability for bats to enter and leave the area over water should provide sufficient space for other species, such as birds to feel secure on the pond during the day.
As the north of the farm is on the Thames floodplain, it may be possible to establish a reed bed in the Shacklefords. The reed bed could allow the introduction of a new habitat for water voles, shrews and mice. The bed also provides shelter against stoats, weasels and polecats that might be introduced to the area. The reed beds provide a source of insect species that have juvenile stages in water, such as the dragonfly. Currently, there are tall trees lining the shacklefords, and the building of bat boxes will provide roosting sites for bats, such as Daubenton's bat that hunts primarily over water sources (Bat Conservation Trust, 2006).
Bat boxes can also be situated to the south of the farm, in the wooded area of next to the cow sheds. As a recent report by The Mammals Trust UK (2005) showed that bats tend to congregate around cattle during night time grazing. This is most likely due to that cattle dung attracts insect and fly species to the area, providing a constant food supply to bats. This is especially important during rearing of juveniles.
Beetle banks that join the River Thames to the centre of the farm will aid travel routes for small animals and insects from the river into the farm. The banks also provides over wintering habitats for insects and the smaller rodents. Insect diversity is also increased with the addition of field margins around the largest fields. This also provides suitable habitats for shrews, mice and voles that take refuge in heterogeneous grass and flower species.
The layout of the farm, with the added hedgerows, field margins, and beetle banks is shown in Figure 3.
For the farm to sufficiently monitor the population abundance of mammal species, it is important to get volunteer involvement. There is a large number of people in the UK that want to take an active part in collecting information on the flora and fauna of the British Isles. It must be noted what type of surveys are to be monitored and whether the volunteers need to be taught how to use specific equipment (eg. bat echolocation devices). Health and safety of the volunteers is more important than conserving mammal species, so procedures must be taken not to put the participants in unnecessary danger (e. wading in deep water, or climbing trees with no protective equipment).
Volunteers and skilled surveyors must use a variety of sampling methods and background knowledge or to successfully estimate the numbers of wild mammals present on the farm. For example bats are primarily nocturnal, so counting bat numbers during the day is inefficient at monitoring their numbers. Field surveys using echolocation devices can be used, as well as colony counts as brooding females leave their roosting sites at night to feed. The Mammals on Roads (MOR) survey identifies road casualties along certain stretches of road, and can correlate this to the abundance of the species present in the local environment. This may be possible to introduce to the farm, except that there is only one major road that travels past the farm, so species aren't likely to cross the highway. A suitable number of deaths need to be recorded before statistical analysis can be achieved. Therefore only species that are common (eg hedgehog, rat, fox and badger), can be suitably correlated to abundance. A more efficient way in counting abundance is by using clay tiles that create footprints as the animal treks across the tile (Game Conservancy Trust). Hair trap tunnels can also provide hair samples for identification either by using guides or keys. A DNA library of hair samples (cytochrome B sequence) is being established that will allow DNA identification of hair samples (Battersby, 2003). At the present time there are 24 mammals sequenced, but a quicker way to analyse samples is needed for this type of surveying to be used nationally. This will in turn allow for the recruitment of more volunteers that are not required to have special skills in identifying the type of hair from species.