Since 1992, there have been 6 different bills that have attempted to ban the use of hunting with hounds in the UK. The final bill was rejected 3 times before the use of the Parliamentary act was used to ban hunting. Since the 2004 ban, it is believed that the ban is a target against the rural communities that participate in the activity. It is claimed that hunting with dogs is the least cruel method for culling foxes, but comes with criticism from the Committee into Inquiry into Hunting with Dogs which have evidence that a dog bite doesn't always initially target the neck of foxes and hares, and the constant pursuit of deer doesn't correlate to natural behaviour. A study on the numbers of foxes during the foot and mouth outbreak proposes the idea that hunting with dogs isn't an adequate way to regulate numbers of foxes. Deer hunting with dogs only accounts for 15% of culling needed. Also, hare and mink hunting make an insignificant impact on the number of the species. Therefore the ban on hunting with dogs can have suitable justification that animal welfare is seriously compromised, and not a conspiracy against the class divisions.
The Hunting Act (2004) was put into practice on the 18 th of February 2005. This Act came with criticism, especially from the pro-hunting groups because the current Labour government had to evoke the Parliamentary Act in order for the bill to be passed through the House of Lords. Tony Blair's statement on the BBC programme 'Question Time' in 1999 that, "hunting will be banned before the next election" (supportfoxhunting.co.uk, 2006) showed the desperation that the party was in order for a complete ban on hunting. Many pro-hunters believe that using the Parliamentary Act was the last attempt that the Labour party could use in 2004 for the bill to pass before the 2005 general election.
Mr Gray's remark came after 6 different bills- since 1992- all tried to ban the use of hunting with hounds, especially that of fox hunting, by the Labour party, (Wild Mammals (Protection) Bill, 1992; Fox Hunting (Abolition) Bill, 1993; Wild Mammals (Protection)- Amendment, 1995; and The Foster Bill, 1997). These bills never passed with the favour to ban hunting, due to the majority Conservative government opposing the bill. After the 1997 general election, where the surge in Labour MPs caused the Conservative government to back down as the main political party, the then-Home Secretary Jack Straw initiated the Hunting Act in 2000 after the results of 'The Committee of Inquiry into Hunting with Dogs in England and Wales' (termed hereafter as 'The Burns Report'). This bill was 'thrown out' by the Lords, which had a majority of Conservative members. The Hunting Act was proposed again in 2002, and once again thrown out by the Lords. The Act was finally passed in 2004, after Alun Michael, the Rural Affairs Minister initiated the Parliamentary Act over another rejection from the Lords. The constant attempts by the Labour party in the last decades over hunting (with dogs), may be due to a form of 'class conflict'.
Mentioned in the Oxford Dictionary (2005) as "a system that divides members of a society into sets based on social or economic status", and was traditionally perceived as high earning members that were powerful and affluent ('upper class'), and those members that were less economically well-off (the 'working class'). As a stereotypical judgement, upper class members were usually wealthy landowners that tended to vote Conservative. Whereas the working-class are perceived to work within towns and cities with a low income. Labour's 1945-97 coalition of the working class and progressive middle-class allies (Galloway, 2006), has stood as a party with the views of the working class, winning support for the party's MPs in the majority of the UK's towns and cities in the 1997 and 2001 general elections (Figure 1). This has caused a division by the wealth of person, the political views they hold, and also whether they live in an urban or rural environment. It can therefore be assumed that the repetition of anti-hunting bills brought forward to the government may be an attack on the rural Conservatives after once common working-class sports such as cock-fighting, dog-fighting, bull and bear-baiting were banned in the 19 th century under the power of the then Tory (which are now modern-day Conservatives), and the Whig (now modern day Liberal Democrat) parties(number-10.gov.uk, 2006) However, it was then, and can still be believed that fox hunting, although enjoyed by the wealthy, was a form of countryside management. The different attitudes to fox hunting between urban and rural dwellers can be summarised in Table 1.
From the above table, it is clear that the views of fox hunting differ between the urban and rural populations. This may be due to media influence, because many people that live in towns and cities have never seen or been on a hunt.
Hunting with dogs is claimed to be the best method for culling foxes. This is because the second most common method for culling wild animals is by the use of shooting the animal from a distance. The riflemen must be highly accurate in order to successfully kill the animal without causing a prolonged pain response in the animal. Shooting an animal inaccurately can seriously cause pain to the animal. Shooting from a distance also allows the animal to have a high chance of escaping with an injury, unlike hunting with dogs, which specifically targets a single animal and will constantly pursue it. "However, this concern is currently not applied to other species of animals during open shooting season, or the irregular shooting of animals or birds by farmers" (Wheeler 2000). It is claimed that the dogs hunting the animal will not cause injury prior to the main neck bite:
Hunting with dogs doesn't always attack the animal with a powerful bite to the neck after a chase, as many pro-hunting groups tend to believe. The Burns Report (2000) obtained the carcasses of four out of five foxes killed during 15 individual hunts (the fifth carcass was not presented to the Committee by the Hunt). Two of the carcasses were shot after being dug out by terriermen when the 'fox went to ground'. The post mortem of one of these carcasses showed the presence of past bullet wounds- supporting the idea that shooting animals isn't the best/ most effective method of controlling numbers of foxes with the minimum amount of stress or pain to the animal. Two other fox carcasses that were killed, were by hounds above ground, and were examined to find "little tissue damage in the head, neck and shoulder region" (Figure 2). Therefore these two foxes couldn't have been killed by a swift kill to the neck as stated by Thomas and Allen. The University of Bristol concluded that these deaths occurred from "probable... trauma to the abdomen, hindquarters or chest...by repeated dog bite".
The two carcasses examined with no factures to the cervical vertebrae that were presented to the inquiry may have been a coincidence, but information presented to the Burn's Report for the same result re-occurring was both supported and opposed. Jones et al, 2000, own studies on 3 post mortems show that the main cause of death was a bite wound over the chest region, and severe breakages of the spinal cord may have resulted from the fox being shaken by the foxhound. As there was no debris, or frothing in the trachea, Jones has stated that the kill, although not on the neck, still killed the foxes instantly (most likely due to the shear size difference between the fox- 7kg, and foxhound 30-40kg)
The fox is classified as a top predator in the UK. Therefore, being chased may not be part of its natural behaviour and may cause stress to the animal. Also, The Burns Report state that approximately a third of foxes that are chased by Masters of Foxhound Association dogs are shot after the fox has 'gone to ground'- therefore it doesn't seem necessary to chase them, and just shoot them in the first place, without the need of a chase.
Huntsmen agree that a fox being chased isn't part of its natural routine, but foxes have evolved to be able to travel long distances, to enable them to catch and find their prey. Deer and hares are characteristic of prey species, in that the "whole anatomy of the species with its muscle mass concentrated at the top of long slender limbs and the bipedal feet is a conformation clearly evolved for flight and speed" (Thomas, 2000), and therefore the animal can travel great distances with the same type of stress levels induced similar to those which occurred in horses and humans which had exercised intensively (Bateson and Bradshaw, 1999 as cited in Burns et al.2000). However, when Bateson worked with Harris for the Burns Report, they both concluded that deer experience heighten activity levels when being chased, greater than deer would experience when being chased by wolves in other countries.
Hunting with dogs often targets those animals which are weak or old, especially in the case for deer hunting (with dogs). This selection, in a way, stops those that are weak and old, suffering over the winter months from its illness. With foxes, it is often for hounds to catch foxes that are diseased (most likely due to mange). If disease is allowed to spread, it could infect domesticated animals or decrease the population of the hunted animal, especially if a ban where to be put into place (Eddy, 2000). This targeting of the weak and old allows a good way of regulating the numbers of wild animals that would otherwise increase in numbers and harm the effectiveness and economy of farmed animals.
It is speculation that numbers of animals will increase if a complete ban on hunting with animals. In the case for regulating foxes, it is estimated that there are 240,000 adult foxes in UK and produce 425,000 cubs each year (Harris 1995, as cited in Baker et al., 2002). Therefore, a 64% mortality (276,250) each year needs to occur to stop the numbers of these animals from increasing in population. However, Pye-Smith (1997 as cited in White et al. 2000) calculates that 15,000 foxes are killed directly from fox hunts and Burns et al., (2000) estimate that only 21-25,000 foxes are killed each year. Therefore, hunting has never been a huge part in the culling of foxes, and the main killing method is due to motor incidents (Pye-Smith, 1997, calculates 100,000 are killed from traffic), and environmental factors (e.g. starvation). Baker et al. , (2002) studied the numbers of foxes before and after the FMD in 2001, by calculating faecal density in sites located throughout England and Wales. The report concluded that the numbers of foxes didn't increase during a nationwide ban on hunting with dogs (and other types of culling methods to a certain extent). The report also found no association between any reduction in hunting pressure that was observed, and the change in fox density. If this report is to be taken into account, it cannot be valid to justify that hunting with dogs is a good regulatory method. The Burns Report also reports that hunting with hounds doesn't regulate other wild mammal species. It is believed that deer hunting with hounds only accounts for 15% of the number of deer needed to be culled to maintain a stable population. Although the numbers of hares and mink populations haven't been statistically measured, Burns et al. believe hunting these animals make an insignificant impact in regions that they are hunted, due to the constant reproductions of the animals.
Averaging out over the year and across all foxhunts, each fox killed costs 930.Looking at it by region, the cost per fox killed varies from less than 100 in six hunts that participate in Wales, but over 3,000 for each fox that is killed in seven hunts in the South of England. This is an un-economical cost to culling in the South, and this evidence, together with collections and memorabilia that is available, reflects to a certain extent that hunting with dogs can be seen as an unnecessary recreational activity. The high cost isn't as high for the farmers who want foxes removed from their land. As White et al. quote "The major advantage to farmers and landowners from the hunt is that it operates without any additional expense on their part, unless they choose to hunt themselves", is one of the main reasons why farmers choose to allow hunting- because the price for pest control is free. If the farmers do not want culling of wild animals on their land, it has been estimated that non-culling approaches may cost more than 3000 per fox killed. For example, Hodge and Pepper (1998, as cited in White, 2000) calculated that the price to erect a fence that would prevent large animals, such as deer and foxes, to enter onto agricultural property would cost in the region of 4.10 per metre of fence, with an extra 14pence per metre every year for maintenance. A fence would also stop the general movement of wild animals across the countryside, and with animals such as deer that move to graze, fencing them off might cause them to starve- therefore bringing in another welfare dispute.
The suggestion that the ban on hunting with dogs is entirely due to class, than animal welfare seem implausible. The ban is/will affect the rural population, mainly because they are mainly the 'class' that participate in the activity. However, I believe it is right that the rural community should be incensed by the ban. There was little, or no scientific evidence given to The Burn's Report that a ban on hunting with dogs would result in an increase in wild mammal populations, only speculation from both sides of the debate. As Leader-Williams (2002) states:
I believe that this statement is right, but from what evidence is presented in this report, I would agree that the affect on class is a result on a ban, and not the cause. Wild mammals do need to be regulated- especially the over-populated deer in the south-west - but modern-day hunting with dogs has been waived from regulation of animals into a cruel sporting activity.