Dogs evolved from wolves between 15-100,000 years ago. They share similar genes, and anatomical characteristics. Dogs have strong carnassial teeth that shear flesh in a scissor-like fashion, and use powerful muscles to aid in this action. The shape of the dog skull is similar to the omnivorous bear's. Herbivores however, use a developed masseter muscle to masticate plant food in a circular, lateral movement- a procedure that carnivores do not posses. Similarly, carnivores do not have the same microbial activity to efficiently degrade cellulose before absorption, making green plants ineffective in the diet. Carnivores demand a high intake of protein requirement in comparison to herbivorous and omnivorous animals, with essential amino acid deficiencies more common in carnivores. Modern-day dog food consists of a large proportion (50-70%) of carbohydrate, which dogs are able to digest. There is proportionally less protein, and usually comes from cereal and vegetable crops which provide an almost constant nutritional composition allowing the right ratios of essential amino acids to be absorbed, with an excess of limiting amino acids to reduce nutritional protein disorders. Nutrients from meat sources are much lower (~4% minimum) in complete diets, therefore dogs can be healthy with a low meat intake diet.
It has long been debated whether to categorise the domesticated dog as a carnivore, omnivore, or an omnivorous carnivore. This is due to the vegetation-eating behaviour that is observed in dogs, and also due to the high carbohydrate intakes that are being fed to the nation's pets. The Oxford dictionary (Soanes, 2005) states that a vegetarian is "a person who does not eat meat for moral, religious, or health reasons". Some evolutionists and nutritionists believe this comment can be extended from 'a person' to 'an animal'.
It has recently been shown, by studying the genetic construction of mitochondrial DNA that dogs originated from East Asia, due to the high genetic diversity of the DNA base sequences. It is calculated that his would have occurred less than 15,000 years ago (Vil, as cited in McGourty, 2002) - far less than the previously calculated 100,000 years ago (Vil 
et al. , 1997). All studies have concluded that dogs originated from wolves, and not coyotes. The clusters of similar base sequences in many breeds of dogs, give reason to believe that in the past there was constant back-breeding of dogs with wolves. Wolves and other canids are known to prey on species such as moose and elk, along with smaller mammals such as rabbits. Once the prey has been caught, the predators tend to eat the internal viscera of the prey, which would, in most cases contain [partially] digested vegetable matter. Therefore the evolutionary ancestors of dogs do, to a certain extent eat vegetable matter, but are not vegetarians because they are also consuming meat.
Carnivores have specialised masticatory apparatus to allow the animal to ingest certain sized pieces of food efficiently. Carnivores, like herbivores have a front row of incisor teeth that are generally used for nibbling. Either side of the incisor teeth are large canines which have a root that is usually even larger than the tooth. This root firmly holds the canine in place to allow the animal to firmly hold the tissues of its prey when tearing it apart. The characteristic features of all carnivores are that of the carnassial teeth. These sharp, multi-rooted teeth do not occlude, supporting the idea that canines tear the food, instead of biting, and chewing food like most herbivores. When comparing the dentition of dogs (Figure 2) with that of the Brown bear (Figure 1), there isn't an obvious, visual difference between the shape of the teeth. Brown bears still have the same jaw structure as dogs, and powerful masseter muscles (described below), yet is easily classed as an omnivore due to that the bears are known to often eat roots, sprouts, and berries, along with a large variety of vegetation. The only difference is that the upper jaw of the bear aligns closer to the bottom jaw, giving more of a chewing mechanism than the dog, despite showing similar multi-cusped polar and molar teeth. Brown bears that inhabit the coastal regions of America are much larger, and heavier in weight due to the high protein diet that they consume from fish and crustaceans (Macdonald, 1992). This gives suggestion that bears too, might be omnivorous, but only when they revert back to their carnivorous instincts that the animal shows the maximum size of the species. When using the bear as an example, it is plausible to believe that despite the evolution of the jaw for a carnivorous diet, dogs can live on a herbivorous diet, but may have a nutritional imbalance resulting in stunted growth.
Herbivores and omnivores have evolved specialised muscles and dentition in order to sufficiently masticate their vegetation to allow for adequate digestion of the feed intake. Herbivores, when compared against carnivores, have a pronounced masseter muscle, which initiates and aids the movement of the jaw in a lateral movement, which grinds food on the flat molar dentition at the back of the mouth. An animal that can live solely on a vegetarian diet should have a pronounced masseter muscle to help break down the strong cellulose walls that would otherwise prevent the absorption of proteins and fat within the plant cell. Carnivores, however, have a masseter muscle that is smaller in size, due to the fact that the muscle cannot move the mandible in a lateral movement due to the shape of the jaw. It is noted in Dyce (1987), that the only movement of the mandible in a lateral movement will cause trauma, and is 'occasionally so severe that the coronoid process engages the zygomatic arch, locking the jaws in the depressed position'. This problem occurs due to that the mouth of evolved carnivores, such as the dog and cat having the scissor-like movement of the jaw bones, and the postglenoid process prevents the temporalis muscle from dislocating the jaw. This would evidently be possible because the temporalis muscle is a powerful muscle that joins the mandible to the top of the cranium by stretching from the large coronoid process in carnivores to the occipital region. The pronounced zygomatic arch on a carnivore's skull shows that it is bowed to allow the large muscle to work properly. It is believed that the temporalis muscle evolved to restrain prey species for consuming (Dyce, 1987; Pough, 2002). A strong temporalis muscle wouldn't have evolved as much as the cat, which is defined as an obligate carnivore.
Dogs, as well as other carnivores contain no salivary amylase enzymes in saliva; therefore the salivary glands' main function is to lubricate the mouth and oesophagus, and not digestion. The stomach of the dog is comparatively large for the species. Colin (as cited in Sisson, 1953) gives a capacity range of 0.6-8.0 litres, depending on the breed of dog. The large expansion that the stomach can undergo reflects the eating mechanism that dogs engage in. Dogs tend to gulp their food in large quantities, and are known for their voracious appetites. This may relate back to the wild ancestor of the dog, where the wolf would sometimes spend long periods of time without food, during times of low food availability or when in constant pursuit of its prey. The cardiac sphincter is generally wide, which may be related to the ease of which dogs can vomit. Once the food bolus has been broken down in the stomach by hydrochloric acid, the chime passes in to the pancreas, where enzymes aid in the digestion of the food. Dogs can, and are more efficient at digesting carbohydrates, in that they produce three-times as more pancreatic amylase to breakdown starch (Frisby, 2001). Proteases and lipases are also released, similar to all monogastric mammals. The chime then passes through the relatively short intestinal tract. It is believed that the dog's intestine is approximately 5 times the length of the dog, whereas the intestinal length of the sheep can be 25 times the body length (Dyce, 1987). This short intestinal length, and simple when compared to ruminants, is similar to the cat- supporting the idea that the dog is a carnivore.
Dogs are hind-gut fermenters, in that the presence of fermentable microbes are located in the intestines of the animal, and not located before the digestible stomach like fore-gut fermenters, which include all ruminant animals. This is believed to be a primitive digestive vertebrate characteristic of the animals due to the same digestive patterns in birds and lizards. Since no mammal possesses the genetic information to produce cellulase enzymes within the body, the animal has to rely on microbial activity to breakdown neutral detergent fibre such as cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin-based structures. It is only until these structures have been broken down, that the nutrient composition within the plant cell can be digested and absorbed. In the dog, microbial digestion of cellulose occurs in the colon, an organ that is mainly involved with the regulation of the absorption of water from the chime into faeces. There are little or no sites of absorption of cellulases that have been broken down. Therefore microbial activity doesn't have a great effect in the dog's nutrient intake. Coprophagy may occur, similar to that of rabbits, which digest cellulases in the caecum. However, in the dog's case, it isn't true coprophagy, in that the animal has to re-ingest the food as soon as it emerges from the anus (Pough, 2002). The dog would find this process hard to perform every time it defecates. Removal of the colon, along with the microbial activity, in dogs is relatively successful (Findlay, 1998); supporting the idea that microbial fermentation isn't necessary for the dog.
A true carnivore, such as the cat and mink, have a specialised metabolism that is adapted to the ingestion of animal tissues which is devoid of carbohydrates and contains an excess of protein relative to energy (Morris, as cited in D'Mello, 2003). Dogs, on the other hand, are able to cope more with an intake of carbohydrate, (as noted above with the amount of amylase that is released during digestion), but still requires a high intake of protein compared to true omnivores such as the pig and human. Dogs are still susceptible of an arginine deficiency that can lead to hyperammonaemia- but will not be as severe as the susceptibility in cats. Arginine is present in meat sources such as pork and beef, and not very common in plants and vegetable. However, it is common in soybeans- which are one of the main sources of plant-derived arginine in dog food. Unlike animal sources of protein, soy does not vary widely in amino acid content and availability (Purina, 2006). This is one of the main reasons why dog food companies use soybeans to ensure a constant supply of amino acids in the right quantities to prevent any limiting amino acids from reducing protein synthesis, which would cause non-limiting amino acids to become oxidized. Prolonged reduction in protein synthesis would lead to muscle depletion, and eventually death (Hendriks, as cited in D'Mello, 2003). Cats and dogs tend to excrete more nitrogen-containing material than herbivores and omnivores. This is due to the animals' evolutionary ancestors consuming high quantities of amino acids, and because amino acids cannot be stored for long periods of time in the body, any excess are excreted by the small and large intestine.
It is possible to watch domestic dogs eat grass. It was originally thought that eating grass was used as an emetic, to force the dog to make itself vomit to empty the stomach from disturbances. However, due to the cardiac sphincter is wide, with little muscle closing the oesophagus from the stomach; dogs can vomit with relative ease. Cats sometimes eat grass to provide folic acid into the diet, and may account as the same principle (Morris, 1998). Dogs don't swallow all the grass that they chew; therefore the animal might enjoy the taste of the plant sap that is present in the leaves.
Table 1shows the nutritional analysis of some of the pet food products that are available in most supermarkets. The results show that the majority of complete and mixture products contain a high percentage of carbohydrate, with the average composition of 45.6% (FW) in complete diets, and even higher (64.3% FW) in mixer diets. There is also an extra 2.5-3% more carbohydrate as indigestible fibre. Most dog food carbohydrate that is digestible comes from cereals and vegetable origin. The only meat that is contained in the ingredients is usually stated at a minimum of 4% (14-24% minimum in more expensive/ specialist foods). The low meat content reflects the low percentage of protein that is present in dog food. The highest protein content is present when feeding a dog is in a compete meal. However, on a dry matter basis, canned food has the highest composition of protein, but is made up of over 80% water. Canned food usually contains a gelling agent, which is known to aid in the total gastrointestinal tract nutrient digestibilities of amino acids, especially the essential amino acids (Karr-Lilienthal et al. , 2002). Therefore, supplying canned meat to the dog may have a lower protein content, but the digestibility of the molecules is increased. The high carbohydrate diet, which herbivores and omnivores usually eat, (because vegetation has more polysaccharides than meat), it is possible to believe that domestic dogs can be classified as a vegetarian, especially when the animals are being fed on the cheaper brands of complete food (e.g. 'ASDA Smart Price'), which has low amounts of nutrients that derive from animal tissues.
The debate over whether the domestic dog as a species should be classified as an omnivore does have scientific support with the similarities to the anatomy of the dog with the omnivorous bear. Both consume berries and vegetable matter. Dogs fed supermarket pet foods consume a very low percentage of protein, from an even lower source of animal-derived meat. Dogs fed on these diets are therefore omnivorous, and not a vegetarian because of the small inclusion of animal matter. Dogs are also not vegetarian because the animal has no ethical, religious or health reasoning that we know of. They are being fed on a diet by humans, who think about the prices of food, and it is cheaper to produce and buy products that are mainly made from cereals, and not freshly packaged meat.