Emma Bovary lives her life as if it were fiction and this decision directly results in her unfortunate destiny. She refuses to accept anything other than the idealised and romanticised illusions she reads about in her beloved novels. However, this essay will also attempt to establish whether it is possible, qua reader, to sympathise with or understand Emma's decision and whether, in fact, this chosen lifestyle is merely a dangerous one.
Emma aspires to a life which is well beyond her social class. She will only accept the love which complies with that which she reads about and Flaubert uses many examples to demonstrate how this can be extremely dangerous. She constantly lives in a world which is unreal and, according to Flaubert himself: "Madame Bovary herself was to be a woman of perverted character, a woman falsely poetical, of false feelings." Emma is ecstatic when she is to marry Charles and thinks that all her dreams will become reality. She has spent her early life being educated at a convent and, cut off from the world, has had only literature as a sense of what "real" life and love are like. However, Emma quickly realises that the novels are not true to life and her spirits are first dampened when she sees Charles' ex-wife's wedding bouquet still sitting out when she returns home. Soon into her married life she begins to realise that it is not anything like what she had hoped for: "Avant qu'elle se marit, elle avait cru avoir de l'amour; mais le bonheur qui aurait d rsulter de cet amour n'tant pas venu, il fallait qu'elle se ft trompe, songeait-elle. " She also wonders if she has misinterpreted the words "flicit...passion et ...iveresse". Although Charles is eager to please her she becomes extremely lonely and starts to dream of a man coming to take her away from her unhappiness and, what is more, begins to resent her husband for his contentment. Emma was worried and "songeait quelquefois que c'taient l pourtant les plus beaux jours de sa vie, la lune de miel". This depression of Emma's grows increasingly more prominent and, saving her suicide, reaches its apogee after Lon Dupis leaves for Paris to continue his law studies. Emma has a lot in common with Lon and does not realise that she loves him until he has gone. She becomes so depressed that Charles has to send for his mother as he is so worried about her.
We can see therefore, that living life as if it were fiction is extremely dangerous as it inevitably results in disappointment when things do not work out as one had dreamed. Emma's ultimate depression which undoubtedly stems primarily from her dissatisfaction with the love and passion she has in her marriage, results in her suicide at the end of the novel.
It is because of the novels she reads that she becomes resentful of Charles and this dissatisfaction results in Emma becoming a person she herself does not like. So desperate is she to fulfil her ideals of love that she commits adultery first with Rodolphe and then with Lon. She makes the idea of a personal relationship the sole centre of her existence and this is "intensified both by her position and the kind of person she is." Because of the novels she has read Emma needs an "ideal lover" for her own self-esteem and "her drawing or piano playing mean nothing to her if there is no lover to share or admire, and she abandons them". Emma knows what she is doing to Charles is wrong and indeed Flaubert gives the impression that had it not been for her attitudes attained from the novels she reads it could have been very different and "a different woman might have found an outlet in other ways, discovering delight in nature, consolation in religion [or] the sense of purpose in social charity." Emma writes to Lon saying that they cannot see each other and forces herself to go to church and pray before her first visit to him. However, she gives into temptation and, as a married woman, betrays Charles with Lon just as she has with Rodolphe and this is certainly a danger of living one's life as if it were fiction.
Emma is so besotted with her "ideal" life that when Charles takes her to the Opra she "sees only what is like or unlike her own feelings." It could be argued that this is somewhat selfish of Emma - to expect her life to be fairytale and merely because it is not how she had dreamed, betray Charles. This neglect, however, extends much further than her husband and the very little presence of Berthe given by Flaubert mirrors how little she means to Emma. Just as with her husband Emma rejects her child just because she spoils the stereotyped picture of ideal maternity Emma has read about - Berthe looks ugly and is sick over her collar and she had wished for a son - someone who could be independent and leave a place if they wanted to or were unhappy as Lon and Rodolphe do. Emma substitutes her lack of fulfilment with buying things from Monsieur L'heureux and falls into heavy debt emphasising that one of the dangers of living such a life can leave a vacuum in a person's existence and the desperation of the individual to fill this abyss can lead to yet more problems.
Emma belittles Charles and has a certain arrogance when at the ball of the Marquis d'Andervilliers. She pretends to belong to a higher social class and does not want Charles to dance: "Mais tu [Charles] as perdu la tte! On se moquerait de toi, reste  ta place. " This comes from her living her life as if it were fiction and not only does she behave poorly to other people but Emma also allows herself to be swept away by Rodolphe because the scene at the agricultural fair at Yonville fits in with the "ideal" he novels have created for her. Rodolphe seduces Emma "d'une voix basse... il se tenait les bras croiss sur ses genoux, et, ainsi levant la figure vers Emma, il la regardait de prs, fixement. " Certainly one of the dangers of living one's life as if it were fiction present in Madame Bovary is that it is very easy to be seduced by something if it appears to be what one wants. This is what Emma has always wanted and does not notice that Rodolphe has no intention of leaving with her.
One could argue, however, that Emma's difficulties should be taken into account and that these are partly why she takes the path she does. Emma is oppressed by Charles and her mother-in-law and is forced to have lessons from her as Madame Bovary senior "lui [Emma] trouvait un genre trop relev pour la position de fortune. " She suffers from ennui and genuinely simply wants to be loved and to love someone in ways which she had read about and "cannot chose her career; her one hope is to join her life to someone superior who will teach her, admire her, and justify her existence." The world in which Emma lives is a completely male dominated one and Emma finds her only options to be adultery or suicide; Lon and Rodolphe can and do leave and pursue other dreams but Emma does not have this option and is stuck in unhappiness.
It could be contested that Emma finds escape in the only means put before her and should not settle for a mundane existence and that if she had not dreamed she would have suffered eternal ennui. Although Emma commits adultery she does maintain some honour, namely refusing to sleep with Guillauman even though she is desperate. As a reader we sympathise greatly and with Emma and the happy events which do not involve betrayal such as dancing with the Viscount and her first talk with Lon would suggest that not only is living one's life as if it were fiction not dangerous but also quite healthy to hope and dream.
However, Flaubert shows that through pursuing these dreams happiness will never be ultimately achieved and "the more intensely she [Emma] strives, the more her different experiences follow the same inevitable sequence: longing, apparent achievement, then the sudden or slow sense of emptiness, monotony, disintegration, to be followed by the artificial whipping up of a new illusion." Flaubert also includes the blind beggar to represent Emma's ugly soul and highlights that she has become an overly extravagant adulteress and a liar. This is the vision Emma sees when she dies.
In conclusion, therefore, Madame Bovary is a novel which illustrates the dangers of living life as if it were fiction.