Horses have developed over the last 55 million years from a small forest dwelling browser, to a long legged plains grazer. However, the animal has still retained the 'primitive' hindgut digestive fermentation. This has caused the animal to become more sensitive to what it ingests, as it does not have the ability to neutralise toxins like the ruminants foregut microbes. The physiology of the stomach prevents eructation and vomiting, resulting in the horse being susceptible to colic from the build up of indigestible matter and gaseous molecules from the result of fermentable feed products. Plants that are high in fructans also affect horses by disrupting the hindgut bacteria, causing a cascade that eventually affects the lamina in the hoof. Laminitis occurs when the lamina is degraded, allowing the rotation of the pedal bone. Good stable management, together with the knowledge of the horse anatomy is needed as prevention of these conditions is more effective than treating the symptoms, as fatalities are high among cases.
Horses are thought to have evolved 55 million years ago from a small mammal creature, the Hyracotherium (Roberts, 1991). This animal was believed to be more of a browsing than a grazing animal, where it would eat the thicker, more succulent leaves of the Eocene vegetation. Over time and climate change, the tropical forests decreased and increased grassy plains appeared. The horse ancestor slowly evolved to adapt to these surroundings by losing the primitive mammalian formula for teeth- with the loss of pronounced canines, and the flattening of the molar cusps to create a grinding surface to help masticate the more coarse grass (Hunt, 1995). The horse evolved to have longer legs, a straighter back, and stronger bones to allow the species to survive the grassy plains by using its speed as an escape mechanism, rather than camouflage that the smaller ancestor used in the dense vegetation. The instincts and the behaviour of a gregarious herbivore has not changed in the horse since the animal evolved from Equus caballus (Auty, 1998) around 1 million years ago in the Pleistocene epoch. However, humans have been breeding and feeding horses for over 3000 years, and yet problems still arise in the nutritional difficulties that face the horse that can lead to health disturbances if the correct requirements are not sufficiently fulfilled.
Horses are hind-gut fermenters, in that the presence of fermentable microbes are located in the intestines of the animal, and not located before the digestible stomach like fore-gut fermenters that include all ruminant animals. This is believed to be a primitive digestive vertebrate characteristic of the animals due to the same digestive patterns are present in birds and lizards (Pough, 2002). However, if the horse were to have a rumen like cows, sheep and goats, the high speeds that the horse can make would be severely compromised due to the shear weight of a specialised fore-gut (Hintz, 1993).
Since no mammal possesses the genetic information to produce cellulase enzymes within the body, the animal has to rely on microbial activity to breakdown neutral detergent fibre such as cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin-based structures. It is only until these structures have been broken down, that the nutrient composition within the plant cell can be digested and absorbed. In the horse, microbial digestion of cellulose occurs in the large intestines, especially that of the caecum, a blind-ended sack that is over a metre long (Douglas, 2000), which is host to the symbiotic, fermentable microbes. As the large intestine is an organ that is primarily involved with the regulation of the absorption and secretion of water into and out of the chyme to maintain homeostasis in the animal, the digestion and absorption of the cell contents after breakdown of the cellulose cell walls isn't as efficient as ruminant animals. The large intestine has sites for absorption of volatile fatty acids (VFAs) that are produced by the micro-organisms, but there are no sites for absorption of amino acids from the plant cell contents (Bowen, 1996), as the contents have passed the primary site of absorption in the small intestine (Hintz, 1993).
Other monogastrics such as the dog, pig and man have a smaller caecum relative to their body size, so digest even lower plant material content to the horse and ruminants. For the horse to effectively utilise the digestive capabilities of the fermentable bacteria, the horse would have to perform coprophagy, a mechanism successfully used by rabbits and hares (Collinder, 2001). However, the anatomical structure of the horse would hinder the animal to be able to reach round and re-ingest the food as soon as it emerged from the anus every time the animal defecates.
The horse is one of the few monogastrics (with the panda and elephant being other examples) that can comfortably consume high fibre diets of low nutritional quality by being able to ingest very high feed intakes to obtain their requirements from non-fibre feed sources (Collinder, 2001). The horse grinds the high fibre using specialised teeth for the coarse feed, and therefore breaks the fibre down into smaller pieces before entering the stomach. This allows for a more rapid transit for undigestible plant structures through the alimentary tract, with digestive efficiency remaining constant (Pough, 2002). The horse is more suited to a high fibre diet when compared to ruminants as undigestible fibre suppresses the chemical activity of rumen microbes on the material that can usually be digested. This results in a slower transit time of digestible matter through the ruminant tract. This is represented in Figure 1.
Due to that the horse is a hind-gut fermenter and does not absorb as much nutrients from plant material as ruminants, the horse has to continuously consume food throughout the day to obtain the animal's nutrients. The comparatively small stomach of the horse, which can hold 8-15 litres of food, shows that the horse needs to consume little amounts of food, frequently throughout the day- as shown in the natural state of wild horses. As the majority of stable management practices impose specific feeding times for the horse each day, health problems may become associated with this due to over- and underfeeding or general poor feeding routines.
An example of a poor stable management is the sudden change of feed. When the type of feed needs to be changed, it should be introduced gradually to the horse to allow the microbes in the caecum to change gradually to help digest the new feedstuff. This is because the microbial population is dependent on the nutrients provided by the chyme produced in the small intestine. The sudden change of feedstuffs can cause electrolyte imbalances due to acidosis (Auty, 1998) which can lead to both enteral and extraenteral problems in the horse (Zeyner, 2003), which are described below in more detail. Another example of poor stable management is the feeding of mouldy or pathogen-contaminated hay and concentrates. A horse is more susceptible to infection since the horse is incapable of vomiting any food that the horse feels is disrupting its digestion. This is because the cardiac sphincter of the stomach is a more muscular, one-way valve compared to other mammals such as the dog, which can vomit with relative ease. The horse is also at a disadvantage when compared to ruminants since the microbial organisms can detoxify some toxins and moulds in the fore-gut before the molecules are absorbed by the ruminant (Hintz, 1993). The cardiac sphincter also prevents eructation; therefore gases can build up within the alimentary tract, causing colic that is one of the most common and lethal health problems in the horse.
Colic, which refers to a 'severe pain in the abdomen caused by wind or obstruction in the intestines' (Soanes, 2005), is a term used for a wide range of causes and symptoms that all affect the gastrointestinal system. There seems to be no gender that is more prone to colic, although types of colic may be gender specific, i.e. uterine torsion in mares. There is conflicting studies regarding breed and age risks. For example, Tinker et al. (1997) identify Arab horses to be at a reduced risk of developing colic, whereas Cohen et al. (1999) describe the opposite, where Arab horses are actually more prone to colic. However, in all horses that develop colic, the risks of death still remains high, despite improved medical and surgical techniques (Greet, 1993).
Colic tends to occur mostly in the large intestine due to the layout of the colon in the lower abdomen of the horse. The large intestine is attached to the abdominal wall at two points. The first is at the ileal-caecal junction, and the second attachment is at the pelvic flexure where the colon shortens to form the rectum. This results in the ileal ingesta having to pass two sharp, 180 u-bends in the large intestine to successfully pass through the horse (Best, 2006). These two sites are prone to impactive colic, which is a build up of food at the tight flexure. The irritated intestine contracts spasmodically around the lodged food material, tightening the obstruction, therefore causing more pain in the animal. Impaction usually occurs in stabled horses that have eaten a large quantity of bedding, which cannot be broken down into smaller digestible segments, resulting in a thicker chyme that is liable to build-up in the colon. Another cause of impaction is a large amount of parasitic larvae present in the lumen blocking the route of passage (Best, 2006). As with all types of colic, veterinary attention is needed. A large amount of liquid paraffin is most likely used in this situation, in conjunction with painkillers (Greet, 1993).
As the horse cannot eructate, gas has to move caudally through the digestive tract. Therefore, gaseous distension tends to occur with an impaction, as the gas cannot adequately pass through the tract. Gas build-up in the stomach and intestines may be the result of feeding the horse a high proportion of brewer's grain/yeast. These supplementary feeds provide a good source of B-vitamins (Auty, 1998) to the horse, but the molecules ferment in the intestines causing a production of gas to be released in the intestines, causing both abdominal pains and a laxative effect if fed too much. Gaseous distension also occurs when the abdomen becomes twisted from the lack of attachment of the intestines to the abdominal wall. This is known as intestinal catastrophy. It is the most dramatic causes of colic, which often leads to the horse either dying, or needing to be euthanized (Greet, 1993). However, intestinal catastrophy appears to be causative without much relation to the kind of feedstuff that is fed to the animal (Smith et al., 1972), and therefore cannot prevent against this type of colic in regards to monitoring nutritional intake.
Spasmodic colic from muscle spasms of the intestinal wall tends to be the most common, but luckily the least harmful form of colic in horses. Causes could be due to parasitic larvae penetrating the endothelial lining of the intestine. However, the most common cause in healthy animals is that they are fed too soon after exercise. As blood flow is diverted away from all areas of the gastrointestinal system during exercise (Manohar et al., 1995) by the sympathetic nervous system, it results in the reduction of digestive functions (including peristaltic contractions). Feeding the horse too soon after exercise, before the parasympathetic nervous system controlling the resumption of digestion is signalling again, incorrect nervous connection occurs, leading to spasmodic contractions that is painful to the animal. Spasmolytic drugs usually dissipate the problem when administered by a veterinarian (Greet, 1993).
Magner (1980) states that laminitis can occur in over-worked horse and ponies on hard ground (such as roads and pavements). Johnson et al. (2004) have described that 'laminitis can be a clinical component of equine Cushing's syndrome associated with a dysfunction of the pars intermedia' in the pituitary gland. However, it is mostly overfed animals that are usually kept in rapidly growing grass paddocks (Dyson, 1993), usually those that contain high fructan levels that produces a high content of rapidly fermentable carbohydrate-based material when digested. This digestion can affect the acidity of the hindgut, making the animal susceptible to endotoxaemia. The decrease in pH can kill the symbiotic bacteria that usually allow the horse to stay healthy and absorb VFAs. The death of these microbes produces a range of toxins that lead to a cascade mechanism once absorbed in the colon. This is shown in Figure 2. The toxins result in vasoconstriction of blood vessels to the lamina between the pedal bone and the hoof wall, with the disruption starving the vessels and lamina of oxygen. Pain results as the cell induces inflammatory fluids in the local area, where most pain to the animal occurs when pressure is placed on the injured foot. Chronic laminitis can cause the pedal bone to drop within the hoof due to the supporting lamina have been separated.
The above conditions are the two main reasons why a horse requires a call-out for veterinary attention in the UK (Harris et al. , 2006). Prevention of the noted cases, as colic is frequently fatal, and laminitis casualties very rarely get back to normal exercise routines if the horse has managed to be treated effectively, is better than treating the cases when the symptoms arise. Generally, to lessen the risk of colic occurring is to maintain a regular worming programme, regular attention to teeth and good stable management, especially the change of the feeding programme to be bought about gradually. Preventing laminitis is less clear as causes of the condition isn't mutually exclusive between certain molecules or systems (Bailey et al., 2004). Although animals that may be predisposed to laminitis can be confined to stabling from pasture that is rich in fructans is one way (for example, during mid-day in spring where the rate of photosynthesis is highest in most plant species), it may not be beneficial for the animal in regards to welfare, resulting in behavioural problems or other health risks that are associated to confined animals. Research doesn't provide a guideline to suitable levels of fructans that can be eaten, as individual horses have different levels of tolerance (Harris et al., 2006). The horse or pony should be provided a diet that does not have excessive carbohydrates, such as the over-consumption of cereals. This should allow the animal to stay at a reasonable weight, with any weight loss being carried out slowly. Horse owners must understand the anatomy and behaviour of the horse to suitably look after its health, with the risk of developing problems kept to a minimum.