Euripides' 'Suppliants' was written in the late 5 th century, speculatively dated at around 423 BC. By this time the democratic state of Athens had gained great power in Greece as leader of the Delian league, and as a result was shortly to become involved in the Peloponnesian war. This tragedy was produced as part of the Great Dionysia, held in March of each year. The week-long Dionysia was a grand state-run religious festival that involved ceremonies, processions, and animal sacrifices as well as daily performances of plays. 'Suppliants' deals with themes such as war, divine interference, the importance of burial for the dead, and perhaps most intriguingly, democracy as a ruling style.
The extract is from near the beginning of the play. Prior to the Herald's entrance, the King of Argos, Adrastus arrived in Athens representing the families of the Argives who fought against Thebes for Polynices (the titular suppliants). The city's new king Creon had refused the dead Argive warriors burial, prompting Adrastus to seek outside help. After much debate Theseus was won over and proposed taking the dead from Thebes by force to the people of Athens, who quickly assent.
Theseus firstly explains the balance of power in a democracy; '...the poor man has an equal share in it.' He is quick to correct the herald, and proudly asserts this fundamental difference between democracy and monarchy (and also oligarchy), that every citizen has the right to a say in how Athens is run. Here and later in the passage, Theseus' language stresses the importance of the concept of equality over all else, making it seem something a city must strive towards; 'One man has power...equality is not yet'. By extolling the worthy ideals that underpin democracy, he aims to make Athens' model of government seem admirable, even enviable.
He goes on to link equality with the law, which once laid out gives rich and poor 'the same recourse to justice'. He argues against the herald's argument that democracy is easily swayed by the self-serving, who evade notice as no single leader can be blamed. 'A man of means, if badly spoken of, will have no better standing than the weak'- the system's inherent equality means no one can seize enough power to abuse.
Theseus also depicts democracy as a natural progression from monarchy, which is made to seem primitive; 'In the earliest day, before the law is common...'. To win the listener over to his side he finds fault with the second system. He condemns monarchy, saying 'Nothing is worse for a city than an absolute ruler', who would 'make the law his own'. It is implied that there is greater potential for wrongdoing by the powerful in systems other than democracy. 'The people reign, in annual succession', as opposed to a monarch abusing his power unquestioned for a long period of time.
However, Theseus notably doesn't elaborate on the actual institutions of democracy that facilitate the fairness and equality he so values. He could have explained to the herald how poorer citizens were given financial aid so they could travel to the assembly, how officials were chosen by lottery and could only hold power for a year. While he makes great reference to the importance of law in democracy, Theseus doesn't clarify just how the law courts are fair. But this lack of detail is understandable given that the extract is from an emotional drama performed in a poetic style. Endless facts would break the narrative, and Euripides wouldn't have had to explain democracy to 5 th century audiences.
It is also interesting that Theseus doesn't directly counter the Herald's argument against the poor having any say in a state's government. He claims that a poor man is too ignorant to be capable of using power correctly, and has no right to it in any case. Theseus' only comment is that any man with 'good advice to give the city' is free to do so. These vehement allegations could perhaps be similar to those made by supporters of oligarchy or monarchy in the active political debate in Athens at time Euripides wrote 'Suppliants'.
Theseus also inexplicably misses the chance to pick a hole in the herald's argument, who states that Thebes 'is controlled by one man, not a mob' ('mob' here presumably again referring to people of lower social standing). Until Creon's accession Thebes had been in the throes of a bloody civil war, and was in turmoil even before that because of Oedipus' downfall. Theseus could perhaps have asked the herald to reassess just how well his town was really being 'controlled' by its unsettled monarchy.
Theseus concludes his speech with a classic showman's device, a rhetorical question; 'For the city, what can be more fair than that?'. The modern reader might take issue with the character's definition of 'fair'. He declines to mention that women, metics and slaves still had no vote in a democracy, and ignores completely Athens' other injustices, such as an absence of legal rights for women of all classes, and the slave trade itself. And for all his grand talk of equality for all men in Athens, Theseus still demonstrates a snobbish sense of place, as shown by his attitude towards the other speaker- 'What a bombast from a herald!'. Theseus' Athens seems an incredibly fair city to live in- if you were a male citizen.
Also of interest is Theseus' early statement 'the city is free, and ruled by no one man'. But his version of democracy seems to operate in quite a different manner to that of Euripides' time. In 5 th century Athens all the members of assembly made took decisions concerning Athens' well-being, aided by the council. After Theseus' mother and Adrastus have persuaded him that battle is the best course of action, only then does he put this serious matter to the people he says all have equal decision-making power; 'The city gladly and willingly took up this task when they heard that I wished them to do so' D.Kovaks (1998: 53). Just how democratic was Theseus' Athens?
Theseus' defence of democracy certainly outlines its main aspects in a favourable light. He mentions its 'fair' system of votes and legal structure, and speaks proudly of its equality. He strengthens his argument by slating monarchies and systems in which the undeserving have great power to abuse. Yet his speech largely consists of vague statements rather than factual argument; 'The people reign, in annual succession'. What purpose could Euripides have had in writing Theseus' dialogue in this way? He surely did not intend this 'Suppliants' to be a discussion of the relative merits of systems of government. The rest of the play elicits a more emotional reaction from its audience by its depiction of human suffering. So although Euripides does seem to have intended to stimulate thought and debate among his audience by his insertion of a 5 th century political system into a mythological setting, he did not choose to examine the topic too deeply in this extract.