The epic poem, the Aeneid, is considered not only Virgil's greatest work, but perhaps the greatest of Rome's Augustan Age. Written during the final period of Virgil's life, it follows the Trojan hero Aeneas, who overcomes many obstacles to found Rome and fulfil his destiny. Based on the Iliad and Odyssey, the Aeneid draws many a flattering comparison with Augustus and Aeneas, and makes much of their shared descent from Venus.
Propertius, an upper class love-elegist was also writing at this time, sometimes considered subversive. The extract, 1.1-8, is from a poem typical of his sophisticated style.
Both passages are concerned with love, namely its effect on people.
The first extract, from Book Four of the Aeneid, presents love as a destructive force. Dido has fallen in love with Aeneas, a situation orchestrated by Venus. The goddess, wishing to protect Aeneas from Juno's wrath, manipulates the Carthaginian queen mercilessly throughout Book Four.
Right from the start, the reader is aware that for Dido, the story cannot end happily, as Aeneas is destined to leave Carthage. In Book One, Jupiter confirmed that Aeneas would succeed in founding Rome; a destiny that doesn't leave room for a Carthaginian consort. Virgil uses syntax with negative connotations to make the transgressive nature of Dido's love very clear; it is described as a 'wound' and a 'fire biting within her', almost parasitic in the way it saps her life force. Virgil pinpoints aspects of obsessive love; driven to distraction from her duties to her people, she is convinced this 'heaven-born' hero can do no wrong. It is also one-sided at this point, as Aeneas' emotions towards Dido aren't mentioned at all in this extract.
Dido is aware of how ridiculous her situation is, that she loves 'this stranger' Aeneas, and has to watch herself fall victim to this madness. Aside from the fact that Dido and Aeneas are simply not meant to be together, Virgil implies that love is a bad force overall. Dido suffers under the power of 'love's disquiet', disturbed by haunting dreams, allowed no relief from this unwanted feeling day or night.
She is succumbing to, and being destroyed by what the Romans called 'furor', a state in which a person was controlled by their extreme emotions and lost their sense of rational thought ('ratio'). Furor was considered dangerous, and although Virgil presents emotions like rage as appropriate in the battles of later books, they must be balanced with ratio. In Book Two, Venus has to step in to stop Aeneas from killing Helen in an angry fit, and remind him of his duties to his family and the city (pietas); 'Why this raging passion?... Will you not first go and see where you have left your father?'
So, for Dido to be in love is for her to be irrational, out of control, neglectful of her duty and consumed by passion. This was exactly the type of behaviour Augustus did his best to discourage among Roman citizens, especially the women.
Aeneas' passion for Dido/submission to furor is depicted as nothing but wrong by Virgil. It keeps him from his destiny, and he has to be twice reminded of it by Mercury, who chides him for 'idling your time away in the land of Libya'  If left unchecked, this furor could have jeopardised the future of Rome.
It should however be remembered that Virgil's purpose in writing the Aeneid was not to present a view of love, romantic or otherwise, but to create a great Roman epic poem as propaganda for Augustus. It constantly reminds the reader of the heroic origins of Rome, and frequently refers to Augustus' divine heritage. Love is not a major theme or driving force in the poem, and only features prominently in Book Four, as a detour from the important matters of founding and protecting Rome. The inclusion of such a negative, sinister portrayal of love in the extract succeeds in creating a sense of foreboding for the reader, and adds to the drama of Book Four.
Though the second extract is on a less epic scale than that of the Aeneid, it too depicts love as a powerful force. The voice of the poem is, like Dido, lowered by love, 'trampled', made 'pitiable' and humiliated. He personifies love, presenting it as a 'he', a figure with the might to reduce him. The love-struck narrator is driven to a 'frenzy' and lives 'without taking thought', obsessed much as Dido was. Yet in this extract, love isn't forced on the narrator by the gods, rather he is infected by its 'contagion'. Much has been made of Propertius' subversive stance, who, as an upper-class Roman, was expected to be unmoved by love. His use of extreme language and imagery highlights how atypical his situation is- making the poem all the more emotional.
He makes use of a feature of elegy, militia amoris, 'to capture with her eyes...' Interestingly, the one captured in this extract is a man; once under love's spell he is an abnormality in Roman society, a male citizen acting as slave to a woman. Although the idea of servitium amoris was another common feature of love elegies, Propertius makes it clear that this 'perverse' state of affairs is disapproved of by the gods. He himself doesn't seem happy with his helplessness.
While these ideas of slavery and infection don't coincide with today's idea of romance, we should consider what the Augustan idea of romance was. Perhaps in an age of the 'stiff upper lip', the only romantic view was an illicit, violent, extreme one. If this was so, Propertius' unpleasant, 'perverse' sense of being in love may have seemed romantic at the time.
Both Roman poets suggest that to be in love is to suffer, and be manipulated by forces out of your control. In Dido's case, love is the means by which cruel gods get what they want, another hardship humans can do little to counteract. Propertius is equally vulnerable to love's force, but presents it as an affliction with consequences contrary to Augustan social norms. Although the love described here is not romantic in today's sense (i.e. a positive, life-affirming force), a clear sense of the darker side of love is presented by both extracts.