It cannot be disputed that Virgil's character Aeneas is a hero; portrayed as a brave, wise leader, he overcomes huge obstacles to found a new city, from which the great Roman Empire would later develop. What sort of a hero he is however is an issue of debate. Virgil chose his main character of the poem as Aeneas, a Trojan from a Greek epic. While this gave his poem (written a great deal later than the works of Homer) a degree of credibility, it also left him with the problem of fitting a character with features of a Greek hero into a poem that was intended to be the defining Roman epic. Virgil manages to use this conflict to his advantage, to advance the plot and develop Aeneas' character, giving the story an emotional depth and resonance. The ways in which Aeneas the hero is characteristically Roman also reflect the underlying purpose of the Aeneid; to promote the greatness of Rome and Virgil's patron, the Emperor Augustus.
When attempting to interpret the Aeneid on any level, it is vital to first understand the circumstances under which it came to be written. During Virgil's formative years Rome was in a state of unrest, which culminated in the assassination of Julius Caesar in 44 BC. The period which followed saw Virgil's lands seized as a result of the disorder, and his pastoral poems, the Eclogues and Georgics display his love for the Roman countryside, and the pain the upheavals around him caused. The accession of Octavian, later Augustus, in 29 BC, was a turning point; the victor of the Battle of Actium promised to build up Rome to greatness once more, and bring back the stability and prosperity of the past that Virgil so craved. This, and the fact that Augustus became Virgil's patron, accounts somewhat for the nature of the Aeneid- it is an epic written to emphasise the heroic origins and past greatness of Rome, while also praising Augustus as the regenerator of the Empire. In some places this praise is quite obvious (Book Six), but is mainly woven into the poem subtly by way of comparisons drawn between Aeneas the hero and Augustus the Emperor. The Aenied was part of Augustus' long-term propaganda campaign in which he made every effort to present himself as the ultimate Roman hero. The Res Gestae documents Augustus' selfless (or so he claimed) achievements at length- his victories in battle, huge financial contributions, gifts made to the gods- in short, the many ways he kept Rome safe and improved it during his lifetime. These heroic deeds are easily comparable to those that Virgil describes Aeneas performing.
So it seems the study of Aeneas as a Roman hero is fairly convoluted- to discern how much of a 'Roman' hero he was, we must also look at his similarities to Augustus the hero.
For purposes of this essay, I shall make a few basic assumptions about Roman heroism. Any Roman hero would have to adhere to the moral standards laid down by Augustus as part of his regeneration of Rome. Some idea of these standards is given in Book Six of the Aeneid. Adulterers, those causing civil disruption, and those committing crimes against their families were interred in Tartarus with figures from myth who had heinously offended the gods. Not only would a Roman hero have to avoid transgressing this new moral code, he would also have to fulfil the other more traditional requirements of heroism, those seen in Homeric heroes e.g. prowess in war and leadership.
There are several characteristics of Roman heroes that Aeneas has from the start of the poem, and others that he develops as it progresses.
Although shared by Greek heroes, Aeneas' inherent prowess and courage in battle are certainly Roman attributes. The Romans were, by definition, a fighting, conquering force, as declared by Anchises at the turning point of the poem, the parade of future Romans in Book Six. He tells Aeneas, 'Your task, Roman, and do not forget it, will be to govern the peoples of the world in your empire... to impose a settled pattern upon peace... to war down the proud' So, to be Roman is to be a warrior, and Aeneas is certainly this, as shown by his prowess and ferocity in battle in the poem's later books, especially its final lines. The vengeful and bitter ending to the poem seems to justify MacKay's thought that 'heroism, in the conventional sense, involves loss of humanity'. The final sacrifice that Aeneas has to make in the long series of sacrifices required for the founding of Rome, is that of his mercy. Driven to extreme rage by Turnus' treatment of Pallas' body, Aeneas loses any of the compassion he once had. The immense toll of his responsibilities and fate is never more apparent.
Heroic and Roman though this fighting ability is, Virgil makes it clear early on that it must not be simply mindless, rather tempered with ratio. Ratio, the Roman concept of clear thinking and good sense, is not a quality Aeneas has in great amounts in the first half of the Aeneid. In Book 1, he is almost overwhelmed by the constant deluge of problems Juno forces on him; 'Groaning, he lifted his palms upwards to the stars and cried: 'Those whose fate it was to die beneath the high walls of Troy with their fathers looking down on them were many, many times more fortunate than I'. Despite this inner distress, Aeneas is a natural leader and is still able to help his people, immediately taking charge and providing food for them when they land in Libya. The prowess at hunting he demonstrates is an interesting Greek trait, and also comparable with Augustus' oft mentioned provisions of food for Rome in times of crisis. At this early stage, we are already being presented with a 'dutiful Aeneas', with Roman traits. To aid him in achieving his destiny, and his transformation, guidance from outside forces keeps him on track, and from giving in to despair. Venus consistently aids her son, pointing him in the direction of safety in Carthage, protecting him from Juno and stepping in to prevent him making mistakes. In Book Two's flashback to the fall of Troy, it is only her intervention that stops him taking the life of Helen in an almost catatonic state of rage. Aeneas has to be pulled out of his 'ranting and raving' and reminded of his pietas. This duty to his family, the people of Troy, and the gods is a heavy burden on Aeneas throughout the poem, and one he is not able to attend to fully at first. His later move towards rationality and selflessness (see below) is markedly different to the attitudes of Greek heroes such as Achilles, who seek only glory through war, channelling their furor into gaining as much fame as possible before their inevitable early death.
So, despite the obvious need for heroes to be violent in battle, Aeneas' furor must be moderated, tempered with ratio. Quinn goes as far as to say that 'it is only when there is scope for initiative that moral responsibility and moral judgement become significant." i.e. outside battle situations.
Aeneas' struggle with ratio is shown further in Book Four. He is distracted from his duties during his stay in Carthage, and for a short while his emotions for Dido take precedence over the founding for Rome and his destiny. To be more accurate, Venus and Juno manipulate the situation so that Aeneas is kept artificially in Carthage, in spite of his already decided fate. Aeneas' behaviour after being reminded of what his purpose by Mercury is certainly more Roman than Greek. His cold, almost emotionless speech to Dido utterly fails to 'humanely acknowledge and respond to the despair of a beloved person', rather gives her the bare facts, that fate compels him to leave, she is not his wife, and what he wants most of all is to be in Troy again. Unlikeable though this makes him, this change in attitude is what is best for the Trojans and as Lyme notes, 'to be compassionate is irrational, unhelpful, even dangerous: it may divert you from reason'.
Aeneas' transformation from Greek to Roman hero is a gradual one, at least until roughly the middle of the poem. During the first half of the Aeneid, he is not fully committed to achieving his destiny, rather going along with it under duress; 'It is not by my own will that I search for Italy'. Fuhrer, having studied the scholarly opinion, states there is a general consensus that 'there is a change in the personality of Aeneas, from a lower degree of heroism to a higher one, in a sense of morality and inner maturity'. This graduation to higher standards of morality (i.e. leaving Dido and not being a slave to lust/ love) is an indication of Aeneas' increasing 'Romanisation', for lack of a better word, as he comes closer to achieving his destiny. There is some debate over when exactly the turning point for Aeneas' is, with Heinze naming it as Anchises' speech to him at the end of Book Five, and Howe instead suggesting 'a gradual change of character which is completed in the sixth book... (after which point) he is no longer uncontrolled, uncertain and aimless in his actions, as he was earlier." In any case, from Book Seven onwards, Aeneas fully pursues his destiny, having accepted it, made his mistakes and been put right by the gods.
In summary, throughout the course of the Aeneid, Aeneas demonstrates several characteristics of a Roman hero. He is a born leader, whose skills only improve with time, an accomplished warrior who learns to temper his fighting instinct with ratio, and puts aside the fruitless furor of his time with Dido, governing his emotions as a Stoic Roman would. Aeneas becomes increasingly diligent in fulfilling his pietas, and truly suffers for the Trojans and future Romans. Despite his early Greek attributes that were necessary for the plot, Virgil's Aeneas is drawn as a Roman hero- he founded the city, and as founding father certainly embodies the ideals Augustus was promoting when it was written. Aeneas heroic deeds are inextricably linked with Augustan Rome; symbolically, the shield he uses in battle to found Rome is decorated with what Augustus presented as the defining event in Roman history, the Battle of Actium. Aeneas is named a Roman by Anchises in Book Six before Rome even exists. Perhaps Virgil was painting his poem's hero Aeneas, the first of all Romans, as the archetypal Roman.