In today's society, as in that of Ancient Greece, the name 'Helen of Troy' symbolises the epitome of female beauty. One of the few female characters in the Iliad, an epic dominated by men and their concerns, namely war, Helen remains something of a mystery to us. While the written sources agree that she was the most beautiful of all women, they contradict each other on almost everything else about her. Her personality and the question of how much she is to blame for the Trojan war has been disputed throughout antiquity and the more recent past. With so little about her known for certain, just how has Helen continued to fascinate western authors and audiences for so long?
To consider this question, I shall use classical sources in conjunction with the recent novel 'Troy', a reworking of the Iliad for older children and teenagers. Spanning the final days of the siege of Troy, the book is written from the viewpoints of young Trojans, newly added characters, as well as the figures present in Homer.
Perhaps the continued interest in Helen can be attributed to the varied ways she is presented in Classical epic poetry. Helen's first appearance in western literature is, unsurprisingly, in the Iliad. Perhaps the bloodiest ancient epic, it stresses the immense human suffering that Paris' abduction of Helen caused. Homer introduces us to her in Book Three, where despite the kindness of Priam and Hector, she is not seen positively by the Trojans; 'for all her beauty, let her go back in the ships, and not be left here a curse to us and our children' In Geras' Troy, Andromache expresses her feelings rather more strongly- 'I hate the war and that woman for starting it' That Helen has been repeatedly presented as an object of hate highlights one paradox surrounding her; despite her outward beauty, she brings misery to others, or, as Suzuki puts it, 'for some, Helen is like a goddess, for others a grief'
The Helen of the Iliad is highly aware of the damage her desertion of Menelaus caused, calling herself a bitch several times during Book Six and behaving humbly towards Hector. Yet she also blames Aphrodite for her sorrows and those of the Trojans, passionately attacking her when the goddess is compelling her to go to Paris; 'Why so eager to work this seduction on me? Go sit by him yourself..." This gives the impression that Helen was coerced by the power of the gods to leave Menelaus, or at least regrets the mistakes of her youth. Her disgust for Paris by this stage is also made clear; 'since the gods have decreed that these miseries must be so, then I wish I had been the wife of a better man than this' These speeches inspire sympathy for Helen in the reader, sympathy for a seemingly moral, passionate woman made a victim.
Her depiction in the Odyssey however is rather less appealing, yet still intriguing. Appearing in Book Four, Helen is again living with Menelaus after the war, and acts as hostess to Telemachus. She tells of how she was filled with joy at the Greek attack on Troy, though Menelaus disputes her tale with an accusation that she was still helping the Trojans right until the end. She is further shown to be duplicitous by her dosing of the mens' drinks with a calming potion. This suggestion that Helen, daughter of Zeus, had godlike, magical qualities, coupled with her 'almost supernatural ability to enchant and beguile' makes her all the more captivating.
Helen's character is also of significance in the Aeneid. Aeneas describes the last night of Troy, and seeing Helen hiding in the palace, stressing not her beauty, but 'how she lurks and crouches', a 'portentous and sinister' depiction. She is the subject of Aeneas' blind hatred, and he intends to avenge Priam's death on her, until Venus reminds him of his duties and the fact that 'the cruelty of the gods' is really to blame. Aside from this brief appearance in the poem, Virgil transposes aspects of Helen's character onto other prominent female characters. Dido and Lavinia are 'diametrically opposed to each other' yet both share qualities with Helen; Dido, manipulated by Venus, loves Aeneas and threatens the building of a new Troy, as Helen brought about the destruction of the old one, while Lavina is seized and controlled, fought over by two warriors.
From these Classical representations of Helen we get quite a negative view. Indeed, 'from the Odyssey on, Helen is always presented... either as an emblem of doubleness and duplicity on the one hand, or a trivial cardboard figure on the other- to be scapegoated and repudiated." Today however, in 'Troy' at least, Helen is starting to be portrayed as a more complex character. The epic setting is imbued with modern concerns; that Helen and Paris' marriage is now loveless, his infidelity, and her grief at being separated from her child. While these aspects of the story create more sympathy for Helen, her marked disloyalty to Troy as time goes on (as declared in the Odyssey) does not; 'It's not my city. It never has been my city. As far as I'm concerned the whole place can fall apart stone by stone' By the end of the book, many characters are dead, the remaining few engulfed in misery, manipulated to breaking point by the gods- the actions of the humans involved seem rather insignificant.
The few other women from antiquity to have sustained interest also have reputations as 'bad' women, and seemingly survived in collective memory because of their transgressions. Cleopatra and Boudicca for example, show manly qualities, lead armies, scheme and die heroes' deaths. Yet not only is Helen likely a mythic figure, from a much earlier period than these women, she is famed for 'feminine' qualities; her tragic beauty and helplessness compared to men, and conversely her scheming, deceptive nature.
Perhaps Helen's survival can be partly attributed to the dominance of Christianity over Western civilisation in the centuries after the classical period. Some parallels between Eve and women from Greek myths can be drawn, for example Pandora, the first woman created being dangerous and an evil for men to deal with. Helen, a sexualised, dangerous figure would likely also have been identified with Eve, due to her reputation for tempting and leading men astray, and thus 'kept alive'. It is probably also worth noting that many of those who have analysed, interpreted and reworked sources on Helen over the years are men (e.g. Joseph of Exeter). Hughes is of the opinion that for men, she's always been 'an archetype of beauty, of womanhood, of sex, of danger' so sexual fascination could have contributed to her continued presence in Western culture. Added to this is the timeless fact that any object of male desire will generate jealousy, and a different kind of fascination among women. 'Troy' highlights this; 'her heart contracted whenever she looked at Helen, even though she knew it was fruitless to long for something you couldn't have, her beauty filled Andromache with envy." So, when dealing with absolutes, like the most beautiful woman in the world, a large degree of sustained interest can be expected.
'Helen of Troy, alluring in her multifaceted nature, has become an archetypal image...'
Today we remember Helen of Troy as 'the face that launched a thousand ships', the stimulus or scapegoat for a horrific epic war. The question of her guilt can perhaps never be resolved due to the varied presentations of her character in epic poetry. Not only has this generated interest in her, it has also given authors a great deal of scope to interpret Helen to their desired effect. Helen can be seen as one extreme or the other, powerful, or powerless because of her ultimate beauty. This paradox has meant that throughout history, the opinions and desires of the time have been projected onto her, and she is by turn seen as manipulative whore and remorseful victim.
Added to this, Geras raises the point that stories of tragic romance are hugely appealing to audiences. The idea of a love so strong it started an epic war seems to have timeless appeal; 'For love of Helen... that's what the stories said. More romantic, said the singer. It's a poet's first duty to give the public what it wants.'