Today, some consider that 'there is no such thing as 'Greek religion''. In 'On making sense of Greek religion' John Gould disputes the notion that we can simply 'make sense' of the evidence left- 'data which we put together and call 'Greek religion': the best we can hope for will be no more than piecemeal explanations of a particular ritual or a particular myth'  We have only a fragmented picture of ancient Greek religious practices from the evidence of art and descriptive texts. We have an even less precise idea of the reasoning behind Greek rituals- religious belief, as with other aspects of ancient cultures, leaves little physical evidence remaining. We do know that much of Greek religion was secretive and an enigma to the uninitiated even at the time, with widespread secret cults and 'mysteries'. It is also difficult to come to conclusions on 'Greek religion', as the area we now call Greece wasn't a unified country until long after the 5th century BC, rather an area of land on which separate city states co-existed. Although it seems there were beliefs commonly held across Greece, we can't assume there was religious uniformity. To compound this, unlike religions more familiar to us, there was a lack of Greek scripture or an 'organised body' to dictate standard practice. Greek religion was 'an open, not a closed system', with potential for individual interpretation.
So it seems that the answer to the question 'Why did the Greeks perform sacrifice?' is unlikely to be simple. This essay will trace the emergence of Greek sacrifice from prehistoric times to the 5 th century BC. By examining and interpreting the evidence for sacrifice in ancient Greece, I hope to conjecture a few of the beliefs behind this ritual activity.
The ideas behind sacrifice can be traced back to prehistoric Greece. By the Palaeolithic period, or even prior to it, mainland Greece was populated by nomads from central Asia, who lived in hunter gatherer societies. These Indo-Europeans brought religious ideas that would endure to the Classical period. Burket has put forth the idea that later ritual sacrifice was rooted in this early 'condition of man the hunter', when hunting and killing an animal was a spiritual, primal experience. It also seems that these nomads placed religious significance on the sky, the only constant aspect of their landscape. This seems a likely origin of the later belief that the gods dwelt high on Mount Olympus. Etymological links abound too; the word 'Zeus' has its roots in the Old Indic word 'devah', with the names of other Olympians such as Hera, Ares and Poseidon 'formed form Indo European roots'.
By the Neolithic period, the early Greeks began to form settled farming communities, again influenced by the East, where farming was first discovered. None of the domesticated animals and 'grains, barley and wheat' required for this development were native to Greece. Perhaps it was at this stage that Greece's preoccupation with nature and fertility, seen in its art and mythology, emerged. Now the Greeks could cultivate food and manipulate nature- yet the success of this was somewhat out of their control. A good harvest relied on favourable weather conditions, natural forces they didn't understand. When their farming efforts failed, they must have questioned the cause of their misfortunes, wondered what had such control over them. The natural assumption to make was that a higher power was dictating matters. How then to have some control of their own lives? Burkert explains that,
'In distress and danger man seeks to find deliverance through a voluntary act of renunciation... He seeks to master the uncertainties of the future by means of a self imposed 'if-then''.
If efforts were made to appease forces with power over them, the Greeks could hope to keep the gods benevolent rather than vengeful. We must remember that in contrast to our modern view of deities as distant forces, to the Greeks, the gods had a direct influence over everyday life. Right up to the Classical period they had potential for great good or harm, to raise pious, worthy mortals up as demi-gods themselves (e.g. Heracles), or destroy those who incurred their wrath (e.g. Euripides' Hippolytus). Considering this, the concept of supplicating oneself and offering items to the gods seems logical. 'First Fruit' offerings involved the concept of 'ap-archai', beginnings taken from the whole, for the god comes first'. Before consuming food, the first portion given to the gods, to the force which provided it. The foodstuff was often destroyed (i.e. sacrificed) by way of transmission to the deity.
According to Plato, 'Socrates define(d) piety as 'knowledge of sacrificing and praying' and sacrificing as 'making gifts to the gods''. To achieve the social norm of piety and avoid personal disaster, sacrifices were essential.
Although many sacrifices involved the death of a victim, (see below) there were other ways the Greeks made sacrificial gifts to the gods. 'A more lasting testimony than a sacrifice' when appealing to or thanking the gods was the dedication of a votive offering, such as a statue. Girls coming of age gave their childhood toys to sanctuaries, and craftsmen dedicated 'the tools of their trade' on retirement. Libations often occurred alongside sacrifices, while still significant in their own right.
The most dramatic sacrifices were those that involved the ritual killing of a victim. The type of victim was specific to the deity concerned, with major Olympians receiving the 'most noble sacrificial animal', the bull, and lesser gods other common domesticated animals such as goats and sheep, although birds and fish were also used. The bull's religious significance can be traced back to its appearances in Minoan and Mycenaean art. At Knossos wall frescoes depicted bull leaping, and the 'horns of consecration' iconography is common in Cretan architecture. The bull was of some unknown significance to these Greeks, a significance that endured in a different form to the Classical period.
Descriptions of sacrifice indicate a great wish to please the gods. The animal received by the deity must be a 'perfect' specimen- anything less would be an insult or harbinger of doom. Docile animals were preferred, as a struggling victim was a bad omen. Much ceremony was involved in sacrifices, presumably to show the proper degree of respect to the gods. Victims were garlanded, even gilded with gold, and led to the temple's altar in a procession, accompanied by music, as depicted on the Parthenon frieze of the Panathenaic festival. Their throats were slit at the altar, the blood sprayed over the altar, the body then dismembered. Internal organs and thigh bones wrapped in fat (as in Homeric texts) were placed on a fire to be burnt for the god, other edible parts eaten at the customary feast, as significant a part of the ritual as the actual killing.
However, there is some suggestion that by the 5 th century BC, sacrificial feasts had become more occasions for indulgence than holy rites. In Menander's comedy, 'Dyskolos', a character attacks the 'scoundrels' who place on the fire 'the tail bone and bile, because they are inedible...then gulp down all the rest'. Perhaps by this period, some did view sacrifice as a social event. However, we must bear in mind that the above evidence is from a comic play, and may not be intended to be taken literally.
In some instances the animal was not in fact eaten, but entirely burnt, a 'holocaust' in which the whole of the offering was transmitted to the god. Pausinias states that '...among the ancients custom ordained in regard to sacrifices that the victim on which an oath was made was not to be eaten by any man' This tells us that sacrifices were in fact taken seriously, used to seal important oaths, and that tradition was a major factors in shaping the religious practices in Greece. Its rituals, including sacrifice, were dictated by what had gone before. Indeed, when examining depictions of sacrifice from centuries prior to the Classical period, we see that 'almost all the elements of the later Greek sacrificial ritual seem already present." The Ayia Triada coffin, dated around 1450-1400 BC, has painted on one side a bull sacrifice just the same as that in 5th century Athenian ceremonies, with 'only the fire on the altar missing'
An important function of sacrifice was providing entrails to soothsay by. This is said to have helped Xenophon make decisions during his military campaigns in the 5 th century BC;
Just as the early Greeks sought to make sense of their world, those from the Classical age still tried to read signs from the gods. 'Divinity, it seems, speaks to man, but in a language that he cannot understand'; sacrifices were one way the Greeks attempted to understand this language.
For grand festivities, or issues of supreme importance, it was believed that a great gift was required for the gods. In the case of the Athenian Great Panathenaia, a great festival in Athene's honour, over 100 'sheep and cows are slaughtered at the great altar'.
However, in Greek mythology and literature, sometimes matters of dire importance required human sacrifices. In Euripides' 'Iphigeniea at Aulis', the Greeks were prevented from sailing for the Trojan war until Iphigeniea, Agamemnon's own daughter was sacrificed. There is also evidence for actual human sacrifice in Greek prehistory. Several hundred administrative clay tablets (dated to the 14 th/13 th century BC) inscribed with the language Linear B have been found at Pylos. One tablet is conspicuously messy, and appears hastily written, perhaps at a time of crisis such as an attack on Pylos. It records gifts for Olympian deities, 'gold vessels and men and women'. An unknown word in the text is suspected to mean 'victims'- it seems possible that human sacrifices were made to the gods by the people of Pylos during a disaster. Disturbingly, physical evidence has also been found at Knossos; 'a deposit of children's bones with clear knife marks'.
Sacrifice was an integral aspect of Greek religious festivals, the Thesmophoria especially so. The 'most widespread Greek festival', Burkert describes it as the 'principal form of the Demeter cult', the central aspect of which appears to have been sacrifice of piglets. Demeter was the goddess of fertility and 'closely associated with crops'. She is now widely believed to be a form of the 'earth mother' figure from Greek Prehistory, who had power over fertility, the suffix 'meter' meaning 'mother' Demeter was honoured widely by women, to ensure their personal fertility and that of the city's crops. Mackenzie states that it was mainly 'as a provider of the food-supply that Demeter was addressed.'
At Athens the Thesmophoria was conducted near the Pnyx, at the top of a hill. Women alone were allowed in the area for the three day period of the festival. While separated from their husbands and families, the wives of citizens (it is not known if women of lower status were allowed to participate) performed mysterious rituals, including the sacrifice of piglets. In the myth of Demeter, which appears to have influenced much of the Thesmophoria's ceremony, her daughter Kore was abducted to the underworld by Hades. Demeter's misery halted the growth of crops and brought starvation to Greece. Only when Kore was returned to earth for half the year was the land's fertility restored. To the Greeks, Demeter was a powerful goddess with control, ultimately, over life and death, and needed to be treated as such. The principal of 'First Fruits' still stood; 'She was asked for gifts of cattle and corn and fruit, and bulls and cows were sacrificed to her'
Bremmer has stated that only gods considered 'impure' and on the 'margin of social order' were given pig sacrifices, as pigs were considered cheap animals. However, Burkert notes that when Kore was taken into the earth, 'the pigs of the swineherd Euboluleus were swallowed up as well'. It seems more likely in this case that the sacrifice of pigs at the Thesmophoria was not a reflection on the perceived importance or purity of Demeter, rather an aspect of the original myth incorporated into the 5th century festival. It was also usual for pigs to be sacrificed to gods associated with the earth, of which Demeter was one.
Some features of the Thesmophoria suggest that participants were re-enacting other such aspects and themes of the myth. On the second day, the women would mourn as Demeter had, fasting and living in 'a primitive state' before feasting. A contemporary account in Burkert's book describes the sacrificed pigs or piglets being thrown down into a cave, and then brought back to the surface again, as Kore was. The decayed remains were then honoured at altars, perhaps signifying rebirth and the return of the crops. Burkert's source claims it was believed that '...whoever takes of this (the pig remains) and scatters it with seed on the ground will have a good harvest'.
Although festivals were special periods during which normal standards of living were suspended, the continued performance of activities at certain times of year created a sense of stability. In some cases these seasonal sacrifices, processions and rites had persisted since the Stone Age.
According to J. Gould, making offerings to the gods was 'the central ritual of Greek Religion... and its most characteristic form animal sacrifice." Though overall the evidence is patchy, we can state that the Greeks believed in a number of all-powerful deities that were potentially harmful to them. Repetitive honouring of the gods via offerings and sacrifice was intended to influence their own circumstances, and avoid misfortunes interpreted as divine anger. Certain significant aspects of sacrifices derived from prehistoric ideas, such as the perceived nobility of bulls as victims. Sacrifices were closely connected with the old themes of nature and fertility, as shown by the Thesmophoria. Bremmer points out that Greek religion was an embedded aspect of society, rather than an entity separate from the concerns of state as it is largely today. Sacrifices were not only one's religious duty, but part of Greek culture, and had been for centuries. So another significant reason for Greek's sacrificing was that Greeks before them had. Ancient Greek religion was 'a system of explanation and response', and though to us sacrifice seems a strange response to the world, it appears to have made perfect sense to the Greeks.