The 5 th to 8 th century was a formative, transitional period for Western Europe. The collapse of the Roman Empire's power structure, in the 5 th century, was caused by internal pressures, but also by the waves of 'Angles, Saxons, and Jutes..." that attacked the Empire on every front. These invading groups were to be instrumental in the development of many of Europe's modern languages and borders, yet 'documentary evidence about even the most important people in early medieval society ... is at best sparse and frequently non-existent'. So, to understand the changes taking place, and the people living at this time, we must look to archaeological evidence, explicitly the 'particularly rich' burials of the period, which are our main source for material culture. For example, in the Alemannic region of south west Germany, there are currently 'only a few fragmentarily excavated settlements', while vast numbers of graves with 'hundreds of thousands of grave goods' are available for study.
Much study has been devoted to the changes in burial ritual in different areas of Europe during the period, with the aim of inferring information on many topics, including social structures, population movement, and religious belief. This essay will examine the burial rites and discuss their usefulness in drawing conclusions about early medieval society.
There are a few British historical sources that comment on the period of confusion after the Romans abandoned the country, and hint at the situation in Europe. It seems that as early as the 3 rd century, neighbouring tribes were raiding and encroaching on Roman borders. Inconveniently for us, 'the end of roman Britain and the beginning of Anglo-Saxon England were not directly consecutive or datable events'. Gildas' 'De Excidio et Conquestu Britanniae' names the Picts as the worst threat to the Romano-Britons, who actually employed Saxons from the continent as protection, and even gave them land to settle on. Gildas claims that soon eastern England was overrun by a threatening number of Saxons, who eventually banded together with the Picts. This seems to be the start of a period of Saxon dominance in Britain. While the document must be used carefully due to its 'demonstrable errors ...(and) derivation from oral tradition', it is roughly contemporary to the period in question, and one of the only written sources for it. In conjunction with consideration of the archaeological evidence, it is likely to prove useful.
The political and cultural changes taking place in Europe are reflected in the differences between 4 th and 5 th century burials. In the years of the late empire, inhumation, sometimes with vessels, was the common Roman burial practice, with 'grave goods becoming increasingly rare' However, excavations of remains interred after the end of Roman rule across Europe produced evidence of a variety of new funerary rites being practiced simultaneously, notably inhumations with extravagant assemblages of grave goods. 5th century burials containing goods of similarly high status have been found in Britain, northern Gaul and southern Germany. Across Europe, furnished burials shared common orientation (west-east) and a lack of standardised grave shape. Appearing earliest in Gaul (in Roman cemeteries at first), such burials often included gender-specific goods, jewellery with women and weaponry with men. The type, style and distribution of these artefacts however varied by region. In Britain, the weapons buried were almost exclusively spears and shields, and generally more females were buried with goods than men. By contrast, in northern Gaul swords were favoured heavily, and there was a bias towards burying men with goods.
The influence that European societies had on Britons can be demonstrated by Lucy/Reynolds' observation that 'different areas of the country can be seen to adopt varying facets of a broadly north European/ Scandinavian burial practice..." The appearance in British graves of Scandinavian cruciform and square style brooches demonstrates communication between groups in different areas of Europe at this time. The influence these groups had on each other is implied by the fact that simultaneous to the adoption of lavish burials, urned cremations, (also with grave goods) like those in north east Germany were too being taken up again by Britons. These changes can perhaps be explained by a direct transfer of religious ideas, that 'where they settled the Anglo-Saxon conquerors followed the religious practices they had observed in their homelands' That these practices were influenced by those of their European neighbours in the first place is possibly indicated by the frequent parallels between Anglo-Saxon grave goods and practices with those from many areas of Europe.
Early Anglo-Saxon burials were nothing if not varied, as demonstrated by evidence of other, more unusual burial practice dating to this period. Charring inside graves appears to indicate a process of 'half cremation'; 'a fire was lit in the grave before an inhumation took place', perhaps as a form of ritual purification. Perhaps more noticeably, large burial monuments for the elite were being built from the 5th to 7th century, signifying a substantial change in how social stratification was represented in death practices from the Roman period. Reynolds and Lucy cite barrows such as Sutton Hoo as evidence of 'the increasing distance in ideological terms between ruler and subject' Anglo-Saxons seem to have perceived a need for this distance to be made clear, and used their burial rituals to do so.
The idea of multiple inhumations in the same grave however (there are repeated instances of double, even treble burials across the continent), did not appear to travel to Britain during this period.
The 'susceptibility to frequent change' of mortuary practices is demonstrated by another shift in burial rites; 'a virtual disappearance of the objects with human burials during the course of the late 7th and early 8th centuries..." This is generally attributed to the rise of Christianity, as it was known to have spread back to Britain by this time. Instead of barrows, crosses and even churches were adopted as above-ground burial markers. The burials were often located in churchyards, close to settlements in contrast to the earlier Anglo-Saxon burials in liminal areas, on boundaries between territories. Adoption of Christian views of the afterlife (that a person's body had to be in tact so it could be resurrected on the Day of Judgement), are almost certainly the reason for the abrupt discontinuation of cremation. Furnished burials seem to have been phased out more gradually, as goods were still appearing in 7th century 'final phase' Christian burials.
The 'significant ritual diversity' that characterises Anglo-Saxon burial customs is demonstrated by the famed site Sutton Hoo, which also shows several parallels between European and British burial rituals. The 'group of low circular burial mounds' in Suffolk were first excavated in 1930's, and found to contain high status burials from the mid 6th/early 7th centuries. The largest of the mounds contained the remains of a huge ship, and a very wealthy assemblage of grave goods. Although not an especial source of burials with rich goods, Scandinavia is known for its 'lavish boat burials' (i.e. Valsgarde). A purse containing Merovingian Gaulish coins was also found near the presumed body (no trace of which was found due to acidic soil conditions).
This raises the thorny question of the ethnic descent of those buried at Sutton Hoo; can we perhaps conclude they were Germanic Saxons, influenced in their burial practices by those of other Europeans? Probably not, given that 'the idea that the artefact types themselves are significant in ethnic terms is one that is increasingly challenged." While Halsall, is absolutely certain that 'the introduction of cremation into lowland Britain was the result of migration from northern Germany', due to the conspicuous similarity of the rites in both regions, he is reluctant to use grave goods as evidence of ethnicity. He suggests that ethnogenesis (the creation of 'new ethnic identities') was widespread in the early middle ages, arguing that there would have been obvious benefits for local people who imitated the high-status newcomers to their area who 'dominated post-Roman society' Others have also observed that it would be irresponsible and closed minded to assume that, for example 'the wearing of Germanic brooches was exclusively confined to people of Germanic origin' Perhaps the most we can assume in this case without further investigation is that trade contacts with Gaul were developed, or perhaps sustained from the past during the 6th-7th centuries.
Evidence of influence from several areas of Europe is implied by the other burials of Sutton Hoo. Mounds 2, 3 and 4 contained, among other things, remains of cremated bones of humans and a horse; while a few horse burials exist from north Gaul, they were frequent in Germany, with animals buried too, like deer.
Finally, perhaps some religious significance can be inferred from the ship's burial assemblage, which has been described as containing '...possessions that reflected every aspect of his (the deceased's) life in order to provide for his needs in the afterworld' This could imply a pagan belief in East Anglia at this time, contrasting as it does with the stark Christian burials of the late Romano-Britons, and equally stark later medieval ones. Yet inferring religious belief from funerary practices is never simple; spoons inscribed with 'Saul' and 'Paul', names with an 'ultimately Christian significance' were part of the 'pagan' assemblage. Adding to the confusion is the consideration that while the spoons are 'probably symbolic of someone's conversion to Christianity' it cannot be proved that the deceased was that person.
This resurgence of certain funerary rituals in Britain, sometimes subsequent to such resurgences in other parts of Europe, combined with the common styles of artefact imply that Britain was being influenced heavily by outside communities, as covered above. Though it is certain that there was an influx of Saxons to Britain, it has been debated whether large-scale population movement in Europe was the cause of 'sudden and drastic (cultural) change from Romano-Britain to Anglo-Saxon Britain' Traditionally, it has been assumed that there were large scale migrations into Britain from the continent, while others (see the 'New Archaeology' of the 1960's and 70's) have put forth the idea that 'the adoption of new cultures could occur by trade or the influx of a small ruling elite with minimal or no impact on the gene pool' Recent scientific developments have made it possible to test both theories by means of a genetic study. That Y chromosomes from the current population of Central England were 'statistically indistinguishable' from samples from Friesia supports the idea of a mass-migration. It was the conclusion of those conducting the study that 'the Anglo-Saxon cultural transition in Central England coincided with a mass immigration from the continent'
5 th to 8 th century burials across Europe have, and will continue to be an invaluable source on this period, and without written evidence, possibly the only ones we will ever have at our disposal. The development/ readoption of a variety of rites after the end of Roman rule indicates the relative disorganisation of society, and the rise to power of separate groups in each region. Europe and Britain shared several 'new' burial rites different to those of the preceding period, from which we can infer both communication, and also significant migrations between different areas. That there were regional variations in the details of these rites also hints at a degree of individuality, and the future emergence of defined areas that would become the later states of medieval Europe.
The significant change in burial rites from the 7 th century is indicative of the religious developments throughout the period; from 'pagan' practices staunchly different to those of the Romans, to the prevalence rites demonstrative of Christian beliefs that would shape Europe in the coming centuries.
However, our interpretations of the burial evidence from this period of population movement en masse, are somewhat limited by blurred lines of ethnicity. Without written records to define their (the Anglo-Saxons and other Europeans) definitions of ethnicity, we may never understand the significance of certain items found buried with human remains.