Aside from Indiana Jones-esque discoveries of treasure hoards, the aspect of archaeology that most captures public interest is surely contact with physical remains of people from the past. Seeing the bones of a person who lived hundreds, even thousands of years ago, makes us feel a strong a connection with the past, and reminds us of our own mortality.
Archaeologists expend much time and effort on studying human remains, due to their significance in interpreting sites and drawing conclusions with far-reaching implications.
When remains have been deliberately disposed of by a society, they can perhaps tell us just as much about the living who performed the disposal as the deceased. A body can inform us of society's attitude towards that person, members of their society once dead, and death as a concept. Prior states that for all of us, the body is 'our most fundamental source of contact with death' and explains that it is 'not merely an object over which people vent their emotions but also one which is utilised to convey a representation of death'
Bodies can be incredibly rich sources of evidence for many aspects of life in the past as well as death. Pearson is of the opinion that human remains are 'most likely to reveal information about the life of an individual and not about their death." By examining how the body was disposed of (burial or cremation, inclusion or absence of grave goods, pathology and more) archaeologists are able to make inferences on social status, occupation, their position/role in a family, religious beliefs.
Such inferences as these, when clearly supported by the evidence, can lead archaeologists to make wider ranging inferences to do with the society the deceased belonged to; its social and economic structure, standards of behaviour, differing levels of wealth, population size and movement. However, caution must be exercised when using interpreting human remains, as I shall explain during the course of this essay.
I chose the Eastern cemetery of Roman London as a case study, as the excavation (from 1983 to 1990) produced a large number of deliberately disposed human remains. In use from the 1 st to 5 th centuries AD, burials and cremations were found, with many dating from the 3 rd/4 th centuries. Located outside the Eastern boundary of the Roman city, the cemetery is so large (encompassing 12 sites, with upwards of 29 burial plots) that archaeologists have been hesitant to confirm that it is in fact a single cemetery. Due to the scale of the excavation an in-depth analysis of its wide-ranging findings would be inappropriate. Instead I will provide examples from the site of inferences archaeologists have made at the site.
The cemetery is a valuable source for death and funerary practices in Roman London, containing 'ample evidence for a variety of burial rites'.
The existence of evidence of cremation in the site's later contexts was of interest to the archaeologists, as it was 'thought to have been generally superseded by inhumation'. Buried urns containing burnt fragments of bone were found across 7 of the 12 sites from which at least 92 individuals were identified. Unurned cremation burials were also excavated, and debris from funeral pyres. The rare discovery of an in situ bustum (Plot 3) is sinificant, given the 'general paucity of evidence for pyre sites from any period in which the practice of cremation was in use'. Considering cremation's popularity, this absence of evidence for the actual process is surprising, yet pyres don't leave substantial deposits, rather 'very shallow evidence of their existence' The bustum is evidence of a complex funerary rite, in which a pyre was cremated over a grave pit, and filled by the resultant debris of charcoal, wood and bone. Others are believed to have existed on site, but have not been preserved due to their delicacy. Other pyre debris deposits were found, dumped leftovers containing only fragments of bone; it is presumed the majority of remains were removed from the pyre and buried, possibly in an urn. These deposits were concentrated in two plots (21 and 28), which could imply rough contemporaneity, and that a group of people used certain burial rites in a separate area of the cemetery. However, conclusions about burial practices should not be drawn too hastily. Archaeologists involved with the cemetery explain that the site was one of the last to be excavated, 'by which time excavators had acquired the experience to recognise the significance of such deposits and the need to sample them'. Prior to this, deposits weren't recorded as extensively, a discrepancy rendering it impossible to make developed inferences from their locations. The poor survival of deposits in the first place only added to this problem.
One inference that was tentatively made related to possible aspects of funeral ceremonies. Pottery fragments from the debris deposits were lacking in mortaria and storage jars, implying that food wasn't prepared or consumed for the cremation/burial ceremony. Many amphorae however were present in the deposits, suggesting that ritual drinking did feature in ceremonies, in 'marked contrast with the kinds of rituals which appear to be represented later on in the cemeteries'
Objects placed deliberately with human remains can be very useful for providing information on the person they were buried with, or indeed those who buried them. One inhumation (site reference B291) had an extensive selection of accompanying goods, which were in this case useful sources on religion. A wooden casket placed at a young woman's feet contained among other items, several ornamental intaglio were found, one made of coloured glass inscribed with the image of Mercury. Myth tells us that he led souls to the underworld, and that his image was found in this grave suggests his importance to Romans in the area at the time of the woman's death (around the 4 th century). Another carnelian intaglio, and also a coin depicts Sol, implying regeneration, while other coins show figures associated with the 'concept of victory over death' like Hercules and Mars. The specialists cataloguing the goods noted that practical and recreational items (shoes and gaming dice) were also buried with the woman. This, coupled with the appropriate religious imagery led to the conclusion that the deceased's relatives buried her with provisions for the afterlife.
In other instances, burial goods have been cited as evidence of ethnicity, another area of interest to archaeologists. Distinctive belt fittings and a crossbow brooch similar to those categorised as foreign in origin elsewhere were found with a body perhaps implying the wearer was an immigrant from the continent. Yet archaeologists must be considerate of possibilities other than that the wearer of a foreign object must be foreign. It could symbolise a trader's connection with another country, or simply be a gift. Other evidence such as the 'heterogeneity of burial rites across the cemetery' and skeletal similarities suggest that those buried there were largely of Romano-British descent, and were 'born, lived and died locally'
The archaeologists analysing the cemetery call burial goods 'symbols that are unreadable now' They hesitate to use them as indicators of status, referencing one paradoxical burial, of a child that was more 'materially rich' than most others, yet whose bones showed evidence of disease and poor diet. The fact that burials were ceremonial, religiously significant, atypical events perhaps suggests that the objects involved are too atypical of a dead person's life. As Pearson attests, 'The dead do not bury themselves, but are treated and disposed of by the living' Who knows what reasons the living had for selecting, or omitting items to be buried with their loved one.
The bodies themselves are perhaps a more appropriate source than grave goods on the everyday activities of those buried in the Eastern cemetery. Although the inhumations contained bones more intact than those of the cremation burials, both helped archaeologists to draw conclusions on Roman lifestyles in the area. Yet the inhumations dated from the entire period of the cemetery's use, and for the archaeologists, 'phasing them within this time span proved difficult' The result was that all inhumations were taken as a single sample, and no comparisons between skeletal evidence of different periods could be made. Truncation across the site and varying levels of detail in recording also rendered analysis of family groups extremely difficult.
However, the inhumations were informative on other topics of interest, firstly the appearance of the deceased. The sample was just shorter than today's population, with average heights calculated for males and females similar to those at other Roman sites Dental analysis found that as with other Roman British populations, a small percentage had minor tooth decay, suggesting relatively good hygiene and a diet containing little sugar. The high levels of wear on older teeth indicate consumption of coarse foods that ground the enamel down. Only a small number of skeletons showed evidence of dietary deficiencies, with rare cases of rickets, stunted growth among the young and enamel hypoplasia due to dietary stress. This suggests that the general population had a diet that was at least adequate, and two cases of gout imply that a small percentage were even consuming 'excessively rich' foods. Whether this is an indication that the elite level of society was not very large would have to be investigated, possibly by further osteological analysis of the bodies in question, or by studying distribution patterns of luxury grave goods.
Stress and wear on bones can indicate which physical activities a person performed regularly and any trauma they have undergone. Osteoarthritis was widespread throughout the inhumations, particularly on the vertebral column, shoulder and hip joints, possibly suggesting 'repetitive activity', likely manual labour. A number of individuals in Plot 3 of the cemetery had 'bony changes consistent with repeated controlled sweeping movement of the arm' interpreted as resultant of either scything or sweeping.
An assortment of (often healed) fractures resulting from everyday activities and accidents were observed across the sample, with very few suggestions of violence- most damage to bones were caused by the 'degenerative complaints of old age'
Despite the multitude of inferences that can be made from it, the study of human remains does have its limitations. While in osteology lesions, breaks, tumours and infections can be studied, sometimes disease and trauma is only evident in soft tissue. Another problem is that some inferences can only be made from bone in good condition, and as the destructive cremation process leaves bone fragments, cremation burials 'curtail pathological discussion'
Pearson bemoans the fact that 'most ancient funerary rites seem to be archaeologically invisible, leaving no direct material trace." We must always contend with the fact that samples cannot be fully representative of populations and their practices. The small numbers of women and especially infants buried in the Eastern cemetery compared to males is typical of Romano-British cemeteries, and possibly a result of differing, 'less-visible' burial customs for these groups. The idea that infants were perceived as having lower status than adults in death was documented by contemporary sources, and backed up by their burial in cemeteries separate from those for grown members of society. The fragile nature and poor preservation of immature bones also accounts for the infrequency of infant cremations found.
That only 27% of burials at the Eastern cemetery were excavated undisturbed, and 165 graves were missing human remains  implies that we will never see a great percentage of the bodies once buried there. It's steady use over several centuries resulted in much truncation and destruction of older contexts, 'notably inhumation graves cutting cremation burials'. While a total of 642 bodies, both cremated and inhumed were studied, an estimate based on the cemetery's size placed its actual population between 13,536 and 180,480.
The deliberately disposed human remains in London's Eastern cemetery were used by archaeologists to make multiple inferences on typical subjects. They acted as indications of funerary practices common to the area during the cemetery's period of use, with evidence of these practices being of use in reconstructing Roman attitudes towards death. Inferences on the perceived nature of life after death, and what was religiously significant to the area's inhabitants were made possible by the burial goods placed with the deceased.
Where the body had not been partially destroyed by cremation, the remains were also indicative of the everyday lives of Roman Londoners, of social stratification, health and ethnic origin. In the case of this Roman cemetery, the human remains have proved most valuable when looked at as a whole, as a sample within which comparisons can be made and conclusions drawn. Despite the incomplete and perhaps misleading nature of the sample, the inferences made from it are nonetheless important for the interpretation of Roman London as a whole.