Methods of absolute (or chronometric) dating have developed greatly over recent years, with dendrochronology and radiocarbon dating in particular being used extensively by archaeologists. While relative dating techniques (such as typology and frequency seriation) can be used to put objects and sites in a chronology relative to each other, we must look to other methods to provide specific calendar dates. One such method is dendrochronology, the study of tree ring growth, and was first put to notable use by A.E. Douglass in the 1930's. Soon after William Libby made another pivotal discovery while examining unstable carbon isotopes- radiocarbon dating.
In this essay I hope to outline the actual processes involved in both methods, compare their merits and give examples of their use in dating sites. I shall also examine the use of dendrochronology as 'a successful means of calibrating or correcting radiocarbon dates' (Renfrew, Bahn, 2000. p135).
Renfrew and Bahn name radiocarbon dating the 'single most useful method of dating for the archaeologist' (Renfrew and Bahn, 2000. p138) By measuring the number of carbon 14 atoms present in a sample of organic material, such as wood, bone or leather, its age can be determined. The element carbon is absorbed constantly by living organisms as carbon dioxide, which is taken in during respiration or photosynthesis. There are three isotopes of carbon, that is, atoms that have 'the same atomic number, but different atomic weights', (Bowman, S. 1990. p10) carbon 12, 13 and 14. Of the three, carbon 14 is the rarest in the atmosphere, and the only carbon isotope that is radioactively unstable. Like other unstable isotopes, carbon 14 has a half life and so decays at a rate known to archaeologists. An element's half life is the period of time it takes for half of the atoms present to decay away, which for carbon 14 Libby calculated as 5568 years, although more recently this was adjusted to 5730 years. So, the amount of carbon 14 left in a sample indicates how long ago it ceased to live.
However, it is not the case that a sample can be analysed and a specific calendar date easily ascertained. The presentation of radiocarbon results requires some explaining. The level of carbon 14 in the atmosphere is not the same as that of the past, having been changed due to an carbon emissions since the industrial revolution and the use of nuclear weapons. For this reason all results are standardised to the archaeological 'present', set at 1950, and presented as however many years before the present, or BP. There is also always a margin of error attached to these dates, a standard deviation calculated by the archaeologist. Factors such as contamination and decay of the sample, or inaccurate testing make it highly likely that the date provided is not exact. The real figure can only be shown as lying between two dates;
2600 400 BP
This result would indicate that the age of the sample lay within a period from 400 years before 2600 to 400 years after 2600, i.e. 2200 to 3000 years before the present.
With recent developments in radiocarbon dating, such as the use of AMS (Accelerator Mass Spectrometry) to detect carbon 14 atoms (Bowman, S. 1990. p34), the technique has been put to use in a number of high profile archaeological investigations. Radiocarbon dating of the Turin Shroud was possible in the 1980's because only a small sample size was required for AMS. The cloth (made from plant fibres), which had previously been suspected of covering Jesus Christ's body, was found to actually date from the medieval period. (Renfrew, Bahn, 2000. p145. Bowman, S. 1990. p36)
As well as the substantial margins of error attributed to radiocarbon results, the technique has other limitations. Contamination of samples gives incorrect results; for example, if during excavation modern organic matter came into contact with a sample, when tested the number of carbon atoms present could have been altered. The use of paper in the packaging and storage of samples too would render them of little use in radiocarbon dating.
Aitken goes against the views of Renfrew and Bahn, crediting dendrochronology with 'an accuracy far surpassing radiocarbon' (Aitken, M.J. 1990, p36) in dating sites; instead of a margin of several hundred years, samples from the Sweet Track have been dated to within a matter of months (Baillie, M.G.L. 1995 p17). It is perhaps an easier concept to understand than that of radiocarbon. The yearly growth of a tree is visible as rings of varying widths in the cross-section of its trunk. This variation in width is caused by environmental factors such as temperature and rainfall, which can stunt or increase growth year by year. These environmental conditions will have the same effect on the growth of trees of the same species in the same area, meaning that the same yearly pattern of rings is visible in their trunks. This is highly useful to archaeologists, who are able to cross date tree remains from overlapping periods found in the same area. Measurements of the exact size of each ring in a sample are made and recorded in a computer database, to which other samples can then be compared. If roughly contemporary, these other samples would hopefully have rings matching those already on the database, and ideally would stretch even further back in time. This adds to the database and forms the beginnings of a tree ring chronology. With enough well preserved samples available in the area, and assuming the environmental conditions had a notable effect (but not a detrimental one, see bellow) on ring growth, different trunks can be linked up to establish, 'a year-by-year record of average...growth, for a particular region'. (Baillie M.G.L. 1995. p17) Once this chronology has been established, 'floating sequences', that is, undated ring patterns from sites can be compared to it and are often successfully dated.
Remarkably the geographical area within which samples can be compared can be quite large; a European oak chronology stretching back 7272 years has been achieved. (Aitken, M.J. 1990. p45) In the 1980's, scientists were able to link up the Belfast Palaeoecology Centre's Irish bog-oak chronology with German oak sequences by Huber and Hollstein. This successful amalgamation of their two sequences was possible because both used oak samples, a species highly suitable for radiocarbon dating. Oak has long been a commonly used building material across Europe, with a strong presence in the archaeological record. Oak trees are sizeabe, enabling the large samples required to be taken, and even allowing for radiocarbon dates to be taken as well. However, a substantial number of samples are needed to build a chronology in the first place, as oaks are short-lived.
The relatively low sensitivity of oak makes it 'less prone to abnormalities', (Aitken, M.J. 1990. p45) abnormalities that can limit the success of dendrochronology as a dating method. Aitken makes special mention of sensitive conifers such as pine and spruce as being problematic to analyse. (Aitken, M.J. 1990. p37-8) In years of especially harsh conditions for growth, conifers are prone to have missing rings, with other instances of double rings occurring. He highlights the paradox presented to archaeologists; that in sensitive trees that react extremely to climate, growth patterns are very clear to see, yet 'there is highest risk of these abnormalities'. (Aitken, M.J. 1990. p38)
However, one species of conifer, the bristle cone pine, has been of great importance to dendrochronology in North America. The unusual environmental conditions in the Californian White Mountains has left the ancient wood there near-perfect for use in dendrochronology. The high altitude and low temperature created an inhospitable environment for the micro organisms that would otherwise have speeded decay in the trunks, which were also extremely well preserved by their high resin content. (Bowman, S. 1990. p19) The pines were also highly suitable because of the great number of narrow rings in each trunk; samples with 100+ rings are preferred in dendrochronology to guarantee a unique sequence. Dead and alive pines, some up to 4000 years old, were used to create a master chronology stretching back 6700 years. Interestingly, this was validated by another from the area, and calibrated also by radiocarbon dates of the pines, as well as those of the 'lowland oak chronology in Europe' (Aitken, M.J. 1990. p44). Suess used the bristle cone pine chronology in constructing the first calibration curve, which shall be discussed later.
Aside from irregularities present in the wood, more difficulties can arise just through sampling it. As with all archaeology, sampling is destructive of the material. Dendrochronology has especial potential for this destruction, given the importance of getting 'samples which run out to the bark surface' that indicate the all-important date of when it was felled. Baillie cites the MC18 chronology that was constructed using late medieval painting boards, valuable objects in themselves (Baillie, M.GL. 1995. p45); to avoid unnecessary damage, the technique of coring was used. Even less destructive methods still have been utilised in dendrochronology. Taking a photograph or mould of a tree ring sequence ('contact lifting') can be just as effective.
However, even delicate sampling methods are of no use with samples that have not been preserved well. Wet environments have the best survival rates for ring samples, hence the use of bog oaks by the Belfast chronology. And of course, if the species of wood being sampled doesn't have an existing chronology to be compared to, all archaeologists can judge is whether it is contemporary to any other ring sequences in the area, no calendar date can be ascertained.
Aitken cites a 'second radiocarbon revolution', the first being its invention, the second being its use in conjunction with tree ring analysis. The aforementioned first calibration curve by Suess in the 1960's was a significant development in chronometric dating, that proved 'major discrepancies between radiocarbon age and calendar age' (Bowman, S. 1990. p17). The older a sample is, the more inaccurate the radiocarbon dates are likely to be. One of Libby's initial assumptions that he based radiocarbon dating on was that the percentage of carbon 14 in the earth's atmosphere has always remained the same- this turned out to be untrue. As a result of this, radiocarbon dates from before 1000BC are erroneously young and need to be calibrated using a curve. These curves are based on radiocarbon dates taken from individual tree rings, the dates of which have already been calculated. There was a confusing 'proliferation prior to 1985' (Bowman, S. 1990. p17) of more such curves.
Bryony Orme's case study of radiocarbon dates in the Somerset Levels demonstrates the importance of using two methods of chronometric dating when analysing a site. It looks at Garvin's Track, from which conflicting sets of radiocarbon dates were obtained from brushwood samples, reproduced below. The track forks off into two sections, West and East, which the archaeologists had reason to believe were built around the same time, but the radiocarbon dates are confusingly spread over a long period:
By performing a tree-ring analysis of the samples, it was ascertained that the tracks were in fact contemporary; 'sometimes virtually identical patterns of growth' (Orme, B. 1982. p18) were found. The construction of Garvin's Track was subsequently placed within a narrower period, between 2470-2330bc. Orme later notes that 'the two approaches to dating are therefore very complementary' , with radiocarbon placing the context in a large timescale, and tree samples identifying it within a shorter period. She also states that young tree samples are especially useful in proving 'exact contemporaneity of material' (Orme, B. 1982. p20) in a way that radiocarbon is simply incapable of doing.
The use of both methods is also wise considering the limitations of dendrochronology. Even after a sample of wood has been linked up to a master chronology and its date of felling ascertained, there is still no certainty that this is when it became part of the archaeological context. As with the issue of heirloom artefacts giving a site or context an inaccurate early date, so a piece of wood may have been left to mature after felling, or have been reused in several buildings. For this reason, brushwood rather than timber was used to date Garvin's track way.
It would not be of much use to label one of the discussed methods of chronometric dating as 'better' than the other, it may in fact be impossible to judge which that is. Radiocarbon dating is invaluable in giving us a long term picture of human activity, and as the scientific techniques become ever more sophisticated, its range and accuracy can only be improved. Dendrochronology can have an extremely high level of accuracy, informs us of human events on a short timescale, and can even go further by indicating an area's environmental conditions thousands of years ago. Both methods have inevitable drawbacks, and are only helpful if used properly. In conjunction, radiocarbon dating and dendrochronology have great potential for dating sites, and adding to our knowledge on the subject, as the work on the successful bristle cone pine chronology has shown.