The first part of this assignment looks at the idea of using corpora as an analytic tool. Corpora can be defined according to Guy Cook as " a databank of language which has actually occurred, whether written spoken or a mixture of the two." However the following investigation concerns itself only with the use of an electronic online Corpus and therefore all the results are taken from written accounts.
The initial aim of the study is to look at the semantic prosody of a word or phrase and to determine whether it is positive or negative. The first phrase used in the study was chosen as "set in" when meaning that something moves in, for example when 'depression set in'. Therefore due to the way that the online corpus works the facility is unable to differentiate between different meanings of the same phrase and subsequently this needs to be done manually with each new set of results.
The first search was done using a database from The Times newspaper from March 1995 with ,as aforementioned, the phrase "set in". Of the 55 concordance lines which were produced only 9 lines related to the correct meaning of the phrase. In each of these cases but one it was clear that the phrase had a negative prosody as the concordance lines dealt with, to name but a few 'panic', 'recession', 'infection' and 'tiredness', all words which are associated with negativity.
In line 26 the word reaction precedes the phrase "set in". Standing alone the word 'reaction' can be said to have either a negative or a positive prosody however in this case once again it appears to have a negative prosody.
In order to extend this investigation it was decided that a number of different databases should be used to see whether this would alter the semantic prosody of the same phrase, these being a database of The Times newspaper from a month earlier in February 1995 and the other an extract from one of the Sherlock Holmes novels.
With the database from February 1995 a similar result was expected as that from The Times database of March 1995 as they are both of the same genre. As predicted, of the 58 results only 6 of the results were used in the correct context and once again each of these had a negative prosody. This was determined to be the case as more often than not stories of current interest in the news deal with events that have had a negative impact on the world.
It was due to this that it was therefore necessary to investigate whether changing the genre of the text would alter the way in which the phrase was being used, having taken into consideration the idea of poetic license it was altogether possible that in a fiction novel the writer may have used this particular phrase in a metaphor.
However the two results that were produced from doing a search of a database taken from the famous Sherlock Holmes novels once again were shown in a negative light. However this was in a slightly different way than had been seen before in the newspaper extract. This time the term "set in" had been used to describe the movement of weather, but yet it was simply describing, 'gales' and 'frost' both elements of weather which are associated with a cold and unpleasant climate and not for example 'sunshine'.
This lead the investigation to continue further, looking at ways in which subtle changes to the original phrase used would be able to produce a different semantic prosody. As originally, the database from The Times in March 1995 was used.
Firstly the phrase was altered to "setting in" and this search only managed to produce one concordance line which didn't use the idea of "setting in", in terms of movement as required and therefore no conclusions could be drawn from this.
The last investigation again looked at a variance of "set in" which was "sets in". There were four concordance lines found in the database from The Times in March 1995 which contained this phrase. One was used in the specified manner and referred to the word 'disillusionment' which naturally is a word with a negative prosody.
In conclusion there are a number of things which can be learnt from this investigation.
Firstly we can see that the genre of text that we look at has very little bearing on the 'collocations' as described by Cook in Applied Linguistics as "frequent combinations of words" within a language.
In addition to this the study showed that small alterations to a phrase will not influence its collocation either as all it is simply doing is changing the tense of the phrase for example 'set in' is the past tense of 'sets in'.
The second section of the assignment looks at the idea of ' Discourse Analysis' which is described by Jan Renkema in Introduction to Discourse Studies on page one as "the discipline devoted to the investigation of the relationships between form and function in verbal communication." In this particular case it is the idea of persuasion within the media that is being investigated.
A piece found on the Times newspaper's website on Sunda y 26 th November 2006 entitled "Word on the street..... they're listening" is of particular interest, it can be found in the appendix. The article written by Steven Swinford and Nicola Smith looks at the idea of introducing CCTV cameras on the streets of London in order to intercept cases of crime before they happen. The authors have used a number of linguistic tools in order to persuade the reader to engage in their means of thinking.
Firstly the use of Noun Phrases within the article is a prominent choice of the authors to strengthen the meaning of their message. These phrases are combinations of words which very often go together and due to their familiarity evoke emotion in the reader. A number of these can be seen in the article, two examples of which would be "growing concern", found in the fourth paragraph and secondly " further discussions" found in the eighth paragraph.
Another concept used by Swinford and Smith is that of dysphemism. A dysphemism is that opposite of a euphemism and refers to the choice of an author's words to emphasise in this case a negative occurrence. Renkema talks on page 256 of an Introduction to discourse of how "using milder words will result in a milder attitude" to explain why a euphemism or equally a dysphemism would be used. Once again this linguistic technique can be seen in the piece. The noun phrase "uncharted territory" has been purposely selected where perhaps the word 'new' could have been used as an alternative to uncharted. The same can be seen later on where the word "warned" has been chosen in favour of 'explained' or again in the case of the use of "escalates" instead of 'grows' perhaps.
Further to this Swinford and Smith have chosen to use many attributive adjectives within the text in order to emphasise the meaning of the noun in a way that makes the reader perceive it as the writer had intended. In this article the word 'aggressive' is used in the first paragraph to highlight the fact that the exchanges between those concerned are in fact of a violent nature. This same technique is also used later on when the authors refer to 'subtle' changes in the noise so that audience is able to see exactly how the camera is working.
The use of quotations is also a prominent feature of the article in order to re-inforce what is being said. By doing this the writer of an article is more likely to get the reader on their side as it no longer becomes simply the view of a journalist but instead reliable fact given by someone of considerable authority. In this piece it can be seen that Swinford and Smith have taken quotes from Graeme Gerrad who reiterates their distaste for the ideas put forward in the article. Not only have the writers very cleverly selected who to interview regarding their topic in relation to their particular point of view but they have also ensured that by using his position as 'chairman of the chief police officers' video and CCTV working group, that their article suddenly becomes more reliable and subsequently persuasive.
The methods mentioned above are only some of the ways in which a writer can incorporate linguistic techniques in their work, in order to create a piece that is persuasive. It can also be seen that they are very successful in moulding the mind of the reader, as instantaneously when you read this article you have been lead to believe that the idea of CCTV installation is an invasion of privacy and that you should be sceptical over its benefits.