Bertolt Brecht's Der aufhaltsame Aufstieg des Arturo Ui is a savage, witty parable written to allegorise the nazi era. His portrayal of crime and justice in the play can be contrasted with those of Fritz Lang's film M. Eine Stadt sucht einen Mrder, which is a shocking criminal tale based on various actualities of the time. Lang acknowledged the influence of Brecht as an author and director when he himself directed M in 1931. In reality, such was Brecht's influence that it would have been virtually impossible not to have been during this epoch of German film and literature. However, Arturo Ui was not written until 1941 and was to have a vastly different objective than that of Lang's film. Whilst M is a serious production describing the hysteria caused by an unknown child serial killer in Berlin, Arturo Ui is a satirical play detailing Nazi Germany. Yet despite these competing authorial intentions, parallels can be drawn between the treatment of the paramount theme of crime and justice.
The protagonists of the two works occupy different criminal spheres, both in terms of the nature of the illegalities and of the victims claimed. In M the felon is Hans Beckert, played by Peter Loore, an individual who has murdered children of Berlin after alluring them to come away with him - 'Ein paar S
igkeit, ein Spielzeug, ein Apfel kann... um ein Kinder zu Verhngnis zu werden. ' In Arturo Ui, however Brecht presents a collective threat, using the allegory of 'gang culture' to portray not only murder but also physical violence, blackmail, bribery and manipulation. Brecht suggests that 'crooked dealing necessarily entails violence." This is evident when Arturo Ui's offer to Dogsborough of 'protection' is declined but then promptly accepted due to his intimidation after the murder of a witness at the official enquiry.
The underlying criminal motivations suggested in the two works provide an additional source of comparison. In M Beckert suffers from a mental illness, which is initially apparent by the camera shot of his face as he gazes into the mirror in front of him. He contorts his visage and this directly emulates what he would look like to the authorities who brand him as insane. Here the 'double perspective literalises Beckert's split personality' as the scene itself splits and doubles his face. This particular eighteen second long shot is further significant in that the murderer self-examines himself and this provokes the reader's empathy which will become increasingly evident throughout the film. He repeatedly experiences periods of physical and mental distress, highlighted by his unease as he watches the child picked up by her mother. His anxiety is reinforced by the cognac which he purchases from the caf in order to subdue his nerves. His facial contortion is disturbing and this is mirrored in the music accompaniment which Lang includes in this sequence (51.20). In Arturo Ui the rationale of the Mafioso is purely economic, reflecting Brecht's criticisms of the Nazi regime. Arturo Ui wants to control the vegetable trade in Chicago and charge the sellers for his protection against rival vegetable dealers. This idea is initially rejected but Ui manages to persuade them and he eventually rules the protection in Chicago and Cicero. The play ends with his ambitions for further domination symbolising Hitler's dangerous ardor for expansionism: 'denn nach Schuzt schrein nicht nur Cicero und Chicago, sondern auch andere Stdte: Washington und Milwakee! Detroit! Toledo! Pittsburg!... Charleston! Und New York! '
Yet although these motives differ in the two works, the underlying contemporary social and economic conditions are attributing factors in the crimes. Both Lang and Brecht suggest that it is almost inevitable that such situations will arise in Germany in the 1930s. Lotte Eisner argues that in M there is indubitableness that society will produce such creatures as Beckert as Lang again and again reverts back to the idea that 'any one of us might turn a murderer in certain circumstances' and that 'in those restless times after the end of the war and the abortive attempts at revolution, the mad investment and the vast unemployment that were to give Hitler his opportunity, there was - what else could be expected? - a crop of mass murderers." It is likely that Beckert had a traumatic experience during the First World War as 'in his 1930 work journal, Lang recorded an idea for a scene in M that was never filmed: 'War scene as an excuse of the child murderer before the underworld court.'' It is often the case that the confusion of war and peace time for a soldier can lead to psychiatric problems - sometimes compelling them to murder, repeating that which they were forced to do in combat and thus compulsively restaging 'the crime in order to reclaim the moment of original trauma.'
In Arturo Ui Brecht depicts Germany's economic and social turmoil of the 1930s and remains committed to his Marxist standpoint by 'circling back to the image of production and consumption'. The opening of the play speaks of 'Verdammte Zeiten! ' and the situation is 'als ob die Nacht am hellen Mittag ausbrch! ' With not only money being short but ''[Es] s gibt keinen Anstand mehr! ' Indeed, Brecht views Nazism as a distortion of democracy in a time of crisis. In this capacity when 'the vegetable market... is shown in the grip of the depression' the question arises of whether it is condign that morals are abandoned if people genuinely have to fight for their survival: 'Moral, wo bist du in der Zeit der Krise! ' Brecht does not compare the crises of the Cauliflower Trust to the depression in Germany on a serious note, it is merely so that the rest of his satire will work and he uses his 'epic' theatre and the theme of 'Verfremdung' to try to achieve this. However, it is controvertible whether gangsterism as a denouement can 'adequately describe Nazism and its atrocities' and perhaps the subject is too emotional for the necessary detachment for the reader as 'the weight of the innumerable victims lies too heavily upon the spectator's mind'. Frederic Ewen develops this point 'particulary in view of the fact that gangsterism is an accepted phenomenon in modern life, no likely to arouse more than a genteel gesture of protest." It is only fair to note, however, that Brecht would surely have changed the subject or style of his play had it been written post-war when the full nefariousness caused by the Nazi war machine was realised.
In Brecht's play and Lang's film, it is evident that the treatment of the crimes extends beyond merely labelling them as infamies, as extenuating circumstances are provided in both. The social and economic difficulties in Arturo Ui mean that the audience is not entirely opposed to the gangsters fending for themselves. In M the audience empathise with Beckert as it becomes apparent that society has contributed to the creation of this monster and his struggle to fight his alternative personality is Sisyphean. In the mirror scene with the child, he experiences feelings of lust, before being recognised and chased. His nervous, agitated, frightened expressions indicate that he is not a sadistic, natural killer, but a character defined by his struggle against his malign side. Lang uses cinematic technique to express the murderer's discomfort as he browses the shop window and the 'manically moving objects' correspond directly to Beckert's agitated state. When he sees the mother come to the child he panics and hides in the shop window clutching his chest.
Lang depicts Beckert's necessity to kill through images such as that of the infant's reflection in the mirror, which is disturbed by the position of the knives that face invitingly inwards in order to highlight his temptation. The murders themselves, however, are not visualised, with Lang using other techniques to portray the occurrences. This is initially employed at the opening of the film when Elsie Beckmann's mother is searching for her following her disappearance. Lang uses dramatic irony, enabling the audience to view the sinister enticement scene in which it becomes evident that Elsie is to be murdered. In this episode, the shadow of the murderer appears on his wanted poster as he says to Elsie: 'Du hast einen schnen Ball', whilst simultaneously her mother cries her name. The murder is seen in the form of Elsie's absence; as Frau Beckmann calls her daughter Lang instils a montage of shots; the first of which is looking from the top of the block of flats down the staircase. The staircase is desolate and the geometric, hypnotic pattern of this image emphasises its emptiness and that Elsie is nowhere to be found. Lang then introduces shots of the garage, her empty place at the dinner table which is laid waiting for her, a barren field into which the ball she was previously playing with rolls out of the shrub and settles in the straggling undergrowth and finally a balloon trapped in the overhead power cables. The latter two of these images relate directly to Elsie as her personal possessions are shown. The former two also suggest places where she might usually be found. What is particulary powerful in this sequence is Lang's use of silence; we hear nothing; save the frantic, erratic calls from the worried Frau Beckmann, and this makes the scene more dramatic. Indeed, the vociferations themselves coupled with her distressed visage serve to uniquely intensify the drama as well. The result, therefore, is that the gruesome details of the murder are left to the viewer's own imagination and this effect is 'incomparably more impressive than if we had seen the deed itself in all its details." Lang wrote of the death that it would be difficult not to sicken the audience because of the nature of the crime and therefore, only gave hints. He wanted to 'make the audience an integral part in the creation of this special scene by forcing each individual member of the audience to create... the murder according to his personal imagination." Other visions of phsical violence come in the 'court' room scene where Beckert tries to escape but needs to be physically restrained and where the 'mob' tie up the guards as they search the building where Beckert becomes trapped and needs to hide in.
In Arturo Ui the crimes themselves are detailed entirely differently and Brecht does depict his murders and assaults in some detail. When Ted Ragg - a journalist speaks out against Ui and his associates, saying that 'Die wankelmtige Menge wendet sich zu neuen Helden' he is threatened by Ui and his bodyguards. There are many examples of violent crime which sometimes involve death such as Sheet's 'suicide' and the murder of Sheet's accountant Bowl. This incident is carried out behind closed doors but the shots are heard by the audience and it is clear that Ui is responsible. Arguably the most graphic murder in the play is that of Roma by Givola and his men as 'Die an der Wand [Roma's men] Stehenden werden mit dem Maschinengewehr niedergemht. ' This is presented in terms of Al Capone's St Valentine's Day Massacre and at this point Ui has no problem ordering Givola to 'Macht ihn [Roma] fertig." a man he has known and trusted for many years. The fact that - as Givola fires at Roma and his men - he is described as 'aufgeregt' can be contrasted directly to the image of Beckert; this passive malignity is vastly different to the anxiety seen of Lang's murderer.
If Arturo Ui is taken as the main perpetrator in Brecht's play then it is possible to compare and contrast the portrayal of his personality with that of Beckert. It is important to dispel the common myth that 'Lang's murderer... is based neither on Haarman nor on Krten, who had not been convicted when the film was made." Peter Krten, it is widely suspected, murdered adults as well as preying on young girls. Fritz 'the butcher of Hannover' Haarman was a serial killer who sold his victims as meat to his neighbours. Whilst Beckert wrestles with his conscience in an attempt to defeat his alternative criminal personality, Lang gives the sense that he is somewhat hindered by the pressures placed on him by society. Brecht hints that Arturo Ui genuinely wants to be relatively lawful and values virtues such as loyalty and honesty, even if this is only apparent amongst his own. This may seem somewhat ironical as Brecht was, of course, extremely anti-Hitler and 'nothing mattered more to Brecht than the sense of participating in the fight against [him]'.
The main contrast between the portrayals of crime and justice in Arturo Ui and M is that Lang works for realism whereas Arturo Ui evokes satire. In Lang's film this becomes obvious in his characterization of Beckert. It is clear that Lang did not want to stereotype his murderer - 'a brutish type with bushy eyebrows' but instead chose Peter Loore who could appear frightening yet evoke empathy in the viewer. In the film Lang uses very few lighting effects to maintain this realism and there are many examples where the film has the appearance of actual newsreels to add to the authenticity. It is necessary for Brecht to make the reader laugh at the atrocities carried out by Ui and his associates as this forms his critique of fascism. The play is an allegory of fascism and the vegetable dealers symbolise Germany and its acceptance of the mythical law and order that the Nazis championed. In the play the greengrocers accept Ui's 'offer' for protection after the 'warehouse has been burned down at his [Ui's] orders." By exposing Arturo Ui and his fellow criminals to laughter Brecht ridicules the concept of fascism. It is necessary, therefore, for the crimes to be exaggerated and 'this world of mobsters, machine guns and melodramatic menace is essential for the play's satire." One particulary amusing example is in the 'court' scene where Hook - a wholesale vegetable dealer - replies to the judges question of 'Haben Sie Herrn Giri gesehen? ' saying 'Ja, im Bro des Karfioltrusts am Tag des Brendes meines Speichers' yet then immediately revokes this statement after a brief interlude in the court where he returns 'Zusammengebrochen, hat einen Stock neben sich und Binden um den Kopf und ber den Augen' to out rightly contradict all that he has just said. This is a malaise of justice, yet it is more damning for Brecht to subject the mobster to ridicule than it is to treat them with respect as 'they [the Nazis] are by no means great political criminals, but the perpetrators of great political crimes, which is something completely different.'
Brecht further parodies the gangsters and their crimes and justice in Arturo Ui through their rhetoric. 'Diese Sprachform ist fr Brecht... das sthetische Produkt der Selbstdarstellung des Brgertums mit seinem Glauben an die absolute Heiligkeit der herrschenden brgerlich-kapitalistischen Ordnung. ' It would appear ironic to have gangsters talking in classical metre and presented as if they were in a Shakespearean or Faustian travesty but this element of high culture satirizes that which the Nazis often used to mask their violent reality. These speeches are 'used to expose the vacuity and moral and spiritual mediocrity of a "gangster-hero" - Hitler - to denude him of that aura of heroism and greatness which attach in the popular imagination to murderers and criminals who commit acts of epic proportions." When Ui makes a speech to the vegetable traders of Chicago and Cicero he begins with 'Chicagoer und Ciceroer! Freunde! Mitbrger! ' This is taken from Mark Antony's speech in Shakespeare's Julius Caesar and 'Brecht is sardonically placing Hitler's speech-making in a literary and theatrical perspective." Another example is in Givola's flower shop where the dyads of Givola and Dulfeet and Betty and Ui appear alternately. This is symbolic of the garden scene in Goethe's Faust where Mephistopheles softens up Martha while Faust is preparing the ground for Gretchen's ruin. In Arturo Ui Givola entertains Dullfeet whilst Ui and Betty interchange: Betty: 'Freundschaften, die in Wind und Wetter reifen... ' Ui: [legt ihr die Hand auf die Schulter] 'Ich liebe Frauen, welche schnell begreifen." The rhyming pattern throughout is another example of elevated verse undertaken by Ui and Givola. As in Shakespeare's Richard III 'Arturo Ui woos and wins the widow of the man she has murdered; and like his British prototype, he has a nightmare vision in which he sees another of his recent victims, Roma.'
As in Nazi Germany the general public just seem to accept the gang's 'laws' in Arturo Ui and this can be seen with Betty, who, although tries to resist Ui and after he has murdered Dullfeet swears 'Der Welt zu sagen, welche Pest sie anfiel! ', ultimately succumbs to his pressure and eventually even 'rat... euch [Ihnen] nun euer [ihrer] Vertraun zu setzen in Herrn Ui'. Such is Ui's corruption of her that she continues 'Wie ich es selbst tu, seit ich ihn in dieser fr mich so schweren Zeit nher und besser kennengelernt. In M a 'blame culture' has arisen because of the hysteria caused by the murder of the city's children where - as the police chief states - 'Jeder Mensch auf der Strae, kann der Tter sein'. This is best shown when a little girl stops a man in the street to ask what time it is; the elderly man merely gives the reply and then shows concern explaining: 'jetzt musst du aber schnell nach Hause gehen' but this is enough for pandemonium to break out with people pointing and looking at him suspiciously. It is not long before the melee intensifies and the man finds himself looking up having to explain himself to a policeman before being arrested after frantic calls from the flustered public. Lang uses the camera to reflect society looking down on the man who looks as small as he does in the eyes of the accusing public. Herrn Jager's house must be searched just because of an anonymous tip off and this follows a plethora of false reports and the subsequent imbroglio is difficult for the police to deal with. This is perhaps best shown when the two men argue with the police officer over the colour of the girl's 'Mtze' one saying green, the other red. There are also fifteen dissonant reports about the route taken by Elsie on her way home. The result of this is that as 'there is no such thing as a murderer's visage... [and] every man on the street... is under suspicion of being the child murderer." The problem here, again is that 'Der Mrder ist keine Mabuse-Figure, kein Monster; er ist dick, verweichlicht, ein infantiler Kleinbrger. ' The public in M, therefore, argue amongst themselves because of the crimes committed and this is also represented in Arturo Ui in the emulation of the gangsters, namely Givola and Giri with Roma.
The leitmotiv of justice can be compared in the play and the film with reference to the scenes of the 'court'. When Fish tells the judge in Arturo Ui that he had seen Giri at Dogsborough's restaurant the bodyguards pull a gun on him. They constantly dispraise and 'nehmen eine drohende Haltung gegen Hook' after he gives evidence saying that Giri is the 'Lagerverwalter'. He then is beaten up and revokes his statement. Brecht makes a complete mockery of the Nazi judicial system here with even the judge 'lchelnd' as he says brusquely, and whilst smiling, that the defense's request to consult 'andere rzte' is 'Abgelehnt'. This form of 'mock' justice is present in M; when Beckert is caught he is taken to an underground 'court room'. The public have made this themselves as they do not have faith in the government judiciary system and Beckert's pleas to be handed over to the police fall on deaf ears. Their justification for this is that he will merely have to claim insanity and will be spared. This shows a strong aversion to the justice of the state. Lang hints that this public court is not just either, however, as it is made up of criminals who are described as 'Sachverstndigen' and at his point the camera moves along the line of jurors as the chairman reads out details of their 'experience'. Indeed, it is particulary ironic that the chairman who sentences him to death, stating that 'Dieser Mensch must weg! ' is wanted on three counts of murder himself. The court it would seem 'are not interested in truth or justice, but the elimination of an outsider so that they can resume their illegal activities' as all the defenses solicitations for mercy, to do what is morally right and turn him into the police and get him help '[man sollte] ihm am Arzt geben' are met with laughter around the courthouse. The question which Lang raises here is that of whether it is morally right to seek retribution if a collective confidence in the state does not exist. What is certainly unjust in this sequence is that the jurors are almost like an audience at the theater, the camera moves around them and cries can be heard from the other people in the court calling for the death penalty.
Whereas in Arturo Ui the system of justice is portrayed as being extremely straight forward, as no one is interested in laws except those of the gangsters, in M the system is extremely complicated. When the note which Beckert writes to the press is examined by the graphology expert the 'camera is deliberately immobile to stress the rigid milieu." Earlier on in the film as the police are trying to solve the case there are endless files and documents which they search through. These documents attempt to 'make up' the person they are looking for. Lang hints that these are somewhat unnecessary and this is best highlighted by the fact that it is the public who actually catch Beckert first. The police are depicted somewhat negatively and they clash with the public during their quest to catch the murderer. The public have no respect for the police as they raid public buildings and because they have orders to suspect everyone, check all identification. The public, therefore, through their use of the beggars catch up with Beckert first and it would seem that Lang is perhaps suggesting that if these two forces had worked in unison it would have been much easier to reach - what is in reality a common goal. The shots of the devastation caused in the building that has been searched by the mob and of the guards having to be tied up indicates strongly that another preferable way should have been found.
Thus, it can be concluded that, during an era defined by economic and socio-political upheaval, both works are primarily concerned with the issues of crime and justice. In Arturo Ui these themes are explored through the allegory of fascism which enables Brecht to both ridicule and criticize the Nazi regime. Conversely, Lang uses the medium of film to depict a more sinister portrayal of an individual's mental turmoil whilst simultaneously being conditioned by these social influences. The focus on punishment produces a greater dichotomy between the oeuvres, with Brecht suggesting the impermeability of 'gang culture' whose influence extends beyond the law, whilst Lang highlights the stigmatization of an individual persecuted by society.