Figure 1
In this task the concept of the use of a variety of modes in the media to express a message is being investigated. A television advertisement is an excellent source for an analysis of such an idea as they often incorporate a number of different uses of language be it visually or aurally.
The advertisement that has been chosen for analysis is the 2005 'Diet Cherry Vanilla Dr Pepper' campaign which is a particularly good example of a combination of the aforementioned modes. As can be seen from the table in figure 1 this advert contain four elements of the use of language in the form of the picture, the voice over and finally the text. They work together to convey the ideas of the producers and directors, making them easily accessible to the audience without much conscious thought.
The main concept of the advert is a young beautiful and successful couple are going out to a stylish restaurant on a date. There are a number of connatations which highlight this for the viewer, for example the choice of wardrobe, the young lady is wearing a fashionable top and the man is dressed in a casual but smart shirt and jacket. This could be said to refer to the idea that although Dr Pepper has elements of class it is still a fun drink and not too conservative.
The scene seems to be perfect, the young man talks of his successful job in a hospital, which is not only well paid but shows he is sensitive and caring towards children, all of which would fill all the obvious clichs of attraction the woman should be having. However it is here that the plot turns and irony sets in as instead of being totally consumed with this 'dreamy hunk' the woman takes one sip of the Dr Pepper and all around becomes irrelevant. It is at this point that 'Mahna Mahna' by the Muppets begins to play, which is a successful choice of music as the lyrics of the song are non sensical and it shows that woman is no longer making any sense of the real world all due to this amazing drink. The advert then cuts to a an ice cream cone surrounded by falling cherries, which evidently is a representation of the flavours of the drink however when the cherry lands on the top of the scoop of ice cream it could be said this image refers to the saying ' with a cherry on top' which is synonymous with the idea of going that extra last step in order to reach perfection.
The last use of a mode in language is demonstrated by the use of text in the penultimate scene where the slogan ' tastes so good you'll get lost in it appears behind the glass of Dr Pepper'. It is the last thing you see and it is a catchy slogan which will stick in your head but moreover it sums up all the ideas which as a viewer have been conveyed to you subconsciously throughout the duration of the advert.
The aim of this part of the assignment is to investigate the opinions of three informants who do not have a background in linguistics on a topic which has been researched in linguistics. It is therefore the intention to use the finding to see how closely the ideas conveyed by these informants relate to theories which have been previously developed.
This particular study concerns itself with the concept of dialect which according to Matthews in the Oxford Concise Dictionary of Linguistics refers to "Any distinct variety of a language, especially one spoken in a specific part of a country." However it is not only the idea of regional dialect which will be investigated in this study, it is also the intention to analyse the ideas of the affects of racial and social background on the development of dialects and lastly the role of dialects in the education system.
In light of this, the questionnaire used in this study is comprised of three main sections each of which consisted of a main question and then a number of sub questions which were posed according to the each informant's responses to the main question. A complete set of the answers can be found in the appendix.
The formation of the questions themselves was in its own right an integral part of the success of the questionnaire and to ultimately receiving comprehensible answers from the informants. This was especially important as those who were being interviewed did not have a background in linguistic studies and so it was vital that the use of subject specific terminology was kept to a minimum.
Another factor which played a major role in the planning of the questions was the idea of structure as it was important that each of the questions was an open question allowing for the subject to be able to elaborate their answers as opposed to simply giving one word answers. This was particularly paramount as the aim of the study was not to see how far people agreed with a study but to gather their personal opinions and to subsequently see whether they correlated to a particular theory or piece of research.
Having said this even with careful planning some problems were encountered during the conducting of each of the interviews, the first issue being with the comprehension of the concept of the word dialect as opposed to accent which can be easily confused. It was necessary on occasion to explain that the study was concerned with the words which were used in the language and not they way that they were being pronounced.
The first question asked " If you encounter someone who has a regional dialect different to your own, how does this affect your ability to communicate with them?.
This question was answered by all parties with little hesitation, however two of the informants were vague with their answer as they felt that it was different depending on which dialect was being spoken. On the other hand another informant gave an answer which was expected, they said "I suppose you have to listen harder and concentrate more," which indicates that they have acknowledged that there is to an extent an amount of physical inconvenience incurred when communicating using different regional dialects which is a concern for English in society.
As the informants expressed a degree of varying attitudes towards different regional dialects it was then necessary to ask them which particular dialects if any they found difficult to understand and it was seen here that the 'Geordie' or Newcastle dialect was one which two of the informants found difficult to understand. Synonymously with it's reputation of strange expressions, one informant pointed out their choice of words often made it difficult to understand the conversation as to them they were unrecognisable. It was however stated that the 'general jist' could still be had. This is particularly interesting as it clearly demonstrates the idea of mutual intelligibility which is the idea of " dialects which can be understood, or understood sufficiently for ordinary purposes", Oxford Concise Dictionary of Linguistics.
The second section looked at the concept of social and racial dialect asking "In what ways do you feel social class and or racial background affects dialect?"
The overwhelming response indicated that the informants believed social class had a strong influence over dialect. They felt that someone from a lower class was more likely to be speak using a dialect as opposed to standardised English.
They also all found it difficult to link racial background with a distinct dialect, concluding that it would be the fact that the person had grown up in an area of a lower social class that was the determining factor, whether or not it was in a community of this same racial background.
The last section looks at the way dialects play a role in education. Firstly the informants were posed the question " What are your feelings towards the way being taught by a teacher with a regional dialect affects a child's development of English? " The general consensus to this question was hesitant , with the informants all only thinking that the children would pick up different words for things. To lead on from the previous question they were then asked " In this case do you believe that all children should be taught in Standardised English?"
Two of the informants were extremely defiant and believed it was vital for children to be taught in this way, however the third believed that by doing this children will miss out on vital social experiences and an ability to communicate with other English speakers on a wider level.
The other two respondents were then asked how they felt the use of solely Standardised English in schools would affect the survival of dialects and they both believed it wouldn't endanger them as they would still be spoken within the family home.
A number of conclusions can be therefore drawn from this study. As aforementioned this study has shown evidence to support the idea of Mutual intelligibility. In addition to this there is evidence to show that the ideas discussed by Spolsky in Sociolinguistics pp 35 concerning the connection with lower social class and an inherent use of slang appear to be perceived to be true in everyday life. However in the same chapter Spolsky also discusses the idea of racial solidarity which according to the answers given have little standing in everyday life.
Lastly it is of paramount importance to remember that the own regional , social and racial dialects of those interviewed will have played an important role in influencing the answers given. In this case it may have been more beneficial to conduct the study with a greater of variety of social classes as although the informants had different regional dialects they were all from middle class backgrounds.