Archaeologists seek to find remains of the dead not simply because it is fascinating but also because it provides an authentication to people's past lives. The physical remnants of the dead, for example: bones, hair and skin provide more details about the life of the individual rather than their actual death.
In this essay, I will attempt to understand past funerary practises, and why they were enacted in the ways that they were. I will also talk about the discoveries made by archaeologists, their interpretations of the evidence, and also draw a conclusion as to how all this helps us, the modern day humans, in developing and shaping our own societies.
In general, archaeologists study the material traces of the disposal of the dead to make inferences about ethnicity and identity, religion and ideology, status, wealth, social hierarchy, as well as gender relations, health and diet, location and movement.
When examining the dead, archaeologists make inferences through the evidence given to them by means of studying bones and tissue remains. We can find out "how long they lived, what sex they were, what illnesses or diseases they suffered, how tall they grew, what genetic ancestry they had, what sorts of foods they ate, what injuries they sustained and whether they were deliberately deformed, bound, tattooed, body-painted or even scarified."
(Pearson M.P. "The Archaeology of Death and Burial" - 1999)
Mortuary analysis teaches us that sex, gender, age, cultural or ethnic identity, and various roles in the society help determine the type of burial, its associated ritual and the selection of objects buried with the dead.
One of the main factors which tells us about the individual and the way in which s/he was buried, is the position in which the body is found. "Bodily positioning is an important part of the body's manipulation. Rigor Mortis sets in within 12 hours of death and the dead body is normally arranged in some way while it is still flexible."
(Pearson M.P. "The Archaeology of Death and Burial" - 1999)
The body may be curled up, laid on its side or flat on its back. In arranging the body in a particular way, the living might have had a special purpose in doing so. It could have been to differentiate between social groups (mainly gender and age groups.)
One of the ways in which they did this in the Early Bronze Age was to bury males on their right sides and females on their left. Another important factor includes orientation. The direction which the corpse faces highlights what body positioning symbolises.
The archaeological remains of the body are the culmination rites of passage which serve to separate the dead from the living and install them within another dimension of human understanding."
(Pearson M.P. "The Archaeology of Death and Burial" - 1999)
There is another type of social differentiation apart from age and sex which appears in the Mesolithic cemetery of Oleni'Ostrov in Karelia.
Generally, men's grave goods tended to have more bronze and gold than women's. Klavs Randsborg, in his analysis of social differentiation during the period of the Bronze Age, concluded that graves which contained more metal gave an indication as to the individual's social status; thereby implying that men were on a higher level.
When examined, the skeleton remains of the dead will disclose the gender and age at death of each individual, and perhaps any dietary deficit or other pathological condition.
It is hard to distinguish which grave goods go with which dead corpse because it is difficult to interpret, given the fact that they will be from communal or collective burials. This is where more than one individual is buried. Thus, it makes it easier to learn things from an individual grave rather than a communal one.
By analysing the remains, it would show the differences in male and female burials and help us evaluate whether the differentiation between the two signify a division in terms of wealth and status.
One other aspect of rank and status involves the age of the individual. We must therefore establish whether this factor changed the way in which the deceased was treated in terms of grave goods.
When analysing the remains of a body, we can find out the diet and general health of an individual by carrying out forensic tests. There are several useful methods of investigation, one of which includes a focus on humans bones. Isotopic analyses of the skeletal remains of a population can show the types of food in the individual's diet as well as indicate the differences in nutrition between the wealthy and the poor members of a society.
The placement of the dead is another complex factor when it comes to burying the deceased. During the period from the fifth to the third millennia BC, agricultural communities in western Europe constructed a variety of timber and stone monuments that were associated with the disposal of the dead. Hundreds of these monuments are preserved to varying degrees to the present day. These monuments give us a little bit of information about the societies who built them.
Effros argues that while mortuary deposits played an important role, monuments and tombs were more effective in terms of spatial communication.
Taphonomy describes the complex processes that affect an organism after death and ultimately determine if and how it is preserved. It is "the assessment of what has happened to a bone between its deposition and its discovery. Although bones have a better chance of preservation than plant material in most soils, they nevertheless survive only under special conditions- for example, if they are buried quickly, or deposited in caves."
(Renfrew C.& Bahn P. "Archaeology: Theories, Methods and Practises" - 8 th edition)
For my case study, I will illustrate how bog bodies are an important part of burial preservations. It is the most well-preserved body in the entire world. Found in 1991 near the Similaun glacier by German hikers, at an altitude of 3200m. The body was the first prehistoric human found with his clothes on and his equipment surrounding him.
The body was given to the Innsbruck Anatomy department for treatment, and after careful examination, it was frozen at a temperature of -6oc. A lot of work was carried out on the materials which were found near the body of Otzi, including x-rays, scans and radiocarbon dating.
It was thought that Otzi had died due to exhaustion on the mountain, probably caught in a snowstorm. The body was protected from the movement of the glacier until a storm from the Sahara laid a layer of dust on the ice which absorbed sunlight and finally thawed it out.
Tests determined the physical appearance of Otzi; he was a dark-skinned male aged about 40 at the time of death and approximately 5ft 2in tall. When found, he was bald and it is possible that he had a beard.
A full body scan showed evidence that he was very healthy apart from his lungs which were blackened (probably due to the smoke from open fires.) Some tattoos were found all over his body. His nails had come off but one was recovered in the excavation.
It has been suggested that Otzi had died a violent death, due to the fact that he had been found with an arrowhead lodged in his left shoulder. There were also cuts on his hands, wrists and ribcage.
To conclude this essay, I will talk about how the study of burials and funerary practises have in my opinion, helped to build a social structure.
We can't treat each aspect of burial practises individually, instead, we must look at the context as a whole. By trying to see the rituals from different social perspectives, we are able to figure out the ways and traditions of our ancestors.