The purpose of this task is to explore the multimodality of a television advert for "Dr Pepper". It is important that there is a focus on the effects produced as a result of different modes which are used throughout the advert. As Cook confirms, "a multiplicity of voices is a feature of many literary works" (2003:64): my aim is to explore the extent to which this multiplicity is present.
The table I have designed (see Appendix: Task One) was an attempt to include all the modes which were present in the advert. My main aim was to make the table comprehensive enough to allow the advert to be re-created merely from its use.
The advert opens with the scene of a man and woman; the man explaining that he works in a children's hospital, despite having won the lottery. This sentence represents the use of a symbolic code; a children's hospital worker depicts a caring, selfless person who works in order to meet the needs of others. The intentions of the man are obviously to create this imagery for the woman.
It is apparent that the element of paralanguage is consistent throughout the advertisement. Firstly, the couple are sat at a small table and so we are able to deduce that, as the physical distance between them is minimal, they are perhaps romantically involved. This is also portrayed through the use of body language during the advert; they consistently make eye contact with each other and are also facing each other. The speech is dialogic and consistently revolves around these two people.
The room is light and airy, and a majority of the advert focuses merely on the faces of the two main characters. This composition, known as the technical code, causes the viewer to feel personally involved in the conversation which occurs between them.
There is a combination of both synchronous and asynchronous communication; the speech is immediate and simultaneous and the writing which appears towards the end of the advert has a time-delay as it must be read by the voice-over after it has appeared on screen.
The purpose of the singing could be to draw the viewers' attention to the product. As the couple are in a busy restaurant, it is somewhat unusual for the man to start singing. This action may cause people to remember the advert. It can be noted also that the prosody changes when the man breaks into song; the volume increases causing the overall delivery of speech to dramatically change. There is also the introduction of music in the background which works in conjunction with the speech and song to create the desired effect.
The two main functions of language are significantly highlighted; the referential function conveys important information for the consumer such as the name of the brand and the flavour of the drink whereas the affective function conveys feelings and attitudes which are put to good use in order to create an overall effect for the consumer.
At the end of the advertisement, the text is written directly above the product. The letters are large and bold and the lettering is also a mixture of brown and cream, possibly with the intention of being the same colour as the product.
This graphology of the written discourse can be seen as yet another intentional outcome of the advert. It is significant that the only piece of text used in the advert appears at the end, along with the visual image of the product. This could be to leave the viewer with the lasting image of the drink and its slogan. As Bell and Garrett state, the use of media can "influence its viewers and listeners by causing them to modify their understandings" (1998:221).
In summary, the combination of both the paralinguistic features and the different modes used within the text has the ability of creating an overall effect for the consumer. It has become clear that each feature is carefully designed with a given incentive. As Cook confirms, there are "carefully crafted words seeking to attract our attention, win our support, change our behaviour" (2003:63), this being the precise aim of the advertisement.
The purpose of this part of the investigation was to compare the opinions of people of different ages. I was eager to see if opinions on the perceptions of politeness would change or stay consistent over time.
I created a series of topics which all related to the broad aspect of politeness and ran a "pilot" test. As a result of the pilot I simplified a number of the questions.
I asked the questions in a quiet area where only the interviewee and I were present. My questions were answered by 3 males, each interviewee being a different age. I decided not to use anyone who was studying the same course, as this would mean that the individual would undeniably have a previous knowledge base on the topic. I wanted all participants to be of the same gender so that this variable could not be used as a possible reason for differentiation.
I made all participants aware that their answers would be used only for the purposes of my investigation and that their names and data would remain anonymous. All three participants were willing to partake.
I chose to create a semi-structured interview as this way I was remaining objective and trying not to dictate the answers of the interviewees, yet I would still be able to maintain a certain level of structure. The six interviewing areas used were:
It is difficult ensuring that the interview is consistent from one participant to the next. Suchman and Jordan explain how "the interview is an essentially interactional event as well" (2003:191) and go on to refer to how "the interviewer is charged with the responsibility of conducting inquiry in something of the manner of conversation" (2003:193). For instance, if the interviewee was conversational there was less of a need for me to probe the person and request more information. I tried to keep the questions fairly open-ended, allowing the interviewee to either give a short and succinct answer or to expand wherever necessary. Closed questions have been heavily criticised and Converse and Presser refer to closed questions as questions which "force people to choose among offered alternatives instead of answering in their own words" (2004:5).
All participants seemed to be in agreement in terms of their own levels of politeness; they changed their mannerisms according to the perceived formality of the situation they were in and according to their audience/listener.
Crowley talks of how Standard English is "the use of a specific, uniform and communally accepted code" (2003:78). All three participants were of the view that this "code" was becoming increasingly less noticeable in today's society. However, their reasons for this perceived digression in levels of Standard English varied from generation to generation. Technological advances such as the increase in texting and the use of computers seemed to be the main point of blame by the youngest and oldest generation. This can be seen in theories such as that of the "Great Divide" in which it is believed that such technological advances have created a serious division between those who have access to modern technology and those who do not; literate and non-literate members in society. Interviewee B in the intermediate age category blamed cultural influences for the decrease in the use of Standard English, and talked about influences from the USA. I would have predicted that the younger generation would be in support of recent advances in modern technology, but my findings seemed to suggest the opposite.
All three interviewees also characterised Received Pronunciation as being associated with royalty and the upper classes. Trudgill (2000:6) refers to Standard English as "the variety which is normally spoken by educated people", therefore reinforcing this concept of perceived superiority.
They were all of the opinion that levels of politeness are changing in today's society and that politeness has become less important. The differentiation between the generations was most obvious with this question as the older interviewees tended to refer to how "younger" generations were becoming less polite. The interviewee from the youngest age category merely stated that "people in general" were becoming less polite.
This finding tends to support my prediction that there is in fact a marked difference between generations. The fact that older generations are witnessing a change in the levels of politeness of younger generations suggests that they were previously polite. Interviewee C in fact went as far as saying that impoliteness has become "an accepted norm" in today's society. As Trudgill boldly states, "social change can produce a corresponding linguistic change" (2006:17), and this seems to be the origin of the interviewees concerns.
Having completed both tasks, I concluded that the role of language in today's society has dramatically changed, and seems to be continuing to do so. From the advertisement, it became clear that the linguistic features which were put to use have become both more advanced and more prominent. According to Bell and Garrett, "media texts have moved far away from the traditional view...to take on a far broader definition to include speech, music and sound effects, image, and so on" (1998:3). This would seem to support my view and suggest that the features used in media have changed a great deal.
I also came to the conclusion that interviews are not wholly reliable. For instance, Foddy highlights how "ranking devices clearly give information about the order in which each respondent would place items. They do not, however, provide information about the subjective importance...each respondent would assign to each item" (2004:351). This was a cause of concern for one of my questions in the questionnaire which asked, "do you think that levels of politeness have become more or less prominent?". My results could have been affected as a consequence.
However, the interviews did seem to highlight the changes that have taken place with regards to language and its function. A majority of those interviewed came to a consensus that the role of language has taken a completely different form in recent years.
Also evident from my transcription was the variety of functions that our language can yield. In media discourse, the persuasive powers of language become highly apparent. Cook summarises this by telling of how, "language manipulates our feelings and thoughts in ways...which we are willing, even eager, to accept" (2003:63).