Our information about the 5 th to 8 th centuries AD is sparse. Objects from this time are rarely preserved, due to the decomposition of artefacts. One way of gathering information is through the understanding of Burial rites. These burials are open to much interpretation and are not able to give information on all aspects of life at this time. Burials can show how the people of the time wished to express their society in the areas of hierarchy, ethnicity and gender distinctions. We also get information about immigration and trade. Burial rites are mostly shaped by the religious views of the society so the burials could give a representation of the theology. Changes in burial rites at the end of this time could show the rise of Christianity.
Within Britain in both early and late cemeteries, cremation and inhumation were practiced simultaneously. Inhumations were generally single, extended bodies with grave goods, however there was great variation. These grave goods are clothing and objects buried with the body. Cremations mainly took the form of an urn filled with the ashes and not fully cremated bone. These bone fragments were, in most cases, placed in anatomical order. Cremations and inhumation burial practices have been found in all styles of cemetery, flat cemeteries, barrows and mounds. These are practised in both the early and late periods (Wilson 1960:38). This leads to a theory that different societies and religions influenced burial practice.
Burial rites from the 5 th century were generally based in the Pagan faith but later changed to encompass Christianity. Burial goods found with cremations and inhumations are usually everyday objects or representations of everyday items (Wilson 1960:40). Clasps and other objects found in burials match the items found in inhabited areas. This means that there was no or little distinction between clothing of life and for death. Use of everyday objects could show a belief in an afterlife in which the same requirements were necessary. Finds of food and drink concur with this idea (Wilson 1960:39).
Orientation of burials is noted by Hawkes (1983) the majority of 7 th and 8 th century inhumations with there head to the west. Lucy writes that Hawkes interprets this as directing the body towards the sunrise. This would account for the slight variation in westerly positioning of the body, as the sunrise changes during the year. It would also imply the use of the sunrise in a burial practice which would mean that some of the ceremony took place in the early morning. From the positioning of the graves one can estimate the time of year the burial took place. This theory is known as the sunrise dating hypothesis. This idea has been countered notably by Brown (1983). Lucy states that Brown razes the point that this dating technique vastly under represents deaths between November and February. His interpretation assumes that the feet are facing east rather than the head looking east. This correlates with the Christian view that at the second coming of Jesus of Nazareth will originate in the East. He explains the discrepancies in direction as not knowing true east (Lucy 2000:132).
Goods and positioning are assumed to be good indicators of theology however they are open to many interpretations. Peter Ucho states that "there is no necessary connection between burial rite and specific belief about afterlife" (Halsall 1995:62). This statement highlights the problem of assigning theology to objects. There is however a distinct move from graves with goods to west-east graves with no or few goods which is generally interpreted as showing the rise of Christianity
The rise of Christianity is most tangibly shown within the archaeological record. Christian burial is distinct from pagan burial in number of ways. Christian burials were normally full length inhumations; these would be in a west-east alignment (head to the west). They also contain no grave goods. These graves were similar pagan burials in the type of grave used; mostly taking the form of dug-graves (Thomas 1971:109). The move from pagan graves to Christian is not simple. Some Christian Germanic tribes still deposited grave goods for a time after conversion; this is a sign of the significance of grave goods. One third of burials found from the 5 th and 6 th centuries AD are oriented west-east, with the head west. This increases to one half in later centuries (Hodges 1989: 131). This could show an increase in Christian thought. The regularity of the graves in cemeteries necessitates a form of grave marking; wood is the most likely material as few have survived. The commemoration of graves seems to be a Romano British and European Christian practice. Stones have been found in the form of stone slabs and pillars, they record the name of the deceased, his father and other details (Thomas 1971:107). There is evidence of a change over time from cremations and inhumations with grave goods to inhumations specifically of west-east orientation. This would seem to be an increase in Christianity.
Burial rites reflect many different parts of society. Anglo-Saxon cemeteries are mostly not found on Roman sites or even on Roman roads, but seem to follow rivers (Wilson 1960:41). This could mean that these invaders did not use the Roman roads but moved along valleys. In north east Kent however Anglo-Saxon cemeteries do closely relate to Roman roads. This implies use of the road system. The early medieval cremation site at York is located on a Roman Cemetery. Hassocks and Ringmer argue that this is accidental re-usage of the site (Wilson 1960:39). Grave goods can reveal social structure. Early graves contain lots of grave goods. Modern interpretation of value is flawed as the value of objects is relative. Halsall interprets these objects as a sign of wealth without estimating value. Their main function being to show wealth, being visible for only a short time meant that maximum impact was essential. This lead him to the wider assumption that there was an unstable society , as the rich were reminding others of there wealth and power. He has also found that the most lavish burials are those of adult males, so the burial would be showing off the person's wealth and that of the family. This is also backed up with the decrease in use of burial goods which Halsall argues coincides with a more stable society (Halsall 1995:66) the ship burial at Sutton Hoo is seen as a rich burial even though it has less physical wealth than other grave sties i.e. Childric's grave. When judged against other graves from its time it is much more extravagant and rich. Another sign of change is the introduction of row-graves, these are standardised and found in smaller cemeteries. This means that less people could be present for the funeral and grave goods were less appropriate.
Grave goods can help to plot trade routs, they are generally exotic and expensive objects. African Ivory chatelaine rings and Indian Ocean cowrie shells have been found within Anglo-Saxon graves (Wilson 1960:45). This is good evidence of trade routs. These may not be direct trade from Africans to Anglo-Saxons but is more likely through indirect trade from Europe. The society at this time seems to be unstable disconnected from the fallen Roman society but still able to sustain trade with other countries.
The movement of people is not easy to determine from an archaeological record, a recordable change could be that of burial rites. The distinctive cremation rite of north-west Germania, was adopted in England by the 5 th Century AD. This adoption is the clearest archaeological evidence of cultural contamination from non-Romanised Germany (Higham1992:173). Immigration has also been interpreted using grave goods. Wilson uses the example of Saucer brooches. These are found in south east England and the Thames valley, but are similar those associated with the Saxons of the lower Rhineland. There are however stylistic differences (Wilson 1960:42). From documentation we know that three different tribes came over to Britain, the Saxons, the Angles and the Jutes. They came from the Netherlands and Rhineland regions. The similarity of burial rites in England and Germany seems to back up the idea of immigration; however the archaeological record could have been miss-interpreted. Halsall sites the cemeteries in Dieve-sur-Meuse and Lavoye (Meuse) France which have very distinctive grave goods and could be easily attributed to different groups but they are found only 20 Kilometres from each other. This is very close and would mean there was probably sharing of background and ideas (Halsall 1995:59-60). The documented and archaeological records do reinforce the idea of immigration and the burial rites can show differences but as Halsall states it is just an interpretation and is limited in its use.
Traditionally ethnicity had been associated with grave goods. These goods are significant because of there importance within society. The styles of grave goods have been analyzed and the distribution plotted. Documentation states that three tribes settled in various parts of Britain. The Saxons were in Essex, Wessex and Sussex, the Jutes in Northumbria and Kent and the Angles in East Anglia. Grave evidence has shown that the distribution of objects, specifically brooches is widely varied. Anglican Cruciform Brooches and Saxon saucer brooches are found almost all over England. Jutish jewellery on the other had, been specifically found in Kent, this could show a very defined and specific group (Lucy 2000:132-7). There is also a separation of burials with different brooches within cemeteries. In Stratton-on-Foss, Warwickshire, the burials containing saucer brooches are found in a different area of that of small-long brooches (Hodges1989:133). This evidence can be interpreted as just showing the fashions of the time but the separation in some cemeteries means that they may have been asserting cultural differences. The wide distribution of artefacts shows that there was a mixture of styles. However Halsall argues that the use of grave goods could be inaccurate in determining ethnicity stating that we associate ourselves with objects that are not necessarily those from our ethnic type (Halsall 1995:60). A person could be born in Russia but be brought up in Spain and associate themselves with Spanish objects. This means that the use of grave goods in this case could be flawed and unreliable. In the study of gender they may be more consistent.
The grave goods with both inhumations and cremations are gendered. These items have been traditionally used to identify the sex of the skeleton. This is unreliable as gendered objects can be found in the opposite sexes grave. Gendered male objects include weapons and female objects include brooches and jewellery. Gendered female objects seem to reflect the styles of specific areas. The separation of genders is evident in the orientation of graves in some cemeteries. In Sewby and Yorkshire the majority of gendered female, Jewellery burials, are oriented south and south-west and the male, Weapon burials, are orientated in most other directions (Lucy 2000:132). Gendered grave goods are only found in adult graves. This has lead to coming of age studies, finding the age in which skeletons are first buried with goods. In North Gaul women were found to come of age younger than men (Halsall 1995:69). Differences in grave goods and orientation show that the concept of gender was important within society. The distinction of death rites implies separation in life.
Burial rites are a lasting form of society. How a group processed there dead can show variation in ideas and difference of lifestyle. Burial rites are able to give us an indicator of the perception of difference such as gender and hierarchy but also economic factors such as trade. The separation or inclusion of different types of society does show use how they were viewed at the time. However this is a limited resource. Many have tried to outline religious practice and belief, but these become conjecture as the burial record is not sufficient. The study of ethnicity is also problematic as ones ancestral ethnicity is not necessarily there practiced ethnicity. This means that although burial rites are important as a source of information it is limited.