The definition of burial is important when demonstrating the presence of deliberate Neanderthal burials. A burial can be seen as the act or ceremony of burying, or the places were a body has been buried in the past. Pettitt (Pettitt 2002), in his book The Neanderthal Dead, states that the majority of scholars would agree that some of the Neanderthal skeletons that have been found went through a burial process. He also states that generalisations are made that consist of sweeping statements such as 'they did bury their dead' (Pettitt 2002:1) which are not necessarily useful or completely accurate. There is a range of convincing burial sites which have mainly been found across the European area of the Neanderthal world - most of these have been brought into questioned as to whether they are actual burial sites. I am going to analyse three of the most convincing demonstrations of deliberate burial. The first example I am going to look at is the Iraqi Shanidar cave, then the Uzbekistani Teshik Tash and finally the French La Ferrassie cave. I will then outline some arguments against Neanderthal burial and the opposition to these arguments.
The Shanidar cave-excavated between 1953-60, by Ralph Solecki- has produced the largest number of Middle Eastern Neanderthals burials. Remains of a few vertebras up to almost complete skeletons have been found from at least nine individuals (Mellars 1996:378), these bodies range in age from the very young to the old (Stringer and Gamble 1993:98). Carbon dating has shown that this site was used for depositing the dead for over 15,000 years, suggesting this was a long term mortuary site and implies the transmission of mortuary tradition or an oral tradition. Limestone rocks have been found over specific graves and may have acted as markers.
One almost complete skeleton, the Shanidar 4 man, has been found to have pollen in the sediments in and around him. Archaeologists have interpreted this as a deliberate burial, which included the placement of flowers over the body (Stringer and Gamble 1993:89). However this has been challenged by others such as Pettitt, (Pettitt 2002) who argue that the pollen is not conclusive evidence. Scientific analysis of the micro flora (small deposits of plants) gave two conflicting answers. The flora found was from plants with medicinal properties which would suggest deliberate placing. But, the nature of the pollen suggests that it was deposited after death by burrowing animals (Stringer and Gamble 1993:158). This is a natural process which should happen in other places however the other skeletons in the cave do not have signs of flora in there sediments. There are other factors that also point to this being a burial. The crouched position of the skeleton has been interpreted, as with other 'burials', as deliberate placement. There is evidence of crouching burials from the upper Palaeolithic. R. Gargett argues that articulation is only possible if the person is buried, as when bodies decay without burial the bones found are fragmented. On the other hand another interpretation could be that the man died in his sleep and his body was covered with soil by others to keep away the carnivores. In 'The Neanderthal Legacy' Paul Mellars concluded that the pollen found is controversial evidence and unproven (Mellars 1996:380). Conversely he uses the physical facts, such as the number of burials and the remains' intact nature, as evidence for burial. He argues that burial creates the correct environment for the preservation of bones and the high concentration of individuals is evidence that the site was returned to repeatedly over time (Mellars 1996:381).
The cave site of Teshik Tash is in the mountains of Uzbekistan, 1,500m above sea level. Within this cave the partial skeleton of an 8 year old boy (Stringer and Gamble 1993:75) was found surrounded by an apparently deliberate circle of horn cores which had been driven into the ground around the boy (Stringer and Gamble 1993:158). The findings of child bone are rare and for them to have been preserved it suggests a deliberate act of burial. This cave's occupation was between 75,000 years ago and 30,000 years ago. The long occupation of the site means that the horn cores could have been placed there many years after his death; the cave was littered with horn cores from the Siberian Mountain goat, which could have by chance formed a circle around the body of the boy, however the positioning of the horns is quite uniform which could suggest their deliberate placement at the time of the 'burial'. At this time carnivores were a threat to all hominids and a dead body would easily be scavenged. These horns could have been placed deliberately to stop the body being taken and dismembered (Stringer and Gamble 1993:158).The caves out of the way location would mean that effort was needed to get to it for both animals and humans. This could indicate that the burial was in an area of low carnivore activity so the threat would be less and protection may not be necessary. The formation of the horn cores seems deliberate and the preservation of the body is an indicator of deliberate placement of the body but there is no strong evidence for religion or symbolism.
The La Ferrassie cave site was excavated at the beginning of the 20th century. Level 1 of the cave was found in 1909, 2 1910 and 3&4 were found in 1912 (Stringer and Gamble 1993:14). This site is important not only because of the collection of individuals found here, seven in total, (Mellars 1996:378) but the seeming symbolism of the burials. Two bodies, a male and female, were found head to head, though not place in a pit (Stringer and Gamble 1993:159). There is also a collection of shallow circular depressions with mounds, some headed with limestone blocks (Tattersall 1999:16). These blocks are from the Aurignacian level and have engravings on them; these engravings have been interpreted as vulvae (Stringer and Gamble 1993:202). This evidence points to the deliberate placement of the Neanderthal bodies after death. The children's bones that have been found at this site suggest burial. Children's bones are soft, so child bone must have been processed in some way to allow the preservation (Mellars 1996:379). Also at so at this site possible symbolism has been found in the form of a bone with fine incised parallel lines (Stringer and Gamble 1993:161). This could be symbolism, but it could also be a sign of a stage of bone production, i.e. removal of flesh. Stringer and Gamble also assert that the sites may not be Mousterian and may be dated to a later time which would change the importance of these finds (Stringer and Gamble 1993:183). The evidence at La Ferrassie seems to be inconclusive as to whether this is a burial however, as with Shanidar the number of burials found suggests a form of tradition surrounding the treatment of the dead.
I shall now analyse the arguments against Neanderthal burials. One Archaeologist who argues against the idea of Neanderthal burial is Robert Gargett. Mellars sees Gargett's view as stating that although they may have buried there died this was not a symbolic or religious ceremony (Mellars 1996:375). Pettitt has outlined Gargett's arguments in his paper The Neanderthal Dead. Gargett's evidence is from studying sedimentology, taphonomy and stratigraphy. He asserts that finding full remains does not necessarily mean burial. His arguments take the form of four distinct points in answer to what he sets out as five key questions. Firstly, pits are not necessary for burial. Secondly, rock falls and natural death could account for the complete findings. Thirdly, caves create a good preservation environment; he also defines good sits as out-of-the-way-places. Lastly more burials in caves are a reflection of the increase in cave dwelling hominids (Pettitt 2002:3-5).
These are the arguments in favour of Neanderthal burials. Pettitts response is that Gargetts ideas over simplify the evidence. His first point relates to Gargetts view that pits are not necessarily burials uses the 'old man' of La Chapelle aux saint, which is found in a pit. Gargett describes this pit as being a natural formation, but is has straight sides, is a regular depth and is small so the body would have had to have been placed into it. His second point is a response to Gargett's he disagrees that full skeletons are the result of cave-ins, he sites the Kabara skeleton which is in a pit which has been cut through two hearths on lower occupation levels (Pettitt 2002:4) which would suggest that the pit was dug with a purpose and was not just natural. Gargett's third point is based on the hypothesis that most burials are in the edges of the cave were sediments may have been deposited naturally over time to preserve the body, however many burials are found in the centre of caves, which would not be a good place for natural preservation. Gargett's last point is based on the idea that we find more skeletons in caves from this time because they were inhabited more. But evidence from modern day and ancient cultures shows that burials are not always in the living spaces (Pettitt 2002:5) and are generally outside of these areas, notably the Romans who generally buried outside the city walls. Pettitt concludes that Neanderthals focused there lives and deaths on the body not objects. He also asserts that these practises are very rare and widely spread which suggests they are just a 'brief epiphenomenon' (Pettitt 2002:18).
Other forms of burial precise have been found from the Middle Palaeolithic. One such practise is the production of bones. The Krapina cave site in Croatia is home to almost 900 fragments of bones, from at least 14 people, some of which show cut marks. An interpretation of these cut marks is that they were caused by cannibals however others such as Richard Klein in The Human Career, argue that there are many interpretations to the cut marks on the bones. He suggests that they could be from defleshing after decomposition, but before burial, or even signs of carnivore activity. There have been hyena tooth marks found in some of the bones (Klein 1999:468). This would agree with Stringer and Gambles idea on carnivore activity. His first interpretation would show repetition of practises and imply ritual; conversely the carnivore hypothesis shows a harsher reality of animals ravaging the bodies after death. Either of these ideas is almost equally as probable but the regularity of the cut marks do imply to deliberate production of the bones.
There have been few sites found which show without doubt that Neanderthals buried there dead. These case studies seem to show that even convincing evidence of burial is not necessarily a sign of religious burial. The floral remains Shanidar have been proven to have been deposited after burial and the Teshik Tash horn cores are not necessarily part of any religious ceremony. The engravings of vulvae at La Ferrise are the strongest sign of symbolism, but are also inconclusive. Neanderthal burials would be a reflection on there culture, which may be more focused on the body than any grave goods. There is evidence of the treatment of the dead in other mortuary practises which focus on the body. The treatments mentioned may be just body dumping however the repetition of the use of a site and the articulation of the bodies do show some sort of processing of the dead.