Absolute dating methods have revolutionised geology and archaeology. Within the last 50 years developments in this field have allowed us to create a historical and geological context. Before absolute adding methods chronologies were created based on findings firstly on individual sites then linked together over regions, this method shows the development of objects but does not show the time scale, within pottery one style could have been used for hundreds of years and another for only ten, this could not be deduced accurately from a chronology. They are also open to vast human error and prejudice. Scientific dating methods have allowed for a model showing the rate of change over time. Two of these methods are Radiocarbon Dating and the Uranium Series. While they are both based on radioactive decay, they cover different time spans and substances. They are both popular methods in Europe and have advanced our knowledge of pre-historic people.
Radiocarbon dating analyses the level of decay of carbon fourteen (14C), a radioactive carbon isotope produced naturally in the atmosphere. The 14C isotope is produced in the Earth's atmosphere when cosmic rays, originating from the sun and the Milky Way galaxy, react with 14N in a nuclear reaction. This 14C with the stable isotopes 12C and 13C are absorbed by all living creatures, by photosynthesis for plants and respiration or absorption from food for animals. This process ends at death at which point the 14C starts to decay, however the stable isotopes remain constant. It is this ratio of isotopes which is measured; an older sample will contain a smaller ratio of 14C as it will have decayed. The first radio carbon dates were published by W. Libby in 1949. Libby's early work found the half-life of carbon, the time it takes for half the atoms to decay, as 5568; however later studies have shown it to be 5730. Radiocarbon Dating assumes a constant half life. It can be used on objects from any climate; this means it is useable in any region. The dating range for this method is 100 years ago to 50,000 years ago; which is quite limited. This method can only be used on substances which contain carbon; this however limiting, still allows for many different organic substances to be dated, these include wood, sediments, peat, water and ice, bone, shell and marsh gas. There are also substances which although capable of being dated produce unreliable results such as iron objects, rock varnishes and substances containing trace amounts of carbon (Geyham and Schleiher 1990:162). In the late 1970's and early 1980's the introduction of gas counters meant that smaller samples were analysable. The original method used 10-20g of wood to get 5g of pure carbon, however with gas counters only a few hundred mg of charcoal was needed.
A new form of 14C dating, accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) has allowed for the dating of even smaller samples. This opens up a new range of objects able to be dated including the accurate dating of individual hairs and seeds. There was conjecture that this technique would allow for the earlier dating of objects as it is able to pick up smaller levels of 14C, however this does not seem to be the case. A well known use of this technique was The Turin shroud. This shroud shows the imprint of a body which many people believe to be Jesus of Nazareth. In the 1980's it was independently dated in Oxford, Tucson and Zurich, each laboratory finding dated of between 1260AD and 1390AD, (Renfew and Bahn 2006:148)thus disproving it's association with Jesus. The similarity in answers shows the reliability of this method.
There were two main assumptions made when carbon dating was first used: firstly that the ratio of each carbon isotope in the atmosphere was constant and secondly that the ratio in the marine reservoir was the same as the terrestrial reservoir. Both theses assumptions have been shown to be incorrect. The levels of 14C on the atmosphere have been affected drastically but immeasurably over the last 150 years. The 19th century industrial revolution meant that large amounts of carbon that had been locked way in plant matter many thousands of years ago were being discharged. This organic matter lacked 14C because it had all decayed into non radioactive isotopes (12C), so the ratio of 14C decreased. This was found by Suess who noted a 2% decrease in radioactive carbon activity in 20 th century trees compared to 19 th century trees, this decrease is known as the "Suess effect". Dendrochronology (the study of tree rings) has shown that there have been different levels of 14C in the atmosphere over time, this could be caused by changes in the magnetic field of the earth, the sun or climate change. Conversely the atomic revolution of the early 20th century has released undocumented amounts of 14C within the atmosphere. This will mean an increase in the ratio of 14C. Both these affects, if not accounted for, would create inaccurate dating results. To counter this affect all dates are aligned to the reference year AD 1950 and the letters BP are used to indicate this, BP meaning before present. Assumptions made about the marine reservoir have also been disproved. Finds dated from the marine reservoir and even finds of animals or humans who have eaten marine animals will show a different level of 14C. The sea is affected by many different factors including the oceanic circulation affect, which is caused by river runoff diluting the water. In Mesolithic Oronsay, off the west coast of Scotland, the human remains found were dated to 400 years older because of this affect (Renfew and Bahn 2006:147). There are many variations due to the wide verity of factors involved even in small areas.
As with all techniques Radiocarbon dating is open to human error. On site problems can lead to inaccurate dating. Contamination before sampling can be caused by ground water depositing 14C deficient minerals, and after sampling contamination can occur by the addition of paper or cardboard in a sample or even the addition of modern mud, these can be corrected at the laboratory. Even without contamination problems can occur. Wood may be reused over time which would wrongly date a site to an earlier time, to combat this, items which would have been used once such as seeds or twigs create a more accurate date for the site. The archaeologists taking samples must minimise contamination and have knowledge of the processes of the site and the materials found or the sample will produce a date which does not reliably add to the knowledge of the site.
The Uranium series focuses on 238U, 235U and 232Th. This method is popular in Europe because the Potassium-Argon technique is not applicable as there are few suitable volcanic rocks in this area. The uranium series is able to date substances from 100 years ago to 1,000,000 years ago, so it covers a wide era.
This process exploits the decay series of two forms of Uranium, 238U and 235U, both forms decay into radioactive daughters until the end of the series which terminates with stable isotopes of lead. During this decay varying levels of the parent to daughter ratio exist. In an older sample more of the parent will have decayed into the daughter so more daughter isotope will be present and vice versa. The amount of parent and daughter isotope can be measured because each isotope's alpha radiation is admitted at a different frequency. The original method of measuring this frequency and deducing the abundance is relatively accurate giving an accuracy of  12,000 for a 150,000 year old sample and about  25,000 for a 400,000 year old sample, however the new method of Thermal Ionisation Mass Spectrometry (TIMS), which directly measures the quantities of the isotopes, can give readings as accurate as <1000 for a sample of 100,000 years old (Renfrew and Bahn 2006:150). Es Skhul, Mount Carmel, south of Haifa contains burial sites of varying ages. There has been question over the length of time these burials were used and the dates given to them. Using the uranium series with electron spin resonance (ESR) this site has been dated to 100 and 135 ka (Grn et al, 2005:316-334). These dates are verified by each other, this indicate the accuracy of this method.
The Uranium series however does rely on a change in state of the isotope to create a beginning for this decay, as the ratio change is measured there must be a constant ratio until the change which is to be calculated. This series relies on the solubility of the isotopes calculated. The Uranium isotopes 238U and 230U are soluble in water; where as there daughters 230Th and 231Pa respectively, are insoluble. This means that when water with a high level of calcium carbonate and Uranium condenses on cave walls or floors and looses H2O through evaporation it leaves the solid calcium carbonate and uranium which can decay into its insoluble daughters. Deposits used for uranium dating are found in caves or near lime rich springs in the form of stalagmites and stalactites and layers of sediment. This method is useful as the remains of human inhabitants within caves such as bone or material culture can be found between layers of sediments and are there for datable. Is also reliable with Coral as the marine environment means it is formed within a closed system, both the uranium series and radio carbon dating are able to produce relatively accurate readings. This method requires different elements for dating than radio carbon dating which has meant it is useful with a different type of material; the substances tested are carbonates, phosphates, some silicate phases such as clinopyroxe and volcanic glass, and water (Calsteren, 2006)
As with Radio carbon dating the Uranium series requires a closed system in which no radio active isotopes could join or be removed from. There are assumptions made when using the uranium series, firstly that the decay of each parent and daughter is constant and secondly that the creation of daughter elements is limited to the decay of a parent element or has been accounted for and thirdly that the daughter isotope was of a known amount or absent at the beginning.
The nuclides used have comparatively short half lives, compared with those used on other scales such as the Potassium-Argon Technique. This means that short scale processes, those of less than 1 million years, can be shown. Nevertheless they must also be long enough to have not decayed completely in this time, as it is the ratio of parent and daughter which is measured. The abundance of an isotope is linked with its half life; a daughter isotope will have a smaller abundance and half life than its parent. Different methods are used because of the variation in the sample size. A shorter half-life as in 231Pa needs the more sensitive radioactive detectors such as alpha spectrometers where as longer half-lives with higher abundances, such as that of 238U are measured using mass spectrometers. Neither of these methods is destructive. This is unlike Radiocarbon dating where the method of the extraction of carbon destroys the object.
This method has been used both to verify others and be judged against other methods. The Uranium series with other absolute dating methods has shown that radiocarbon dating must be calibrated because of fluctuations in the level of 14C in the atmosphere. Radiocarbon dating was used at a Chinese Palaeolithic site by Chen and Yan (1988) on tooth dentine and bone to show that they were preserved in a closed system, this backed up the Uranium series findings.
Radiocarbon dating has revolutionised archaeology. It has meant we can date objects quite accurately which we can cross check with other methods. The uranium series is able to date objects further back than radio carbon dating; there are however other dating methods which do date to the same time span. Since both methods conceptions many problems have arisen and been compensated for, the main assumptions have also been refuted and compensated for and with Radiocarbon dating the half life of 14C has been reassessed and changed by 162 years. This means that all findings before these recalibrations will be wrong and must be reassessed and has created the need for calibration tables. For both, scientific discoveries have widened horizons, AMS has allowed for the dating of objects previously un-dateable such as the Turin shroud and TIMS has allowed for higher accuracy within the Uranium series. Both methods are important to the development our knowledge of the past.