The Lyon Tablet is a transcript-like inscription that contains Claudius' actual speech in contrast to Tacitus Annals, which was written nearly 70 years after by someone who was not there or even a contemporary. It is important to note the purpose of each of these texts as the Lyon Tablet inscription is an informative record of the speech by Claudius whereas the Tacitus version is, although meant to be to an extent informative, intended to entertain the readers of the time i.e. the aristocracy. Therefore the style and presentation is fundamentally differing. This is evident in that the Tacitus version summarises the senator's early views clearly in speech whereas the Lyon Tablet has interruptions from individuals who appear to be senators. From a dramatic and stylistic perspective this would obviously not have suited Tacitus, thus he uses narrative prose. The Tacitus version as a whole is more summarised. "Not to enquire too minutely into the past...new members have been brought into the senate from Etruria...and the whole of Italy... so not only single persons but entire countries and tribes might be united under one name." The Lyon tablet on the other hand, does go into minute detail about the past, indeed the entire second paragraph talks about the ancient history of Rome. This suggests that Tactitus may have read this and decided that it was too long winded and so chose to use his own examples including, as the origin of the Julii, Coruncaii and Porcii as well as his own seemingly made-up rhetorical questions: "Are we sorry that the Balbi came to use from Spain?" these inaccuracies are seen to be more dramatic but deviate from the facts.
The senator's speech to Claudius at the beginning of Tacitus is completely fabricated in its existence, according to the Lyons inscription, and in context it is mainly over-dramatised. For example, in the Lyons inscription Claudius does explain that the senate may have concerns over the "novelty" of introducing new tribes into the senate, however the Tacitus version reads "that every place will be crowded with these millionaires [The Gallic chieftains who wish to join the senate]...whose second and third generation destroyed our armies with fire and sword!". Against such strong opposition as this it is difficult to see why after only the short speech by Claudius, the Senate was so eager to pass a decree. True the Lyon inscription does show that the senate was in opposition but it does not use the same analogies or opinions shown by the senator in Tacitus, for example there being no distinctions left for "our noble houses". This therefore suggests that Tacitus shows a greater opposition to add more dramatic and romantic effect to Claudius speech. This explanation is re-enforced by the fact that he does not state which senator says this he simply says "These and alike arguments failed to impress the emperor" which suggests that the views expressed were possibly a mixture between what he himself thought might have been said at the time and what he factually knew.
Claudius personality emerges to us as greatly improved in Tacitus, the lack of interruptions, the narration, the more heroic, dramatic sentences and the rousing examples all create a strong, articulate character. There are numerous sentences that show this, that are totally or partially distorted from those shown in the Lyon Tablet, but create a more impressive character of the emperor. Firstly the fact that the Tacitus version is shorter in comparison to the Lyon tablet, creates a notion that Claudius ability to persuade is very great, especially as has previously been discussed, because the senators speech at the beginning is directly polarised. Tacitus also keeps the attention of the reader to a greater extent, suggesting that Claudius had great oratory skills whereas the Lyon inscription shows this to a lesser extent. For example realistically, The Lyon tablets contain tangents and slight irrelevancies such as Claudius mention of himself seeming boastful about Rome's many conquests, to which he follows by saying "But I will return to the point" and the second interruption by a senator asking "where the speech is tending". It also ends slowly without giving something for the listeners to hang on whereas Tacitus' version ends "What we are, this day justifying with precedents, will one day become one in itself." Indeed it is the authority with which Claudius speaks in Tacitus that seems so influential and important to the debate "My ancestors, the most ancient of whom...governed by the same policy of transferring to the city all conspicuous merit wherever it was found." Claudius begins in Tacitus and yet the beginning of his actual speech shown on the Lyon Tablet seems to speak with much less conviction and authority, he deprecates his main obstacle and asks the senate not to be alarmed but to remember the changes that the city has undergone throughout the ages, which is a luke-warm statement for his character. The entire tone of Tacitus version is inspiring using such words as "patriotic" and using an example of Athens and Sparta's decline due to their inability to befriend and capitalise on their conquered foes, yet it is virtually all fabricated and greatly more concise if the Lyon Tablet is to be believed. It is also probably no coincidence that Tacitus was a himself a great writer, being taught rhetoric from a young age it seems that the majority of the devices used were created by himself. There is further evidence for this in that Tactitus does have several distortions of the truth, for example he says "if you review the Romans wars, never has one been shorter than the one with Gaul", this is vastly far from the truth as Caesars conquest of Gaul took eight years of intense fighting (other wars, such as the social war, lasted significantly less time).
The Tacitus version of Claudius' speech then is a significantly different one to the actual speech as shown by the Lyons inscriptions. There are some distortions of the facts, over-dramatising of the situation and a great deal of what appears to be Tacitus's own opinions of what people may have thought. Nevertheless it has historical use in that it accurately describes that the decree was passed, it gives some useful insights into what the senators may have thought (as admittedly the Lyon Tablet only gives two senators interruptions and the rest must be deducted from what Claudius says) and illustrates the issues of provincial relationships with Rome at that time.