The figures of Brutus, Cassius and Cato left a legacy in the early Principate, as they were some of the last true champions of the Republic and were revered by some as martyrs to a cause. This cause was the defiance of Tyranny. If this is coupled with the fact that this same period contained some of the most famous and terrible tyrants in history then it is unsurprising that some were ready to die to depose them. The purpose of this essay is to explore the reasons why some men would willingly lose their lives to oppose such tyrants as Nero and the Flavian emperors Domitian and Vespasian. This essay will show the philosophical and traditional reasoning as to why some defied them, as well as illustrating how some of these emperors facilitated this resistance to their own rule.
There are several cases of learned or aristocratic men opposing emperors for their beliefs. However before I discuss those I will firstly look at the Senate in the early Principate. After the fall of the Republic the politics changed, the emperor now had the power with the senate existing only in an advisory role. The main source of conflict between senate and emperor was that they were not a diarchy. The Senate wanted an honourable place as equal to the emperor (Wirszubski, 1950, 137), however never got this wish and in fact on numerous occasions was seen to be abused. Under Nero it was threatened with abolition (Suet, Nero, 37) and it's treatment under Caligula lead the Senate to question restoring the Republic (Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews, 14.2). This, in context to the period, was probably not achievable, nevertheless fundamentally it was the attitude of the emperors and ethos of the time that is so crucial to understanding why some would oppose the emperor.
The main rivalry came from nobles, senators and intellectuals and it came from within Rome (Wiszubski, 1950, 125). It also nearly always had a philosophical edge, usually in connection to stoicism and the legacies of the "great philosopher, tyrant haters" Cato and Brutus. One such opponent was Thrasea Paetus who was eventually forced to commit suicide by Nero for "not what he did but for what he did not do" (Macmullen, 1967, 21) his refusal of flattery to the emperor and his independent opinions, such as walking out on Nero when he was explaining to the Senate why he had murdered his mother earned him suspicion. Moreover his close relatives had been involved in treason, his father-in-law Seneca being famously involved in the Pisonian conspiracy, and as the final nail in the coffin he was a stoic philosopher. As Macmullen says: "If Nero wanted to murder his mother or amuse himself...he wanted no stoic philosopher scowling in the wings." That is not to say all stoics were opponents to the Principate, however the motives Brutus had were stoical and many up till this point had defied the Julio-Claudians in the name of ideas. Indeed his dying words were worthy of Cato himself, "We can pay our debt to nature by freedom. Nero can kill me, but he can do me no hurt" (Tac, Ann, 16.34) His was a typical example of those that died for this cause in a similar way.
The stoic philosophy and "Libertas", which to our modern society has many meanings but can best be interpreted as "freedom" and "freedom of speech", were important to the understanding of the motives behind much of the opposition, whether actively hostile or not. Indeed Tacitus remaks that "Marcellus should be satisfied in prosecuting so many innocent victims for Nero" (Tact, Hist, 4.7). This is intriguing as Marcellus prosecuted Thrasea Paetus with minimal evidence, and according to Tacitus Helvidius Priscus, Thrasea's son-in-law and "welcome to class himself with Cato and Brutus" (Tact, Hist, 4.8), attempted to prosecute him for this, unsuccessfully. Ironically he met a similar end to Thrasea, being executed by Vespasian as did the author of his biographer Herennius Senecio in the reign of Domitian. This leads to another reason for constant opposition, once an emperor, such as Nero, executed a stoic he was seen as a martyr and thrived even more on this persecution. It is incidentally and not coincidental that it often ran in families as men with similar ideas took their daughters hand in marriage and so forth. "It was their [men such as Thrasea] receptions and banquets the emperors feared where voices got lower and zeal got hotter... Here too was where men praised... the Republic and Brutus... and martyred fathers remembered" (Macmullen, 1967, 41) Groups of such men were the heart of opposition to the emperors.
The pressure of this persecution itself however created more friction. Voluntary censorship, found throughout ancient works at this time, was encoded into such works as Tacitus Annals, which could be seen as being conceived to tell the story of the struggle between Principate and Libertas (Wirszubski, 1950, 124). The burning of books, tabooed in today's society reflecting the suppression of ideas and free-thought, was employed at various times, for example the senator Aulus Cremutius Cordus' Annals in 25 A.D. were destroyed for speaking too highly of Cassius. His defense however was memorable, his most important point being that other authors had been quite free to write about the past, such as Livy (MacMullen, 1967, 20). Seneca's view was that Cordus' has stood for Eloquentia and Libertas (Sen, Ad Marciam, 1.2). Tacitus also had a view on this action by the emperors "We have only to read that the panegyrics pronounced by Arulenus Rusticus on Paetus Thrasea, and by Herennius Senecio on Priscus Helvidius, were made capital crimes, that not only their persons but their very books were objects of rage, and that the triumvirs were commissioned to burn in the forum, those works of splendid genius" (Tact, Agric, 2) Indeed Tacitus goes even further "They fancied, forsooth, that in that fire the voice of the Roman people, the freedom of the Senate, and the conscience of the human race were perishing," (Tac, Agric, 2) If we are to take what Tacitus is saying here to bear then it can be construed that these acts by emperors such as Caligula, Nero and Domitian were seen as attacks on the Libertas of the Roman people, something which was against Rome's most ancient traditions. However vitally it was the Princepts of the day that were to blame not the Principate itself (Wiszubski, 1950, 126) after all the entire reason for the establishment of the Principate in the first place by Augustus was, albeit supposedly, to protect the ancient institutions and traditions of Rome. Whether emperor or not then it can be argued that they sometime simply went too far, and this as will shall see was a good cause for many to oppose such "tyrannical behavior".
The stoic philosophy of this period serves as a background to the reasoning for these conflicts and punishments. However if we look at Tacitus "life of Agricola" we can see that it was not at this point however just stoicism that was the cause of the problem, but the emperors terrible actions. In this Tacitus talks of the emperor Domitian putting people to death for "anything trivial... and slaying Aelius Lamia for joking remarks, which were reflections on him, it is true, but made long before and harmless" (Tact, Agric, 2) Indeed Tacitus' opinion of the emperor when he was only a prince was far from complementary "While not prepared to give his full mind to his official responsibilities, he was already playing the part of emperors son so far as seducing girls and women went." (Tac, Ann, 4.2) When educated senators and deep intellectuals look on this type of behavior it is quite within reason that they should want him out of office, stoic or not. Within the period of the Republic the notions of moral virtue and self-restraint were held in high-esteem which is why such figures of Cato and Brutus were popular and why such men as Cordus eulogized them in their works, only to be burnt by the emperor Tiberius. Nevertheless the Participate was still seen as necessary and, apart from a rather futile thought in the interim between Caligula and Claudius, never thought to be brought back. Therefore considering all this, it is vital that we understand that it was not the politics that motivated the opposition but the morality, (Wiszubski, 1950, 129) it was not the sovereignty these people despised but the conduct of its rulers that drove them into defiance. Indeed at first glance what looks like a desire for the republicanism of the past is actually an appreciation and admiration of what has been (Wizubski, 1950, 127). That after all had always been the Roman way, traditions and heroic history were integral to the entire culture of Roman culture, intellectualism and politics.
It is, like so many questions on the empire, a complex one to answer as to why people opposed the emperors. The answer is as complex and circumstantial but some general truths and trends are prevalent. The legacy of Cassius, Cato and Brutus was monumental. Never had assassination gone hand in hand with philosophy in Roman history until the death of Julius Caesar. Like so much of Roman history once a precedent had been established and passed into a "norm" it was impossible to reverse. This is not dissimilar to the end of the Republic itself, once the prizes got bigger and the methods more brutal the whole ethos changed. This particular ethos change coincided with the beginning of the Roman monarchy and as I have illustrated the results were opposition to rulers. The reasons this essay have described and analyzed here are admittedly only some of the very many that exist; one of the reasons for this is that each case in its way is differing. The case of Cordus and the case of Helvidius Priscus for example were different in they had different motivations, ideals and opinions based on the particular circumstances and history they had been exposed to. Cordus primary goal was glorifying the names of Brutus and Cassius as "the true Romans", Prisucs's was in part revenge for his father-in-law's unjust (in is opinion) death and the circumstances to which he was put with Domitian. They shared the same philosophy, true, but the entire notion of Libertas, which was in many ways the foundation of their beliefs, differed itself as the situation demanded (Wirszubski, 1950, 125). Patriots of Rome themselves did not, paradoxically maybe on the surface, disagree with the Principate but saw it as a "necessity", it was more the personal problems of each emperor they hated, resented and saw as "wrong", the figures of Cailgula, Nero and Domitian perhaps are the best examples of this problem, and in a way it was their poor rule which caused strong reactions from the astute, competent and learned.