Sparticus, a name now synonymous with justified rebellion, was praised by such men as Karl Marx and Voltaire yet mainly condemned by writers of the time such as Appian and Florus. Today, through this historical character and the fictitious one of Maximus, popular cinema recreates these gladiators as heroic and inspiring to those who watch them. The purpose of this essay is to see how both these films present the gladiator as a hero and how this reflects modern views. The two films in question are  Gladiator (2000) and Sparticus (1960) with reference to ancient sources to analyse the significance and differences in comparison with modern concepts. The secondary source material is generally used to help understand the meaning behind the two films.
It is obvious from reading the ancient texts that gladiators had a very low class in society, on a par with prostitutes. Florus, a Roman historian who is believed to have lived over a hundred years after Spartacus wrote on the Spartican gladiators "for the soldiers in it were slaves, and the commanders gladiators; the former being persons of the meanest condition, and the latter men of the worst class." (Florus, Epitome 2. 8. 20) Gladiators in the ancient world were even beyond the law, as they were actually seen as below it. The oath of a gladiator, swore on entering, summarises what they were going to encounter "I will endure to be burned, to be bound, to be beaten, and to be killed by the sword." (Petronius, Satyricon, 117) Their rights were then none existent as was their reputability.
The Romans were, nevertheless, curious of the games, "One of the animals put up a marvelous fight - its feet being disabled by wounds it crawled against the hordes of the enemy on its knees, snatching their shields from them and throwing them into the air, and these as they fell delighted the spectators" (Pliny, Naturalis historia, 7.20) The famous studious naturalist he was, Pliny was as interested as were many of his fellow Romans and could not help but betray a sliver of respect, true they were not revered or deified like Augustus or Caesar but Sparticus himself was no less famous. The irony here then lay in that they were hated and repulsed yet intriguing and admired at the same time. In the modern epics Gladiator and Sparticus, the cinematic gladiators are very much different from the ancient opinions. The characters in both these films are heroes to their audience and by our modern standards.
The Roman patrician class saw liberty as something bestowed upon the elite and the war against the slaves was nothing but an embarrassment to Roman society, something which Florus, as seen earlier, condoned (Wyke, 1997, 35). The cinematic Sparticus however is fighting for the oppressed slaves, something in the modern zeitgeist that is most respected and admirable. We see him as a highly moral character that remains self-controlled and is consistently concerned in doing what is right. For example, he stops the freed gladiators from forcing two Roman aristocrats into fighting in the arena telling them not to become like their masters, for if they do, they will be no better. The figure of Maximus is also highly moral, he shows deep contempt for his animalistic status as a gladiator and the fact that his exceptional combat skills are now being used for frivolous entertainment. In one scene Maximus whilst in the arena throws his gladius (sword) up at the "celebrity" box and yells "are you not entertained! Is this not why you are here!" and spits on the ground in disgust. He relates to the audience in that we also feel his contempt for the spectators and the barbaric sport he is being forced to participate in. Their opposition to violence and celebrity is key to their characters as heroes and also the fact that they use it for their notion of "good". In the case of Maximus it is his killing of Commodus. In Sparticus it is his war against the immoral Rome. Indeed it is through this violent struggle against "evil" that we come to sympathise and glorify these two heroes. Commodus is the personification of "evil" of which Maximus is the rightful, conquering hero. Although Crassus is the personification in Sparticus, the overall enemy is the institution of Rome; this differs in Gladiator as Maximus says "He will always serve Rome." This is true even when fighting as a gladiator as wishes to achieve the restoration of the Republic and follows Marcus Aurelius' wishes. However they both die in a Christ-like manner. Sparticus is crucified along with his followers and Maximus is chained in a similar manner as he waits to fight Commodus, before he is wounded fatally. Most importantly however they both die for their ideals which are presented to the audience as the embodiment of good.
The heroes In Gladiator and  Sparticus reach back to the idea of masculine bravery and goodness that is relevant in both ancient and modern societies (Cyrino and Winkler, 2004, 131). This is best expressed through their determination in fighting corruption. Ironically Seneca, speaks of gladiatorial games corrupting those who watch them (Seneca, Epistles 7, "The Gladiatorial Games"). However in Gladiator Maximus uses the games to fight the corrupt emperor Commodus. His inappropriate and incestuous advances on his sister Lucilla and his immature, selfish ruling of the empire are testimony to his morally corrupt character. Maximus is the liberator of this corrupt character, freeing both Lucilla from Commodus and the Roman people from the corruption of the Empire by restoring the Republic at the end of the film. When Maximus dies from his fatal wound he is carried out and Commodus is symbolically left in the arena. Their places are now metaphorically switched, Maximus has become honoured as a hero and savoir Commodus is left lying in the dirt, insignificant, just like an ancient gladiator was.
The figure of corruption and self-indulgence is Crassus (played by Laurence Olivier), in Sparticus he is shown as similar to Plutarch's description "In the case of Crassus many virtues were deeply obscured by one vice, avarice." (Plutarch, Life of Crassus, 1.2). Crassus is also bisexual in Sparticus ("I like both snails and oysters") which is alike to that of Commodus' incestuous longing for his sister. However Sparticus differs to Gladiator as he becomes a Gladiator first before becoming a general. So as opposed to "The general who became a slave, the slave who became a gladiator, and the gladiator who defied an emperor" it is the opposite. The significance is that Sparticus is about the reaction to the horror of being a gladiator, a struggle against an evil oppressor, i.e. the Romans. Sparticus struggles for liberty as a rebel reacting to his treatment when he was a gladiator. "When a free man dies he loses the pleasure of life, when a slave dies... the pain... Death is the only freedom a slave knows." Sparticus poignantly states in the film, suggesting that he'd rather die fighting a freeman than in the arena as a slave. However Maximus is heroic in the sense that he is forced into becoming a gladiator, a fall from freedom, which he eventually overcomes by killing Commodus in the arena.
In Sparticus and Gladiator both heroes suffer terribly. Yet they are given choices of an exit, a way out but never take them. In the ancient world ancient gladiators were admired by many "What even mediocre gladiator ever groans ever alters the expression on his face? Which one of them acts shamefully, either standing or falling?" (Cicero, Tusculanae disputationes. 2.41) even Cicero, an academic and a politician shows here he had a respect for them. But when refigured in Gladiator and Sparticus they were more than brave but morale and noble in their actions. Crassus after defeating Sparticus speaks of how he was a bandit and an outlaw, attempting to destroy all that Rome stood for. His wife Varinia says "He began all alone, like an animal. Yet on the day he died thousands upon thousands would have taken his place." Sparticus's character then is portrayed as one who will always do the right thing, even if it is the hardest choice. This is typified when a rich merchant offers to smuggle him and Varinia out, "go away" he says simply. Maximus is similarly as strong in his journey, when asked for his loyalty Maximus refuses knowing that he is doing the honourable (and heroic) thing, even if it means going through dangerous, possibly fatal, hardships.
One major difference between the cinematic characters of Maximus and Sparticus and ancient gladiators are that they are not objectified in a sexual manner. The character of Maximus does go through a period of objectification after his family are killed he renounces his character by not speaking, "My name is gladiator" he tells the emperor turning his back on him, again showing his status as an object. However even as an object Maximus does not show his body, there is only one scene in which he does this and its purpose is to highlight the servitude and humiliation of being a gladiator. The scene is raw and brutal, depicting a half naked Maximus being coated in lime and various gladiators being punished and killed, Maximus himself is seen from a camera angle that is unflattering of his body. Similarly in Sparticus when the trainer paints him to highlight killing, maiming and slow killing "zones" on the body. The scene is over quickly and the effect on the audience is of disgust, Sparticus himself looks angry and vengeful, indeed it is poignant that his trainer is the one who sparks the rebellion by calling him "Slave", it is at this moment that Sparticus attacks the trainer and begins the revolt marking the end to his objectification. This is also true in Gladiator when Maximus takes back his identity and proclaims himself to the emperor "My name is Maximus Decimus Meridius, Commander of the armies of the north and general of the Felix Legion, loyal servant to the true emperor Marcus Aurelius" and defies Commodus to the roar of public approval. Both cinematic gladiators then break free of there object selves as gladiators and become the champions of the causes. This lack of sexuality is key to heroes characters. Often in ancient sources gladiators were objectified in this manner, they sparked eroticism and sexual excitement fuelled the imaginations of the Roman people "The rich throw into gladiator schools all the best looking and fittest of men" (Seneca, Controversiae, 10.4.18). Seneca's description is condoned by the archaeological findings in Pompey "Caladus, the Thracian, makes all the girls sigh." Reads one inscription "Crescens, the net fighter, holds the hearts of all the girls" (C.I.L. IV, 4397) says more Roman graffiti. However Maximus remains loyal to his dead wife wishing "Only to see her again, for all else is dust and air". Sparticus, even though he is in love with Varinia, would not reduce himself to an "animal" by making love to her when she is offered to him by his masters, his refusal of his animal instincts shows his heroic virtue. This is further highlighted as both Commodus and Crassus are in love with these women and both forcibly try to make them love them unsuccessfully, much to the disgust of the audience.
The figures of Maximus and Sparticus then are not of lovers but of family men. All Maximus wishes to do is return to his farm, "Dirt washes off better than blood Quintus," he half jokes to his officers. Returning to his much loved family are his central concern shown by his prayers, in which Maximus kisses two figurines of his family wishing for their safety, the scene is beautiful and poetic, with the slow instrumental music and close ups of Maximus' emotional face. It allows the audience to connect to Maximus honest and humble desires creating a feeling of righteousness to his actions in the arena as this one simple wish, to love his family, is taken from him. The character of Sparticus is loving and affectionate to his wife he, in a similar way to Maximus, wishes only to be free with his family. His excitement at the news of Virinia's pregnancy is testimony to this. Both cinematic gladiators then show themselves as family orientated. This is connected with old fashioned masculinity, which shows so much appeal to the audience. Their being forced to fight as gladiators then is all the more unjustified to the audience and makes them all the more heroic for their honourable motives.
As we have seen the ancients saw the gladiator to be the worst type of slave. Indeed to be a gladiator was often a punishment if the slave had displeased their masters, committed crimes or they were slaves brought back by wars to be killed in the arena (Kyle, 1998, 91). In a book by Donald G. Kyle he quotes a text from Josephus saying that at the fall of Jerusalem hundreds of slaves were brought back to Rome by Titus to be put to the sword in the arena. Indeed many that died in the arena were untrained brigands, vagabonds and highwayman. The cinematic characters of Maximus and Sparticus however have virtues and nobility far beyond what any Roman could have expected from a "mere gladiator". Sparticus was everything Crassus was not "Sparticus possessed strength and many other laudable qualities; Crassus on the other hand was despicable in his lust for money and his small mindedness with Pompey." (Urbainczyk, 2004 , 102) Crassus then does nothing but scheme and lust for greater wealth and power whereas Sparticus, ironically, embodies all the attributes the Romans would have admired in their time. Maximus's virtuous and rightful triumph over the emperor Commodus is similarly as poignant and admirable. These two cinematic gladiators then are more than gladiators, they are heroes. The ancient Romans had very different ideas on gladiators and slavery, Romans saw gladiators as the worst type of slaves, the modern audiences see them as the worst treated of human beings. Throughout modern human history slavery is seen as greatly unjust, therefore the use of the medium of a gladiator to pursue high morale goals could not be more poignant, relevant and righteous. Maximus and Sparticus are simply a representation of this idea and that makes them all the more heroic.