It is the purpose of this essay to assess the dialogue between Okin and Rawls concerning the application of principles of justice to within the family unit. I will start by looking at Rawls' conception of social justice and Okin's critical response of its failure to address gender inequalities. I will go on to highlight the tensions between both arguments concerning the private/public dichotomy and the ways in which they deal with this distinction, concluding that it is this very divide which both arguments fail to account for in their conception of justice.
Rawls' primary focus within his 'Theory of Justice' is, through the use of a thought experiment, to arrive at principles of justice which are applicable to the basic structures of society. Rawls identifies the basic structure of society as the way in which "the major social institutions distribute fundamental rights and duties and determine the division of advantages from social cooperation."[1]
Within the text, Rawls explicitly identifies 3 examples of what he considers to be major institutions, one of which is the 'monogamous family'. The application of his principles of justice to the family has caused much controversy within contemporary political debate, particularly with respect to Okin's views on the injustice's caused by the gender distinction, and the way in which society's view of the traditional family unit can perpetuate this injustice.
Susan Moller Okin is a liberal feminist philosopher who has concentrated much of her writing on the issue of gender in politics. In 'The Family: Gender and Justice', Okin presents a liberal feminist critique of the gender structure in society. She highlights her belief that the biological differences in sex have been used to legitimise a society filled with discriminative values. Although mostly recognised as equal under the law, women everywhere suffer continuing injustices and inequalities as a result of tradition and socialization. The primary objective of her text is to highlight the need for the forced removal of gender inequalities, which can be achieved through the eradication of gender differentiation.
Rawls' two principles of justice consist of the basic liberty principle and the second principle which consists of the difference principle along with fair equality of opportunity. In terms of political rights it is clear that the basic liberty principle is the most relevant. Rawls gives a list of the liberties with which he holds the basic liberty principle to concern;
Under Rawls formulation of the basic structure of society, these basic liberties are to be applied to all the major institutions, including the family. However, in his 'Theory of Justice', Rawls hints at the idea that it is the heads of traditional monogamous families, rather than the individuals within families (be they traditional or not), that are most likely to consent to these two principles of justice. He generally assumes that the internal structure of the family is, by its nature, just. For this reason, contemporary philosophers, in particular Okin, have taken issue with Rawls' original conception of justice.
Okin believes that, given Rawls' conception of the basic structure includes families, it makes no sense to deny the application of his two principles to within the family. To an extent Okin is sympathetic to Rawls' liberal approach, but believes that a feminist approach is necessary in order to fully secure justice. The application of a similar theory to that of Rawls to within the family will secure a more just society. She believes that, like Rawls, the family is of major importance in the securing of a just society. The way in which children are brought up is of fundamental importance to their moral development. As a result, Okin sees it as necessary to ensure that children grow up in situations which are as just as possible, therefore it is necessary to remove gender inequalities. She argues that due to the current gender structure in society, women are forced to accept marital conditions which severely restricts their freedom of opportunity. The nature of traditional family values pressures women to be the primary care givers within the family, whilst the men are the primary bread winners. As a result of this, women are likely to end up financially dependent on their husbands, and essentially being severely restricted in terms of future options. This, Okin argues, is a result of the deeply ingrained gender divide that is so prevalent in society, and due to the ways in which children greatly rely on their parents guidance in their upbringing, is likely to remain prevalent until something is done in order to remove these inequalities.
In 'Justice as Fairness - A restatement', Rawls adapts his views of the family in order to accommodate for Okin's criticism. He redefines the scope of his use of the term family so it no longer only includes the traditional family;
He goes on to note that this function can be equally fulfilled by families of any structure. However, Rawls maintains that justice does not need to be applied to within the family structure. In the same way in which his principles of justice do not apply to the church due to the free and voluntary participation of its members, they only apply to the family to the extent that families are part of the basic structure;
Rawls justifies this approach to justice within the family though appeal to the public/private dichotomy. This distinction has an important effect on the nature of justice and its influence on the family unit.
In his 'Contemporary Political Philosophy - an introduction', Kymlicka highlights a distinction between two types of the public/private divide. The traditional version of the divide centres on the division between state and civil society. The state is analogous to the public, in which it is the domain of political activity. Civil society is analogous to the private, which consists of the relations amongst individuals outside of the political sphere. This approach faced feminist criticism due to the fact that it failed to embrace female participation in either the public or the private. Women were placed in a completely separate sphere, that of domesticity. A later approach to the divide attempted to address this issue and others by highlighting the right to privacy, this distinction between the public and the private equated the public with the social and the private with the personal. Any activity outside of the family is considered to be in the public domain, whereas any activity within the family is considered to be private.
Okin's analysis of the gender structures of society clearly requires that principles of justice need to be applicable to within the family. However, she also holds that there are basic liberties which need to be protected. If two consenting adults willingly and freely agree to live their family life in the traditional style, then Okin believes that it is unreasonable to force them to otherwise. When discussing the nature of the original position, and the ways in which it can be used to ensure the eradication of gender inequalities, she also notes the importance of ensuring that free and rational choice is not hindered;
It seems that here Okin is submitting to elements of Rawls' argument. In attempting to apply principles of justice to the family, you must at the same time respect the ways in which people choose to live their lives. Similarly, Rawls recognised that it is important to ensure that there is justice within the family, but the measures that are taken to enforce this justice cannot go against the protection that his basic liberty principle provides.
Okin's analysis of gender structures in society has successfully highlighted injustices that lie within the family structure. Given the effect that parents have on their children's moral upbringing it is likely that these injustices will remain within society for as long as the gender inequalities which Okin highlighted are still prevalent in society. Rawls' equal political rights can, to an extent, be applied to these injustices. However, both Okin and Rawls recognise the importance of respecting peoples free choice in such matters. Where Okin wants to see equal political rights applied internally to the family, Rawls maintains that this would intrude into the private domain. But if we are to fully remove the gender inequalities then it will be necessary to intrude into the family life and force the eradication of gender distinction. But even Okin maintains that this is unacceptable. So it seems that equal political rights are not an adequate response to Okin's gender analysis. Okin's gender analysis requires state intervention in ways which are unacceptable according to Rawls' conception of justice, and to an extent her own conception of justice. It seems to me that the eradication of gender within society requires more affirmative action than just the equal distribution of political rights, to an extent which will intrude on our most basic liberties.