Free indirect discourse or style indirect libre is a technique used by writers to present the thoughts or utterances of a fictional character as if it were from their own point of view. This is achieved by combining grammatical and other features of the character's 'direct speech' with features of the narrator's 'indirect' report. It is a technique to allow the reader to interpret the protagonist's thoughts as the author enjoys a seemingly objective stance. Gustave Flaubert was a 'pioneer' of this style and in his novel Madame Bovary, this technique is used copiously. One advantage he enjoyed was that it enabled him to find a style 'suitable to each object, each place, each circumstance [and] each being' and permitted him 'to give expression to the unexpressed thoughts of incoherent people." This style indirect libre involves the reader in the narrative; there is no privation to preface the tenets of the protagonists with 'il a pens
' or - would it be direct speech - 'il me semble' as it is either deliberately apparent or indeterminate who the reference is made by and this is controlled by the author.
The reader is often told how things are seen rather than merely what is being seen. One example of this is Charles' description of Emma as he frequents Rouault's farm; she offers him a drink. Flaubert uses style indirect libre to underline the significance of this moment to Charles. The description is, ergo, extremely detailed and it is clear that it portrays the thoughts of Monsieur Bovary. He sees Emma: '[qui] n'avait point de fichu, on voyait sur les paules nues de petites gouttes de sueur." Flaubert manages to describe Emma in a highly suggestive way and yet manages to keep the semblance of objectivity through the style indirect libre as it appears clear that it is Charles who sees Emma in this way and is becoming emotionally charged as 'Elle [Emma] riait de ne rien sentir, tandis que le bout de la langue, passant entre ses dents fines, lchait  petits coups le fond du verre. ' He is realizing her strong erotic potential which will 'find its first symbolic awakening during the dance ritual at the Vaubyessard ball.'
This style indirect libre would initially suggest that Flaubert would sympathise with Emma as her description is through the eyes of Charles who is in awe of her. Flaubert, however, ensures his rigid objectivity as, later on in the novel, the reader will be able to judge Emma's character for himself when the style indirect libre switches to her shared point of view, through her actions and rhetoric. The reader will see her dissatisfaction with her life and especially with Charles but 'Flaubert's style indirect libre gives a modicum of objectivity' to this lamentation. 'Charles tait l. Il avait sa casquette enforce sur ses sourcils...ce qui ajoutait  son visage quelque chose de stupide'. It is evident that it is not the author who is making this comment but it is in Emma's thoughts. By adopting style indirect libre Flaubert drops the real subject of the sentence and the protagonist's true thoughts are expressed. This technique also enables Flaubert to ensure that the text is impersonal while simultaneously conveying judgments of characters and events; as 'impersonality depends not on what is said but on the fact that no identifiable narrator speaks.'
Style indirect libre combines two voices: the voice of the narrator and that of a character. It is often impossible to tell who actually is speaking as the 'speaker may be the narrator, or one of the characters, or both, or neither." We can see this in incidents where the distinction between character and narrator appears to disappear completely; 'Emma fut intrieurement satisfaite de se sentir arrive du premier coup  ce rare idal des existences ples, o ne parviennent jamais les coeurs mdiocres. It is impossible to tell here whether the narrator is quoting Emma's thoughts or feelings or whether he is, in fact, expressing his own opinions. The effect this has on the reading of the text is that firstly - as a result of the style indirect libre - the reader can read Emma's thoughts, feel her feelings, and appreciate her reactions with a much greater ease as his involvement in the text is further enhanced. Secondly, this intermittent use of 'absent' narration creates an illusion of objectivity and detachment by pushing the character into the foreground as the narrator recedes into the background. Due to the fact that the source of the narration is indistinguishable and that there are not multiple narrators, nor does the narrator have 'a distinct set of characteristics', it is impossible therefore, for a narrator to be 'opposed to another narrator, or to a character." The sequential effect is one which underlines the authenticity and objectivity of the text.
This style indirect libre, thus, allows Flaubert to move unobtrusively between the objective and the subjective and permits him to place stress on certain characterizations. Through style indirect libre Flaubert ensures that we only see what is important to the protagonists and that we adopt their own idiom. We only see the characters through what they notice of each other through what they perceive of each other. Another example of this is where Emma's beauty as she lies in the hotel bed is appreciated by both Lon and the narrator: 'rien au monde n'tait beau comme sa tte brune et sa peau blanche se dtachant sur cette couleur pourpre, quand, par un geste de pudeur, elle fermait ses deux bras nus, en se cachant la figure dans les mains. ' Perhaps substantiation that Flaubert remains objective and that the descriptions are solely through the eyes of his protagonists lies in the trivial inconsistencies in the novel. Emma's eyes are such incongruities; 'on one occasion he gives Emma brown eyes; on another deep black eyes; and, on another, blue eyes. Lon...is described as having golden hair; and later as having chestnut locks.'
Through his use of style indirect libre Flaubert encourages the reader to see through his character's limited point of view and the interplay between the protagonists deliberately leaves space for the reader to interpret their actions. This form of statement allows a third-person narrative to exploit a first person point of view thus facilitating a multifaceted presentation of character, allowing the possibility of both ironic and empathetic attitudes. One example of Flaubert's use of style indirect libre to highlight the dramatic irony in the novel is Emma's excitement when she returns home from the forest after committing adultery with Rodolphe exclaiming: 'J'ai un amant! Un amant! ' This is placed in direct discourse as it is technically true. However, the passage which follows is in style indirect libre: 'Elle allait donc possder enfin ces joies de l'amour, cette fivre du bonheur dont elle avait dsespr. ' Here Emma is disillusioned and qua reader we know this and are immediately aware of the subtle irony.
In conclusion Flaubert uses style indirect libre in Madame Bovary and proves it to be a particularly suitable vehicle for interior monologues often verbalising essentially pre-verbal sensations and states of mind. The style is also used to highlight the irony that is to be found in the text and to subtly control the reader and his reading of the text.