The nature of the mind and its relation to the body (or matter in general) is a subject which bares witness to much debate. Since the writings of early philosophers such as Socrates and Plato it had been suggested that there are elements of the mind or soul which possess certain characteristics which are not shared with the extended world. This has led to much disagreement over the subject and given rise to many competing theories, each contending with its own problems. One such popular theory is that of Substance Dualism.
The fundamental claim of the Dualist is that the mind and matter are two separate substances that are intimately related. This notion arises out of various claims about the different properties which can be attributed to each substance. For instance, it is commonly accepted that matter is extended. It occupies a place in space. Dualists claim that as the mind is not extended, there is no place in space in which the mind can be located, it must be a different substance to that of matter. Dualists also point out differences in the epistemological nature of the mind compared to those of the material, as well as differentiating between the qualitative aspects of the mind and matter. Dualism has encountered various problems and criticisms in its development, which has led to many competing versions. This essay shall focus on one particular version; Cartesian Dualism, which is considered by many to be the most influential form of substance dualism.
Rene Descartes (1596-1650) dualism is most clearly argued for in his 'Meditations on First Philosophy'. Within the text he argues from several different initial premises in order to clearly illustrate his position. He distinguishes between what he holds as two different substances, the extended material world is made up of one substance, extended matter, and the mind is made up of a different substance, thought. Descartes goes on to argue that each of these substances mutually exclude one another. There is no object which can hold extension as an attribute whilst also holding thought as an attribute, therefore minds are necessarily distinct from bodies and other material objects. He begins his argument for dualism using what is commonly coined his 'method of doubt', in which he calls into question the existence of everything which he has previously taken for granted. The result of this doubt leads him to dismiss the existence of his body and the external world using the idea of an evil deceiver. It appears to Descartes that there is only one thing which he can attribute necessary existence to;
Descartes maintains that it is impossible to call into doubt the existence of his thought, and it must therefore exist necessarily. The existence of the body, and extended matter in general can however be called into doubt. His conclusion is that, as it is logically possible for his mind to exist independently of the body, it follows that it is possible for the body to exist independently of the mind. Therefore the mind and the body are entirely distinct.
This argument from doubt has been the subject of strong criticism. Most notably from a contemporary of Descartes; Antoine Arnauld. Arnauld pointed out that Descartes reasoning is invalid. He uses the example of a particular man's understanding of a triangle, and illustrates that just because this man is able to call into doubt a particular property that this triangle may hold, does not entail that this property is non essential. The conclusion drawn from this example is clearly drawn out by J. Cottingham;
This points to an important distinction between logical possibilities and empirical possibilities. Although Descartes has identified a logical possibility, the conclusion he has drawn does not represent, as he has shown it, an empirical necessity. Descartes responds to this criticism by denying a similarity in the example, but accepting the point intended.
The distinction between the attributes of mind and body is further highlighted by investigating the 'oneness' of the mind as compared to the divisibility of the body. This also is an argument directly forwarded by Descartes;
Once again this argument is aimed at demonstrating the different properties which mind and body possess in order to enforce the dualist stance. Many contemporary philosophers have dismissed this argument on the grounds that it no longer stands true in the light of modern psychology. It is commonly accepted that the mind is made up of a variety of faculties; the understanding, the will, the sensory faculties etc. However, Descartes denies that just because it is possible to identify different functions of the mind, it is also possible to divide the mind into parts;
Here Descartes seems to be implying that, although the mind is capable of different functions, it is always the same indivisible mind which performs and is the conscious subject of these activities.
Although the concept of a simple, unified and singular 'I' has a certain intuitive appeal, many scholars have taken issue with it. Possibly the most devastating comes from the studying of empirical psychological phenomena. Experiments using brain bisection operations have shown some interesting results which seem to contradict the dualists claim that the mind is not divisible;
The results of procedures such as this have led philosophers such as Nagal (1971) to conclude that the concept of a unified consciousness is misleading, it is more probable that thought processes are in actual fact a result of "complex interactions of several distinct subsystems" [6]. However, arguments from a physiological perspective have so far failed to prove that, although there seems to be some form of external empirically verifiable division in the consciousness, the patients awareness of oneself as unified has been damaged in any way.
Even if we are to accept the Cartesian notion of an indivisible mind, it still fails to account for the claim that mind and body are completely independent. If we are to argue from a monist perspective we could easily claim that, although consciousness is indivisible, it is still coherent to claim that it is an indivisible property of an extended material substance. The indivisibility argument thus fails to prove that the mind is a separate substance from that of the body.
However successful the dualists attempts are at responding to the criticisms that monists throw at the Cartesian model, there is one argument against dualism which has received the majority of attention. If we are to accept that the mind and body are truly distinct substances, then a big issue arises when we attempt to address the problem of interaction. It is commonly accepted that the extended material world is causally closed. Every event which occurs is caused by and can cause some other event within this causally closed universe. The problem comes when trying to establish how the mind, as an immaterial substance, can causally interact with the extended world. It is clear in the execution of an action which began as a simple thought, it is possible for me to interact with this causally closed off world. This seems to directly contradict the entire thesis which the dualist is trying to present. In order to address this question the dualist either has to concede to the monist, or try to argue that the mind and body don't in fact interact.
In questioning what the strongest argument for substance dualism is, the only response can be to ask what the strongest criticism is. The problem of interaction has stifled all dualists, and never has there been a response which sufficiently addresses this issue. But despite this, it seems there remains a strong element of intuitive appeal. The initial analysis of the various attributes which mind and body possess does seem to lead to the conclusion that they are distinct substances and, despite the fact that Descartes rational approach to understanding the mind often brings about conclusions which aren't necessarily entailed by the premises, it is still possible that these conclusions are valid. By questioning the various properties of the mind as compared to those of the material world, Descartes has highlighted an important distinction. It follows that the strongest argument for substance dualism lies in our own intuitions about the way in which the mind differs from the body; the very fact that we can question what the essence of the mind is and then compare it to the material world illustrates that there are some fundamental questions about our very nature which need to be addressed.