In general terms, the study of morality concerns an enquiry into how we ought to conduct our lives in terms of right and wrong actions. This is the domain of normative ethics. Distinct from normative ethics, the field of meta-ethics concerns the nature and grounding of our moral belief systems, and essentially attempts to define our notion of morality by appealing to beliefs and attitudes.
One such much debated meta-ethical idea is that of error-theory. Error theory can be directly contrasted with non-naturalist moral realism. Both these meta-ethical theories hold that when we make a moral judgement, we are expressing a belief about non-natural properties. The difference between the two lies in the fact that realists hold that these non-natural properties exist, whereas error theorists hold that they don't. Before we get into a critical discussion it is helpful to understand a little about 'beliefs' and 'non-natural properties'. A belief is an attempt at representing the world as it actually is, thus we can either hold true beliefs or false beliefs. A non-natural property is a property of the world that cannot be discovered through the usual method one employs in order to discover a natural property, namely through scientific methods. However these properties are claimed (by the realist) to still be very much part of the world.
The error theorist, contrary to the non-naturalist realist, claims that these properties which all moral judgements are based on don't actually exist. This has been a very controversial claim to make, as it essentially states that any moral judgement is false. For this reason, error theory has recently been the subject of heated debate, and its legitimacy has been very much at stake.
J.L Mackie in his 'Ethics: Inventing Right and Wrong' forcefully argues for moral judgements as beliefs about non-natural properties, but maintains that there are in fact no non natural properties for our beliefs to correspond to;
Thus he concludes all our moral judgements must be false. He explains the non existence of these properties using two arguments; the argument from relativity and the argument from queerness. The argument from relativity appeals to the varying beliefs that different cultures and societies hold in terms of what is right and wrong;
Every individual tends to hold their moral judgements as necessarily true, thus appealing to some kind of objective morality, but if this were truly the case, we must surely claim that any contrasting moral judgement is false, but this could lead to ruling entire cultures as immoral, which seems completely counter intuitive. Therefore, Mackie argues, the non-natural properties which we appeal to must in fact not exist. The argument from queerness states that these non-natural properties are unlike any other property there is. They have an odd action guiding force driving them. If we are to accept that these properties exist then we need a special way of discovering what these properties are. Mackie basically argues that this is untenable.
On face value, Mackie's argument seems perfectly reasonable, but it has aroused much attention from numerous philosophers, the reason being that its basic claim is that all moral judgements are false. If this is the case, then it follows that there is no purpose in making any moral judgements or even holding any moral beliefs. This is clearly not a state of affairs that we want to willingly accept. Mackie identified this problem and attempted to address it whilst maintaining an error theorist stance. A result of which was 'moderate' error theory. Mackie claims that although all moral judgements are false, we can still distinguish between justifiable and unjustifiable moral beliefs by appealing to a subsidiary norm. The example he gives is that of social cooperation. For instance, the judgement that we ought to respect others rights to privacy is wrong in terms of there being a non-natural property which it corresponds to, but is justified in its relation to the subsidiary norm of securing social cooperation. Thus we can still be reassured of the benefit by our making moral judgements.
Crispin Wright in his 'Truth in Ethics' believes that Mackie's moderate error theory is fundamentally flawed. He accepts that there is a strong need to avoid radical error theory, but believes that the appeal to the subsidiary norm gives way to a fundamental instability. Wright argues that the subsidiary norm effectively forces error theory into redundancy. The subsidiary norm can replace the need for any non-natural properties in our making of moral judgements. He introduces the notion of 'superassertibility' ;
Wright holds that superassertibility is a truth determinate in any form of discourse, a superassertible statement will be true in relation to the norm that a particular discourse provides. If we can apply superassertibility to a subsidiary norm we can still talk of some moral judgements as being true or false. If a moral judgement is superassertible then no matter what additional circumstances or information arise, it is going to remain the same, thus it can be called true, and error theory is avoided.
However, Alexander Miller believes that Wrights argument itself has some fundamental instabilities. Miller argues that such an indirect attack on moderate error theory will only lead to radical error theory, which is exactly what Wright wants to avoid. The appeal to using the subsidiary norm as a measure of truth and falsehood in our moral judgements is open to two main attacks;
Miller argues that in order to apply a truth value to the subsidiary norm we will either have to be able to reduce it to a moral judgement or apply a reductive analysis which will explain it in purely non-moral terms. If it is the case that the subsidiary norm is 'irreducibly moral' then it can in no way be used as an argument against the error theory, as the error theory has already dismissed the possibility of truth in positive moral judgements. It seems to have entered itself inside a vicious circle. On the other hand Miller recognises that Wright himself has dismissed the possibility of the subsidiary norm as reducible to non moral terminology, in which case we have to accept it as a moral judgement which, after the application of the error theory, is false.
Miller recognises that Wright might reply using moral judgements as superassertible. But dismisses this on the same grounds as he dismissed the truth bearing weight of the subsidiary norm. If we use superassertibility to determine truth in moral statements, then the truth will either be based on the moral weight of the statement, or will be reducible to non moral terms (which as noted before, Wright rejects). Thus the error theory can once again be applied, and superassertible judgements will all come out as false.
Miller recognises a failure in the approach of Wrights argument which results in an unsuccessful refutation of the error theory. The indirect nature of the argument only works as a dismissive of moderate error theory, but leaves radical error theory unscathed which is exactly what the majority of moral theorists, including Mackie, are trying to avoid. Wrights indirect attack is aimed at a surplus principle that has been introduced to error theory in order to save it from the extreme of radical error theory. Wrights insistence on the truth that this surplus principle provides in moral judgements immediately leads to its necessary falsity as a result of the principles of radical error theory; namely that all moral judgements are false. Any response to the error theory, Miller argues, must be aimed directly at it. In order to avoid a radical error theory, we must come up with an argument which dismisses the claim that moral judgements are about beliefs in non existing non natural properties, but Wrights argument does not succeed.
So we are now left with Mackie's error theory, but it seems that not all is well here either. Miller's attack on any form of indirect argument against error theory has meant that we can not accept Mackie's justification for moral judgements. Contrary to Wright's claim that we "ought...to forgo making any [moral] claims"[5], Mackie believes we can still be an error theorist and be able to justify our moral beliefs without appealing to truth. But Miller's argument clearly states otherwise. If we are to be an error theorist, any justification of a moral judgment will be reducible to some moral norm, which will be false under the error theory.
Obviously it is in no way possible to be an error theorist and maintain that not all moral judgements are false, as that would clearly go against the main tenet of error theory, but Mackie had provided some hope that it was possible to still be justified in our making of moral judgements despite their falsity. However, it seems that Wright's attempt at saving us completely from the falsity of our moral beliefs has lead us only into further trouble; we can now not escape radical error theory through any form of indirect argument;
We either have to attack its premises directly or, despite the claims of many commentators of contemporary meta-ethics, find a strong argument to support a subsidiary norm which can be reducible to strictly non-moral terms. Otherwise it seems the claim that moral judgements are meaningless holds true.