In his 'Contemporary Metaphysics', Michael Jubien identifies properties in the Platonic sense as "entities that exist apart from and independently of the things that have them"[1] Plato's belief that properties are universal stems from a long line of enquiry into the nature of justice, and his perception of the ideal state. Through question and answer sessions with the people he surrounds himself with, he slowly unravels his 'Theory of Forms'
Although Plato has never explicitly stated this theory, many contemporary commentators recognise it as an intrinsic part of Plato's philosophies. Throughout his many texts are references to 'things-in-themselves', or 'ideas', which are used frequently to portray his beliefs about justice and other abstract entities. But because of the nature in which Plato reveals his Forms, commentators have failed to agree on his argument for their existence, some maintaining that he gives none at all. If this is right, then what reason do we have to adopt Plato's theory?
In order to understand Plato's reasons for his theory of forms, we must first understand a little about the nature of properties as universals. Most Platonists believe their to be an innumerable amount of properties. Such properties can range from the colour of a particular object to the location it has at a particular time. For instance, a pen might hold the property of having been used at a certain time on a certain date, by a certain person. It can also hold the property of redness. When we say that these properties are universal, the claim we are making is that the pen does not cause or explain these properties, but instead they exist independently of the pen, and the pen 'instantiates' them. Therefore to claim that 2 different items share the same property, is to claim that they both instantiate the same property. The redness which they instantiate, is one and the same.
The main body of Plato's 'Republic' is concerned with finding the nature of justice, but in order to do so, digressions are made to illustrate his arguments. In book V we see Socrates (the mouth piece of Plato) questioned about the practicality of his ideal state. This is where the 'Theory of Forms' first appears. In order to demonstrate the possibility of his ideal state, Plato appeals to the idea of 'the philosopher ruler'. The most important aspect of which, is his ability to grasp 'Knowledge'.
Plato distinguishes between knowledge, opinion and ignorance, each corresponding to different levels of 'being'. Knowledge corresponds to 'what is', ignorance to 'what is not' and opinion lies between the two. He uses a useful illustration in order to express this view clearly. He depicts a cave in which prisoners are tied down and forced to look at a screen which is showing shadows of puppets. The prisoners, having no reason to think otherwise, believe that these shadows are how the world actually is. But when a prisoner is released, he encounters a further world in which truth lies. Having grown able to accustom himself with the light of the real world, the prisoner is eventually able to look directly at the sunlight, which Plato frequently uses as analogous to the highest form of them all; the form of the good.
It is the aim of the philosopher ruler to follow in the route of the prisoner by escaping the trappings of the sensible world and striving to achieve knowledge in its true sense, that is, knowledge of the intelligible realm. This realm consists of timeless and unchanging properties of objects and entities which represent things in the material world in their purest form, an action that is considered just, partakes in the pure form of justice. These are universal properties. Plato claims that the majority of people can only hold opinions, which are changing beliefs that hold no intrinsic value, and are only approximations to the world as it is. This is the world of the senses, the material world. He illustrates his point by distinguishing between the lover of knowledge and the lover of spectacles. The lover of knowledge is someone who, rather that appreciating, for example, a particular beautiful object, instead aims to understand beauty-in-itself; the form of beauty.
Rather than arguing for the existence of forms, Plato focuses his attention on arguing against the possibility of knowledge of particulars. He claims that knowledge is only possible of things that remain unchanged, and given that particulars are in a constant state of flux, it cannot be possible to have knowledge of them. Any particular can instantiate a property at any time; A car can instantiate the property of speed, a sculpture can instantiate the property of beauty, 2 apples instantiate the property of double one apple. But none of these particulars instantiate these properties necessarily; the car can be crushed, the sculpture may appear to one as beautiful but ugly to another, and the property of double depends on what we are relating the two apples to. We can not claim to 'know' that the car is fast, or the sculpture is beautiful, or that two apples are always double, because in the sensible world, this is liable to change. Plato argues that the Forms are these properties in themselves, as they exist independently of the objects which instantiate them. The philosopher ruler will have knowledge of these universal properties, and be able to apply this knowledge appropriately to the governance of the ideal state.
Although Plato claims that we need universal properties in order to attain knowledge, within the 'Republic' the Forms are very much taken for granted. He provides analogies expanding on and illustrating the idea, but at no point does he provide a proof of their existence or a single reason for why they should exist. This can be obviously seen in Julia Annas' writings;
In order to successfully assess the reasons we have for accepting properties as universals we need to look at modern Platonist views, in particular realism.
Metaphysical Realists have built on the foundations that Plato laid in order to generate further understanding of subject-predicate relationships. The idea of properties as universals helps us to understand what it is to say that two separate things can be qualitatively similar or identical. If we make a claim about a car being red, and then later express a separate claim about a house being red, by accepting properties as universal, we can admit that these two separate particulars have something in common, namely; the instantiation of the property of redness. If we deny properties as universal, then it seems we must also deny that the house and the car can share the same property.
Nominalists argue contrary to realists in claiming that there are in fact no such entities as properties in the first place. They start by asserting that the role of properties as universals in Platonic terms is to act as an intermediary between the world as we see it and the 'world-in-itself'. But go on to claim that we do not need an intermediary, and are in fact connected to the real world directly. If we say that a house is red, it is the utterance of this sentence, and no abstract entity, that bears truth. By saying a house is red, we are announcing that the subject 'house' satisfies the predicate red. However, this theory has been criticised on its failure to account for how a sentence in one language can mean the same in another language.
In answer to the original question, it seems that we have plenty of reason to agree with the doctrine of properties as universals. By denying its plausibility we are also rejecting a coherent theory of basic communication. Everyday use of language commits us to properties and propositions. Although Plato has never explicitly stated these reasons for believing in universals, he has definitely done the groundwork for later philosophers to build on. Realism has shown us that, when discussing separate entities with the same properties, we can clearly understand the relation that these separate entities can hold to each other. Thus providing us with a good reason to ascribe to Plato's theory. As Michael Jubien explains;
This account of similarity and difference is clearly attributable to Plato and the Platonists that followed.