It seems odd to analyse a concept which is so thoroughly engrained in common language such as that of knowledge. However, since the early writings of Plato philosophers have questioned what it is to know something. Distinctions have been made between capacity knowledge, knowledge by acquaintance and propositional knowledge, each with various difficulties associated with them. The most fundamental debate surrounds the concept of propositional knowledge; what it means to say we know a particular proposition. One such response has been to claim that knowledge is justified true belief. This is known either as the tripartite definition or more generally, the standard analysis.
In attempting to define a concept like knowledge, theorists are looking for a set of conditions which cover all aspects of how we use that concept. These conditions must be necessary and sufficient; each condition is essential to the concept and the combination of these conditions is enough to satisfy the demands of the concept. In the case of knowledge as justified true belief, theorists have identified 3 conditions that are said to successfully fill the necessary and sufficient conditions of knowledge. Predictably, these conditions are truth, belief and justification.
The truth condition is pretty much universally accepted. Its basic premise is that it is impossible to claim to know something which is false. If I claim to know that the earth is in fact square, whilst maintaining that it is true that the earth is round, then my claim to knowledge seems somewhat oxymoronic; I am claiming to have false knowledge. The real controversy that surrounds the truth condition lies in our understanding of the concept of truth. Although this is in itself a difficult subject to tackle.
The belief condition, although generally regarded as necessary, has more controversy surrounding it than does the truth condition. The inclusion of the belief condition boils down to the requirement of a psychological connection to an agents claim to knowledge. Broadly speaking, it is impossible to know something which you do not believe of have no belief about. This condition acts to exclude the agent from knowing something which they are at the same time ignorant about. However, although the belief condition is mostly accepted, some philosophers have doubted its necessity;
The underlying idea is that it is possible to accept some proposition without acquiring the tendency to accept this proposition in certain circumstances. In accepting some proposition, an agent is said to know this proposition, but does not necessarily hold the relevant 'dispositional psychological state' in order for it to count as knowledge. Whether or not this view holds as valid, it is important that the concept of knowledge has as a condition some form of relation between that object and the subject. In the standard analysis, this condition is belief.
The third and final condition for the tripartite definition of knowledge is the justification condition. It's apparent through the use of thought experiments that true belief would not suffice in a fully comprehensive account of knowledge. By saying that knowledge is a belief that is true, there remains the possibility of accidental true beliefs. For instance; if an agent believes that he will win the lottery next time he plays, and against all probability, he does, it cannot be said that he knew he would win the lottery. The justification condition means that lucky guesswork does not count as knowledge. However, some philosophers have discounted the need for justification in an account of knowledge;
The suggestion is that the holding of a belief implies some form of justification which has led to an agents arrival at the belief. Therefore the justification condition is surplus to requirement. This line of thought has an intuitive element to it; it makes sense to say that the an agent has a reason for believing in some proposition, and that this reason is itself justification for the agents holding that belief. However it does not capture fully what is trying to be said in adding the justification condition to the standard analysis.
Although the justification condition is used in order to clarify our concept of knowledge, it in turn is a concept which needs much clarification. The traditionally held view is that justification requires a form of evidence to secure the truth of a proposition. However, as we have seen, some consider belief to contain an element of justification, but this does not satisfy our intuitions about knowledge. As a result, philosophers have distinguished between internal and external justification. In holding a belief, it is said that there are two ways in which that belief can be justified;
Internal justification focuses on the responsibility of the agent in assessing the reliability of the ways in which he formed his belief. External justification instead looks at the reliability of the evidence which provided the information and lead to the formation of a belief. The identification of this division in the condition helps to explain the notion that an element of justification is contained within belief. The claim here is that, although almost all beliefs are in some sense justified, those which are only internally justified do not meet the conditions which are required to constitute knowledge. It is possible for an agent to internally justify a belief using completely unreliable methods. However, in order to claim knowledge, the agent must also hold some form of external justification. As a result, theorists have identified an extended version of the standard analysis. In this version, two criterion need to be fulfilled to account for justification; An agent must be personally justified in believing some proposition and the agent must believe the proposition on the basis of adequate grounds. [4]
Although clarifying the nature of the justification condition, it is still difficult to judge how strongly we should interpret the condition. When faced with a sceptical argument, it will be impossible to justify any belief that an agent might hold. Platonic knowledge assures us that, in a state of knowing, there will be no choice other than to accept that you know, but no amount of empirical evidence will lead to this knowledge, it can only be acquired through the 'forms'. These examples of the problems surrounding what we can know have many implications for the standard analysis. However there is a problem which has received much more attention from proponents of the tripartite definition; it comes in the form of an ingenious paper produced by Edmund Gettier (1963). In a three page paper, Gettier provided a counter example which directly attacked the sufficiency of the three conditions which make up knowledge. Gettier provided an example in which an agent, Smith, has strong evidence to suggest that Jones will get a job which they have both applied for. Having seen Jones count some money in his pocket, Smith comes up with the proposition that the man who will get the job has 10 coins in his pocket. As it turns out, Smith's reliable source of information has failed him and it is in fact Smith who has got the job. However, as it happens Smith also has 10 coins in his pocket. Thus the proposition 'the man who will get the job has 10 coins in his pocket' is true. Here Gettier has provided an example of a man who holds a true belief, which is justified, but does not seem to correspond with our intuitions about knowledge; to claim that Smith knew that the man who would get the job has 10 coins in his pocket seems absurd.
However, as much as the Gettier counter example seems to illustrate a fundamental flaw with the tripartite definition of knowledge, it seems to me that it would be easy to counter the objection. If we accept that the justification for the proposition was not strong enough for Smith to claim knowledge, then it seems that the counter example fails. The problem with this is it leaves open the question of what exactly constitutes a strong enough justification? Clearly, Smith had strong grounds for accepting that he would not be the one getting the job, but these grounds were built on non-reliable information. Therefore, we could argue that Smith's forming his belief in the proposition was not in fact justified. Unfortunately, by taking this path, we are likely to end up nowhere but delivered into the hands of the sceptic; we will find no belief which has strong enough justification.
The Gettier counter example has clearly dealt the standard analysis a harsh blow. As a result many philosophers have now directed their attention at finding the conditions of knowledge that will not allow for such counter examples. However, I feel that any attempt to clearly define the limits of such a widely used concept as knowledge will only end in failure. Including concepts such as justification in the definition only ends in the need for further analysis. And this analysis itself is unlikely to be definitive. The fact that it is questioned whether we are really able to know anything at all clearly illustrates the implausibility of ever being able to find a complete set of necessary and sufficient conditions that fully satisfy our concept of knowledge. So, it seems that justified true belief does not definitively illustrate our idea of knowledge, it maybe the case that in certain circumstances this will be a adequate account of what we are claiming to know, but it will not suffice for a universal description.