Given the esteem with which rights are regarded in the majority of liberal systems, it seems only natural to question the justification which lies behind what is generally regarded as a legitimate, yet can often be horrendous, violation of these rights. The two prominent theories within the justification of state punishment rely on two very different justificatory methods; the utilitarian perspective is instrumental in its approach, whilst the retributive perspective seeks justification through an appeal to the intrinsic nature of punishment.
Jeremy Bentham, in his An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation, expounds what is generally considered to be the most influential account of the utilitarian justifications of punishment;
In itself, Bentham considers punishment an evil; the unhappiness which is a result of particular instances of punishment is on utilitarian grounds a sufficient reason for regarding it as immoral. However, to accept this is to overlook the positive consequences of punishment; deterrence, incapacitation and rehabilitation are three empirically verified consequences of state enforced punishment. Given that the positive utility which is a result of these consequences outweighs any negative utility that may result from punishment, then punishment is justified.
The most popular appeal to the good consequences of punishment comes from an appeal to it deterrent effects. There are two forms of deterrence; special and general. Special deterrence aims at deterring the individual who performed the criminal act from committing a crime again for fear of being punished again, general deterrence aims at deterring the general population from criminal acts for fear of suffering a similar punishment. Another popular justification of punishment which utilitarians appeal to is the incapacitative effect which it has on offenders. An offender is less likely to re-offend in an environment in which he is constantly under surveillance such as prison or some outside monitoring scheme. Finally, there is the appeal to the reformative effects which punishment can have;
Clearly this reformative account of justification relies on a penal system which is constructed in such a way as to facilitate the rehabilitative process.
Before considering the retributive alternative to the utilitarian account of the justification of punishment, it is useful to consider the objections to the approach as it stands. The primary objection to the utilitarian account is its potential endorsement of particular instances of punishment which appear counter intuitive. Opponents claim that utilitarianism would justify the punishment of an innocent person providing that it was inline with the utilitarian maxim of being conducive of overall happiness. It is quite possible to conceive of a situation in which the nature of a crime is such that it requires immediate resolution. A situation is quite easily imaginable in which the punishment of an innocent civilian would result in the production of greater utility than not punishing any individual, or maybe even than punishing the guilty individual. All it takes is a little imagination. However, there are ways of responding to this line of argument. Firstly, we can appeal to the idea that the concept of punishment implies guilt, and thus the 'punishment' of an innocent civilian is not to be considered punishment but is in fact an illegitimate act of state coercion. Thus the implication of an innocent civilian as guilty of a crime is not within the scope of the utilitarian justification of punishment (although the criticism would still apply to utilitarian moral theory in general). However, the idea that the innocent cannot be punished is far from being universally accepted. It seems perfectly coherent to claim that the innocent person being punished was being punished on behalf of the guilty person, and thus the criticism still stands. A second response relies on the claim that the punishment of an innocent would in fact result in an overall disutility. The result of arresting an innocent person would be a general distrust of the whole system which could have disastrous consequences. The utilitarian would appeal to the possibility of these consequences on order to justify a strict policy which requires that only the guilty be punished. But this is not sufficient to escape the criticism, for the utilitarian principle requires that, in a situation in which the punishment of an innocent would maximize happiness, the innocent be punished. The primary failure within the utilitarian justification, the retributivist argues, is its neglect of the fundamental concept of desert.
At the heart of the retributivist theory of punishment lays the Kantian maxim that one should treat individuals as ends-in-themselves, rather than as a means to reach some further end. To employ this principle within the field of punishment is to deny that the consequences of an act have any intrinsic value in the justification of punishment. The retributivists focus on the notion of desert. A criminal is deserving of punishment because of the very nature of the criminal act. Even if the consequences would be disastrous, the pure retributivist would still hold that the inherent wrong involved in a criminal act demands that the act be punished. Because of the disagreement as to the exact nature of desert, and the difficulty involved in identifying exactly what the connection is between a criminal act, punishment and desert, a variety of different retributivist accounts of justice have emerged.
The Hegelian approach to the theory of punishment has played an influential role within retributive justification. The focus of the Hegelian theory lays in the claim that punishment annuls the crime. Initially this claim seems ludicrous, the past cannot be altered; how is it possible to annul a crime in which a person has lost their life? Surely punishment is not adequate to nullify a murder? However, although this interpretation of Hegel's claim is generally considered flawed, modern interpretations have had more success. One interpretation argues that a criminal act has inherent in its nature the denial of the victim's rights. Thus the criminal is said to hold himself in higher esteem than the victim, which is unacceptable. Punishment is necessary;
Failure to punish a criminal is interpreted as an acknowledgment of the criminal's superior rights. This is unacceptable, so punishment is executed in order to restore the balance.
A second important approach to the Retributivist account of justification comes from Nozick. Nozick makes an important distinction between retribution and revenge, appealing to the fact that retribution is a more objective account of justice, it ignores the emotive aspects that often accompany a revengeful act. The objective stance which retribution relies on allows for an approach which is inline with considerations of justice. Having established this distinction between retribution and revenge, Nozick goes on to expound his view in which he argues the primary function of punishment is to serve a communicatory role. Punishment is a way of letting the offender know that his act was wrong;
The communicative aspect justifies the punishment irrespective of any positive consequences which that punishment may have. So even if the reconnection with the offender is entirely unsuccessful, the punishment is still seen as justified.
Ignoring the specifics of these last two retributivist theories, retributivism in general faces some serious criticism. There are three primary weaknesses with the retributivist account. These weaknesses fall under three headings; the moral status problem, problems with intelligibility and finally problems of rationality. The moral status problem focuses on instinctual nature of the theory. Critics argue that the retributivist theory is based on no real justificatory grounding, but is rather based on "premoral instincts to retaliate and take revenge." The intuitive nature of retributive punishment is often seen as an aid to its justification, but this intuitive nature can also count against it; many see the retributive account as without a purpose, and certainly not sufficient to justify punishment. The second issue comes down to the problems with the intelligibility of retributivism. The central role of the concept of desert leads critics to question exactly how this concept is employed. What does it mean to say that an offender 'deserves' to be punished? And equally importantly, what exactly does an offender deserve? This latter question has caused a great deal of controversy. The use of the notion of desert in order to justify punishment assumes that it is possible to identify exactly what an offender is due as a result of his criminal act, yet provides no basis for deciding what it is that is due. Finally, there are the problems of rationality inherent in the retributivist justification of punishment. Assuming that the other two issues were resolvable, it is still quite unobvious what rational basis we have for accepting this justification over alternatives.
Criticisms to both the utilitarian and retributive approach to the justification of punishment have been generally accepted as fatally damaging. Attempts have been made on part of both the utilitarian and retributivist accounts to adapt their theories in a way which accounts for the heavy criticism. Nozick's account of punishment as communication was an example of such an attempt. The communicative nature of punishment, although solely justified by the fact it attempts to show the offender why he is being punished, can appeal also to the consequences of this approach as further justification. However, I feel a more successful attempt at compromise comes from the utilitarian camp. The two primary proponents of this view are H. L. A. Hart (1959) and Rawls (1968). Both rely on a distinction between the justification of an individual act and the general principle which governs the justification of the act. They claim that punishment as a concept is justified with reference to the positive consequences which punishment gives rise to. Judicial Systems are an instrument of the state. The state is set up to govern the dealings of society. It makes sense that the judicial system justifies the use of punishment through its aim of furthering the interests of society. Individual applications of punishment on the other hand are justified by the guilt of the offender. This approach sees punishment as justified essentially through appeal to utilitarian principles, but recognizes that the direct appeal to utilitarian principles in the case of individual criminal acts could have disastrous consequences. It is thus in the utilitarians best interests (as seen in solely utilitarian terms) to endorse, at an individual level, the justification of punishment on the retributivist grounds.
This utilitarian attempt at justification is by no means watertight, however it does seem to present a more promising approach to the justification of punishment than the retributivist. The lack of rational grounding and its failure to prove its moral status are devastating problems with the retributivist account. Although retributivism has an element of intuitive appeal, retributivists have failed to account for the moral nature of this appeal. However, utilitarianism is not without problems; the potential acts which this account would endorse leave an incredible amount to be desired. However, it seems to me that through appeal to a historic account of our intuitions, as based on utilitarian primary principles we are able to justify individual acts of punishment with reference to retributive principles. Attempts at this unification are far from being complete. But look as though they are more likely to be successful than retributive attempts.