It is rare that you'll find a discussion group in which the morality of paedophilia is a topic which will divide the opinions of its members. The media and social hype which surrounds the subject leaves little room for an unbiased and constructive debate. This is perhaps justly deserved, for in most cases acts of paedophilia involve the subjection of minors to physical and psychological abuse which can have severely detrimental effects on the rest of that individuals life. It is also true that the acts often occur in relationships which are dependant on an implicit trust, such as the relationship between a carer and child. The performance of an act of paedophilia in such a relationship represents an extreme betrayal of this trust, and thus cannot be perceived as anything but immoral. However, any objective moral account of paedophilia requires the separation of an act of paedophilia from the wrongdoing which often occurs simultaneously with that act. Only upon an investigation into the nature of paedophilia in itself can we assess its morality.
Before discussing the morality of paedophilia, we must first identify what an act of paedophilia actually entails. Primoratz (1999) distinguishes between pederasty, ephebophilia and paedophilia. Pederasty refers to the homosexual attraction and intercourse between an adult male and a boy aged around 11-12 and pubescent. Ephebophilia involves the homosexual attraction between an adult male and a post pubescent youth. Primoratz contrasts the ephebophile with the pederast;
Having identified this distinction, we are now in a better position to understand the nature of paedophilia and it's moral implications. In many societies an act of paedophilia is to be determined with reference to the age of consent which that society has specified through law. Therefore almost all societies will view an act of pederasty as paedophilia. Ephebophilia however, is much more dependant on the societies determined age for homosexual consent. If that society specifies an age of 15 years for consenting homosexual intercourse, then some acts of ephebophilia will not be considered to be an act of paedophilia.
In the wide sense then, paedophilia refers to sexual attraction or intercourse between an adult and a minor of any gender, whereby the classification of a minor with reference to sexual relationships is determined by the societies age of consent. However, for the purpose of this discussion we will examine the morality surrounding paedophilia in the narrow sense. This narrow sense excludes acts of ephebophilia and focuses instead on the sexual attraction of an adult male to a child of either gender who is pre-pubescent or pubescent.
So, ignoring the wrongdoing which is often associated but not necessarily an aspect of paedophilia in itself, on what grounds can we consider paedophilia in the narrow sense immoral? There are two aspects to the arguments for the condemnation of paedophilia, both of which can be explored independently of the other. Firstly, there is the argument from consent. This argument focuses on the nature of children and there inability to give informed consent for any form of sexual relationship. Secondly, there is the argument from harm. This argument holds the potential psychological and physical damage that a child can be subjected to is warrant enough for the complete moral condemnation of paedophilia. However, neither of these arguments are universally accepted. There exists a number of theorists, albeit a very small number, who advocate a thorough re-examination of the moral and legal attitudes directed towards paedophilia in favour of relaxing those moral and legal attitudes.
Those engaged in the advancing a more liberal attitude towards paedophilia argue from several perspectives in order to show that the current standing of the law and morality on paedophilia is unjustified. Key to their argument is showing that the assumption that paedophilia results in psychological harm is unfounded. This argument draws upon research which seems to support this claim. One highly controversial study is that of Rind et. al. which appeared in the American Psychological Association's prestigious Psychological Bulletin. Having researched into the harm which results from childhood sexual abuse, the results seemed to show that there was a weak correlation between a child's exposure to sexual abuse and damage to that child's later psychological development. Advocates of paedophilia argue that research of this type needs to be seriously taken into account.
Although there may be the occasional research paper which can be seen to support the claims of defenders of paedophilia, there is also a vast amount of research which seems to suggest otherwise. According to the case notes kept by the NSPCC, 451 young people spoke to ChildLine about suicide as a direct result of sexual abuse. The harm caused as a result of acts of paedophilia is evident. Ignoring any physical harm which might occur, it is clear from a vast array of research that the psychological harm which results from sexual abuse that any act of paedophilia is immoral.
However, this research is not the end of the matter. For it is quite obvious that through the use if terminology such as 'sexual abuse' that we have returned to a discussion of the wide sense of paedophilia in which social and moral norms weigh heavily on the objectivity if the discussion. Advocators of paedophilia argue that the majority of research conducted into the effects of paedophilia on children is biased for a number of reasons. Firstly, the very nature of studies into the effects of sexual abuse will yield results that show negative experiences, for it is the nature of 'abuse' that it will involve some form of harm. Secondly, advocates of paedophilia argue that the political and societal pressures exerted on the researchers will force results which will lead to the condemning of paedophilia. This was clearly demonstrated in the uproar surrounding the research of Rind et. al. Following the publication of the results of this study, radio presenter Laura Shlessinger launched a media campaign claiming the research displayed an intention to normalize paedophilia. Further to this campiagn, congressman Tom DeLay sought congressional action against the American Psychological Association for their publication paper. According to advocates of paedophilia, it is this general attitude towards the subject which leads research to focus solely on the negative aspects.
So, as it stands, it seems we have yet to establish whether paedophilia in itself is to be considered morally reprehensible. If the advocates of paedophilia are correct, then the argument from harm seems to depend on the results of studies which are unavoidably influenced by the moral and legal norms prevalent in the society in which they are published. Further to this they are conducted in a fashion which will necessarily yield negative conclusions about the effects of 'child abuse'. They therefore do not present an objective account of the immorality of paedophilia.
Groups such as 'NAMBLA' (North American Man-Boy Love Association), a paedophile activist or 'childlove movement' group believe that sexual relationships between adults and children can be conducted in a way which is both harmless and actually beneficial to the development of those children. The arguments forwarded by groups and activists attempt to show that paedophilic activity is misrepresented by the media and common morality. Firstly they question the assumption of harm by suggesting that any harm which does result from a child's sexual experience with an adult is due to the outside perception of those acts and the sense of wrongdoing which is forced upon them. Activists argue that if the common morality perception of paedophilia were to change dramatically so as to accept paedophilic acts then the psychological harm which results from such act would be eradicated. In order to advance this view, some paedophile activist groups propose a code of ethics for 'adult-child' sex. This code stresses the importance of consent on the part of the child to engage in the relationship, the child's ability to withdraw from the relationship, and promoting the relationship in an open manner, rather than conducting it in a secret environment. If these key factors are acknowledged, the paedophile activists that 'intergenerational' relationships can be conducted safely and without harm to the child involved.
However, this argument depends on an environment in which paedophilia is not viewed as a sickening and highly immoral psychological disorder, as many currently do see it. For it still follows that in the current environment any child who consents to an act of paedophilia will not be aware of the moral implications of that act. For if a child were fully informed on the matter, then presumably that child would never consent to such an act. This brings us to the second argument against paedophilia, that of informed consent.
According to WikiPedia, informed consent is a "condition whereby a person can be said to have given consent based upon an appreciation and understanding of the facts and implications of an action. The individual needs to be in possession of relevant facts and also of his reasoning faculties...". Those who view paedophilia as inherently wrong argue that the fact that a child cannot give informed consent is sufficient to prohibit on moral grounds the engagement of any of any sexual interaction between a child and an adult. For only an adult can give truly informed consent, whereas a child can only give partial consent. Some activists respond to this claim by arguing that children can in fact give informed consent, and often actively seek sexual interaction with an adult. Others argue that partial consent is sufficient to justify a child's engagement in sexual interaction with an adult, providing that that the child's inability to give full consent is not taken advantage of, and the consent that is given can be withdrawn at any time.
However, this argument misses the point. The purpose of informed consent is to ensure that a person is fully aware of the ramifications of their actions. Children are generally considered unable to give informed consent because of their psychological constitution. The sexual development of a child compared to that of an adult, and the way in which the engagement in sexual activity is construed is so different that it is impossible for a child to be informed, for this presupposes a full understanding of the nature of adult intercourse. The appeal to partial consent also fails on the grounds that it represents an imbalance of power in the relationship. If a fully informed adult accepts partial consent to an engagement of sexual activity, by the very nature of the distinction between informed and partial consent, that adult is taking advantage of the child's lack of information, and has thus committed an immoral act.
It is clear from this discussion that the social and moral reprehension which surrounds paedophilia is not entirely justified. Any objective account of paedophilia must avoid taking into account the harms which are a result of these acts, for these harms are often a product of the way in which society views these acts. However, it is also true that, no matter how much a paedophile can safeguard a child against future harms, the engagement of sexual activity between an adult and a child, by its very nature, represents a relationship in which the position of power which that adult holds over the child is exploited.