The legal positivist tradition can be traced back to the work of Jeremy Bentham, who in turn drew upon the writings of Thomas Hobbes and Jean Bodin. It traditionally opposes the theory set out by natural lawyers, who hold that law and morality are inseparable. Positivism can be characterized by two major tenets; firstly that law and morality are two distinct entities, and secondly that the validity of any legal system is ultimately determined by reference to certain social facts. This essay will focus on the positivist approach as developed by Austin using his 'Command Theory' of law, and the weaknesses associated with this theory. I will go on to consider Hart's reaction to Austin, and the way in which Hart remedies the positivist approach in order to account for the problems he believed were inherent with his predecessors theories.
Austin developed his command theory of law off the back of his contemporary Jeremy Bentham. Where Bentham had merely outlined the theory, Austin approached the subject in a much more analytical manner, aiming to capture the essential nature of the law as a science and thereby eliminating all the common uses of the word 'law' which are not relevant to jurisprudence. Austin's starting point in determining the exact province of jurisprudence was to exclude all the meanings of law which were not translatable into a command. For Austin, a command can be broken into three components;
Austin's classification of a command helps to illustrate the exact nature of the type of law he is seeking to define. In 'The Province of Jurisprudence Determined', Austin uses his conception of a command in order to distinguish between different kinds of law. His first step is to differentiate between what he calls 'laws properly so called' and 'laws not properly so called'. Laws not properly so called are those which are often referred to as laws but are, in terms of legal science, inappropriate. Examples of these laws are what Austin terms 'Laws by analogy', which include things like the rules of etiquette and international law, and 'Laws by metaphor', which covers things like the laws of nature. Although both of these 'laws' can be construed as commands, they lack a variety of qualities necessary in order to fall into the category of proper law;
These laws 'not properly so called' do not lie within the province of legal science.
Having drawn this distinction, Austin goes on to break down his classification of laws 'properly so called'. Within this category Austin places two sub-groups; laws set by humans and those set by God. Although the laws set by God are properly speaking laws, they do not, according to Austin, fit into the province of jurisprudence. Laws set by humans are of two types; laws 'strictly so called' and laws 'not strictly so called'. Laws 'strictly so called' "consists of (a) laws set by men as political superiors to political inferiors; and (b) laws set by men as private individuals in pursuance of legal rights". Laws 'not strictly so called' are those which do not derive their authority from politically superior individuals. It is the former that Austin believes to be the proper domain of jurisprudence.
Having identified the variety of commands that fall under the category of laws 'strictly so called', Austin proceeds to elaborate further the exact nature of these laws;
As we saw earlier, Austin identifies a command as consisting of three elements; a wish, an expression of that wish, and a sanction if the wish is not complied with. In order for a command to count as a law strictly so called, Austin introduces the further notions of sovereignty and generality; the law must of emanated from a sovereign individual or body, and it should not be applied to particular cases, but rather be general in its applicability.
Austin's use of the term 'sovereign' can be distinguished from the way it is used within legal rules;
Austin's use of the term allows him to avoid criticism based on the fact that many independent states, which have a full legal system, lack a sovereign in the legal sense. Austin explicitly states the way in which he holds an individual or body of individuals to be sovereign;
So a law, as Austin sees it, is a general command which originates from the sovereign of a given society.
Austin's conception of law has been highly criticised. The most notable collection of these criticisms comes from H. L. A. Hart. In 'The Concept Of Law' Hart presents Austin's command theory of law in what he believes is its strongest possible form, then systematically picks it apart. Hart's approach to this destruction of the command theory takes the law as it exists in today's society and compares it with Austin's conception. Hart sees the command theory as implying that laws are just orders from a sovereign backed by threats. He feels that this is a insufficient account of the way in which laws really work. Firstly, although there are many laws which do resemble this model, for instance a law which prohibits theft, there are many laws which are not like this. Laws which oversee the successful implementation and operation of contracts do not appear to impose sanctions if the way in which contracts should (according to law) be administered is not adhered to. The only result from an incorrectly administered contract is the contracts nullification. It may be the case that Austin can defend himself from this criticism by arguing that this nullification is itself a sanction, but given that a sanction according to Austin consists in 'an evil', it seems a bit of an implausible response. Even if it is the case that this response will suffice, Austin's command theory fails to account for laws which govern the administration of other laws. Where Austin has gone wrong, Hart believes, is his failure to recognise that some laws "provide individuals with facilities for realizing their wishes, by conferring legal powers upon them to create... structures of rights and duties within the coercive framework of the law."
Hart's next criticism of Austin focuses on the origins of laws. Under Austin's definition laws are orders which are backed by the threat of a sanction if the order is not complied with. If this is true, then any law should be traceable to a particular act performed at a particular time. However, Hart recognises that many laws have their origin in custom, which often have no traceable date of conception and thus cannot be attributed to the command of a sovereign;
Hart accepts that although the enactment of a statute may represent the transfer from custom to law, it also the case that many customs attain legal status prior to their enactment in a court. Just as some statutes are law before being enacted in a court, so are many customs. Command theorists may respond by introducing the notion of a tacit command from the sovereign. When hearing of a certain custom, by not repealing it, the sovereign is in effect commanding that this be the law. However, this fails to account for the fact that in most modern states it is impossible to identify the exact point at which a sovereign sees a custom being applied as law, and accepts it application. Thus, Hart holds, the notion of tacit approval fails to account for custom as law.
Austin's insistence that in order to be considered sovereign, the person or body must receive 'habitual obedience' has led to further problems with his theory. Hart points out that in a system where the sovereign is an individual, the command theory fails to account for succession;
When one sovereign is succeeded by another, the new sovereign cannot be said to receive habitual obedience. Since habitual obedience is one of the marks of a law maker, then it follows that the new sovereign cannot make laws. However I feel that this criticism is somewhat lacking. Austin held that in order to be sovereign, you must be habitually obeyed. But it could also be the case that a society will habitually obey the sovereign. So in succeeding one sovereign, the new one will, out of habit, be obeyed. As for the problem concerning the origin of all the laws in that society, we can claim that on his succession, the new sovereign commands all the previous laws be obeyed.
The last problem to be considered comes from Austin's notion of sovereignty. For Austin the sovereign of any state has illimitable powers and does not obey any other legislature. However, it is quite apparent that in many modern states, where laws are obviously in existence, it is not the case that the sovereign has unchecked power;
In the passing of a law, most countries have a system of checks and balances that ensure that the law is legitimate. For instance, in the United States of America, a written constitution ensures that the legislature only passes laws which are within its competence to pass. If these restraints are not adhered to the law will not be considered legitimate and thus not be considered law. This shows that Austin's belief that all laws stem from a sovereign law maker is fundamentally wrong. We may try to appeal to the idea that it is still the sovereign who creates these checks and balances, but this would still imply that the sovereign is in the habit of obedience to itself, and would thus fall short of Austin's conception of a sovereign law maker.
Hart's heavy attack on Austin certainly seems to of left command theory redundant. Austin's belief that a law is the general command of a sovereign seems to fall short when considering the way in which many modern systems of government are set up. The fact that legislatures consist of a vast body of individuals means that it is a lot harder to identify what Austin would consider to make up the sovereign. The way in which governments distribute power means that any legislation a sovereign may try to introduce will be subject to a variety of conflicting interests within that sovereign which limit its ability to do so. This essentially makes the Austinian concept of sovereignty redundant. So where Austin succeeded in bringing legal positivism to the forefront of debate within jurisprudence, he failed to give a satisfactory account of that positivism.