This essay will focus on the design version of the teleological argument. Arguments from design purport to show that the way in which the natural world elicits purpose entails that it must have had a designer. I will first highlight the problems associated with Paley's version of the design argument, and go on to focus on Swinburne's distinction between temporal and spatial order. I will discuss how this distinction avoids some of the criticisms of earlier versions, but still has problems affecting it.
One of the most famous arguments from design came from 18 th century theologian and philosopher William Paley. In his 'Natural Theology', Paley compares the universe to a watch. From the intricate design and complex interaction of different parts within the watch, Paley infers that the watch must have had a designer;
Paley goes on to suggest that the natural world contains similar examples of such complex interplay between parts, and infers from this that the natural world too, must have had a maker.
Arguments of the kind Paley expounded, which utilize analogy, are subject to various rules. In comparing two distinct kinds of phenomena B and B* (in the case of Paley's example; the watch and the natural world), we must look to the similarities between the phenomena's causes; A and A* (man and x, where x is the object of the discovery). The similarities and differences between the two effects of the phenomena leads us to postulate proportionate similarities and differences between their causes; the design of the natural world could be said to be infinitely greater than the design of the watch, and from this we infer that the natural world's designer must in some respect be infinitely greater than that of the watch. These are the basic rules of analogy.
In his 'Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion', David Hume launches a devastating attack against arguments from design. Using the character of Cleanthes as the primary proponent of the teleological arguments, Hume illustrates the kind of argument he wishes to show false;
The similarities between Cleanthes argument and that which Paley had forwarded are very much apparent. However, Hume believes that arguments which are based on this type of loose analogy fail, and gives various reasons which show this is the case. His first criticism focuses on the strength of the analogy between human contrivances and the natural world. Using Philo as his mouthpiece, he argues that the considerable differences between the two cases proportionately weakens the strength of the analogy and "is confessedly liable to error and uncertainty". Further to this, he argues that even if the rules of analogy have been strictly upheld, it is not necessarily correct to posit a single Deity over a variety of other plausible hypothesis; it is perfectly conceivable that there are a multitude of agents who have created the universe, all of finite power sharing equal responsibility for their creation. Not only is this plausible, but it is also more inline with an analogy from a product of human creation (e.g. a house, which usually has several people working to build it), and thus more realistic. He goes on to argue that even if we can reasonably infer the existence of a single designer from the order shown in the world, there would still be the need for a great deal of further explanation as to the nature of the mind of the designer; since many of the products of human designed are explained in terms of their function in respect to their creator, we would ideally want to find similar motivations for this being to have created the natural world.
Many commentators believe Hume's criticisms have decisively refuted design arguments of the form presented by Paley and Cleanthes. Even if it is the case that these arguments can escape Hume's criticism, the advances made in the field of biology in the 19 th century certainly seem to of dealt a devastating blow. Darwin's theory of evolution and in particular his theory of natural selection gave a far more satisfactory explanation as to the apparent design and complexity of natural objects. From this it seems correct to reject any argument for God's existence based on the apparent order found in nature.
However, the debate surrounding the argument from design does not end with Hume and Darwin. More recent versions have focussed on the possibility of eluding the Darwinian explanation, whilst also evading the criticisms posed by Hume. One such account comes from Richard Swinburne. In his 'The Existence of God', Swinburne distinguishes between two types of order found in the natural world; spatial order and temporal order. Spatial order is illustrated in the way in which various parts of an organism work along side each other to perform some function. Temporal order is displayed by the simple patterns of behaviour found in objects, and the way in which one event is naturally followed by another. He goes on to suggest that many of the early criticisms presented against the design argument were based on the fact that these arguments were formulated from observations of spatial order;
Arguments based on this kind of spatial order suffer immensely in light of the Darwinian account of evolution. Darwin has shown how complex animals and plants can develop from the generation of less complex species, which in turn can develop from the generation of even less complex animals and plants, thus eliminating the mystery behind the apparent order and interplay of parts found in these animals and plants.
However, Swinburne feels that despite Darwin's theory of evolution, if we are to adopt the temporal version of the design argument, we are able to evade the problems which have arisen with the evolution of biology. He also thinks that although Hume's objections are still applicable, it is also possible to evade these objections. He starts by identifying the temporal order which he is referring to;
This order, he argues, is not solely a result of man imposing it. We as humans observe correlations in cause and effect and from this are able to induce future events, the success of which depend on these events actually taking place, for it is the case that "men cannot make nature conform subsequently to an order which he has invented".
However, various critics have highlighted the hidden tautology in the notion that we live in an orderly universe;
It is a requirement for our existence that the universe should be orderly. In spite of this objection, Swinburne believes this orderliness still suggests a designer; the presence of order is undoubtedly a requirement for our existence, but this order only need be immediate to humans. It is plausible that earth contain structure and order which allow for the flourishing of the human race, whilst outside of earth the universe contained utter chaos. Swinburne believes that the amount of order found in the world greatly exceeds what is necessary for humans to exist. Further to this, the fact that we could only exist if the world was ordered takes nothing away from the fact that the level of orderliness is astonishing.
Having established the nature of temporal order, Swinburne goes on to explain how this order leads us to postulate God. We utilize scientific principles in order to explain occurrences within the natural world. These 'low-level' scientific principles are themselves explainable in terms of 'higher-level' principles, which are again explainable with reference to even higher-level principles. This chain can be traced back to the highest-level scientific principles, which themselves are unexplainable in terms of scientific principles, seeing as they are the principles which all others are explained with reference to;
It follows from this that the order found in the world is unexplainable in terms of scientific laws, since the order is essentially the reason that these laws exist. The fact that we cannot use a scientific explanation to explain the order found throughout the world leaves us, according to Swinburne, with two options; we either abandon any further attempts to explain, or we appeal to some form of personal explanation which posits an agent with intentions beliefs and capacities. Swinburne believes that the latter alternative is the only reasonable option, and that this option entails an agent who has the power to maintain this order.
Although it seems to avoid the heavy refutation that Darwinism presented, this temporal version of the design argument seems to be as equally subject to Hume's arguments as was the spatial version. It is not necessarily the case that it is a single infinite deity which is the cause of all this order, it is equally as plausible that it is a multiplicity of agents, all of which are finite in power and knowledge and are responsible for different parts of the order. This suggestion, according to Hume, may be even more plausible given that it is more analogous to what we are witness to in the actual world. Even if we can establish a single infinite deity we are still left with the complaint concerning the nature and cause of this being. It will have properties which further need explanation, which this argument fails to address.
However, Swinburne has solutions to this argument. A key feature of Swinburne's argument is his appeal to the principle of simplicity. This principle as, as recognise by Hume states that;
He believes that the acceptance of a hypothesis like that proposed by Hume only serves to complicate matters further. Any finite being has properties which could be more so or less so, and thus we are able to question why they have this quantity of each property. A single infinite being on the other hand is much less complex. We no longer have to concern ourselves with why it possesses such and such amount of each property, or why it is only responsible for whatever part of the order. For this reason, we should accept the existence of a single infinite agent as the cause of order over the existence of a multitude of finite agents. In order to deal with the argument that God needs further explanation, Swinburne appeals to the notion of 'complete explanation';
Although it is possible to view God's actions as requiring further explanation, these explanations will themselves be explicable in terms of God.
However his use of the notion of simplicity in his design argument has not gone unquestioned;
Mackie believes that Swinburne's quick dismissal of a multiplicity of finite agents is unwarranted. Given the multiplicity of natural laws to be found, it would make more sense to posit an agent for each law. However, Swinburne believes that the explanatory power of this hypothesis would leave a lot to be desired, where as with a single infinite being, no further explanation is required and is thus the preferred option.
It seems that Swinburne's arguments have decisively evaded the arguments associated with the development of the biological sciences. His appeal to the temporal order as an example of the design of the world rather than spatial order cleverly side-steps problems associated with Darwinism. However the criticisms posed by Hume do not seem to of been as successfully avoided. Although he has not relied so much on analogy in order to prove the design of nature, his insistence that the simpler hypothesis is the option we must accept lacks weight in terms of proving the existence of a deity, for it seems equally plausible and possibly more so, that the cause of nature lies in a multiplicity of agents. So whilst the distinction between spatial order and temporal order has saved analogical arguments from complete nullification, there is a lot more work to do if design arguments are to succeed in their aim.