Within philosophy of religion there is a type of argument, known as pragmatic arguments, which utilise the possible benefits of belief in order to persuade the listener that it is rational to accept God's existence. The most prominent version of a pragmatic argument comes from French philosopher Blaise Pascal. This argument is known as 'Pascal's Wager'.
It is the purpose of this essay to explore the rationality behind this wager and consider the objections which it must confront. Initially this essay will briefly explain the nature of the wager and consider a simple objection. I will use this objection to reveal some of the subtleties involved in the wager and go on to fully explicate Pascal's argument. Finally I will consider objections to the wager and responses, concluding that Pascal has indeed shown that informed agnosticism/atheism is irrational.
In his Pensees, Pascal argues that we have the choice of either believing in God, or not believing in God. Given that there is an equal chance of either being the case then it is rational that we choose the path of belief;
Given the potential reward involved in believing in God, Pascal argues it is rational that we gamble on God's existence. This is Pascal's wager.
Initially this Wager may seem superficial. Critics have pointed out that to choose the path of belief in God because it presents an opportunity to receive great gains is highly against the Christian ethic;
Although Pascal does explicitly state that this initial choice is only the first step in acquiring a genuine belief, his critics still believe that religion is incompatible with such a greedy way of thinking; to start the path of belief in such a way is to debase the end which the path leads to. However, on a closer inspection of Pascal's argument, we find that Pascal draws heavily on the investment necessary for a genuine religious belief. It is not the case that, upon reading the wager, a rational atheist will decide to turn theist and automatically believe in God. Religious belief involves a lot more than the simple assertion that 'God exists', it involves a change in your way of life. Pascal recognised this fact, and used the wager not as bait for self indulgent non-believers, but as a rational reason for these non-believers to start on a quest for belief;
Belief cannot be forced, it must happen naturally through choice. Pascal's wager provides a reason for investigating the path of religion further. It does not pretend to claim that it is possible to simply decide to believe in God just so we can benefit from the rewards which such a belief results in.
The fact that Pascal suggests the wager is only the start of the path towards genuine belief brings out another important aspect of Pascal's argument. Pascal believed that epistemic proofs such as the teleological argument for the existence of God, if successful, can only result in the conclusion that 'God exists'. These proofs do nothing to establish the articles of faith as essential to belief;
Pascal holds that any argument which aims to establish God's existence via epistemic methods will not only fail to capture the practical consequences of dedicated religious belief, but also ultimately fail in it's primary aim. Pascal argues that, if there is an existing God, His nature is such that He is infinite and without limits, we are thus "incapable of knowing either what He is, or whether He exists". This is why Pascal places so much emphasis on belief; it is only through faith and belief that we can come to know of His existence.
Since we can only come to know of God through a genuine and dedicated belief in him, and any epistemic proof of his existence is impossible, it follows that any non-theist is presented with a choice, with two options of equal probability; either accept that God exists and make a small sacrifice in order to embark on a path of religious belief, with the possibility of being infinitely rewarded in the afterlife, or remain a non-believer without making the small sacrifice but risking the possibility of an afterlife of infinite misery and pain. Given the equal probability of the two options, it is rational to choose the path of belief. If we are to bet that God does exist, the maximum we will loose is, say 10 units of utility (this is the cost of dedicating our life to religious belief), with a potential gain of infinite utility. If we bet that God does not exist, we keep our 10 units of utility, but run the risk of paying an infinite amount of disutility in the event that God does exist. Pascal thus argues that it is not only rational to aim at acquiring a genuine belief in God, it is completely irrational to not do so;
It is even debatable whether the path of religion involves any sacrifice at all. It may seem that there a lot of pleasures which a non-believer would have to give up, but Pascal argues that, once engaged in belief, these 'pleasures' no longer seem pleasurable. Thus, to choose to believe in God allows for the possibility of infinite utility, without any cost. It is therefore completely irrational not to choose to believe in God.
As long as the Gods postulated as alternatives to the God of Pascal's wager offer the reward of infinite utility in the afterlife, then it seems that these Gods are equally as worthy of worship. It may be objected by proponents of the wager argument that the existence of a made up God is far less probable than the God of Christian theology, but as long as the rewards of worshipping this made up God are infinite, then the value of its outcome is infinite, the same value which worshipping the Christian God carries;
If we were to invent a God who's only worshipping requirement was that we refrain from eating sandwiches for one day a year, then although the probability of this God existing is tiny, it is still logically possible and therefore has a probability which is greater than zero. Thus the potential gain of worshipping this God is still infinite. Since this God demands a lot less from the worshipper than the traditional Christian deity, then the rational non-believer may rationally choose to worship the sandwich God instead.
There are a variety of responses to this objection. George Schlesinger argues although the expected gain in utility from worshipping any possible God is infinite, it still makes sense to worship the God which has the greatest probability;
Schlesinger draws on the general principles surrounding gambling in order to argue that Pascal's wager requires a different set of principles. In general the cost of betting is proportionally lower than the potential reward, depending on the probability. Fairness requires that a combination of low probability and low reward means a low initial bet. If we apply this same principle to wagers where the potential prize is infinite then we see that it is an unavoidable consequence that the cost should also be infinite, since if x is infinite, then any proportion y, of x will also be infinite. Schlesinger sees this as absurd and it is thus the case that different principles of gambling apply in the case of Pascal's wager;
If we apply this to the many-gods objection, we see that the rational wagerer should choose to believe in the God which is most probable. Since a God who is infinitely supeme is more probable than an arbitrary God who prohibits sandwich eating on one day a year, a rational wagerer should choose to believe in the former. From this we can draw a general principle; the more sense a God makes then the higher the probability we can ascribe to that God. Thus the God which makes the most sense is also the most probable. Drawing upon the numerous religious texts which have appeared throughout the ages, we find that the majority of representations of God are as an infinite supreme being, of which nothing greater can conceivably exist. This is the God which makes the most sense, and is thus the God which is most probable. The rational wagerer should thus choose to believe in this God.
If the notion that the more sense a God makes then the higher the probability of His existence fails to impress, then another option is to appeal to simplicity. An appeal to simplicity requires that we accept the simplest hypothesis as the most probable. Out of all the God's we can postulate the simplest one will have properties of infinite goodness, power, capabilities etc., for we do not have to question why they are in possession of only a certain amount of each property. Such an appeal to simplicity will lead us to only one option;
Having established that the absolutely perfect God is the God deserving of worship, it is up to the wagerer to take the first step down the path of faith and decide what form this worship takes.
The majority of religious arguments attempt to prove only the existence of a God. Any which go on to try and attribute properties that this God may have, generally fail. Where these others have failed, Pascal has taken an alternative route. Not only has Pascal shown that it is rational to believe in God, he has also shown that it is rational to believe in a God with infinite perfections. The objection that it promotes irreligious attitudes lack weight due to its failure to grasp the essential motivation behind the wager; to persuade an informed agnostic of the irrationality of atheism, not to lure the agnostic in with the promise of eternal life. The 'many-gods' objection inflicts more of a blow to Pascal's argument. By solely appealing to the expected utility of religious practice in order to justify belief, Pascal is confronted with a potentially infinite amount of Gods whom the wagerer could rationally have faith in. However this objection is easily sidestepped by appeal to probability and the principle of simplicity. A God with infinite and absolute powers makes more sense and is thus more probable. He is also simpler. Both of these facts combined should lead a rational wagerer to accept this God as the God worthy of worship. Overall Pascal's argument shows not only that theism is rational, but that agnosticism/atheism is completely irrational. All that remains for the wagerer is to decide how his life as a theist is to proceed.