The aim of this experiment was to analysis my diet over 3 days, by weighing all foods consumed and inputting the results into a computer data base (foodbase 3.1 standard Edition),and to assess this method of dietary analysis.
These results were then compared to known DRVs to highlight any deficiencies, or over consumption, and possible ways in which my diet could be improved.
The DRVs for energy have been calculated to give the average energy requirements for any populations group, The EAR for my age and sex is 1940 kilocalories (DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH 1991). Diary analysis showed that my intake falls short of the EAR for my age and sex by 314 kilocalories.
By increasing my energy consumption the shortfall in nutrients in my diet which are below the DRVs could be addressed. However the EAR is only a guide. My total energy expenditure will be my BMR, dietary induced thermogenesis, and the total amount of energy that I use in physical activity (DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, 1991). This will vary within the population dependant on factors such as sex, height, weight, age, physical activity. A detailed analysis of my energy requirements were not assessed in this assignment.
My fibre intake for the 3 day period averaged 10.4 g per day this falls well below the DVR of 18g. An increase in fibre could be achieved by eating pulses, wholegrain foods, and eating a greater amount of vegetables and fruit. (WILLS, J. 2005) An increase in my energy intake with these foods will also increase the levels of iron and iodine, which fell below the DRVs. Fortified wholegrain breakfast cereals would also provide a good source of iron and fibre.
My calcium intake was 547 mg an average of 153 mg less than the DRV. To increase calcium in my diet I could include more dairy produce, which provides a good source of calcium, as well as dark green leafy vegetables and the soft bones of seafood if eaten whole, e.g. Sardines (BEAN, A.2003).
Advantages of the weighed method are that it is quantitative, portions can be measured accurately. It is a widely used method and can be compared to other studies. This method was found to have high reproducibility of results, which led to the assumption of the validity. Measurements with different methods however gave different results. With the use of doubly labelled water it was found that individuals often under report their energy intakes, especially if they have a high BMI. Hence care should be taken to consider sources of error and how they may alter the results of using any diet assessments (GEISSLER & POWERS,2006)
The 3-day weighed dietary survey gave an insight into my diet; however it did not cover a long enough period to assess my diet fully. It was inconvenient to weigh my food. Some of the foods that I consumed were not on the data base and I had to add the nearest equivalent. The data can only be assumed to be valid if my collection and processing of the contents of my diet was accurate. Even with taking great care there is still room for margins of error.