The film Dantes Peak is about a dormant volcano that suddenly erupts and threatens the nearby town. Prior to the eruption are indications of such an event occurring, some of which are realistic, whilst others are not so realistic.
The first indicator of an eruption is greater than average seismic activity below the Cascades, at a depth of some 10-20 km. This is what would be expected with most eruptions. After this event, the volcano itself is monitored more closely. Seismometers and tiltmeters are set up around the volcano to monitor any seismic activity or bulges appearing on the mountain. This monitoring is what happens in the monitoring of 'real' volcanoes. Dead animals and trees were also found, evidence of poisonous gases being released from the volcano. Although in real life this can happen, it is not a good indicator of volcanic activity about to occur, as wildlife and vegetation can die from many other causes such as disease, famine etc.
The acidity of water up the mountain had increased to dangerous levels too. This is unlikely to be due to the acidity of the 'country rock' but most likely increased volcanic activity. This phenomena is sometimes found in real life situations. Later on in the film the town's water supply turns brown and smells of sulphur dioxide. This contamination is not what one would expect to find in real life and is therefore an unrealistic event.
As it gets closer to the eruption in the film, the amount of seismic activity increases, until a powerful earthquake occurs during the first eruption. This increasing seismic activity prior to an eruption is very similar to real eruptions. The eruptions of Mt. St. Helens (Washington State, US) and Mt. Pinatubo (Philippines) had both seen increasing seismic activity before their eruptions.
Whilst ash is falling during the film, the residents of the town are seen walking through the ash as it falls. If this was for real, the people would not be able to breathe as breathing in the ash would damage the lungs and they would suffocate and die fairly quickly. A car is also seen driving over a lava flow and manages to drive clear of it! This would not be the case as the intense heat would melt the tyres and the engine would quickly catch on fire.
The eruption of Dantes Peak also occurs in two phases. The first stage being the first eruption resulting in an earthquake, an ash cloud and much ash falling. The second stage being the a much more explosive eruption followed by a pyroclastic flow. Many eruptions have just one single eruption so the events in the film could just have been put in for cinematic effects rather than portraying real science.
Here is a list of all the volcanic phenomena occurring during the film;