Jules Verne wrote 'Journey to the Centre of the Earth' in 1864. The main story is about Axel and his uncle, Professor Liedenbrock discussing about the interior of the Earth and whether it is possible to reach the Earth's centre. Much of the geological science referred to in the novel was at that time considered fact, but nowadays, much more is known about Earth's interior.
On page 24, it refers to the limit of the terrestrial crust being at a dept of 30 miles or 50 kilometres. This is true since seismic waves show that the average thickness of continental crust is between 40 to 50 kilometres. It also mentions the temperature at this depth will be greater than 2372 Fahrenheit or 1300 Celsius, this is similar to reality as it is estimated that the base of the crust is around 1300 to 1400 Celsius.
Page 26 contains this, "it is quite reasonable to suppose that the external crust cooled down first, whilst the heat took refuge down to the centre". This is mostly the truth as when the Earth was formed, the crust did cool first with the interior retaining the heat. Professor Liedenbrock also asks, if there were internal heat, then can it not be concluded that it is diminishing? The Professor was correct as evidence shows that the Earth has cooled since it was created and that the heat within is very gradually decreasing as the number of radioactive elements in the interior that can decay also decreases.
On page 24, it refers to the internal temperature rising 1F| for every 70 feet in depth and that this is constant throughout the Earth's interior. This is not the case because the thermal gradient is not constant with depth, but in fact changes. Within continental crust it is 20C to 30C per kilometre, but in the mantle below the crust the thermal gradient drops to 0.5C per kilometre. The actual figure of 1F for every 70 feet (approximately 1C for every 20 metres) is not true either. For continental crust it is on average 0.5C per 20 metres, but for the mantle it reduces to 0.01C per 20 metres.
It also states on this page that the core's temperature is 360032F or 200000C. This is not true as scientists now believe the core's temperature is actually near 5000C. Following on from this is claims that all substances within the Earth's core must exist as a gas due to very high temperatures. This of course is not true as no evidence suggests that just gas is found within the interior of the Earth, gas is found within magmas for example, but not on its own!
On page 25, the Professor says that the interior of the Earth cannot be water, gas or any known mineral as the Earth would not weigh what it does. He is right by saying it is not water or gas, but wrong by saying that it is composed of unknown minerals because the bulk of the Earth's interior is made up of well known minerals at that time, such as iron, nickel and magnesium.
Page 26 contains a sentence saying that the terrestrial nucleus could not be liquid as it would be effected by the gravitational pull of the moon and would subsequently cause massive, periodical worldwide earthquakes. Due to S-Waves not passing through the outer core of the Earth, then it can be inferred that the outer core is liquid as S-Waves do not pass through liquids and therefore this sentence is false. This page also contains a theory as to why the Earth's interior contains heat. The Professor claims that the Earth has been heated by combustion on its surface and that reactive metals such as sodium and potassium found at the surface ignite easily, and with rain, penetrate down into the Earth where they combust again with explosions and eruptions. This is what he claims creates volcanoes. This is not so as it is known that volcanoes occur where flowing magma with the mantle reaches the Earth's surface via plate boundary movement, fractures in the crust or hot spots in oceanic crust and then erupts, thus creating a volcano! It is also known that the heat of the interior is not from very reactive metals penetrating the crust and combusting generating heat, but from the decaying of radioactive elements such as uranium and thorium that drive convective currents transferring heat to the surface.
Professor Liedenbrock also quotes, "there is no proof at all for this internal heat; my opinion is that there is no such thing". When looking at the Earth, there is much evidence to suggest the opposite. Volcanoes, greater temperatures found in deep boreholes and mine and hot springs all prove that immense internal heat exists.