Medicine in the ancient world, and especially in ancient Greek medicine, has been dominated by the idea that what can be observed by the five senses can be used to identify whether a patient is sick or healthy. This meant that ancient doctors would have taken their observations on what happened on the outside of the patient's body and they were expected to use these 'in order to determine what was happening inside' the body. This idea, along with several others, became very important with the introduction of Hippocratic medicine.
There are several texts associated with Hippocrates, known to many as the 'Father of Medicine', which were written between the 5 th and 1 st century BC, meaning that they could not all have been written by one man. These texts were known as the 'Hippocratic corpus' and were presented in a variety of different ways, as some texts are based around recipes and advice, whereas others 'give grand theories about the nature of the body and the origin of disease' instead.
With the advancing of the concept that what could be observed on the exterior gave doctors the ability to diagnose illness on the inside of the body, Hippocratic medicine was given the status of being a 'techn', as what can be observed shows what cannot be seen, in the same way as prophecy allows people to know things that they cannot see upon seeing something else. This is an idea portrayed in Aeschylus' play 'Prometheus Bound' with Prometheus' words:
This idea of medicine as a techn, or as something which gives knowledge, is also shown in Thucydides' account of what became known as the plague of Athens, although many scholars have speculated that the symptoms may be those of a different disease, or one which has been modified over a number of years. Thucydides, with his description of the epidemic, which lasted from 430-426 BC, leaves 'a clear clinical picture of the pestilence [and] identifies its infectious nature'. This implication that disease and infection was passed on through contact as, according to Thucydides, 'those with naturally strong constitutions were no better able than the weak to resist the disease' was an extremely radical idea, because at the time, people were not aware of germs. According to Hippocratic medicine, disease was not caused by contact, but by having too much of something in your body. Hippocratic medicine was very much centred on the concept of the 'four humours', which are named in the text 'The Nature of Man' as being 'blood, phlegm, yellow bile and black bile', but other Hippocratic texts have cited them as being four different fluids, such as phlegm, bile, water and blood. Hippocratic medicine, therefore, by and large would cite an imbalance in the four humours as one of the major causes of illness. However, the causes of epidemic disease are cited by the Hippocratic texts as being something more than a simple imbalance in the humours. The Hippocratic texts have stated that 'some diseases are produced by the manner of life that is followed [but] others by the life-giving air', because, according to the author, the air was 'the only factor shared by young and old, men and women' and the theory was that, because the disease was affecting everybody, there had to be a common factor to tell why everybody was being affected, and the surrounding air was the common feature.
Thucydides' reasoning for why epidemic disease struck was rather different. The plague had struck Athens during the invasion by Sparta. This meant that more and more people were moving from the surrounding area of Attica into the more well-protected city of Athens and consequently, the city became overcrowded, which 'made matters much worse than they were already' as the newcomers were being worst affected by the epidemic, as there was little or no housing for them because the city was so crowded, so they were forced to live in huts in the heat. These huts, according to Thucydides, were very poorly ventilated, causing them to become overheated and promoting the spread of disease.
It is important to recognise the fact that Thucydides does not explicitly mention whether the Spartans, who were besieging Athens, were affected. It is possible that this was for reasons of propaganda, so that the Athenians could appear impressive by surviving something as dangerous and strange as the plague. Medically, however, the idea of crowding is crucial, because the absence of any form of this disease being recorded in Sparta is a reminder 'that Athens, not Sparta, was under siege and severely overcrowded', which shows how the idea of overcrowding in a city was viewed as an important factor for the spread of the epidemic. There is, however, another part of Thucydides' text which indicated that overcrowding was not the sole factor that caused the epidemic, as he mentions that the plague returned in the year 427-426 BC, when Athens was not under siege, and it is stated that 'it had never entirely stopped though there had been a considerable decline in its virulence'. This concept of the plague recurring in a second, if less severe, outbreak, shows how Thucydides, despite having little or no medical training, had 'clearly recognised the infectious nature of the disease and that patients who survived the illness were immune to further attacks or developed only mild recurrences', although Thucydides had never 'possessed an understanding of contagion or immunity', once again giving an indication of how little known these ideas of disease being passed on by contact and also of partial immunity from disease once a person had contracted it previously were in classical Athens. It also raises the question of what other factors would have contributed to the cause of the epidemic if it was not simply due to overcrowding. One of the theories which had been very popular until the 1860s was the 'miasma' theory, which stated that the plague had spread because 'the air spread poisons produced by rotting materials or stagnant water'. This was very much a Hippocratic theory and even survives to this day, through terms such as 'malaria', even though, in the 1860s, when germs were becoming recognised, it was dominated by the theory of contagion, a theory Thucydides himself had noted, but had not fully recognised it for what it was.
Thucydides shows that he was familiar with Hippocratic medicine, most notably when he describes the means used by the Athenians to attempt to cure themselves of the plague. Firstly, he mentions how the plague was a disease that was so new that the doctors had no idea about how it should be treated. Indeed, Thucydides notes that the mortality rate amongst the doctors was the highest, as they were the ones 'more frequently in contact with the sick', once again emphasising the idea of disease being passed on by contact with other people, so because they did not know how to treat their patients, the doctors also did not know how to treat themselves when they fell sick. One of the reasons why doctors did not know how to cure the plague was, according to Thucydides, the fact that it brought out a variety of different, and often obscure, symptoms, which made the disease very difficult to identify. Doctors were well familiarised with Hippocratic ideas for treatment, but because the concepts of Hippocratic medicine centred on the balance of the four humours and on the influence of outside features such as the weather, they would have been confused by the plague. This is because, as Thucydides states 'human art or science [was not] of any help at all', and this was largely what Hippocratic medicine was based around.
In the 'Hippocratic Corpus', which is the work which is made up of between sixty and seventy medical texts, there are seven books called the 'Epidemics'. These are books of case notes written by physicians. Thucydides' description of the time of year is, in terms of language, very similar to some of the case notes in the 'Epidemics', as Thucydides 'starts his description of the symptoms with a general remark that the year was notably free from all other kinds of illness' and comments such as these were very common in the 'Epidemics'. The comment also adds to the ideas of why curing and diagnosing the plague was so difficult for doctors and also reinforces the issue of balance which was so crucial to Hippocratic medicine. However, when the plague struck, there was no problem with the balance of the humours in the body, as Thucydides has noted that even healthy people were affected, or with the air at the time, so the doctors found it hard to diagnose what was causing the plague in the first place, which would have made it even harder to cure.
Another way which the Athenians tried to cure themselves of the plague was by praying to the gods and consulting oracles. Again, this is very much a Hippocratic idea, as the Hippocratic writers believed that the 'divine', or the gods, were what caused changes in the weather or the balance of the humours and it was these changes that made people ill. This is an idea used by the Greek historian Diodorus Siculus in his 'World History' when he 'used Thucydides' description of the Athenian plague as a model... [when he] describes an epidemic which afflicted the Carthaginians investing Syracuse in 397 BC'. The difference between Diodorus and Thucydides, however, is that while Diodorus' style is in accordance with the gods causing sickness, Thucydides says that 'As for the gods, it seemed to be the same thing whether one worshipped them or not, when one saw the good and the bad dying indiscriminately', thereby indicating that, unlike Diodorus, Thucydides did not hold the gods responsible for the attack of the plague. He also notes here, and with the words 'equally useless were prayers made in the temples [and] consultation of oracles' that, although the gods were not responsible for the plague, they did nothing to help cure it. Again, the fact that, ultimately, when discussing the cause and cure of the epidemic, 'Thucydides makes no attempt to account for the onset of the plague in terms of the anger of affronted deities' is exceptionally rare and radical for the time. This is because, instead of using the well-known Hippocratic concepts such as the humours and fluctuations in the air and atmosphere, Thucydides is giving a 'rational, careful [and] detailed description of a disease', as he describes the initial 'vomitings of every kind of bile that has been given a name by the medical profession and then the outbreaks of pustules and the burning sensations. This is an indication of a change in medical thinking which was very advanced for a time when there was no knowledge of germs and, consequently, no knowledge of contagious infection. In choosing to describe the symptoms of the plague in such detail, Thucydides, while not rejecting the Hippocratic theories outright, is bringing about a new idea that diseases can be treated by examining the symptoms of the population and finding common features in the symptoms, rather than putting illness down to a lack of balance in the humours, or fluctuations in the atmosphere, which were either seasonal or brought about by vengeful gods.
Thucydides' description of the plague of Athens is, therefore, extremely radical for the principal reason that the ancient Greeks did not know about germs passing infection from person to person through contact, which is what Thucydides is implying occurred during the epidemic in Athens. The description, however, does not reject Hippocratic theories on the cause and cure of epidemic disease completely. Instead, Thucydides uses these theories and expands on them, therefore showing that the methods for the spread of epidemic disease can be much greater than simply through change in the atmosphere and instead can be a result of 'an infectious agent associated with an animal or insect reservoir, or respiratory transmission with a 'reservoir-like' mechanism ensuring persistent re-infection', which would give some explanation as to why the plague resurfaced when Athens was not besieged, and also how these methods are much more complex than Hippocratic doctors recognised.