The opening lines of this passage recapitulate the opening words of the poem, which run like this:
In doing this, the words also reiterate the love that Tibullus feels for this woman, even though, as yet, there has been no mention of her by name. It becomes clear to the reader that Tibullus has placed his deep love for her above everything else, including:
which he wishes would perish before he sees the girl he loves weep as he goes away to war. With these words, as well as the previous couplet where he passes riches which he may gain in battle to those who can endure such a life, coupled with his opening words, Tibullus is explicitly rejecting a traditional means for a Roman male to achieve wealth and power, as he places his love for a woman above any material gain, even if she will not requite his love. It is implied, therefore, that he does not crave any form of power, including the power over a woman that he might hold over his beloved if they were married. This is made even more remarkable by the fact that, in his poems, the reader never in fact sees Tibullus and this woman happily together, raising the question of whether she may have had other lovers whom he knew about and that their relationship was an unhappy one because of this knowledge, but he was powerless to do anything to her because he loved her so much.
When Tibullus then addresses Messalla, his army general and patron, he immediately tells him:
According to Tibullus, therefore, nothing is "intrinsically wrong with war and the wealth that comes from it", however, this is not a life that he desires, as his calling is different in that he is being:
The reader now becomes aware of this poem's state as a 'paraklausithyron', or a poem where the lover is left locked outside his beloved's door. However, the imagery used for this description is considerably out of context for the situation, being at once very much military-orientated imagery and at the same time, very domestic imagery, bringing to light two different metaphors for the lover.
The first metaphor is that of Tibullus as one of the 'spoils' of war, as the Roman soldiers would display their spoils outside their houses, so that others might take note of what they had achieved. In this way, Tibullus is one of the 'spoils' , not of war, but of love and it is the woman he loves who has made him this way.
The second metaphor is of a slave or a doorman who, like other Roman slaves of this nature, was kept chained outside the door of the master or mistress's house to welcome guests. Although the reasoning for Tibullus being there is different, the image works because he is, metaphorically speaking, a slave of love.
There is also a comparison between the girl he loves and his general, Messalla, as she " is the domina in a double sense, he is the slave, prize of love's warfare"; as well as being treated like a slave, or a war-prize, as he is kept outside, Tibullus is also literally a slave to his unrequited love.
Tibullus then, for the first time, introduces his beloved by her name, Delia, whereas previously, there have only been few hints of their relationship, possibly in order to "hold back the 'facts' to prevent them from interfering with [his] desires" as all the lover wants is a simple life where he can admit that:
The image of the funeral, which follows his declaration of happiness in passivity, is not uncommon in love elegy, but he begs that Delia might:
Ostensibly, the reader now sees a shift in the balance of power between the lover and the beloved, as, at his death, Tibullus "believes he will have some power, at least emotionally, over Delia", as he is no longer chained at her door, but at the moment of the burning of his funeral pyre, she:
However, this is not truly a shift in the balance of power, as, even though Delia is leaving offers to him with her tears and kisses, mirroring how Tibullus himself left offerings to the gods earlier in the elegy, he cannot use her offerings to his advantage now that he is dead. He also presumes that, since:
she must at least slightly care for him, as he believes making her weep at his death will not be difficult. However, the reader must still remember how Delia had previously "bound the poet before her hard doors", making the reader doubt that she truly has feelings of tenderness and love towards him.
Ironically, Tibullus later begs Delia to:
as he believes that this will hurt his ghost and he does not want her to be responsible for this. This undermines the initial superficial power shift as it now becomes clear that the poet's concern for Delia means that, not only can he not exercise full emotional control over her, but "the logical extent of such power would actually harm the poet", meaning that he is forced to appeal to Delia to not do these things, rendering him as powerless in death as he was in life when he was left outside her door.
Once again, Tibullus uses military imagery in a much more subtle sense, with:
This resembles, arguably, a flint arrowhead embedded in Delia's breast, giving the reader a different metaphor; the traditional motif of the wound of love in a lady's breast, the lack of which indicating the lack of love that Delia has for Tibullus, rather than the fact that she feels any compassion for him.
The final section preceding the final couplet ostensibly opens with an abrupt shift in the mood of the poem, lightening the tone with the idea of uniting and loving - although this is undercut by such a concept working with the consent of Fate - only for Tibullus to add that:
This not only returns the reader to the sombre state of affairs shown earlier, but also, with the implication that love will end, apparently, with death, discards or undercuts the visions of Tibullus with Delia on his deathbed. That vision, which previously seemed so loving, is now viewed "as being empty and unfulfilling [with the lover preferring] the much more immediate and much more enjoyable prospect of love in the present", forcing the reader to reconsider the previous lines where he talks about his vision.
The next five lines suddenly see Tibullus writing in reverse chronology, where he is suddenly an old man and realising that:
This makes his earlier desire to be inactive ironic, because now this leads to what can be read as sexual impotence which is something that is undesirable to him.
Immediately after describing himself as aged, however, Tibullus turns his attention to the present, where:
This personifies love in the form of the goddess Venus, who must be controlled and also shows the poet portraying love as something of a struggle for power. There is something almost ironic in this as his affair with Delia is in itself a power struggle and one that Tibullus looked to have accepted was lost, but now he can break down a door without shame, leading the reader to the question of why he appeared so weak when he was faced with Delia's door.
The final couplet of the elegy:
is an abrupt reminder of the opening of the poem, where Tibullus regurgitates his idea that he does not desire wealth or activity, like a traditional Roman man, or soldier, but instead only desires peace. To the reader, these final lines can encapsulate the entire poem, because, with his love for Delia, Tibullus is showing that not only does he not crave a traditional Roman lifestyle, but he also does not appear to crave the power that goes with a position of authority.
Love elegy, by the time it reached the Latin poets, was already a very popular genre dating back to Greece and Alexandria. Because very little poetry from these times survives today, several critics have questioned the importance of these works to Latin love elegy. With that said, however, it cannot be denied that certain elements of Greek culture have become strong influences in Latin elegy, especially considering that "it is a task of no great difficulty to compile a register of passages where the Latin poets appear to have been inspired by Greek models", which is especially true in the elegies of Propertius when he makes allusions to myths in his elegies, and also in some of the longer poems of Catullus.
It is similarly true to say that, regardless of past influences, Latin love elegists found themselves "justified [when writing love poetry]...in introducing pastoral themes". This is especially true in the poetry of Tibullus, where he is shown rejecting ideas that would be befitting to a traditional Roman male in favour of an inactive, country life.
The issue of power relations between the 'lover' and the 'beloved' is also an interesting one, especially when comparing how it is treated in the elegies of Propertius and Tibullus, and this is what will be explored here.
One of the most interesting aspects of the relationship between Tibullus and his 'beloved', Delia, is that, despite the enamoured nature of his poetry, they are almost never seen together in happiness. There is the impression that she is, in fact, a prostitute, as well as a married woman. The reader understands that Tibullus is aware of this, although he is powerless to do anything except warn her husband, especially when telling him:
Already, the reader sees how Tibullus can only advise, rather than challenge, Delia's husband, in the same way that he cannot challenge Delia herself, as he is so infatuated by her. By writing these words, he shows how, as a lover, he is powerless against Delia and can do nothing to ensure that she stays with him.
An earlier hint of his unhappiness at his unrequited love for Delia is given when he likens her to:
in which he gives one of his otherwise rarely-used, in comparison with other elegists such as Propertius, mythical comparisons, here used to show how Delia has 'bewitched' the lover and then failed to reciprocate his love for her.
The balance of power between Tibullus the lover and Delia is also reflected in the balance between Tibullus as a poet and as a lover. Compared to Greek love elegists who wrote in the third person, "Roman elegists [wrote] about erotic matters in the first person and claim they [were] writing about their own personal experiences", which reinforces the powerlessness of Tibullus the lover, which is being constructed by the author, giving the author a similar power over the lover to the power that Delia holds over him.
Several of Tibullus' poems about Delia take the form of a 'paraklausithyron', or a poem about being locked outside a door. In his poetry, the door he stands outside "is strong and impervious...[and] the poet is powerless to overcome it", to the extent that he is reduced to begging Delia's slave to:
thereby revealing how he is in need of other means of suppressing his grief and bringing himself comfort, such as wine and sleep. However, even in comfort, he is showing his powerlessness with Delia as he has been reduced to begging a young slave-boy for help.
Another way in which Tibullus illustrates his helplessness as a lover is by actually talking to the door and initially cursing it:
and then, barely moments later, by pleading with the door:
As an author, Tibullus is using the door, not only to show the lover's powerlessness, but also almost as a mediator between the lover and Delia, as he struggles with his feelings that alternately make him curse and plead with the door, in a way that he might do so in the face of unrequited love. However, it also shows the lover as being weak, since "victory in...the tipping of the power balance in favour of the poet [or lover]...would open the door", but as the door remains closed, he cannot gain this victory, or the power that would come with it.
The paraklausithyron also serves, in the fifth elegy, to remind the reader that, because Tibullus is now reduced to seeing that:
and that he must watch from a distance, "it is with [Delia] that the ultimate power lies" as he is forced to appeal to her, not only from the door, but also from a distance, so it is evident that she will pay him little attention compared to her rich lovers.
One of the great tragedies in the relationship between Tibullus and Delia is brought to light by the use of military and pastoral images in his elegies and, to a lesser extent, images of being hunted like prey.
The military imagery is used, in conjunction with the pastoral imagery, to contrast the inactive life in the country that Tibullus openly desires with the arduous life of a soldier which will bring riches that his beloved desires. He is aware that she has other lovers, but he would rather injure himself than her:
This idea of the lover being unable to hurt his beloved, while at the same time granting her permission to:
ties in with the idea of Tibullus as both a slave and as 'spoils' of war as he is waiting outside the door. It is therefore, ironic that he wants nothing to do with war, yet he is being forced to, albeit passively, take a part in it, s he is a victim of 'militia amores', or the war of love. He is therefore forced to "reconcile the twin poles of private and public life, of leisure and active service...of duty and love, of war and farming" and the tragedy is, as far as war and farming go, this is not possible for him.
The images of being hinted also tie in with the military imagery, as Tibullus desperately invokes the god Love:
once again raising the issue of the war of love, as well as placing Tibullus in the powerless role of the 'servitium amores', or the slave of love.
Tibullus, as a lover, also gains the reader's sympathies through the "attempts to assert the power [he] claims he does have", most notably:
when in fact he only succeeds in emphasising the contrast between himself and Delia's wealth, thereby accentuating that his power is inferior to hers.
The pastoral imagery is used to show "the old Roman ideals of simplicity, poverty...and all domestic virtues", which is exactly the life that Tibullus desires, rather than the wealthy, traditional Roman life of a soldier and the power that comes with it. The lover's anguish stems from the rejection of this power and wealth, as it is clear that Delia desires rich men and all he can do is dream that:
while all the time he knows that his dreams can never be realised as he and Delia each have completely contrasting desires from life. Tibullus' desire for poverty and simplicity is, tragically, incongruous to Delia's desire for wealth.
When Augustus ruled, he brought about a legislation that not only condemned adultery and promoted marriage, but also condemned homosexuality, unless men were having sex with young male prostitutes.
Tibullus, however, unlike Propertius, does experiment with homoerotic themes when he writes his pedarastic poetry about a young boy called Marathus. The first of these poems, the fourth elegy of the first book, "releases the pressure [from the Delia poems] by turning to...a different...poem", although the theme of powerlessness is still ever present.
Tibullus invokes the god Priapus, for help in finding a 'puer delicatus', or a handsome young boy and he is told first:
but then, immediately after this attempt to dissuade him, he tries to tempt him at the same time by extolling the virtues of several young boys.
Theoretically, Tibullus should now hold the power since "boys should [respect] poets for their power to bestow the immortality of the Muses", as he can have revenge, as a poet, on those who spurn poetry. However, while he gains power as a poet, as a lover, he appears as powerless as he was with Delia as the reader learns:
Clearly, Priapus' advice to give the boy what he desired until he succumbed was fruitless, because Tibullus has found a young boy, but the boy does not desire him. He is tormented by love for Marathus, but he can do nothing to gain him. In fact, he tells him in a later elegy:
as he portrays himself as an expert in love, passing on advice to Marathus on how to seduce a woman.
Despite the departure from the serious tone of his Delia poems, Tibullus' pedarastic poems still tell the same story of a man in love, but powerless, for whatever reason, to gain the love of his beloved.
Propertius, like Tibullus, wrote his elegies under the Augustan regime, but his methods of portraying his relationship with his 'beloved', Cynthia, are sometimes very different to those of Tibullus as both elegists often use different devices.
There is a small hint of a shift in the balance of power when compared to Tibullus, which is most explicitly shown with the words:
which are spoken after Cynthia gives up her idea of a voyage in apparent favour of staying with Propertius. This shows a marked contrast with the elegies of Tibullus, who is never shown as being happy or victorious in his pursuit of Delia.
However, the idea of Propertius holding power over Cynthia is vastly undermined by the idea of "the lover [Propertius...belonging] to the category of romantic lover", meaning that, as a lover, Propertius is equal, or inferior, to his mistress. Cynthia, right from the outset, has caught him and made him:
as she "prompts, forwards or obstructs the desires of the lover" forcing all his Roman masculine arrogance aside, and rendering him helpless.
In a later elegy, Propertius, as a lover, is rendered even more powerless when he tells a friend that he has no fear of going to war, but rather that he is:
Cynthia torments Propertius "with complaints and threats because his friend is urging him to the active life". The reader is now presented with another marked contrast between Propertius and Tibullus, as it is Tibullus who craves a peaceful life and Delia who desires the wealth war could bring, whereas Propertius looks ready for battle, but Cynthia is holding him back.
This leads into the idea of Propertius the lover pitted against Propertius the poet, and in turn, against Cynthia. As an author, "Propertius regarded his love poetry as...inspired by Cynthia", meaning that her beauty is famous because:
Because Cynthia's beauty is what inspires him, the power between her and Propertius is interchangeable. On the one hand, Cynthia holds the power over him as an author, because had he not seen her, he would never have been able to write his poetry about her.
On the other hand, the fact that she is this well-known because of Propertius gives him power, not only over his alter-ego since he is the one writing the poetry, but also to a lesser extent, over Cynthia herself, as it is through his poetry that she is famous. In this way, Propertius, as an author is able to, indirectly, give himself as a lover, a small amount of power over Cynthia.
The state of being in love is commonly described as both a sickness and a curse from the gods. From his very first poem, "Propertius gives us the...image of love as a disease, a madness", as it is now that:
Because these adverse gods have made Propertius 'suffer' from his lovesickness, there is yet another indication of how powerless he is against Cynthia, especially considering that:
Despite the fact that Cynthia is in no way a god, the distance Propertius is prepared to go for her indicates that she has an almost divine, that is absolute, power over him. This can also be linked to the words to his rivals when he speaks about how:
to warn them, ostensibly against falling in love, but with the hidden undertones that he is much more possessive of her and jealously warning them to stay away from her, linking his lovesickness to jealousy of them. It also links to his powerless state, as against Cynthia, against his rivals, to whom he can do nothing, in the same way that he is powerless against the gods.
According to Propertius:
showing that, if love is indeed a sickness, it is by dismissing similar situations involving superficial wounds, such as blindness and battle wounds that Propertius shows how it is not a sickness that can be cured by a mere physician. Instead, he uses mythical ideas, rather than mortal ones, such as:
to give an idea of what the one who has the ability to cure such a sickness would have to be able to do and thereby showing how it is impossible for him to be cured.
In conclusion, both Propertius and Tibullus find themselves almost consumed by their love for their respective mistresses, to the extent that, especially for Tibullus, any power they, as lovers, may hold over them is rendered inferior to the power Delia and Cynthia hold over them as they give up what they desire to be with them. In the case of Propertius, he gives up the thought of going to war to be with Cynthia, and Tibullus is prepared to give up everything to be with Delia.