Archaeology as a discipline has been evolving extremely rapidly for the last few decades. Considering its sudden appearance after many centuries of only sporadic archaeological interest of the Near Eastern rulers, the development we are witnessing is very amusing and understandable bearing in mind the recent technological progress. Different areas of the subject were developing constantly and the direction of this development depended on the technologies as much as ideologies.
The study of countryside developed already in the 19 th century, when the scholars or rather antiquarians such as Dr. J. Wilson working at Woodperry in 1840s, Mr. S. Stone or Mr. Leeds carried their first excavations on deserted medieval villages. The development of medieval archaeology was inevitably limited by certain factors. It concentrated mainly on churches, castles or manor houses, so their view of medieval life was biased by towards the higher class of the society. Also the works were often carried out by architects, interested in the structure of a feature at one level, instead of digging down to find out more about the chronological sequences (Beresford and Hurst 1971). In the 14 th - 15 th centuries many medieval villages became deserted, forming perfect sites for future archaeologists due to the high level of preservation. This is why most of the evidence about the villages from the 1840s onwards up till 1960s comes from this period of abandonment. The excavations were held at such sites like Upton by Profs. Hilton and Rahzt, Hound Tor by Mrs. Minter and most of all at Wharram Percy by Prof. Beresford (Beresford and Hurst 1971). However, in the 1980s and 90s the interest of the scholars seem to turn more towards the study of the origins of villages and the surounding landscape. Instead of focusing on individual settlements the new approaches emphasize the importance of the attached fields and the buildings within them. This forms a "block of countryside" under examination, creating the opportunity to analyze the "inter-relationship between the human and animal populations, settlements, fields and the environment and how that relationship changes through time" (Astill and Grant 1988:36). In other words, we are now interested in answering the question why people chose to live in villages, not why they deserted it. Therefore the next arising question is why did we change our interest?
The factors determining this might have been various, including new technologies available that allowed archaeologists to reach lower levels of settlement, thus enabling the study of its earlier periods in more details and with more accuracy. For instance, Beresford and Hurst mention the limits of phosphate analysis to determine the location of the house, due to "the constant sweeping of the floor by the housewife". Nowadays they would meet some strong protests against such view from feminists or some insulted housewives, but nevertheless the areas with high phosphate content, (which would mean the presence of animals) were in fact the spaces between the houses. With present geophysical techniques the chance for obtaining accurate results are much bigger. In addition, the administrative side of archaeology has changed significantly, taking as an example the development of rescue archaeology in the 1970s and 1980s and later the introduction of PPG16 which revolutionized the sources of funding the excavations. Hence a greater amount of evidence became available to analyze as more excavations were held. New ideological approaches such as New Archaeology or post-procesual Marxist archaeology undoubtedly influenced the way of thinking of the scholars. The arguments for the change from timber to stone (which I will analyze in more detail in due course) clearly bear the traces of traditional and the New Archaeology. We also should consider different cultural backgrounds of the researchers and the regional variations and different cultures, not only within Britain but also the whole Europe. Ian Hodder claims that there are as many interpretations as there are archaeologists and that archaeology can never be fully objective, so that subjectivity and modern approach can affect the process of interpretation (Renfrew and Bahn 2002). In this work I will analyze our changing knowledge about peasant houses from 1960s till 1990s, focusing mainly on the debates of different archaeologists and historians about the durability change of building materials and plans of buildings.
Since 1960s our idea about the construction of a peasant house has changed considerably. If the data about the construction changed, this undoubtedly led to the reassessment of the opinions about their durability. The study of deserted medieval villages that evolved throughout 19 th and 20 th century up till 1960s allowed the archaeologists to draw some conclusions about the construction of the houses. This was based on however limited number of excavations and contemporary excavation techniques. The most popular objects of investigation appearing in the publications seemed to be Anglo-Saxon sunken-huts like those at Upton or West Stow. This was not due to the common interest of contemporary archaeologists in these structures, but to the fact, that sunken-huts can be relatively easy recognized during excavation process thanks to the darker fill of the huts (Beresford and Hurst 1971). Also, the stone foundations or walls could be easier recorded, because of the lack of sufficient techniques to record the remains of timber. Beresford and Hurst in their work "Deserted Medieval Villages" provided only very limited amount of information about timber buildings, claiming that the later stone disturbances did not allow them to investigate the timber phase (Beresford and Hurst 1971). On the other hand, on the basis of the study of turf and cob walls (not very detailed either) from probably 9 th till 13 th century excavated at Hound Tor, they made a conclusion, that the buildings that had such walls could not be made to last more than five, maybe up till twenty years (Beresford and Hurst 1971). Therefore, the surviving vernacular buildings, dated not earlier than 16 th century, had to be the results of the Great Rebuilding, which took place at different locations and in different periods of time and was a general replacement of those impermanent structures by permanent houses. However, even those earliest and of poorest construction were evaluated as supreme to those from the excavations, which did not demonstrate any evidence for substantial timbers, able to withstand the weight of a massive roof structure (Wrathmell 1989).
After twenty years of research the new methods and resources such as written documents provided the archaeologists with evidence for use of cruck, forks or siles, which would be the "missing" major timbers supporting the roof. Such evidence include the accounts of the vicar of Kirkby Malham, who in 1454 paid carpenters for placing stones under the crucks to stabilize the building. The use of these elements is also often recorded in schedules of repairs, like the fifteenth-century one from Northallerton or Durham. Furthermore, there is evidence for timber "tenants' buildings being moved and re-erected". This indicates the houses had to be of good quality, enough to make it worth moving them to another location (Wrathmell 1989). Already Beresford and Hurst (Beresford and Hurst 1971) noted a series of stake-holes around the buildings, which they thought indicated numerous rebuilding of the houses. They could not, however, date them precisely, so they were not able to set the time interval during which the rebuilding took place. It might well have been a few hundred years, hence being a clear evidence for the more substantial construction of these houses than they originally thought. Continuous works on their houses would be rather problematic for the peasants who occupied them. Therefore, a new approach states, that the Great Rebuilding took place because of the change from low-cost buildings, which required a great amount of maintenance works to high-cost stone ones, that did not need a constant care (Wrathmell 1989). We need to remember, that the medieval peasantry was a hierarchical social group, within which we can distinguish those more and less wealthy. Hence it is possible to incline, that their buildings varied considerably as for their quality, as William Harrison wrote in 1587 from those 'commonly strong and well timbered', to those 'slightly set up with a few posts... in the fenny countries and northern parts... where for lack of wood they are enforced to continue this ancient manner of building' (Morriss ). So there was already a new manner of building, but because of the lack of resources people were forced to build in 'old way', and those who could afford it could buy wood on markets.
The changing evidence and techniques also affected our knowledge about the building materials that were used for peasant houses. The general types of material were agreed already in the 1960s and that did not change. What did change is the estimation of periods and regions the materials were used. Thus, a fact is that there was a trend to proceed from turf or timber framed buildings to more substantial stone walls. In their work on deserted medieval villages Beresford and Hurst (.....) describe the turf walls as being dominant in the south-west region of England, with not much evidence for their presence in any other part of the country. As an example they put already mentioned Hound Tor, dated for about 9 th till 13 th century. Some cob walls were recorded during excavations in East Anglia, also traces of timber constructions in many parts of the country. Timber was said to be difficult to investigate 'because of disturbances from later stone buildings' and in most cases there is nothing but 'the odd post-hole or slot been found' (b&h 1971). In addition, the debate on the use of substantial timbers in the construction has already been mentioned above. The change from timber to stone occurred in late twelfth and thirteenth centuries all over the country. According to the idea of the early medievalists about early medieval houses, they were not built to last more than twenty years, sometimes less. They also found evidence for frequent rebuilding and although re-erecting new buildings from the same timbers also took place, there had to be undoubtedly enormous amount of wood used to build these houses over the centuries. Therefore, the archaeologists came to a conclusion, that due to the development in agriculture and a greater level of land consumption the wood supplies in most parts of the country became over explored. This was the main reason for the emergence of stone buildings.
However, nowadays as well as twenty years ago, archaeologists reevaluated this view, suggesting a new solution for this phenomenon. Namely, the new factor causing the occurrence of stone buildings (or timber buildings on stone foundations) is said to be the availability of money. As the idea of durability of the houses changed, which I analyzed above, the use of materials had to be also reconsidered. Dyer presents his opinion on high standard of medieval peasant houses, from the thirteenth century being constructed by professional carpenters. This brings us to the reflections on the medieval economy in the countryside. As the archaeologists of let me call it the 'old school' thought, the materials used for building a house were those available in the closest vicinity. Therefore, we see turf buildings in the south-west, cob walls in the east and timber all over the country. However, even in the areas where stone was easily accessible we do not note the occurrence of stone buildings before late 12 th century. This puts that idea of 'regionalism' into question. In addition, in the 12 th to 13 th centuries, as I mentioned, the change from timber (or wattle-and-daub method) to stone took place, and this was in most parts of England, regardless of the immediate availability of stone. Astill claims, that this was a proof for the medieval economy relying more on accessibility of market, that the resources themselves. If people could afford hiring a skilled carpenter, this was an indication of their material status, which leads us to the conclusion, that people started to build in stone not because the wood resources were over explored, but because of the economical growth and availability of money (Dyer in Astill ). Here we can notice the influence of the New Archaeology. While the 'old school' explanation was simply lack of wood resources, in 1980s archaeologists came to a conclusion, that maybe it was something less prosaic than that and found a connection to the contemporary economical and social processes.
In 1971 Hurst presented his typology of medieval peasant buildings. He included three groups, a peasant cot, a long-house and a farm. They were generally associated with the material status of the peasants, placing the cottagers, who had little arable land, if any, on the lower part of social status. They lived in peasant cots, which were small houses with one room of around 5 by 3.5m or two rooms 10 by 4m (Beresford and Hurst 1971). The next level was inhabited by the villeins, who lived in long-houses, which by definition is a long building, of a varied size, with living part at one end and a byre with for agricultural use, separated from the living part by a cross-passage. It has been found in many parts of England, mainly the south, but also Yorkshire and Northamptonshire. Hurst claims, that long-houses were the development from earlier forms of timber buildings, occurring from the 12 th century (Beresford and Hurst 1971). As we know, this was the time of change from timber to stone. In addition, the different types of houses are said to be the result of varied prosperity of the farmers, thus we can observe the change from timber to a cot or to a long-house. This was not a chronological development then. The next group consists of farms, in case of which the byre was separated from the living part in order to stress the material status of the people living there, the new-forming group of yeomen. They imitated the manorial houses, forming a courtyard by placing the byre or barn perpendicularly to the house. This type of settlements occurred in 13 th century and was often simultaneous with long-houses and a change from long-house to a farm was also recorded.
In their work, Beresford and Hurst admit, however, that the evidence they possess, on which they base their observations is very limited due to a small amount of excavations and the existing ones being brief and incomplete (Beresford and Hurst 1971). Therefore, archaeologists must continuously reevaluate their knowledge according to the new data. Regarding the cots, we now know, that they were rather located on the outskirts of villages or within the village green (Wrathmell). There is relatively more evidence about long-houses. However, the difference between long-house and a farm has been recently put into question. While the known sites have been excavated again, there is apparently no evidence either for presence of absence of the cattle in the 'cattle part' of the long house, which forms part of its definition. There has been a considerable confusion over the term "long-house", since over the last few decades archaeologists have been assigning this term to buildings with opposite entrances. It has been thought, that in the late medieval and post-medieval period long-houses were converted into farms. Hurst suggests, that this was a development of a type of dwelling. Due to the above circumstances as well as the fact, that the three examples used to prove the transition and as Gardiner claims in his work, the three of them are 'suspect' (Gardiner 2000). Furthermore, the occurrence of long-houses has recently been associated with the type and state of local agriculture. Chapelot and Fossier (in Astill) noted, that this type of houses "disappeared" from most parts of the country apart from the Highlands and British Isles. They explain, that houses in which people live under the same roof with animals represent an undeveloped agricultural system, 'based on grain production and a backward form of stock raising'. On the other hand, according to the evidence from Goltho, Beresford claims, that the reorientation of houses in a form of a yard was directly connected to the new, stock-based form of agriculture (Beresford 1975). This is clearly a sign of regionalism, neglected earlier by Beresford himself and Hurst (Beresford and Hurst 1971). Nowadays we know from the documentary evidence however, that the long houses were much more popular also in the parts of the country that seemed not to have any traces of them (Wrathmell ). This can either undermine the whole theory about regionalism, or simply mean that we do not know those other regions well enough yet.
Over the last forty years archaeology once again proved to be a very dynamic discipline. Our knowledge can change surprisingly quicky due to the changes in technology, new evidence, influence of a certain ideology and approach. Archaeologists, as well as their students and the public should know and accept this fact, remembering at the same time that no solution is the only correct one. Very true are the words of Chrostofer Dyer, who argues that 'the size, quality and complexity of the late medieval peasant buildings have frequently been underestimated' (Dyer 1986). The studies of the deserted medieval villages gave the archaeologists an impression, that the earlier medieval houses were not built to last long, they were mostly made of local, bad quality materials and that at different time and locations there was a rapid change to more permanent dwellings, which they called the Great Rebuilding. This marked also the barrier between medieval and post-medieval farmhouses (Wrathmell 19..). These ideas were then undermined by the new approaches, based on more careful excavations and better techniques. Now we think that the durability of the medieval houses depended on the status of the peasant and the accesibility of resources and money. Those more wealthy peasant hired skilled carpenters to build their houses. As well teh Great Rebuilbing seems not to be a rapid change any more, but rather a whole process. The changes in durability as well as materials used occurred in different regions, which is an evidence of trhe process being more varied and complex than it was previously assummed by Beresford and Hurst. The plans of houses were thought to develop chronologically, one form from another, from a peasant cot, through a long-house to a farm. Now it has been proved, that some forms developed independently and did not derive from the 'previous' one. There are still many unanswered questions or those which apparently have an answer, but it needs further reconsideration. Therefore, we should not accept the knowledge we have as the one providing all the answers.