Since the emergence and characterisation of  Legionella pneumophila in 1976, much interest has been caused due to the organism's ability to survive and replicate within components of the human immune system that normally combat such an infection. In recent years the incidence of Legionnaires' disease has increased. This essay aims to understand the characteristics of L. pneumophila that allow infection, survival and replication within both amoebae in the natural environment, and human alveolar macrophages leading to the development of the pneumonia-like Legionnaires' disease.
Legionella pneumophila is a motile, gram negative, aerobic rod commonly found in fresh water supplies where it prevails as an intracellular parasite of amoebae (1). This organism has complex nutritional requirements, including an unusually high iron and cysteine requirement, low levels of sodium and aromatic compounds (3). Unlike other waterborne pathogens (which are often transmitted through drinking or recreational water or from person to person), the spread of L. pneumophila occurs via infected aerosolised water droplets that are subsequently inhaled.
It wasn't until 1976 when an outbreak of Legionnaires' disease struck an American Legion convention killing 29 people, that L. pneumophila was first established as the causative agent of this pneumonia-like disease (2, reviewed in 1). It is now recognised that L. pneumophila is a classic opportunistic pathogen, infecting and causing disease in immunocompromised individuals, for example the elderly, individuals with damaged lungs or lung-related disease (1).
In addition to the generation of Legionnaires' disease, L. pneumophila also causes a much milder, flu-like self-limiting disease called Pontiacs Fever (3). Unlike the symptoms exhibited by Legionnaires' disease (fever, disorientation, lethargy and lung damage), symptoms of Pontiacs Fever are less severe and include fever, chills and headaches. To date evidence of Pontiacs Fever has only been noted during Legionnaires' outbreaks and in comparison to Legionnaires' disease there have been no recorded mortalities from this form of the infection.
The spread of L. pneumophila is dependent upon the aerosolization of contaminated water droplets from contaminated water storage systems. Until the development of water reservoirs (e.g. cooling towers) and evaporative condensers of air conditioning systems, L. pneumophila posed no risk to humans (4, reviewed in 1). However, in recent years the number of Legionnaires' outbreaks has increased, the majority occurring during the summer months when use of air conditioning is generally greater.
By examining the processes occurring within such water storage and distribution systems we can gain an increased understanding of why more and more outbreaks are being recorded. Firstly, as with any surface, biofilms form within water storage systems. A microbial biofilm consists of bacterial colonies attached to each other and their surface by the secretion of adhesive polysaccharides. In adverse environments, i.e. nutritionally deficient conditions, biofilms trap essential nutrients (for example iron), providing a rich environment for bacterial growth. As the number of large-scale water storage and distribution systems has increased, more buildings now contain reservoirs of L. pneumophila. In practice, these reservoirs cause an increased threat to humans due to inadequate cleaning and water treatment standards which don't remove the organisms before they have chance to replicate and spread to potential hosts.
A second factor affecting the increase of Legionnaires' outbreaks is the presence of amoebae in aquatic systems. This organism feeds on microorganisms present in biofilms and hence may ingest L. pneumophila by whirling phagocytosis (a process characteristic of L. pneumophila). Of the thirteen species of amoebae, only two support the replication of L. pneumophila (5) and therefore act as reservoirs for L. pneumophila in the natural environment. These two species are Acanthamoeba and  Naeglaria (3). Within the amoebae, L. pneumophila undergoes high levels of replication and is protected to a much greater extent than free bacteria in the water would be from water treatment processes such as chlorination and Kathon CG. As a result, controlling the presence and replication of L. pneumophila in potable water supplies is very difficult, as even residual treatment which may kill free bacteria cannot remove cells carried by the highly tolerant amoebae. These facts can be shown by a study using water samples obtained from five hospitals in Paris. Of the samples taken, 71% contained amoebae and 47% showed presence of L. pneumophila (6, reviewed in 1). When these water samples were incubated, bacterial replication occurred, providing the sample contained amoebae (1).
In addition to protecting L. pneumophila from water treatment processes and allowing replication, colonisation of amoebae has also accounted for the evolution of virulence factors essential for infection and replication within human alveolar macrophages. There are numerous similarities between the life cycles of L. pneumophila within both amoebae and alveolar macrophages (for example in both amoebae and macrophages, coiling phagocytosis occurs) but moreover genetic studies have shown that the defects in three virulence factors essential for bacterial replication and survival in monocytic U937 cells also inhibits these same processes in amoebae. The effects of such research is summarised in figure 1:
This research therefore indicates that the strategies evolved by L. pneumophila to grow in amoebae also work in the human alveolar macrophage.
In addition to the research shown in figure 1, there are other virulence factors of L. pneumophila that are established in amoebae and not only enable growth in macrophages, but in fact increase the incidence of the organism and the rate at which complications with the disease are created. Examples of such factors are summarised in figure 2.
The increased ability of Legionella pneumophila grown in phagocytes to withstand chemical biocides and antibiotics was demonstrated as 71% of bacteria obtained from Acanthamoeba polyphaga survived a 24-hour exposure to 5g/ml riampin. This value of 71% is significant as when the same conditions were applied to bacteria cultured in broth, more than 99.9% killing was observed (12, reviewed in 1). This therefore clearly shows that replication in amoebae increases the virulence of Legionella pneumophila and hence the ability of this organism to cause infection and disease.
In general, when a host organism becomes infected, it is the job of both the innate and humoral immune responses to clear that infection. L. pneumophila infections however do not follow this rule as this organism demonstrates relatively high resistance to humoral responses such as complement-mediated killing even though the complement component C3 is readily bound (13, reviewed in 1). Even with the presence of specific antibodies there is little increase of monocytic bactericidal activity. Horwitzal. (13, reviewed in 1) demonstrated this by incubating serum- resistant encapsulated E.coli for one hour with 10% fresh normal serum, L. pneumophila specific antiserum and polymorphonuclear cells. It was observed that the number of colony forming units (CFUs) decreased by 2.5 logs. Another similar treatment reduced L. pneumophila CFUs by only 0.5 logs. These data therefore indicate that complement, specific antibodies and polymorphonuclear cells cannot resolve infection and therefore partly account for the ability of L. pneumophila to enter and replicate within human alveolar macrophages.
Due to the inability of innate and humoral immune responses to clear L. pneumophila infections, this role therefore becomes the responsibility of cell-mediated immune responses (14, reviewed in1). However, as L. pneumophila is an opportunistic pathogen such responses in immunocompromised individuals fails and hence allow the infection to prevail.
Horwitzal. (15, reviewed in 1) studied the role of the cell-mediated response in non-susceptible hosts. The activity of peripheral blood mononuclear cells from recovered individuals in comparison to age and sex matched controls. The findings of this research are summarised in figure 3 and show that clearly a specific T-cell response has occurred in the recovered patients.
In addition to the data described on the previous page, the supernatants of samples of patient cells exposed to L. pneumophila contained activated nave mononuclear cells ready to inhibit replication of this bacterial species. This therefore supports the idea of a cell-mediated immune response.
There are many stages to the cell-mediated response, however as previously discussed these are only feasible in non-compromised host cells. A critical activator is interferon- (IFN-), a cytokine that activates macrophages. Bhardwaj et al (16, reviewed in 1) demonstrated that IFN- doesn't enhance L. pneumophila killing or prevent the formation of replication vesicles but instead prevents bacterial growth via an iron-dependant mechanism. The ability of IFN- activated macrophages to prevent growth was reversed when samples were supplemented with iron transferrin (17, reviewed in1). This therefore indicates that the pool of iron in activated macrophages may limit the growth of L. pneumophila and has been further proved by Byrdal. (18, reviewed in 1) in research showing that IFN- activated blood monocytes contained 73% fewer transferrin-binding sites than non-activated control cells. Because of the ability of activated macrophages in non-susceptible hosts to terminate infections by L. pneumophila, we can begin to understand the factors that allow this organism to evade immune responses in the compromised individual and hence cause infection.
Although the role of the host immune system is to protect and rid the body of foreign organisms, in the case of L. pneumophila, factors of the immune system in immunocompromised individuals actually aid the replication and survival of this organism within alveolar macrophages.
As described in the previous section, components of complement (e.g. C3 and specific antibodies) opsonize the bacterium in an attempt to remove it from the body (13, reviewed in 1). However, upon failure of complement-mediated killing, receptors on the surface of macrophages recognise the opsonins and allow a special whirling phagocytosis event to occur, characteristic of L. pneumophila infections (19, reviewed in 1). In the absence of opsonization, the Mip protein (macrophages invasion protein) found on the L. pneumophila outer membrane, potentiates the invasion of human mononuclear phagocytes, again via whirling phagocytosis (3). This Mip protein is only synthesised in response to low levels of amino acids and the consequent presence of uncharged transfer RNAs (tRNAs), which activates Rel A causing the accumulation of guanosine 3'5' bispyrophosphate synthetases (ppGpp). This accumulation results in entry into the stationary phase of replication and the expression of virulence traits that promote transmission e.g. the Mip protein. This example therefore illustrates how the growth phase of L. pneumophila determines its phenotype (20, reviewed in 1).
Once inside the macrophage, vesicles containing L. pneumophila must act quickly to become isolated from the lysosomal pathway and hence survive and replicate within their host macrophage. The main virulence system employed L. pneumophila is the dot/icm gene system (defective organelle trafficking and intracellular replication genes). As part of the type IV secretion system these two genes were originally designated due to their ability to transfer plasmid DNA to a recipient cell (21, reviewed in 1). However, immediately after phagocytosis of L. pneumophila by alveolar macrophages, these genes establish a different role, by assembling and activating a secretion system that integrates pores into the phagosomal membrane and hence remodels the phagosome membrane. It is through these pores that effector proteins (which would otherwise be used to traffic the phagosome to the endosome) are then transported to the host cytoplasm (22, reviewed in 1). Royal. (23, reviewed in 1) demonstrated the importance of the dot/icm genes in this process by using Electron Microscopy (EM). Results showed that in contrast to wild type cells, dot/icm mutants were delivered to the lysosomal compartment between five and thirty minutes after infection.
Examples of proteins lost from the phagosome during membrane remodelling include the lysosomal marker LAMP-1 as identified by fluorescence microscopic assays (25, reviewed in 1). The loss of this guanosine triphosphate (GTP) binding protein from the membrane prohibits the promotion of fusion between early and late endosomal compartments (26 reviewed in 1). Unpublished observations also indicate that the loss of transferrin receptors from the phagosomal membrane stops virulent L. pneumophila vacuoles from interacting with the early endosomal compartment (27, reviewed in 1).
Whilst the dot/icm genes can explain phagosome remodelling and the evasion of the endosomal pathway, other studies suggest that these processes could be accounted for by the presence of smooth vesicles on the cytoplasmic phagosome membrane within 15-20 minutes of infection (24, reviewed in 1). Horwitzal. (24) used kinetic studies to show that such vesicles budded from the phagosome taking with them proteins that would otherwise activate the endocytic pathway. In this way the maturation of the L. pneumophila-containing phagosome was hindered.
The evidence presented to support both dot/icm and vesicle remodelling of the phagosome membrane illustrates the importance of this step in the intracellular survival of L. pneumophila. By measuring the release of p-nitrophenyl from the synthetic substrate p-nitrophenylphosphorylcholine (29, reviewed in 1) the activity of phospholipases has also been identified as interacting with the phagosome membrane and hence preventing phagolysosome formation. Two other molecules are also known to disrupt phagolysosome formation. These are the lectin, concanavalin A, and ammonium chloride. Although neither of these two molecules have been linked to pathogenesis, the lectin can cross-link membrane glycoproteins forming vacuoles that can't fuse with lysosomes (29, reviewed in 1), whilst ammonium chloride raises vacuolar pH hence interfering with phagolysosome formation (30, reviewed in 1).
As previously described, the dot/icm type IV secretion system is one of the primary mechanisms by which ingested L. pneumophila avoid immediate lysosomal delivery. Research has shown that this same set of genes is also involved in the recruitment of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and the formation of a replication vacuole. (31, reviewed in 32).
Within one hour after the isolated phagosome is established, numerous mitochondria are recruited to its side and approximately four hours after isolation the cytoplasmic face interacts with the host cell ER, hence establishing the site of replication (24, reviewed in 1). After fusing with the ER, L. pneumophila becomes replicative, acid tolerant, and stops the expression of virulence traits such as those involved in the blocking of membrane fusion. Once these important transformations have occurred the  L. pneumophila exploits the natural function of the ER, and is delivered by autophagy to the harsh environment of the lysosomal compartment. It is then within the nutrient-rich environment of the lysosome that the L. pneumophila really exploits its host cell by replicating exponentially until all possible nutrients have been exhausted. Without the ability to replicate so profusely at the expense of the host macrophage, infection by L. pneumophila would have been fruitless and all the mechanisms evolved to evade host protection mechanisms would have gone to waste.
As the available nutrient levels gradually decline, the L. pneumophila stringent paradigm response is triggered, coordinating the expression of virulence and entry into the stationary phase of replication. The mechanisms by which this response occurs is shown in figure 4:
When amino acids are limiting uncharged tRNAs activate RelA, a guanosine 3'5'- bispyrophosphate synthetases. Accumulation of ppGpp coordinates entry into the stationary phase with expression of virulence traits that promote transmission to a new host. Some effectors may be substrates for type II and IV secretion systems whilst others such as flagellin (essential in providing motility for finding a new host), the development of osmotic resistance (essential for surviving in the natural environment) and the secretion of cytotoxins (promotes escape from the spent host by lysis) are more easily categorised.
The most obvious way to prevent further incidence of Legionnaires' disease would be to eradicate L. pneumophila from all water systems that may produce contaminated aerosols. As previously discussed this would be an extremely difficult in practice due to the resistance of bacteria within amoebae and biofilms to biocides. Other method such as UV radiation and heating to 60C can be used to kill L. pneumophila within both biofilms and amoebae, but in practice the costs involved with treating such large volumes of water in this way make these treatments impractical (3).
Therefore the majority of recent research has been focused on the development of biocides for water treatment that have no detrimental effects on humans, but kill L. pneumophila living in biofilms and amoebae. In addition, research has also focused on the development of a vaccine that would involve the activation of macrophages and recruitment of cytotoxic T cells to help kill the bacterium-infected macrophages (3).
However, at this point in time no such advances have been made and therefore the main method used to prevent outbreaks of Legionnaires' disease remains the cleaning and maintenance of water systems such that microbial life is limited or prevented. Regular chemical and microbial testing of potential L. pneumophila water systems should monitor these processes.
The increased incidence of Legionnaires' disease in recent years is primarily due to the increased need to store water in large quantities and the development and increased usage of aerosolizing technology for example whirlpools, showers and air conditioning systems. With inadequate cleaning and the stringent water treatment policies implemented by many countries, many pathogens are not removed from such water systems and instead find themselves in the perfect niche for colonisation and transmission.
Within the natural environment, L. pneumophila can survive and replicate within amoebae. The colonisation of this organism has enabled L. pneumophila to remain in aquatic systems at a higher incidence than if the bacteria were just free-living. This is due to the resistance and protection conferred by the amoebae during water treatment processes and other adverse environmental conditions. In addition, the colonisation of amoebae has also led to the evolution of specific virulence factors essential for infection, survival and replication within human alveolar macrophages such that when a susceptible host inhales a L. pneumophila-contaminated aerosol and becomes infected, this component of the immune system is exploited.
A greater understanding of the virulence factors and the characteristics of L. pneumophila which enable it to be such an efficient human parasite will help prevent outbreaks of Legionnaires' disease in the future.