The Ecclesiastical sources for the crusades were written to motivate people to fight in the crusades by clergymen and those associated with the Church or expressing the opinions of the Church. The Church used a variety of justifications for the crusades as people were questioning how war could be incorporated into the Biblical teachings of peace, love and forgiveness.
The Ecclesiastical sources mention a number of times the awful treatment of the Church in Jerusalem as justification for the crusades, and the barbarism of the Saracens or Turks is constantly highlighted. Pope Urban II in his letter preceding the first crusade wrote that, 'barbarians in their frenzy have invaded and ravaged the churches of God.' This idea of barbarity is repeated many times. The atrocities against the Church and other Christians was also emphasised as justification - something needed to be done to put a stop to such treatment. Fulcher of Chartres described the 'warlike invasion' by the Turks, where they were, 'slaughtering and capturing many, destroying churches and laying waste the kingdom of God.' What makes such behaviour worse was that the noble Christians, people of God, had been destroyed by, 'a foreign race, a race absolutely alien to God'. Robert the Monk repeated the subject of race, calling them 'unclean' and 'dreadful'. It was an insult to the Holy Land that such inferior people should have defiled the land and 'enslaved (it) to pagan rites by a people which does not acknowledge God.' Baudry de Bourgueil took this point further and declared that, 'the sanctuary of God...had been profaned.' Not only have they razed churches and violated Christians, but they 'worship their idols' in the land where the Lord Jesus was born. Gregory VIII prior to the third crusade used the justification that they should use the enemies' actions against them, 'And let us in no was hesitate to do for God what the infidels do not fear to attempt against the Lord.' In contrast to the idea of vengeance as justification, Jacques de Vitry explained that the crusades were justified as a duty, as the enemies 'need to be bent with a benign harshness.' He described the crusades as 'justice against wrongdoers', not out of revenge but for their own good. Thus the idea of the barbarity and terrible treatment by the invaders in the Holy Land was used by the Church as justification for the crusades.
The history and geography of Jerusalem was another very important means of justification, and linked with the idea of profanity. It was due to the idea that the Holy Land had been treated appallingly that the Christians felt it was their duty to go on crusade. The Saracens had not just conquered land belonging to Christians, they had conquered the very place where Jesus lived, 'the source of all Christianity'. This land was 'given by God as a possession of the children of Israel' and thus it was their duty to protect it. Guibert de Nogent described it as 'repay(ing) Jerusalem the debt you owe her' as it was 'from her that you have first received the first implications of the knowledge of God.' Biblical history was also used to support this argument. The Maccabees were referred to as an example of those who also 'fought for the sacred rituals and the Temple'. This implied that the crusaders could also 'justly defend the freedom of the fatherland by the exercise of arms.' In fact, de Bourgueil added to this with the words, 'The Holy Church keeps for herself an army to come to the aid of her people.' The Church was justified in using military force to protect itself. The Ecclesiastical sources also make other Biblical references to force being used to defeat God's enemies, 'the Sennacherib was consumed with an angelic hand' and 'among these (who serves in warlike arms) was Holy David'. In fact, Jacques de Vitry specifically warned against those who said that the crusades were not in line with Christian teaching as being from the devil. The Church therefore emphasised the history of the Holy Lands to justify why the crusades were not a contradiction to Christian teachings.
The crusades were further justified by a need to liberate the Holy Lands. Awful atrocities were being carried out there; the land was historically very significant for Christians, so the land needed to be liberated. Pope Urban II urged the people to 'liberate the eastern churches', and that their motivation for going should not have been a 'desire (for) earthly profit' but the 'liberation of the church'. The crusades were justified because the Christians were going to the 'aid of (their) brothers' and to save 'the faithful of God'. As the Eastern Church 'prays to be liberated', it was their duty to be an answer to prayer. Biblical references were again made to support this argument, as Jesus commended people to 'lay down one's life for one's brothers' and He Himself was the ultimate example of such actions. The Church justified the crusades by explaining them as liberating Christians conquered by a barbaric race in a land that belonged to God.
The main justification used in the Ecclesiastical sources and repeated many times was that it was God's will and plan for such events to happen. It was God who called people to go on crusade and it was He who would guide and protect them. It was not the Church, they argued, who were asking for help, but 'a battle-cry summoning you to war...brought from God." People had every right to go and fight because it was what God wanted, and in fact it was their duty to go. 'Consider that perhaps the almighty has provided you for this task, so that through you he may restore Jerusalem'. No-one could argue with the crusades if they were planned by God, and so this was the ultimate justification. Christ is described as 'standard-bearer and your inseparable guide', which would have given people increased courage as they had God fighting on their side. Biblical quotations again were used in this argument, as Christ had commanded people to 'carry his cross and come after me', as it 'is better for you to die in battle that to tolerate the abuse of your race and your Holy Places.' This argument is supported by Augustine who said that, 'your physical strength itself, is the gift of God." Such justification by the Church won a lot of support as if it was God's will, then the crusaders believed that they were assured victory.
The Church also used the idea of salvation as a means of justifying the crusades. Although it was also used as motivation, the crusades were justified because they were some people's only way of assuring their salvation. The Ecclesiastical sources contrasted a few times the crusades to the petty wars and skirmishes carried out between Christians at home. The crusades were a way to absolve themselves for these sins, 'God has instituted in our time holy wars, so that the order of knights...might find a new way of gaining salvation." In contrast to fighting against their own brothers for selfish reasons, they could 'pursue their own careers' for a noble cause. There was nothing nobler than dying whilst fighting for God, and the idea that it would be better to die was another recurring theme. St Bernard exclaims, 'How blessed are the martyrs who die in battle!' and Guibert de Nogent explains that, 'now we are proposing that you should fight wars which contain the glorious reward of martyrdom.' Therefore, the crusades were justified as they attained salvation of souls.
The Church justified the crusades therefore by showing the necessity of it to save God's Holy Land from barbarism and savage invasion, and to save other Christians. It was seen as God's purpose and plan, and by joining the crusades, salvation and forgiveness of sins was possible. The Ecclesiastical sources for the crusades provide good examples of the Church's opinion as most as written by popes or religious figures keen to promote the Church's point of view.