The first things that come to mind when we talk about the Viking Age are plunder, siege and violence. However, this period in European history has undoubtedly left a much more significant mark on its cultural development, than merely burned monasteries and plundered villages. After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, Europe faced an entirely different type of political, economic and social organization. While the south was dominated by the Gothic kingdoms, the north-west Europe was much less centralized and the system of chiefdoms was predominant in the early stage of post-Roman times. The growth of Frankish power and the spread of Christianity began the process of political and social changes, leading to early state formation. Changes in the character of production, the increasing social stratification, the intensification of trade, and the formation of urban-type centers and the early-feudal states were accompanied by the development of shipping of inland, coastal, and sea-going types, emphasizing the differentiation of tasks in the sphere of transport.
Therefore, with the development of more advanced shipbuilding technology and the establishment of more centralized rules in Scandinavia, the so called Vikings initiated their sea voyages in search for new lands. Till that time military conflicts or alliances dominated in the relations between the regions of north-west Europe. Their aim of the Viking voyages, however, was not entirely limited to invasion and conquest. They were as skilled tradesmen as warriors, therefore their expansion resulted in the rebirth of what was first the trade settlements around the Baltic and later proper towns or cities such as Dublin or York in Britain. By that time, the seas around the north-west Europe were regularly crossed by Frisian merchants, Anglo-Saxons, Slavs and growing in strength Scandinavians.
The Viking voyages have been thoroughly studied for many years. Much ink has been spilt on the Viking warfare and trade. The vast amount of evidence available both in Britain and on the Continent encouraged the studies of shipbuilding. Also the contacts between north-western societies received a lot of attention. However, these two aspects of life in the Viking Age have often been two separate areas of study. This topic has not been much explored yet, but shipwrecks undoubtedly carry a lot of information, not only about the shipbuilding techniques, but also about the contacts between early medieval societies and regions of north-west Europe.
The aim of this work is to examine the role played by the ship finds in our understanding of the cultural contacts between societies in north-west Europe under Viking hegemony. Although trade and war were part and parcel of the social relations in the studied period, they will not be the subjects of analysis in this work. Instead, it will concentrate on the evidence for the spread of culture, art, technology and religion.
Most of the ship finds known also inevitably comes from the Viking Age from that region, resulting in the Viking ships being one of the best documented and studied development of ships. This is largely due to the fact that Scandinavians treat that period as a very important part of their cultural heritage. Therefore, the archaeology of the Viking Age, weather settlements or ships, is highly developed in Denmark, Norway and Sweden. In addition, at least till the 10 th century the Viking dominated the navigations at all seas around north-west Europe. Their early voyages were mostly targeted at war and conquest, therefore the safety at sea was very limited and the danger from the pirates caused decrease in sea traffic. The Vikings did not fight their battles on their ships, but rather preferred to attack on land from sandy landing places, which was the reason why we do not find many remains of ships sunken during sea battles at that time. There are, however, some wreck finds from other regions of north-west Europe, as all in all the Vikings did not manage to seize all the traffic at sea. In the Viking Age the predominant type of ships used in north-west Europe was the clinker-built, round-hulled vessel, both oared and under sail. They further divided into the keel plank boats associated with shallow waters of the rivers, creeks and coastal seas between Denmark and France and the T-shaped keel boats, associated especially with Scandinavia (Greenhill 1995). In order to analyze the significance of shipwrecks for understanding the cultural contacts in Viking-age Europe, it is necessary to present in short some most important finds representing these types in different regions of north-west Europe. It is impossible to present all the finds, however the ones shown below are surely representative for their seamanship traditions.
The studies of Viking-age shipwrecks as evidence for cultural contacts are still relatively little developed in Europe, although vast amount of shipwreck materials have been used for investigation of shipbuilding techniques. Many ship discoveries have been made either in late 19 th or the first half of the 20 th century. The technologies of archaeological investigation were far less advanced than today, therefore many evidence that today would have been studied in detail, have been omitted and inevitably lost. On the other hand, the new opportunities that experimental archaeology has to offer today open new perspectives and approaches to the study of boats. A more social approach has recently been applied in this field, resulting in more advanced examination of the relation between shipbuilding and cultural contacts. In the future experimental archaeology as well as innovative display methods will surely contribute to the understanding of the organization and relation between societies in north-west Europe in the Viking Age.
The Viking Ship Museum is an iconic example of the use of new technologies and theoretical approaches to the study of ships. The research conducted there proved that shipwrecks can provide precious evidence for the mechanisms by means of which cultures and art spread in early Medieval Europe. Such phenomena as the transition to feudal society or adoption of Christianity on European scale are certainly better understood if we know how they occurred. Also archaeological materials might prove useful in verifying the often subjective historical evidence.
The shipbuilding techniques have been shared by many societies, which contributed to the general development of the region, resulting in the establishment of extensive trade connections. The types of technologies adopted from other societies might as well tell us a lot about their mutual relations. If the Irish adopted the craft of warship building, that might suggest, that the predominant relations that they had with the Scandinavians were military. Undoubtedly, the technological advancement of one society put it in a superior position towards the other, which drove the technological development and competition.
The spread of Christianity has been studied in detail, however the pagan traditions that many medieval societies shared were equally important. A more in-depth analysis of the finds accompanying the crew on their voyages might shed some new light on the spread of religious practices. Many European burials contain ships, the tradition which spread from Scandinavia. That might have meant that the Scandinavians were somehow treated as more advanced and adoption of their rites became a sign of higher status within other societies.
However, not only the shipwrecks themselves can be useful source of information about the Viking-age cultural contacts between the societies in north-west Europe. Also other finds associated either with boat technology like the toys from Gdask or with boat burial rites, like Menzlin cemetery can reveal other aspects of these contacts, not visible otherwise in shipwrecks. Therefore, it is fair to suspect, that with the development with even new techniques of archaeological investigation and surely with new approaches, even the finds that we have today can surprise us with new information. Some require re-interpretation, the others just more in-depth analysis. In the future, the emphasis should definitely be put on the new way of reconstructing and displaying the finds, to move them from the pages of archaeological reports to the museums, where they can come back to life as education tools for the present and future generations of visitors.