The saddle shown above will be the object of this short account. It will be based mainly on the interpretation of the author, although some major pieces of information from written sources will also be incorporated, as will be the materials from the files of the object held in the Museum of English Rural Life, by which the object is currently owned. The scarcity of these materials, however, do not allow using them to a larger extent. The lack of archival evidence might have been caused by the fact, that the saddle was acquired directly from its previous owner and user, which did not allow the whole elaborated pile of paperwork to be compiled. The existing files included the correspondence with the Godmans' farm from Horsham who donated the saddle to the museum in 1958 (information derived from the object file).
This particular saddle is now held by the Museum of English Rural Life, which in obvious way determines the way of interpreting it. The museum has divided its collections according to the materials the artefacts are made of, hence the metal, wood, straw or leather section, a part of which the examined saddle would have formed had it been in the main exhibition area. Instead a similar saddle is presented as a part of a larger revealing the aspects of using leather on a farm, mainly to do with horses and their harness. The analyzed one is meanwhile kept in a store, maybe because of the incomplete form. There is probably a cushion missing, as there is one on the rest of such saddles and as one needed to be used while putting the saddle on a horseback not to cause any damage to the health of the animal.
At this stage it is crucial, therefore to explain the construction of such type of saddle and the way it was used in the past and is still used nowadays in some parts of the world, which will be analyzed further in this work. A cart saddle consists of a pad or a panel, which in other words are two cushions, lay parallel to form a long gap between them and above the spine to lay the burden of the cart on the muscles on the sides of a horse instead of its spine and withers to protect the animal from injuries. A wooden frame or a tree is attached to the pad, which is then covered with leather housing. Leather part actually plays mainly decorative and protective role here, but it is undoubtedly dominating the outlook of the artefact which is possibly why it is allocated to the leather section. A bridge is a part of the wooden frame and mostly a metal protection is incorporated in it, in a shape of a channel, in which the chain is placed. A girth strap passes under the belly of the horse to keep the saddle in position. Straps along the back of the horse, the meeter strap attached to the collar and harness, and the crupper strap along the horse's rump, kept the saddle from slipping backwards and forward. A breech band (breechings) was fitted around the horse's hind end, attached to the crupper by hip and loin straps, acting as a buffer when bringing the wagon to a halt or pushing it backwards (Brown 1991). The basic function of a saddle like this one is to provide a support for the chain connecting the two shafts of a cart, which are also attached to the collar through the fittings in a saddle. The use of saddle allows taking a small proportion of the weight of a cart, to balance the weight and decrease the amount of energy the horse needs to move the cart (Keegan 1973). A saddle like this would have been used by some major agricultural activities, as well as to pull some carts not necessarily in the countryside, but for example vehicles distributing barrels of beer etc. For the lighter carts a collar was usually enough. Sometimes cart saddles are also used for while ploughing the field, when a saddle with a 'redger' iron is put on a horse nearest the plough to take the weight of the downward thrust caused by the change in the line of draught (Keegan 1973). There are signs of use on the leather housing on the sides in the places where chain would have contacted with its surface. Also the straps seem to be well-worn, which is evidence for rather agricultural than representative use and/or for a long term utilization of the object.
There are several ways of interpreting the object. Although now this particular saddle is owned by the Museum of Rural Life it is not impossible, that it changes the owner in the future but also, and more obviously, can be displayed in its current location. Therefore, it is essential to think of other contexts in which a cart saddle can be presented. For instance it could be a part of an exhibition showing the technological progress on a farm in the field of saddlery or in a more general perspective the means of transportation. It could be considered more generally in terms of the development of the use of horsepower and chariots or ploughs to work the fields. Or in terms of the technology of making the saddles themselves. It is important to notice, what materials is the object made of and what is the workload involved in the production of such saddle and if it was the same or different in the past. Given that the saddle consists of wood, metal and leather and the parts are fairly elaborated this might mean that different people were involved in the process of production of this object.
Also there could have been an exhibition about the designs of saddle used on farms or not only on farms. This would involve displaying different types of saddles. This particular one is a cart saddle but the also are riding saddles or racing saddles, the designs of which are varied according to the function they need to fulfil. Here also we need to consider the different materials used, as the saddles used on farms need to be stronger and last longer than for example those for pure representative purposes. Here the main and the most important part of this saddle is the wooden tree which holds the whole weight of the shafts. In case of riding saddles the leather is the main component, which is obvious considering such saddles must make both the rider and the horse as comfortable as possible. Kentish cart saddles, for example do not even have the leather housing (Keegan 1973). Therefore it is possible to classify them not only according to purpose but also region.
The introduction and the development of saddler certainly affected the society in one way or another. Looking at this aspect from a Marxist perspective it is possible to analyse the new division of labour commencing this event. Prior to that, men had to be more involved in the fieldwork. The weight of a cart that a horse could pull was limited by how much it could stand. Also the time for which it could work was certainly shorter when the burden was heavier. But when the cart saddles were introduced the labour became easier for the horse, which meant a single animal was more effective. That might have had some serious effects on the economic situation of a farm or estate. The next step of this ladder would be the introduction of a tractor and cars for ploughing and simple farm transportation. This phenomenon could be looked at locally or in different parts of the world as the saddle is certainly different within other societies. Some might still not use it at all. How their economy and agricultural system looks like?
This brings us to ethnographic examples of the use of cart saddle. A question arises, how different ethnographic societies deal with the problem of the weight of carts? The harness as a whole might look completely different and there might be many different ways in which to make a horse comfortable with pulling a heavy cart.
Treating this saddle as an artefact makes it possible to consider it from an archaeological perspective, which I will focus on in the next part of this work. A saddle as such was probably introduced as early as 2 nd century BC, which is proved by the finds from a Scythian kurghan burial of Pazyryk excavated first in 1929. These nomad people hugely relied on horses in their daily lives, therefore were the first ones to develop a so called 'horse culture' and master the management of these animals. The first societies to use chariots were the Hittites, Aryans and Celts, who then spread this technological advancement further into Europe, Asia and Americas (Edwards 1987). This approach creates a possibility to arrange an exhibition of the development of horse management from domestication to the present use throughout cultures and regions of the world. "Horse - the past and the future". This would also link with the ethnographic evidence to form a nice, coherent entity in terms of the picture of the role of horses in the development of civilizations. It is surprising that the ancient cart saddles already consisted of a pad that was made of two cushions placed on horse's ribs in order to protect its spine (Edwards 1990). This is evidence that ancient Scythians already possessed a fair amount of knowledge about the anatomy and the needs of horses, which allowed them for such effective management. Since the most easily accessible artefacts will obviously come from England, the local saddles would form a core of the exhibition, of which the ancient and ethnographic examples would be just nice introduction and context. Therefore we can distinguish such types like Yorkshire or Lincolnshire, Scottish, Kentish saddles and so on according to county. They vary in their construction and design, but the general rule and purpose is essentially unchanged. That depends hugely on the type of horse people are using in different counties, as well as on the predominant local industry or area of agricultural production. That is because different industries or agricultural activities required different types of equipment, within which horse was an important part. Heavy industry or any kinds of activity required a heavy horse, which was naturally stronger built, therefore needed a slightly larger pad. Different races of horses were also differently built, hence for example an unusual shape of the Scottish saddle, which was also affected by the type of collar used in that region.
These are the main ways of interpretation one can think of analyzing a cart saddle. It is also useful to look at the marketing aspect of such object and the possible ways of advertising it. There were qualified people who were producing saddles like this one and then undoubtedly selling them to the farmers. Firstly, when this producti0on was performed by individual craftsmen, the saddles had many designs, according to the individual taste and techniques. When mass production was introduced the number of designs of for example the trees was reduced to about twelve basic ones (Brown 1991). This craft inevitably required some sort of advertising as well as an organisation of a selling point. Saddlery was one of the crafts performed in the countryside in the past and it certainly required the whole marketing and advertising system around it, which might also be worth looking at.
It is also essential to think of an interesting way of displaying an object like this one, given that leather might be especially difficult to preserve and protect as an organic material. An attractive idea that occurred to me was to make replicas of different parts of harness from different time periods and different cultures and actually let the visitors equip a horse by themselves. That would be a model of a horse, of course. But this would allow people to understand fully the roles played by different parts of harness and why each of them is important. While the real object would have been placed safely behind a glass, the hands-on experience would provide a useful lesson. Conservation matters also need to be considered. Especially the lightning, as leather is sensitive for bright light and can easily loose its colour. Also relatively new objects would draw attention and fingers of kids and some adults, causing potentially some damage.
Given the character of the object and the information about it, that is possible to gather, it is rather impossible to display it on a detailed kind of exhibition about the history of this particular saddle. But as each cloud has a silver lining there are many other possible ways to present it, including the above mentioned exhibition on the techniques and designs in saddlery, the social changes within societies commencing the introduction and technological development of saddles as a whole or merely cart saddles, as well as the ethnographic or archaeological approach to the object. Horses played an important role in the development of early agriculture and therefore also our own civilization. However, without such equipment like saddles and harness they would have been much less effective. For this reason these objects should be given a fair amount of attention in museums. We can also associate the object itself with a whole group of people surrounding it, using it and being involved in its production. We can also learn a lot from those societies that use such equipment even today or some local form of it that plays the same role in the management of horses as the above analyzed English style of cart saddle. Due to the materials it has been made of there are limitations of how it can be displayed. Necessary steps need to be undertaken to protect it, but there are still possibilities of creating an interesting exhibition, for example by using replicas of artefacts. Different methods of learning need to be taken into account, as well as different audiences, when we think of organising a display of any kind. For some people illustrations of how the saddles were used might be enough to memorise their purpose and role. For some others some more hands-on experience is necessary. Also children would probably prefer to check by themselves how saddles were used in the past, not to mention the fun that would give them and therefore contribute to the good outcome of the process of learning. Even though a saddle is theoretically a rather 'boring' item of everyday life, it is not made of any precious material and does not attract so much attention as some other treasures, for example archaeological, it can still be displayed in a way to make it as attractive and interesting as possible. Considering its long history, in my opinion it is worth stressing it, because it is well amusing that such technological advanced items like saddles were used by people such a long time ago, and in addition by people of which we previously though as backward and mainly agricultural. That is why I chose to analyze this aspect of interpretation of the object, because of the potential attractiveness of the exhibition and because of my personal interests as an archaeology student.