The behaviour, lifestyle and biology of the species Homo Neanderthalensis can be inferred from their fossil remains as well as comparative anatomy with other members of the Homo genus. Information can also be obtained from studying the Middle Palaeolithic archaeological record. It is important to recognise that in many ways they were quite similar to modern humans. The configuration of their limbs, hands and feet indicate that they stood, walked and manipulated objects in much the same way that modern humans do. There is nothing in their vertebrae, joint structures or feet to say that they were anything but a fully upright bipedal species (this definitely detracts from the stooping ape - like beast of the early 20 th century). Probably most important in disproving this rather old fashioned view are the postcranial (body) bones associated with La Ferrassie 1 (approx 70,000 kya) a French site containing the remains of several individuals. An earlier reconstruction of a Neanderthal skeleton by Boule (from his work at La Chapelle-aux-Saints in France) portrayed Neanderthals as stooped, brutish creatures which are misconceptions that have stayed with our notion of Neanderthals to this day. The morphology of the leg bones and the foot demonstrate without any doubt that the posture and gait of Neanderthals differed very little from modern humans. Today the skeleton of La Ferrassie 1 is considered the "classic" example of Neanderthal anatomy by many archaeologists. (Fagan 1991: 159)
The first and possibly most important part of Neanderthal anatomy to look at when considering anatomies influence on behaviour is the brain. The Neanderthals were a relatively large brained species; Endocasts taken from the inside of fossilised skulls have been compared to that of other species in the Homo genus. The brains of Homo Erectus were between 1,150 and 1,250 ml, modern human range from around 1,200 to 1,500 ml in volume. This is curious when compared to Neanderthal brain sizes of around 1,300 ml for female specimens and 1,600 ml for male (Stringer and Gamble 1993: 81 - 82). It can be argued that these figures suggest that evolution (at least where brain size is concerned) does not seem to follow a step by step pattern. In other words as our species progressed brain size and intelligence increased in tandem. On the other hand it can be argued quite strongly that brain size does not necessarily indicate intelligence within our own species, working with brain size alone is problematic at best.
Endocasts have shown researchers however that modern humans and Neanderthals do share at least one majorly important trait, they both have cerebral dominance which basically means that the left and right hand sides of the brain perform distinct, separate and unique function  (Stringer and Gamble 1993: 83).
Although we can determine the actual size of the Neanderthal brain we cannot learn anything about its internal structure. Archaeologists have studied various other aspects of their anatomy such as the size and shape of their endocranial cavities, as well as their vertebral spinal canals with do indicate (possibly) that the full range of cognitive abilities was available to them (Walker and Shipman 1996: 142) It is however virtually impossible to make any real and scientific judgements based on brain size or Endocasts alone. In order to gain more insights concerning Neanderthal behaviour it is probably more pertinent to look at some other aspects of their anatomy.
Another important aspect of Neanderthal anatomy to consider when studying the relationship between anatomy and behaviour is their dental remains. In comparison to modern humans the average size of Neanderthal teeth are much larger. The front teeth
were especially prominent and research has begun to show that they played an important part in Neanderthal life. Archaeologists have studied and analysed the use - wear patterns found on fossilised teeth which appear unusually rounded, worn and deep, showing that they were subjected to heavy use. Microscopic analysis has found traces of material, organic in nature, embedded in the teeth. The patterns and alignment of this material are suggestive of material being gripped between the front teeth and pulled tight. This evidence could point to the fact that Neanderthals used their strong front teeth and muscular jaws as a vice to secure a variety of objects and possibly food. An example of how this might work could be the preparation of animal hides (Stringer and Gamble 1993: 77).The Neanderthal could of used his/her front teeth to grip one end of the hide whilst pulling it tight with one arm and then using the free arm to manipulate and prepare the hide possibly using one the many types of scrapper tool (some evidence points to the right arm being used for this task) (Walker and Shipman 1996: 142) Microscopic evidence from fossilised teeth found at Atapuerca in Spain support the theory that stone tools were being held in the right arm. The action of the stone tool being used in conjunction with the item being manipulated left distinctly different scratch marks on the teeth indicating the direction of the tool (Stringer and Gamble 1993: 77). Evidence such as this gives archaeologists valuable insights into Neanderthal behaviour and everyday activities as well as the role their unique anatomy might have played.
An interesting and unique piece was excavated at the French site of La Quina (approx 50,000 kya) where the fragmentary remains were found of several individuals were found (Scarre 2005: 149). The same scratch marks were found on the milk incisor of a young Neanderthal. This provides researchers with a tantalising insight into the early lives of Neanderthal children. The use wear marks are extremely suggestive and show that at least to a certain degree children were being taught the skills necessary to survive as well as taking an active part within their family units or communities (Stringer and Gamble 1993: 77).
Apart from the Lithics that make up the vast majority of the Middle Palaeolithic archaeological record, the skeletal evidence provides the greatest insights into Neanderthal behaviour. Neanderthal bones were extremely well built and robust with thick walls and large joints. The average Neanderthal had much shorter forearms and leg bones (when compared to modern humans that is) and large barrel chests. Therefore Neanderthals would have been rather short and squat in appearance, heavily muscled with broad chests (Stringer and Gamble 1993: 93). Archaeologists have compared these traits to that of modern living peoples and have found that they actually have the most in common with the Inuit people (a race of people that have adapted to the cold climates of the frozen north with climates similar to that of ice age Europe). This goes some way to proving the theory that Neanderthals evolved to survive in cold and extreme climates (other evidence to support this includes their highly effective nasal system thought to regulate temperature) and is reflected in their anatomy  (Walker and Shipman 1996: 151).
The robustness present in Neanderthal fossils suggests a skeletal structure that had evolved to withstand a lot of punishment and hardship. The bones themselves supported immense muscles, which made the Neanderthals into virtual powerhouses and left their mark. The ligaments and tendons needed to support this musculature left deep marks on the bones at the point were they connected to the joints, the size of these marks are very suggestive of the sheer bulk of this species. There is evidence from sites such as Le Moustier and Roc de Marsal in France that this well developed muscularity was present even in childhood. It can therefore be argued that this is an inherited evolutionary trait as opposed to a trait developed over a period of time. It does however prove that the Neanderthal required massive amounts of strength and endurance in order to survive (Stringer and Gamble 1993: 93). An example of this could be their legs, which show great endurance and strength, this implies frequent and prolonged movement across the landscape carrying large burdens. As far as anatomy goes and musculature goes the emphasis really was on brawn.
Neanderthal anatomy can also inform archaeologists about diet and subsistence strategies. Their fossil remains show abundant signs of nutritional depravation during growth and around 75% of all fossils found show defects in the teeth as a result of this. Stable isotope analysis of the bones chemical composition shows that they were primarily carnivores, with meat accounting for approximately 90% of their diet (although recent excavation with more up to date scientific processes have begun to uncover evidence for at least some plant resource exploitation, though this is mainly is the Southern parts of Neanderthal territory) (Scarre 2005: 149). It is therefore entirely valid and reasonable to assume that hunting (and some scavenging) would have played a large part in the average Neanderthals life, in fact their lives and behaviour patterns could well have been dominated by changing weather patterns and the movements of their prey (the archaeological and skeletal evidence does support this i.e. stone tools with no other obvious use apart from hunting and cliff drive sites like Jersey)
The difficult existence of the Neanderthals is reflected in the high frequency of traumatic injury found within the fossil record. Amazingly almost all adult Neanderthal fossils found to date show an astounding array of serious wounds, sprains, fractures and break (even an amputation at one site called Shanidar in Iraq). Many of these injures are healed fractures and breaks occurring around the torso (upper body). Comparative studies by Berger and Trinkaus in the mid 90's have thrown up some interesting data, a fair number of the injuries found closely resemble the kind of injuries sustained by modern day rodeo riders. In other words the kind of injuries one might expect when coming into close contact with large mammals. Archaeologists have suggested that the dangerous close quarters hunting of large herbivores such as Woolly Mammoth, Rhino and Aurouchs could very well account for injuries of this type (Scarre 2005: 149).
The tricky and sometimes unreliable ageing of Neanderthal remains show that life expectancy was very low (again when compared to modern humans, biologically speaking they may have had a much shorter life span). Few fossils have been found of individuals over the age of 40 and none whatsoever have ever been found over 50 (so far anyway!) This shows that the dangerous lifestyle and world of Middle Palaeolithic Europe and South West Asia clearly had its costs, in terms of stress, injury and life expectancy. Fossil remains show that over 70% of Neanderthals experienced times of great stress during their development (Fagan 1991: 159).
.
There are certain sites which provide archaeologists with vital evidence and clues concerning Neanderthal lifestyles and the trials they in their ice bound world. One important site worth mentioning is the French site of La Chapelle - aux Saints (approx 60,000 - 50,000 kya), discovered and excavated by A and J Bouyssoine in 1908. It was here that the now famous "old man of la Chapelle - aux saints" was discovered, the reason this find was so historically and scientifically important was the fact it was the first relatively complete skeleton discovered. The nickname "old man of la Chapelle - aux saints" was used because the age of the skeleton is approximately 40 years, which as previously discussed is the upper age limit for the species (Fagan 1991: 159).
The "old man of la Chapelle - aux saints" is an interesting and useful find because his anatomy provides researchers with a wealth of information about his life. Many of his teeth were missing completely but the bone that had surrounded the teeth had been given more than enough time to heal after tooth loss. This means that he lived a considerable of time after he lost so many teeth. He also suffered from debilitating arthritis which would have certainly left him incapable of performing any tasks that required strenuous physical labour. It has been argued that in order for him to survive for so many years he would have needed the help and support of the other members of his group with processing food and maybe even moving from place to place. This fossil is considered to be the first example of Neanderthal altruism to be discovered. (Fagan 1991: 159)
The fossil remains found at the Shanidar cave site in Northern Iraq (the extreme Eastern edge of known Neanderthal territory) were excavated during the 1950s by Ralph S. Solecki and Rose L. Solecki. Stratified occupation layers were identified in the cave dating to the Middle Palaeolithic and Upper Palaeolithic periods, as well as a later component dated to the Pre Pottery Neolithic (10,600 BP). The lowest levels at Shanidar (approx 50,000 kya) included some accidental, and some apparently deliberate burials of Neanderthals including the Shanidar 1 skeleton. The fossil was male and like the "old man of la Chapelle - aux saints" was aged around 40 - 45 years at the time of death, his skeleton displayed signs of severe deformity. His right arm was severely atrophied (withered) a condition he had for most of his life, possibly even from birth. His right leg was also crippled and deformed (which means that he probably had a painful limp throughout his life) and had a healed fracture on one of the metatarsals. At some point during his life he suffered from a severe and crushing injury to his right eye socket (clearly visible when the skull is examined) which could have resulted impartial or complete loss of sight in that eye, even brain damage to a greater or lesser degree. All of these injuries combined would have almost definitely led to at least partial paralysis throughout the right hand side of his body. What is clear however is the fact that these injuries were sustained long before death and he survived for a good number of years despite them. He would not have been able to contribute very easily towards his community or family group and would have been a strain on resources and a burden. Archaeologists believe that this situation (and that of la Chapelle - aux saints) infers that Neanderthals looked after their sick even when they were not an active part of the group, this denotes implicit group concern (Fagan 1991: 160).
This says a lot about Neanderthal social structure and organisation, as well as suggests levels of care, emotion and compassion (coupled with the evidence for the possibility of burial practice) previously only attributed to modern humans. There could however be an alternative argument, the Shanidar 1 fossil and the "old man of la Chapelle - aux saints" could both have been either the group's leader or have had access to knowledge and memories that the group needed in order to survive. Variation must also be taken into account, just like with modern society, different groups might have had different practices, whereas one group might leave an injured member behind another might save him. It is unfortunate that the answers to these questions are unanswerable.
The Neanderthals were a highly evolved and well adapted species, who flourished for millennia, is the harsh conditions of ice age Europe. Archaeologists have gleaned vast amounts of data from studying their anatomy. Their skeletal structure tells of a species with the strength to handle the dangerous situations they faced on a daily basis. They must have relied heavily on the heavily musculature, which must have been at least as important if not more so than their intelligence. They probably had at the very least a form of proto language (evidence for this comes from the hyoid bone found at Shanidar which is very modern human in appearance) as they almost certainly had the cognitive functions required. Their children grew up quickly and had to use their unique anatomy to adapt to their environment as well as learn the skills necessary to survive in the short time they lived. In many ways their behaviour seems very human in others it seems completely alien. We will never know their complete story, but through careful scientific study of their anatomy as well as the archaeological record we can learn as much as possible and their behaviour and everyday lives.