This paper is distinctly post - processual in its approach to settlement archaeology and urges the reader to take a broader view of the Neolithic and its people, the author has a definite background in the archaeology of landscape as well. This background is key in understanding the point the paper is trying to make, to make his point Pollard uses many examples and is highly argumentative in his approach.
As the title suggests this paper is primarily concerned with settlement practices in the British Isles. The author, Joshua Pollard draws on his extensive knowledge of settlement in the British Neolithic as well as his apparent intimacy with previously excavated Neolithic sites. His examples cover a wide geographical range, comparing and contrasting sites as diverse as Skrae Brae in Orkney, Hurst Fen in East Anglia and Hazelton North in Gloucestershire.
Pollard uses these examples effectively and they help to support his arguments. He acknowledges the fundamental differences between settlement practices in the far North and Southern Britain. He uses a comparative approach to support his arguments concerning Neolithic settlement variability and mobility, he states that;
Although the geographical range is quite wide ranging from North to South, it could have used some examples from continental Europe and even Ireland. These examples could have been used to broaden and develop the comparative nature of the paper and the arguments presented.
The paper is mainly concerned with looking at different aspects of Neolithic settlement within the British Isles. The paper has three distinct areas dividing the arguments, 'temporality and mobility', 'scale', and remembrance and reference'. Pollard begins by pointing out the fact that the relationship between people and the experience of settlement and landscape is a highly important yet relatively un - studied aspect of Archaeology. He states that "as archaeologists we rarely reflect on this sense of personal experience when engaged in studying settlement".
His arguments try to instil a new dimension into the understanding of settlement. Pollard tries to expand the readers viewpoint by arguing that the decision making process when applied to Neolithic settlement practice is extremely fluid and variable, it is in fact a "skilled practice involving experiential knowledge, social and ontological risk, decisions about where and how to live, with whom and at what cost or benefit". He then goes to criticise archaeological thought and practice by pointing out the fact that "the central problem with the archaeology of Neolithic settlement rest not with the nature of the information we recover, but with the way it is understood". This is a prime example of the whole basis of Pollards argument, he wants the wider academic community to approach Neolithic settlement archaeology in a whole new manner, to reinterpret the current schools of thought. At times he also argues that archaeology can be too influenced by the times and different 'waves' of thought and that this needs to change in favour of a more open viewpoint.
The central argument of the paper as a whole is primarily concerned with broadening understanding of the largely dismissed (in favour of large scale ritual sites) field of Neolithic settlement. Pollard is trying to change the way in which the wider academic community classifies and approaches this particular field.
Pollard views Neolithic settlement systems as highly variable, he brings attention to the fluid (a word that stands out very prominently throughout this paper) nature of the era (in his view anyway). The author's arguments are very strong and it is plain to see that he is attempting to guide the reader's viewpoint and make them aware of the mobile nature of settlement and how it was affected by various factors such as season, location and even geographical region.
In order to support his argument concerning the fluidity of Neolithic settlement pollard uses a range of examples drawn from his extensive knowledge of the field. One such example is Trelystan, Powys near the Severn Valley, it was here that a series of "flimsy" stake - built structures was excavated. Archaeologists suggested that the reason for the structures "flimsy" construction was the fact that they were not expected to be occupied for more than a decade or so (argued to be an example of seasonal transhumance). A structure of this construction and type would definitely not be an example of long term residency and planning.
Pollard also makes use of material evidence such as lithic scatters and middens to help support his theories surrounding the lack of apparent permanence in Neolithic settlements ( it is here he uses the comparative approach to great effect again when comparing Neolithic material culture to that of the Mesolithic).
There is however a flip side to Pollards argument, he states that by its very nature Neolithic settlement practice was highly varied. This therefore leads to the conclusion that not all populations were quite highly mobile, in some cases and geographical regions certain population groups were sedentary in nature, Pollard approaches this aspect as well and he warns of the problems that could arise from ignoring this fact;
This clear acknowledgement of two distinct variables in Neolithic settlement practice helps to bring Pollards argument together before he moves on to discuss ritual and domestic boundaries.
Pollards main argument concerning the boundaries between the ritual and the domestic, is simply and clearly stated, he views Neolithic monuments as acts of remembrance as part of the peoples place within the landscape. He uses chronological examples to support his arguments that (as with most elements of Neolithic settlement practice) the boundary between the ritual and the domestic was again rather fluid;
Pollard appears to be arguing that monuments were placed as acts of remembrance over occupation sites that had been abandoned, that the people how lived there viewed disused places of occupation as ritual in nature, they had a special significance that needed to be remembered. This would (it can be argued) mean that the boundaries between the ritual and domestic were to all intensive purposes non existent, that they were one and the same. His arguments also hint at the people of the Neolithic having a sense of history, which extends our insight into the Neolithic mind. Pollards paper ends with a final important reminder of the importance of the domestic arena as it "is after all where people would have spent most of their lives"
This is in general a very well written and argued paper, it lacks the theoretical 'blurb' that some papers are weighed down by, which adds to it success. It is clearly and eloquently written and Pollards arguments are supported by strong evidence and prime examples, which clearly shows a well researched paper. The examples cover a good range of geographical locations which help to provide the reader with insight into his arguments.
The paper in general is highly successful; it provides the reader (and hopefully the wider academic community) with a fresh viewpoint and a new way of looking at settlement in the British Neolithic. It provides vital insights into the behaviour of the people of that era and will provide researchers with a new perspective to work with. In my opinion the arguments presented should be further expanded and applied to a wider range of archaeological areas, as I have gained a lot from reading this paper.