Archaeological theory is a very wide ranging and multilayered part of archaeology as whole. It covers many subjects and methodologies, and is constantly evolving new ways of thinking as well as new approaches to archaeology itself. The term theory, when applied to archaeology (as well as other social sciences) generally has a greater diversity of meaning than most other natural sciences and most definitely covers more ground. The range of different types of theoretical approaches to archaeology can often be confusing and difficult to separate, this an aspect of archaeological theory that is very often criticised by the wider academic community. Each theory has its own unique approach which is almost certainly always influenced by the archaeologists that thought them up in the first place as well as their politics and cultural backgrounds. The theories cover many aspects of the human past from society to cultural background and even material culture. The theories themselves (and the archaeologists don't forget) as well as the unique and particular approach they adopt or undertake is very often influenced by current political trends and 'fashion' or even new technologies and associated ways of thinking.
An example of how this can happen is Gender Archaeology which was definitely shaped and influenced by the increasing popularity and rise of feminism in the 1980's. As feminist issues came to the forefront of public and even academic society, gender archaeology and its unique views and interpretations soon followed and became and increasingly important part of archaeological theory (Fagan 1996: 244).
Gender archaeology at its most basic level looks at the roles of males and females, their activities, their relative positions within past societies as well as assesses the symbolic and cultural meanings attached to them throughout the whole of human history. It works on the assumption that all historical (as well as modern!) societies require a definite collaboration between men and women (Fagan 1996: 244).
The main aims pursued by gender archaeologists include attempting to correct the male orientated bias that has and still does exist in archaeology; this basically means changing the assumption that all past societies were male dominated and that women were second class citizens (some gender archaeologists also try to change the use of the word 'man' when referring to humankind, a distinctly feminist sounding agenda). They also criticise existing practices within the world of practical archaeology (another supposedly male dominated area) and attempt to suggest possible new ideas, practices, methodologies and approaches. Another aspect that they seek to change is the distinctly male dominated academic world and encourage a more open, 'politically correct' and equal approach. Lastly they study gender throughout history using the archaeological record to provide them with supporting evidence. They use the full range of material remains to assess the impact gender has had on the structures of society as well as the possible cognitive processes concerning gender and possible gender roles (Fagan 1996: 245).
The role of gender archaeology within the subject as a whole is an arguably extremely useful one, even if one could say that it is influenced by politics. It causes the archaeological record to be looked at in a new and exciting manner. Areas of archaeology that had been previously dismissed by the academic community are now being studied adding to the sum of human knowledge. As a theory it shares a lot with feminist theory (at least as far as its political aspects go) and to a certain degree Marxist archaeology. It is, however, distinguishable from other theories because it looks at a particular and specialised area of archaeology that has previously been dismissed. (Bahn 1996: 290).
Marxist archaeology is another obviously politically influenced theory, which at its simplest level is the interpretation of human history using a set of principles laid down by Karl Marx. The theory is primarily looks at social change and structure throughout history by examining the connections between forces of production, for example, technology and the power it has over the people within a society. It also looks at social organisation, for example, it would be concerned with feudalism in the middle ages and how it affected society as a whole (Bahn 1996: 292).
Marxist archaeology is heavily influenced by 'classical' Marxist political theories and is concerned with the struggle between socioeconomic classes within particular social groups or societies. Marxist archaeologists also suggest that a particular society's economic base or foundation can invariably be responsible for its basic ideologies, which in turn effects the amount of direct control over and the lifestyles of the people within that society (Bahn 1996: 292).
Marxist archaeology is clearly directly attributable to Marxist political thinking and the associated theories. This is something that proponents and supporters of the theory do not deny; they admit to being fully cognisant of the nature of the theory but still think it has immense relevance in modern archaeology. This particular aspect of Marxist theory is the most commonly criticised by the wider academic community with the vast majority of archaeological theorists (well academics in general) preferring to keep their personal political belief system separate from their professional lives (Bahn 1996: 292). . One other aspect (or even sub - discipline) of Marxist theory worthy of mention is the Neo - Marxism movement which places emphasis on the ideological aspects of social hierarchies and social structures as opposed to the economic aspects (Trigger 1989: 93)
Both of these 'schools' of thought are arguably flawed theories. They are, it can be argued, (and has been many times) too influenced by out - dated political ideas. Marxism is (in my opinion) a relic of WW2 politics and cold war thinking and has no real place in the 21 st century, even if we do live in very politically motivated times. There are as with most theories some elements than can be applied to archaeology and must be noted and studied. It is essential when studying ancient societies to look at power distribution and the relationships between different classes and elements within those societies. But this does not mean that Marxist ideologies have to be brought into the equation. Marxist theory is distinguishable from other theories purely for the fact it is so heavily influenced by real - world politics and serves as an example of how politics and archaeology are not necessarily mutually exclusive.
The first important and noteworthy phase in the history of archaeological theory and thought is commonly known as cultural or culture history. The aim and practice of culture history was quite straightforward, archaeologists grouped sites into distinct social groups or cultures, they then looked at the geographical locations, the period of time in which they existed as well as the length of time and studied any possible links and interactions that may well have occurred. Archaeologists who support or supported this theory looked at each culture and determined that each one was governed by a set of rules which in turn went on to govern the behaviour of the people within that particular society. An example of how this might work is looking for patterns in style and craftsmanship, for instance an arrowhead with fluted barbs should theoretically belong to a different culture than an arrowhead without barbs at all (Trigger 1989: 99)
This theory is flawed is some ways, an approach such as this leads to people viewing the past in a possibly incorrect manner. It is possible that the past would be viewed as nothing more than a collection of different and separate population groupings only classified by their differences (such as material cultural, architecture e.t.c) as well as any influences they may or may not have had on each other. In reality the evolution of culture and social groups is a lot more complicated than this and archaeological thought has definitely moved on from this rather old fashioned viewpoint.
During the revolutionary 1960's new ideas and viewpoints were being established in almost every sector of the academic world and archaeology was no exception. A group of primarily American archaeologists, which included Lewis Binford, looked at the well established cultural history theories and decided a new approach was needed. (Trigger 1989: 99) They proposed a "New Archaeology" which would be more scientific in its approach as well as draw ideas and methods from the closely allied field of anthropology. Binford and his supporters saw the formation of culture as the result of a set of behavioural processes and traditions. It was this study of processes that led to this new archaeology being called processual archaeology. Processulalists (as they came to be called) took the idea of hypothesis testing from science and applied it to archaeology. They would formulate a hypothesis and try to apply to the particular culture they were trying to study and try to prove its veracity. Excavations would also be undertaken with the hypothesis in mind in order to test and prove their ideas. Another aspect of culture historical thinking they tried to change was the emphasis of culture over people, in other words large social groups dominating research instead of individuals. They also began to prove that modern ethnic groups were not always easily comparable or similar to the cultures within the archaeological record. (Hodder 1991: 106)
Processual archaeology was extremely revolutionary in its time and literally rewrote the book where the study of cultures was concerned. The analytical (through computer modelling of population exchanges, this shows how technology can effect archaeological though as well) and scientific approach was easily adopted into archaeology and shows how truly interdisciplinary archaeology can be. It forced many academics to reassess their previous conclusions and as with most theories looked at past societies in a new and exciting way (Hodder 1991: 106).
Archaeological theory as previously mentioned is a greatly varied field that has viewpoints and new approaches to almost every single facet of archaeology. There are many 'schools' of thought covering many different aspects, some are in direct opposition and compete directly with each other (processual and post - processual theory), whereas others work in tandem (gender and feminist theory) trying to establish new methodologies. For the layman it can be very difficult and even confusing to see the relevance of all these myriad theories and the place they have in modern day archaeology. Some theoretical archaeologist tend to cloud their writings in dogma and overly complicated 'jargon' (Alison Wylie for one!), but ultimately they all to a certain extent have a valid point to make. Some theories have overlapping agendas or ideas which can make it even harder to distinguish them from one another. Unfortunately (like many other areas in science) a lack of objectivity can be a problem and researchers must be aware of this so that it can be dealt with otherwise any data compiled could be misinterpreted and corrupted.
In order to make use of these theories they have to be looked at separately so that one can be distinguished from another. When studying a specific site, society or culture one or more theories can possibly be taken into account. For example if an archaeologist was studying a fifth century Anglo - Saxon graveyard, theories concerning gender, landscape and even Marxism could arguably be considered, even the scientific hypothesis testing of processual archaeology could be useful. In order to do this however archaeologists must have a clear picture of each theory, its strengths and its weaknesses if they are to successfully complete their research.
Theory is extremely useful to the academic community as whole as it encourages new lines of inquiry and new approaches that previously may have been dismissed or in some cases not even acknowledged (gender archaeology is an example of this). It can on the other hand be argued that theory can all too easily be susceptible to the trends and fashions of the time (feminist, gender and Marxist archaeology are all to a certain degree 'victims' of this) in which they were invented, be it politically (this can be dangerous or even in some cases misused) or even technologically speaking. It must be argued that just because it is not necessarily easy to wade through each theory and their potential conflicts it can and must be done so that historical accuracy is kept intact.