Barbara Bender is an archaeological theorist who takes a distinctly post - processual approach to her work. She looked at the work of other people before she started her own.
The aim of her work appears to link buildings with their landscapes using spatial analysis, she attempts to look at the overall picture and states that buildings should not be isolated within that landscape and that landscape is more fluid than previously thought. She criticises other archaeologists saying that they:
This quote shows that she is attempting to say that the scope of understanding where landscapes are concerned is far too limited and that many more factors must be taken into account even if they are not outwardly obvious. She uses the work of two landscape "pioneers" W.G Hoskins and Raymond Williams as examples of how there are two views of landscapes in cultural and historical contexts she says that "Hoskins writings can be used to legitimise this sort of disembodied frozen past" meaning that he appears to not understand the fluidity of landscape. She goes on to say that in Hoskins writings "the past is cut off from the present" Whereas Raymond Williams "provides a politicised theoretical framework that is less open to such abuse and serves to enlarge our understanding of how landscape 'works'" . She then goes to say that his "theorizing of 'structured feeling' moves backwards and forwards (without positing causality) between people's changing social and economic conditions and their experience and understanding of their world". It is not difficult to see which view of landscapes she finds the more pertinent.
The paper in question uses the world famous prehistoric monument Stonehenge as an example of how building can become static within their landscapes. She puts forward the idea that the landscape surrounding than monument was ever changing that settlements and field boundaries were fluid in nature. She uses evidence to back up her argument , for example, the fact that archaeologists have found signs of "flint working, planting and grazing washed up to the very edges of the monuments". There uses and significance were not always straightforward.
Her theoretical scope is very definitely post - processual with a vaguely Marxist tint, she also puts theory before data and uses examples she knows will support her theory. She aims to place whole contexts of settlements within their landscapes. She looks at the effect individuals have on the landscape and how they mould and distort it over time. The data she uses is prehistoric in origin, using Stonehenge, Avebury and Silbury Hill comparatively. She does however successfully bridge the gap between theory and data, she does put theory first but uses actual scientific data to support her arguments.
Her style is at times confusing and presents her case in an overly complicated manner. She does inspire the reader to look at landscapes and buildings/monuments in a new and exciting way. Her post - processual viewpoint is very obvious and can easily be criticised as it pulls together so many arguments it is not necessarily very concise.
Alison Wylie's paper is based upon critical theory and her own views concerning objectivity and subjectivity. She looks at the reconstructed settlement of Shakertown in a very critical manner as well as reconstructions in general. She says that:
Her views are very extreme and have a very aggressive tilt to them, she is insistent that Shakertown and other reconstructions are only built on one persons views and are not objective enough. She believes that reconstructions are very ethnocentric which means that ones values and cultural aspects hold true throughout other time periods and other cultures. It is also the belief that ones culture is morally superior which is something that all archaeologists must try to avoid entirely. She thinks that we are in danger of viewing the past with modern viewpoints and all the cultural bias that follow, personal biases and prejudices are also a problem in her view. Her argument is not very well supported by her data set because she only chose one very limited example which does not appear to bridge the gap between theory and data very well at all. Her theories concern subjectivity and objectivity and the fact that as an archaeologist you cannot be either but in reality a little bit of both is required. Her opinion of Shakertown is very low, she thinks it is static and not true to life, she puts this point across very firmly. Her paper is written in a very complicated and difficult read style and is in my opinion nothing more than a rant at something that in her opinion is very poorly done. She does not appear to understand that although difficult archaeologists must at least try to be as objective as possible, but this is not always possible. Reconstructions will never be entirely realistic (without the aid of a time machine anyway!) but must be appreciated for what they are, a way to look at the past visually and give archaeologists (and the public) a chance to feel the past. She is right when stating that objectivity is a problem that must be addressed and avoided.