The Viking raids of the 9 th and 10 th centuries are amongst the most well known and documented episodes of early medieval Europe. Before this period Scandinavia was a distant outpost with little cultural, political and economic significance or value for the rest of the world. The beginning of the Viking age starts traditionally around 793 AD to when the first historical account of a Viking raid was writted describing a raid on an English monastery at Lindisfarne on the east coast. It is around this time that similar records of raids start appearing all around Europe. The age of the Vikings had begun.
The popular image of the Vikings handed down through the generations is based on written accounts from the time. These accounts portray them as brutal, merciless barbarians who were nothing more than heathen pagans that spent their lives killing and stealing from good Christian folk. In many respects this image was true to a certain degree but it must be taken into account who wrote these depictions. These 'hirtorians' were for the most part priests (one of the only actively literate groups at the time) and would have been particularly horrified by the pagan Vikings and their practices. On the other hand however it is important to realize, that the Church itself would have been a relatively defenceless and extremely wealthy target. Many monasteries were positioned along the coast which would have made attacking easier for the seafaring Vikings; they would have made an extremely tempting target. Another point to consider is that the Vikings were pagans and did not believe in or fear the Christian's God, something that would usually have gone a long way to protecting a monastery from attack. However as with any historical account it is inevitable that a certain amount of bias would creep in and the priests would not have had the opportunity to see the situation from all sides. This is where archaeology steps in, to find physical evidence of all aspects of Viking life.
The Vikings were a seafaring people who relied on their ship building knowledge as well as their practical knowledge of the seas and oceans on which they sailed. Just the sight of a Viking warship off the coast of many countries was enough to spread terror and panic. The ships themselves were of exceptional design and came in two distinct classes, the longship and the warship. The longship ranged from 70 to 140ft in length while the more practical and easier to maneuver warship ranged from 70 to 80ft in length. Both had extremely shallow drafts which led to the ships having the ability to enter river systems as well as allowing them to come close to shore and even be beached for extended periods. The shallow drafts also allowed for speed and manoeuvrability which was essential in sea battles, over all ships of Scandinavian design had the advantage. Generally the ships were rowed by the warriors within and when they were adequately rested they could reach speeds of 8-10 knots.
In the late 1960s the remains of five 11 th century longships and warships were found at the entrance to Roskilde Fjord near Roskilde in Denmark. The ships were in a remarkable state of preservation and had been purposely sunk with stones placed inside their hulls. The position of the boats, in the main navigation channel, suggested that they had been placed there to protect the nearby city (the Danish capital at the time) from sea borne assault. This can lead to two conclusions, that the inhabitants were sufficiently worried about attack that measures needed to be taken and that they had ships to spare (Renwick 1979: 7)
The excavation of these ships was an extremely lengthy and expensive process and required the building of a coffer dam which enclosed the area and allowed the water to be pumped out and drained. This meant that the excavation could proceed as if it was taking place on dry land. The results of the excavation provided archaeologists with very important data concerning Viking shipbuilding techniques and technology (Renwick 1979: 7). It is obvious that the Vikings spent a lot of time, energy, experience and money on designing their warships. This helps to prove that they were a warlike race; the ships themselves match the descriptions given by the previously mentioned priest, which means that their depictions were accurate at least in one respect. Viking warships were perfectly designed for lightening fast raids and ambushes and were fearsome in aspect.
There is however another side to the story archeological evidence shows that warships weren't the only type of ship commonly used by the Vikings. Things had begun to change by the 10 th-11 th centuries and European society was beginning to settle down as nations began to form. The Vikings slowly began to turn from raiding to commerce, and they began to build a new generation of ships more suitable for this purpose and more characteristic of the generality of Viking shipping at that time. The most characteristic of these trading vessels was the Knarr or Hafskip which was used for long distance trade and features widely in the Icelandic saga as the principal vessel used for exploration and colonization. It was in these deep water high sides sailing ships that Bjarni Herjolfson and Lief Eriksson used in their voyages across the North Atlantic to the American continent.
References to the Knarr are abound in the Sagas, but there is even less evidence of them in Viking iconography, for much the same reasons that Greek and Roman Roundships are not well represented in classical iconography. But it was the Knarr and its derivatives which constituted the basis of Viking Sea trading and transport. These merchant vessels were built with a larger load capacity and for seaworthiness and stability rather than speed. These ships had a wider deck, shelter for the crew (unlike the warships where the crew had to sleep open to the elements) and a cargo hold in the middle of the ship. There have been a few archaeological sites where evidence for Viking trading has been found including the Askekarr ship which dates back as far the 8 th century. This shows that the Vikings were not just interested in warfare and that they did indeed trade, hardly the sign of a society whose only interest was bloodshed there was another side to their culture. (Greenhill 1976: 215)
Due to their sea faring nature the Viking sphere of influence (as opposed to an empire comparable to the Roman and British empires) stretched from their homelands in Scandinavia to Constinople in the east to Greenland and North America in the west. Through out these realms there is much archaeological and historical evidence of their activities and wherever they went they made cultural and social impacts. Raiding was all very well for the yielding sporadic bursts of wealth but only trade could yield a regular income. It can be argued that the achievement of the Scandinavians as traders rather than raiders proved the more enduring and successful. The Vikings made use of various different methods for trading; they used simple fishing camps or minor trading stations, through to seasonal markets, densely settled towns and trading ports (Renwick 1979: 20)
Recent excavations in Viking Age towns and market places have revealed a myriad of evidence for craft industries including debris from the making of everyday and luxury objects such as glass, amber, bone, antler, wood, iron, bronze and precious metals, as well as for subsidiary industries such as ship repairing and agricultural industry. The blacksmith, woodworker, bead-maker, specialist jeweler, horn-and antler-worker, leather-worker and stone carver all played an important part in Viking society and were the foundation of Viking society and trade. Many warriors were in fact skilled in other professions and were only part time raiders and warriors seeking to gain a reputation. (Sawyer 2001; 78)
The eastern European island of Gotland with its central Baltic location was prominent as a centre for trade with both the east and west Baltic areas. Naturally formed shelving beaches provided many landing places suitable for the shallow-draft vessels of the Vikings and allowed the development of good communications and trade routes throughout the Viking world. Gotland was a trading port deriving its commercial success from the handling of transit trade through the Baltic and the eastern European regions. Wealthy pagan graves and buried hoards of Viking treasure from all over the island suggest that native Gotlandic farmers had indeed participated in this rich commercial trade. Several burials were uncovered in the area containing hoards of grave goods, helping to prove the extent of Viking influence and trade as well as the huge profits made. The Gotland burial hoards contained large amounts of imported Arabic and European silver in the form of coins (about 40,000 Arabic, 38,000 German and 21,000 Anglo-Saxon coins), silver objects and jewelry, sometimes hacked into smaller pieces for ease of bartering and trade or melting down for use elsewhere. Sets of bronze weighing scales with surprisingly accurate regulated weights, used for weighing out silver and precious metals in commercial transactions, were also found in the Gotland area (Sawyer 2001; 79)
The Vikings also had trading centres in Western Europe, one the most important of which was Dublin in Ireland. The Vikings first established a base at the mouth of the River Liffey in 841. This was used as trading and raiding base which survived until 902 when the native Irish defeated and exiled the Vikings. Dublin was at its peak around 1000AD and would have been a very busy trading port with many ships coming and going throughout the year. There would have been ocean-going traders, coastal traders, and of course the fearsome longships or warships, all of which used the port as a base. This helps to prove the duality of the Vikings, that they had interests in both trading and raiding. Many different goods were traded, including wool and other woven materials, hides and furs, weapons, items for everyday use and even slaves (evidence of raids) for transport across the known world. These items would have been traded for goods that would have usually been unavailable such as ceramics from England, soapstone for Shetland, silks from Baghdad, broken glass pieces from Germany (to make bracelet stones and other decorative items), tin from Cornwall (a centre for tin mining in Europe), silver from the Middle East, and ivory in the form of walrus tusks was imported from the Arctic colonies like Greenland and Iceland. Evidence for the slave trade in Dublin includes chains and manacles which have been found on various excavated sites and as individual finds. One find of particular note is a 10meter long iron chain with an attached collar which was found beside an iron spearhead, a bronze pin and a human skull beside a crannog at Ardakillen near Dublin. The skull has signs of up to twenty axe or sword cuts, which is perhaps a testament to the brutality of the age and the possible mistreatment of slaves.
The Vikings also traded internally especially with their more isolated Northern Atlantic colonies like Iceland and Greenland. Greenland relied on trade due to its very nature, a sparse and barren land with almost no timber; it can be argued that the inhabitants would have relied almost completely on traders and supplies from other more resource rich settlements. Below is a description from the Kings Mirror a 13 th century 'handbook' written in the form of a father's advice to his son:
The historical source is direct evidence of the difficulties facing the Greenlander's and proves that trade was essential for the survival of certain colonies. This is also backed by archaeological evidence in the form of Viking longhouses and evidence of other buildings which were made from timber that couldn't have been native to Greenland.
Overall the Vikings were a much more complex and multitalented society than they were given credit. An indication of the violent nature of a particular society is the fact that nearly all the graves of males should include weapons. A well equipped warrior had to have a sword, a wooden shield with an iron boss at its centre, a spear, an axe, and a commonly portrayed in modern pictures, are extremely rare in archaeological material. Helmets with horns, ubiquitous in present day depictions, have never been found amongst weapons, archaeologists find signs of more peaceful activities; sickles, scythes, and hoes lie along side of weapons. The blacksmith was buried with his hammer, anvil, tongs, and file. The coastal farmer has kept his fishing equipment and is often buried in a boat. In women's graves we often find personal jewelry, kitchen articles and artifacts used in textile production. This is all tied up in the belief systems that existed at the time, but also provides archaeologists with a window into the past, the goods and artifacts found have a lot to say about the lifestyle and profession of the deceased.
The answer to the question: Were the Vikings raiders or traders? They were both, above all Viking warriors sought glory and a reputation (known as 'word-fame'), they sought fold and a place in the sagas, this was part of their belief system. Although as time progressed they became involved in their own myth starting elite groups like the Jomsvikings. Many Vikings who took part in the raids went on to set themselves up in business or in some cases to fund journeys of exploration. The Viking conquests left lasting impressions on the areas they visited, their social structure, dialects, place names, personal names and even law codes. However the Vikings in turn were exposed to different cultures and lifestyles which they took back to their homelands, which started to reshape parts of their society. Their poetry, art, history and mythology still remain fascinating to this day.