Humanities first known art tradition appeared during the Upper Palaeolithic period. The vast majority of Palaeolithic art appears in cave systems throughout the world, especially in areas like France and Spain. Prehistoric are comes in two main forms parietal and mobiliary art. Parietal art covers paintings and engravings on stationary surfaces, such as cave walls or on large blocks of stone. A famous and well known example of parietal art are the spectacular cave paintings discovered in 1940 at Lascaux near Montignac in the Dordogne region of France (Lecture 8, 28 th October 2005). There are many images of animals including Reindeer and Bison (animals commonly found throughout Europe in that period) which date back almost 22,000 years. The reason these paintings have survived the test of time concerns the environment for artefact preservation. The paintings and related artefacts are protected from the elements in a cool, dry environment, ideal for preservation (Aiello 1982: 80).
Mobiliary art covers art that is portable in nature, in other words engravings or sculpture on stone, clay, bone or even antler that can be carried easily by an individual. This can include personal decoration and items such as beautifully carved spear throwers, which while practical, are also decorative. One common piece of mobiliary art are small stylised figures of human females called Venus figurines, these are regularly found on Palaeolithic sites throughout Europe and the Near East. The figurines are considered by many archaeologists to be fertility symbols and may have some religious significance (Aiello 1982: 80)
The most important and hotly debated question surrounding the enigma of Palaeolithic art is quite simply; why? What does it represent and what is it for? Art is a landmark in the human journey and understanding it is essential in understanding our heritage. Paintings, engravings and sculptures that are unquestionably art suggest that the artists were people who were to all intensive purpose like us, they thought and felt in the same way we do. An animal would not be able to define a painting as anything other than an incomprehensible mess of random colours and shapes, art and the appreciation of art is unique to man. Understanding the reasons behind its creation is a quest that many archaeologists have taken up over the years, and many theories have been proposed (Lecture 8, 28 th October 2005).
The first and possibly most obvious theory is 'art for arts sake', which means that Palaeolithic art is nothing more than 'primitive mans' first attempts at being creative (Lecture 8, 28 th October 2005). Some archaeologists believed that the paintings were nothing more than decoration, making their immediate environment more appealing. This theory was generally abandoned quite quickly as new theories were introduced (Leakey and Lewin 1977: 140)
In recent times however, the theory has been revived by John Halverson an anthropologist from the University of California. He suggests that the images are the product of a 'primal mind' and that the art is the 'human consciousness in the process of growth'. He states that the reasons the images are relatively simple, depict no complicated scenes and are naturalistic in appearance are the result of a mind in the 'early stages of mental development', in other words, the paintings were experiments in imagination or creativity (Leakey and Lewin 1992: 318).
Another theory became popular when researchers realised that there was a definite link between more recent Australian Aboriginal art and Palaeolithic art. Anthropologists realised that the Aboriginal paintings were part of ritual hunting magic. They argued that both societies were hunter-gatherers and that there were many similarities in the number and composition of species in the paintings. It is therefore reasonable to suppose that both societies produced rock paintings for the same reasons. That painting images of certain 'prey' species was either some kind of offering to gods unknown or they could have believed that the paintings gave the hunter some power over the animal's depicted. It could also have been a way of symbolically increasing the numbers of certain animals to ensure that a hunt would be successful or there is a more simple explanation, it was a record of kills from a particular hunt (Leakey and Lewin 1992: 318).
When considering this theory it must be taken into account the species that appear most often in rock art, their numbers and even the style in which they were painted. Around 60% of European rock art is dominated by three main species, Horse, bison, oxen (all commonly found in the Palaeolithic landscape). Animals such as Mammoths, reindeer, ibex, boars and goats make some appearances but only occasionally. Images depicting plants, carnivores, fish, birds and people are rare, and some only appear on one or two sites. The animals that do appear are 'prey' animals that would have been very common and part of life for the Palaeolithic hunter. If taken as whole the images do not represent how the animals appeared in nature, the scope is just not broad enough there appears to be bias towards certain species (Leakey and Lewin 1992: 318)
There is one major problem with the hunting/sympathetic magic theory; the fossil record does not in a number of cases support it. One example is Reindeer; they were an extremely important part of Palaeolithic life, not just for food but for their antlers and hides as well and are not very commonly depicted in Palaeolithic artwork. There are a few other species where this discrepancy shows up and casts doubt on the whole theory (Leakey and Lewin 1992: 319-20)
The next major theory is based on work published and researched by Clive Gamble and Steven Mithen and is called Information theory. The basis of this theory suggests that the rock paintings were in fact recording devices for passing on environmental and resource information to other hunter-gatherer groups. These measures were required in order adapt to the extreme ice age environments that they lived in. The paintings would have provided hunters with information about which particular animal species were edible and in abundance as well as their locality (Lecture 8, 28 th October 2005). This could explain the absence of certain species of rock art; they just weren't immediately available at that time in that area. The paintings could also have served a secondary function in regards to this theory; the marking of territory. For example if a nomadic group enters a cave system they haven't previously encountered and it contains the art from a rival group they are made aware of the occupational history of that cave.
Another theory has in recent years gained popularity, ritual magic and shamanism. Amongst modern hunter-gatherer groups like the San or Bushmen of Southern Africa (Namibia, Botswana, and South Africa) shamanism and rock art are closely intertwined. Again, both the San and Upper Palaeolithic artists are hunter-gatherers so it could be argued as with the hunting magic theories that they would follow the same patterns and possibly ritual practices as well. (Clottes 2000, )
One very important factor that must be taken into consideration when looking at Upper Palaeolithic religious practices and mythology is that they would have been completely different to our own. We just would not recognise certain things as being significant as we have no firm point of reference from which to study religions of such great antiquity (Leakey and Lewin 1992: 318).
The central point of almost all shamanistic religions is the spirit world, shamans try to enter and connect with this world by entering a trance like state. There are various methods for doing this the most common being the ingestion of naturally occurring hallucinogenic drugs. The art could in fact be the neuropsychological outpourings of a shaman practicing religious rites. A shaman would have fulfilled a key role in society; they would have been a mediator communing with the spirit world. They would have portrayed could have been spirit guides or as previously mentioned been connected with hunting magic. Some paintings exhibit geometric patterns and shapes which are present during the initial stages of a trance. Palaeolithic shamans would have been Homo sapiens just like us and therefore had an identical nervous system, this is a great help as the effects of certain rituals can be compared with modern groups.
The caves themselves would have been places of deep cultural and religious significance, places of mystery and fear. Many societies believe that the supernatural would lays beneath our feet, a realm of spirits and the dead. When entering a deep cave system Palaeolithic people would have been aware that they were entering a world of spirits. Some paintings have found in deep inaccessible passages in difficult to reach places, in small tight passageways, high up on ceilings; some archaeologists have noted that these locations are perfectly positioned for sound resonance. The cave environment was without a doubt a central point for our ancestors. In the Tuc d'Audoubert cave system in France two clay sculptures of Bison were found in the centre of a circular cave room far from the entrance. Near the Bison a circle of small human footprints were, could these prints be from children being led to an initiation ceremony? These questions are still left unanswered and will continue to tantalise archaeologists for many years to come. (Aiello 1982: 80)
The question "what was Palaeolithic rock art for?" is perhaps not as important as what it represents as a whole. The theories that have been presented in this essay all make valid points and have a ring of truth. Very few have any solid evidence to back them up; comparing ancient rock art to the work of modern tribes is very helpful in establishing theories but ultimately is not concrete. Viewing rock art through western eyes inevitably can lead to bias, the mind of 'primitive man' is extremely elusive and whereas we are anatomically identical their mindset and belief system must have been incomprehensible. Interpreting rock art is difficult, for example; some animals appear pregnant, is this an attempt to symbolically increase their fertility? This is not a question easily answered. Of all the proposed theories the shamanistic approach seems most likely, and the evidence seems to support it.
Rock art does represent one important thing; imagination. The artwork shows that humanity had begun to develop their mental faculties and lay the foundation of the complex society that we live in today. Humanity had begun to look at the surrounding world in a new and exciting manner using their imaginations to create objects of beauty and plan ahead. The are could represent the human need to leave a mark after death, something that well be left behind to reach out to future generations. What ever the reason the very fact it exists is of enormous importance that someone painted a picture that only existed in their minds eye is proof that we are different from every other creature that has ever existed. An imagined world of their own creation.