Throughout the span of human history many societies and civilisations have risen and fallen, many of these societies have approached the disposal of the dead with a great reverence and ritual. Generally the funeral rites and practices would take days, weeks, months and in some cases years to plan and put into action. They were and still are seen as an important part of separating world of the living from the world of the dead. The material remains of these practices provide archaeologists with invaluable data and evidence to interpret and analyse. This provides the archaeological community with a unique and exciting challenge, every site, tomb and burial must be approached differently depending on the environmental and physical conditions. Artefacts and skeletal remains must be treated with due care and consideration and catalogued in a precise and meticulous manner in order to aid scientific method.
If handled properly archaeologists find skeletal remains and their associated artefacts extremely useful for academic study. The way in which a particular society or ethnic group handle the subject of death and the disposal of the dead can be very telling about their belief systems, religious practices and social structures. (Stirland 1986: 5)
The bodily remains themselves can provide a treasure trove of information about the individual or individuals found. Detailed study of the bones themselves can provide information about lifestyle, migration patterns (stable isotope analysis) and the physical attributes of that particular person. (Stirland 1986: 5)
Anthropometric data can easily be obtained from skeletal remains, for example the measurement of long bones can help to calculate stature and body mass, and the skull can be used to recreate facial features. Evidence of trauma is retained and can be studied and compared with statistical data to extrapolate information about the kind of activities undertaken by certain individuals. Malformation, congenital disorders and joint wear due to hard labour can all be recognised, catalogued and studies with a high degree of accuracy. (Stirland 1986: 5)
Certain diseases leave their mark, such as tuberculosis, leprosy, arthritis and osteoporosis. Once identified the data is extremely useful in ascertaining a possible cause of death as well as helping archaeologists to track the diseases evolution, infection and mortality rates and movement through ancient populations. Other diseases are caused by poor diet or a lack of certain minerals, one example being Rickets (children) or Osteomalacia (adults) caused by a lack of vitamin D. This particular affliction is generally associated with the industrial revolution and the subsequent problems with severe overcrowding and poor diet. This type of information is very important to archaeologists as they can then learn a lot about the conditions in which people lived and the effect disease and illness had on them. (Stirland 1986: 36)
Another important aspect concerning the body itself is its orientation and the way it is arranged within the grave itself. The orientation can be very suggestive and help to place the burial into religious and social contexts. For example Muslim graves are always orientated with the body facing Mecca no matter which part of the world the burial site is in. This would therefore indicate to archaeologists the importance of Mecca in the lives of members of the Islamic community. Another example would be Christian burials with the grave orientation being with the head pointing west. The theory behind this involves the Christian belief in Judgement day, that god will appear in the east and deceased will rise to meet him face first. These examples go a long way to prove that grave orientation is rarely random and is usually associated with some form of ritual behaviour or religious practice; this therefore gives researchers a line of inquiry to follow in their investigations. (Pearson 2003: 6)
Within the grave itself the arrangement of body can be placed in varied positions, each representing different beliefs. Bodies have been found in various burial sites in many different positions ranging from lying face up to sitting or even standing. Many bodies are found lying on their backs with their hands crossed on their chests, this is a very peaceful pose and suggests a certain degree of care and tenderness in the placement of the body. The bodies arrangement is in the majority of cases one of the first indicators of deliberate burial. Archaeologists can also make a judgement of the speed and care taken with a burial, if the body is an awkward pose it can prove that the body was buried in haste or even just dumped (which in some cases, such as some European bog bodies, can smaller groups with slightly different practices within a particular area. It is also reasonable to assume that the deceased had family, friends and had achieved some measure of respect during his/her lifetime. (Pearson 2003: 6)
Archaeologists can learn a lot from the grave of burial pit itself; the size, shape, depth and care taken or not taken whilst digging it can provide the archaeological community with vital information. It can in some cases reflect the social standing or rank of that particular individual; even gender can have some role to play in shaping the processes of funeral practices. Generally the more formal the funeral rites are the more effort is put in to the preparation and the grave itself. A modern example are Christian graves, they are very formal and functional, and their dimensions vary according to coffin size and are mostly around 6ft deep. The reasons for this depth is twofold, firstly to protect the body from tampering, secondly to prevent the spread of disease. The graves are clearly marked with comparably little extravagance (usually just a headstone or a small statue or in some cases a small mausoleum) and set out in clear areas of grids. This is designed to give relatives a place to visit and to stop newer graves intersecting old ones, a common problem in the poorly planned cemeteries of medieval Europe. (Pearson 2003: 7)
Not all burials required the digging of formal grave pits in specially prepared sites. Some groups, especially in pre-Iron Age societies made use of natural features such as caves, fissures, rocky overhangs and ditches. (Pearson 2003: 5) This could show that these groups observed funeral practices with very little ritual and were just a way of disposing of a carcass rendered useless in death. It could be argued that the emphasis was on the spiritual rather than the mortal remains and if true says lot about the people who are represented by these types of burial and their belief systems. It could also indicate a lack of time and resources as well as a possible nomadic lifestyle with a lack of permanent structures.
The most obvious and recognisable feature of burial archaeological are any above ground or semi - buried burial structures. Burial structures range from simple headstones to burial mounds to full scale monuments like the great pyramids in Egypt. When studying these monuments the general rule is the larger the structure the higher the social status and the more powerful the individual of individuals who are interned within. The larger monuments were hugely symblois; they were statements of power and domination meant in some cases to remind the populace who's in charge. They were built for a variety of other reasons, including the protection of the deceased and their grave goods and to help them ascend to the afterlife. Archaeologists can learn a lot from burials of this type, they can study building methods and technology, the positioning of the building itself, the wealth and resources of the particular civilisation that built it. Some burials were constructed to mimic structures from everyday life like houses or in the case of the change over time, for example, during the European Neolithic some burial mounds and barrows were used communally (although they did appear to contain individuals of higher rank) whereas the emphasis did shift towards wealthy individual burials during the Bronze and Iron ages. These monuments stand as a testament to human beliefs and ingenuity. (Hadingham 1976: 50)
Grave goods are the items placed within the burial chamber or burial pit; they can be personal in nature. They can also be gifts from family members, friends and even subjects (in the case of royal burials). Grave goods can range from simple everyday items to the bodies of slaves and concubines. The goods themselves can be representative of the deceased's profession, in other words, a warrior may be buried with his swords and other relevant items. Although this is not always accurate and the items present could be an idealised view of the individuals life and achievements. In many cultures the presence of grave goods serve the purpose of providing materials necessary for starting a new 'life' in the afterlife. The first Chinese Emperor Qin Shi Huangdi had a vast terracotta army built in order to protect him in the afterlife, this shows a strong belief in the religious ideals surrounding death, a true belief that death is not an end but another beginning. It is physical evidence such as this that helps archaeologists to build a picture of a particular culture and its relgious and social belief. The artefacts themselves can provide vital information about lifestyle, religion, the extent of trade, artistic standards and technology, and social standing rank and power. The artefacts also reflect the growth through time of material wealth within a civilisation. As a civilisation grows it begins to develop wealthy powerful classes, an elite, which as they grow more powerful their burials generally grow more extravagant. This can be used as a method to chart the rise and fall of a civilisation (for example during times of war and disease epidemics mass graves occur more regularly) throughout a certain period of time as well as record changes in belief, attitude towards death and ideology. This information is vital in understanding a particular burial and being able to compare and contrast with similar burials and place it in a wider context. (Pearson 2003: 9 - 11)
The Hochdorf burial is an Iron Age tumulus located near Stuttgart in Baden - Wurttemberg, Germany was discovered in 1978. The Hochdorf tumulus was 30m high (100ft) and surrounded by a low stone wall, it was dated to the final quarter of the 6 th century BC. The interior consisted of alternating layers of planks and stones forming a chamber which contained a single body about 6ft high of a male, aged between 30-40 years old. The grave goods contained within the chamber were of such magnificent quality that its occupant earned the nickname 'The Hochdorf Prince'. The burial is clearly of 'Celtic' origin but unlike most important 'Celts' of the time he was not a warrior, the only weapon found was a small iron dagger which was more likely an essential accessory rather than a tool for killing. The 'prince was laid out in luxury on a Greek style bronze couch covered with expensive furs and finely woven fabrics. Around his neck was a golden torc of typical 'Celtic'; design, and placed just above his head was a strange conical hat made of birch bark of unknown design and origin. All around him lay items of immense value, suggesting great wealth, influence and power. Within the burial chamber itself a massive four wheeled iron decorated was found filled with feasting equipment such as drinking horns and pottery vessels, suggesting that feasting was a big part of this individual's life. At the foot of the couch stood another object of Greek design and origin, a huge bronze cauldron hold more than 70 gallons or 318 litres of wine (an essential part of 'Celtic' life). (Bahn 2004: 295-206)
This site is incredibly important, it helps archaeologists to understand the early 'Celtic' world and al lot can be learned about their role in central European history. The 'Celts' did not have a writing tradition so sites like Hochdorf are very useful for filling the gaps in our knowledge. The archaeological evidence helps to prove that trade between the Greeks and the 'Celts' was taking place and the 'Celts' were in touch with what was at the time the most advanced civilisation in Europe. Due to the fact that such a high status person was buried in such a manner without being a warrior suggests that there was more to 'Celtic' culture than the filthy 'barbarians' described by the invading Romans. Dr Erwin Keefer of Stuttgart Museum suggests that the 'The Hochdorf Prince' could have been a cultured diplomat or trader, who traded in Greek goods and possibly Greek ideas as well. The relationship between the Greeks and the 'Celts' has been previously noted in the Histories by Herodotus a 5 th Century BC writer known as the 'Father of History'. Men like the 'Hochdorf Prince' would have previously been made rich by the trade in iron using the river Danube as a supply route. The burial provides physical evidence of this relationship and goes some way to disproving the traditional theory of the blood thirsty head hunting savages that rampaged through Europe murdering indiscriminately. It also helps to build on the store of knowledge of burial practices at the time. (Bahn 2004: 205-206)
Burials in general provide archaeologists with huge amounts of information about past societies; there is a vast amount of variation between cultures (and even within cultures). Each group had different approach, from cremation, to mummification and simple burial a whole set of beliefs and rituals accompany each method from the highly extravagant to the downright bizarre and mundane.