The Canso d'Antioca was written by Gregory Bechada in the twelfth-century. He was a soldier but had a good education, including knowledge of Latin, yet he chose to write his account in the vernacular, in his mother tongue of Occitan French. This was the first piece of vernacular history in French, predating the earliest Anglo-Norman texts by two decades, and continental French texts by a century. It celebrates the crusaders' victory at Antioch in 1098, which was of great significance as it gave the crusaders a foothold into the Holy Lands and they then went on to conquer Jerusalem. History writing in the Middle Ages was often a combination of literature and history, so the reliability of such sources is questionable. The Canso d'Antioca is described as an epic chronicle; although there is undoubtedly some accuracy in his account, there is a propagandist element to it also.
The Canso d'Antioca was written at the request of the bishop Eustorge, and was partly a commemoration for Bechada's lord, Gouffier of Lastours, who also participated in the conquest of Antioch. Bechada was also advised to write this account by Gaubert the Norman. This may have influenced the writing as Bechada had to take their views into consideration, but it also gives the work added authority. His account could not solely have been his opinions or perceptions. Bechada was anxious about the use of the vernacular. Despite knowledge of Latin, which was considered the authoritative language, Bechada chose to write in Occitan 'so that the populace might fully comprehend it', which was the same reason for writing in popular metre. Thus Bechada is concerned with stressing the truth and reliability of his writing. As an epic chronicle, many literary descriptions and devices have been employed which may appear to limit the credibility of the writing. The chansons de jest that were common in the Middle Ages drew on historical events to highlight social and political aspects of the day. It is clear also that Bechada produced propaganda for the crusades, to encourage participation and support for it. Yet despite all these things, the Occitan fragments of the Canso d'Antioca can still be considered as history as there is truth in his words and they do give a description of a famous incident during the First Crusade.
The most obvious propaganda in the Occitan fragments of the Canso d'Antioca is that for the work itself. 'If anyone wishes to learn a song, I think he is very foolish/ if he fails to sing this one'. Although this quote can only be found near the end of the extract, it shows Bechada's concern to appeal to the audience. Although it is subtle, as it is not the main focus of the passage, it would influence the audience into trusting in the song. The Occitan fragments actually begin with a conversation between the King of Persia, King Kerbogha and his 'courtly interpreter', Herluin. This dialogue helps to convey the Turks response to the crusaders and the battle at Antioch, or at least the crusaders' view of what the Turks thought. It then moves on to very detailed descriptions of the battle and the individual combats. There is a clear propagandist message in the lists of names of the soldiers that partook in the battle. It is only the highest soldiers that are mentioned, possibly those that Bechada's patron had relations with, and they are described as, 'a courageous and bold group'. The King is portrayed as worried and anxious about the threat of the Christian army, so he seeks for consolation in Herluin. Herluin, however, far from relieving his fears, exacerbates them, by encouraging Kerbogha to flee, 'Noble king, why not turn and take flight?" The strength of the Christian army is emphasised to celebrate their victory and increase their prestige. It would also encourage others to join the crusaders as they would be impressed by the easy defeat of the Turks and by the fear the crusaders inspired. As the knights were depicted as heroes, others would want some of that glory too, and in this account they would have role models to follow. There are detailed descriptions of individual battles, commemorating certain soldiers, such as Duke Godfrey and Walter the German. Although epic chronicles did contain stock motifs, such as a set description of single combats, this could be seen as propaganda as Bechada chose to highlight certain men above others. Thus there is clear propaganda in the listing of names and the bold and valiant descriptions of the soldiers.
The choice of words used by Bechada is often anything but objective and shows a certain propagandist bias. To Herluin, the white army 'seem more like angels'. Whilst many chronicles did contain incredible events, this could also be seen as propaganda as the crusaders were portrayed as having supernatural forces on their side, 'God sends them to help their friends." The role of religion is also highlighted, perhaps to give justification to the battle. The crusades were authorised by the pope and encouraged by many ecclesiastical sources. Bechada may have wished to support the idea that the victory was the will of God. When he describes the death of Heraclius of Polignac he is keen to emphasise the moments immediately preceding his death, 'He spoke and made his last testament and took Communion,/ and then he dies and met his end." This would ensure that people knew Heraclius had died absolved of all his sins. There is a great deal of hyperbole and emotive language used, again to accentuate the valour and might of the crusaders. Herluin is filled with pride upon sight of the army, 'he feels such joy as has never been equalled'. After the crusaders have fought the Turks, the land is described as, 'crimson with the blood flowing from the dead and wounded." This all serves to increase the terror of the army and show how much they should be feared. Thus there is clearly a propagandist element to the Canso d'Antioca.
The style of history writing in the early Middle Ages included many literary devices, and as most were written as songs to entertain, they had to appeal to an, often, uneducated audience. Thus whilst the Occitan fragments of the Canso d'Antioca clearly contain much hyperbole and exaggerated description, a lot can be learnt from them about the history of the crusades. Bechada is keen to stress the truth and authenticity of his work, and to distinguish it from mere romance, seen as a 'degenerate' form of art. Although the names of the soldiers are clearly a commemoration of a chosen few, it does inform historians of at least some of the people who took part in the battle at Antioch. Their origins are also mentioned, which gives historians an idea of the nationalities involved, and shows just how far-reaching the crusades were, 'paid soldiers have come from all corners of Christendom.'. Their armour and appearance are part of the stock motifs used in the period, but do help us to understand what knights wore at the time and what accessories they carried, 'they all carry scrips in the fashion of pilgrims'. Similarly the origins and appearances of those fighting against the crusaders are mentioned, 'Kerbogha of Persia, the king of Safargat,/ and Bal of Femenia'. Bechada does concede that the Turks were 'well equipped and provisioned for battle,/ since their horses are superb and the men are well armed', but this may have been more to prove just how mighty the Christian army was to defeat such strong fighters. Thus much can be learnt about the appearance of the warriors and their nations of origin.
The Canso d'Antioca also provides insight into the legalities of warfare, and its customs. Kerbogha 'sent a messenger to propose to the Franks that they should not let their best men be cut to pieces and slaughtered', but instead just thirty men from each side 'should do battle with each other'. He used technical legal language and precise negotiating details. Although the reason given for this was Kerbogha's fear at defeat, which may have been an exaggeration, the mention of 'his mother the queen who had deeply frightened him' does contain some truth. The King's mother was against the battle and tried to dissuade her son from getting involved. The French rejected this compromise, as it was not 'the custom here in our kingdom that a Frank should come to a sworn agreement over a battle once the battle lines are drawn'. This gives insight into the legal procedures of battle during the crusades. The fragments also illustrate the rituals of battle, such as the calls to battle. The Turks, 'sounded a horn of carved ivory,/ three times on a full note and twice more faintly'. This again may have been a stock motif, but the idea came from somewhere so it is likely there was an element of truth in it. There is also evidence of medieval fighting tactics, as Kerbogha is described as ordering his men to 'all spur together in a single charge'. Bechada was therefore not interested in solely glorifying war, as he includes evidence of military discipline and tactics. He also mentions the 'holy Christian companies being selected and subdivided'. Thus much can be about tactics and military matters from these fragments.
The Canso d'Antioca also gives historical insight into the religious persuasions of the two groups. Although the Turks' religion is distorted and seen from a purely Western view, it does provide insight into the Christians' opinions of Islam and shows just how wrong they were. Herluin declares to Kerbogha that, 'your outlandish idols will certainly not be able to protect you' and, 'certainly no heathen god will be able to save you'. This is an incredibly mistaken view of Islam, which believes in one God, and was formed during a time of serious disillusionment with the pagan idols of the day. Yet Kerbogha does not correct this view of his religion and in fact uses similar terminology, 'our idols are so courageous and valiant'. There is also a reference to Mohammed, the prophet, yet Bechada seems to think that Muslims equate Mohammed with God, 'If Mohammed wishes it so'. This is also incorrect. Thus the Occitan fragments help to show the misunderstanding between the two groups. Kerbogha also belittles the Christian faith, calling the crusaders 'madmen...so little sense do they have!" Although Bechada is seemingly depicting his own religion as nonsensical, he is in fact showing just how ignorant the Turks were in not believing. He describes the religious actions of the crusaders, 'they humbly worship the Cross' and explains the meaning of it: 'the Lord received death [for our] salvation'. Therefore these fragments not only explain the religious differences between the two groups but also the mistaken views they held of each other.
The Occitan fragments of the Canso d'Antioca clearly contain elements of propaganda, and the fact it was commissioned by a patron means that this is inevitable. There was a purpose for writing it and Bechada had to be aware of the needs of his audience. Yet the style of history writing at the time must be taken into account. As the piece was aimed at an uneducated audience, and took the form of a song, it was designed to entertain as well as instruct. Therefore, it is an epic chronicle. It contains elements of literature, evident in the hyperbole and descriptive techniques, yet at the same time does give an historical account of the battle at Antioch. Many of the included events have evidence elsewhere, and much can be learnt from these fragments. If nothing else, they are an example of history writing on the crusades written in the twelfth-century.