Aphasia has been of interest to the psychological, linguistic and neurological world since the late 1800's when the disorder was first identified. The acquired language disorder literally translates as the total loss of language function, despite patients not necessarily losing all of their language abilities (Carlson et al, 2004: 388)., and has been found to be the result of damage to the brain and nervous system (Obler, 1999: 1). Libben states that "the study of aphasia is the most important tool in the investigation of language and the brain" (1996: 424) with many types of aphasia being identified in recent years spanning all modalities of language. Aphasia is split into two main groups, the fluent and the non-fluent syndromes with fluency being categorised as the ability to express five or more words uninterrupted (Goodglass, 2001: 67). Non-fluent and fluent syndromes demonstrate very different symptoms and are thought to be the result of different injuries.
This assignment aims to focus on two types of aphasia that have been influential in the area of neurolinguistics within the modalities of speech and comprehension- Broca's aphasia, a non-fluent syndrome: and Wernicke's aphasia, a type of fluent aphasia. These two syndromes will be discussed and other factors that have aided knowledge of brain localisation considered.
It has been thought that by observing those with aphasic syndromes language functions can be identified within the brain (Libben 1996: 425). This theory supports the approach taken by Broca who observed that of the two cerebral hemispheres of the brain that one, the left in 97% of cases (Obler, 1999: 28), is dominant in language functions, with specific parts of the dominant hemisphere being linked closely to particular language skills (Obler, 1999: 9). The notion that specific areas of the left hemisphere play particular roles in linguistic ability was supported by a patient, referred to in the literature as "Tan", whom Broca observed to have near perfect comprehension, yet was unable to speak. After the patient's death, Broca performed an autopsy which showed a lesion to the lower area of the left frontal lobe leading Broca to identify this region as responsible for speech production (Libben 1996: 421) and therefore the aphasia experienced was labelled Broca's aphasia.
Typically Broca's aphasic's have lesions in the lower areas of their frontal lobe (Broca's area), said to be responsible for planning, speech and prediction, which consequently influences their fluency, prosody and production and retrieval of words, especially function words (Obler, 1999: 39/41). The speech of Broca's aphasics is described as "slow, deliberate and effortful" (Obler, 1999: 39) with "limited vocabulary, restricted grammar and awkward articulation" (Goodglass, 2001: 61). Patients have been found to use one or two word utterances, often simplifying more sophisticated speech sounds, with attempts to generate full sentences failing due to lack of syntactic support (Goodglass, 2001 : 62), however the words used are meaningful (Carlson et al, 2004: 389)
Broca's aphasics often suffer from agrammatism, meaning that they lose the ability to express themselves in complex ways, and to understand others who choose to express themselves in this way due to disruption of grammatical features such as word order (Carlson et al 2004: 390). The lack of complex syntactic comprehension can be demonstrated through the use of passive sentences where the patient finds difficulty in understanding reversible components, for example:
In this example both the mother and daughter are capable of carrying out the action of hugging, and are therefore reversible; yet the underlying grammar of the agent, in this case the mother, and the theme, the daughter, are lost due to the syntactic deficits within the patients' language. However, should a sufferer of agrammatism be given the following example:
The patient would have an increased chance of understanding the sentence correctly as Broca's aphasic's who suffer from agrammatism retain lexical semantics and therefore would recognise that the apple was not realistically capable of eating the boy, and therefore the boy must be the agent (Libben 1996: 427).
Comprehension was not originally thought to be a characteristic of Broca's aphasia, as "Tan" demonstrated relatively good comprehension skills (Caplan 1987: 44) and non-fluent aphasics being found to be able to match heard words to the correct picture 62% of the time (Schwartz et al 1980 in Carlson et al 2004: 390). However the difficulties with complex structures could be related to the suggestion that Broca's, and other non-fluent, aphasics struggle with comprehension of unfamiliar, less frequent and longer word retrieval, which seems to be supported by Boller and Dennis (1979 in Carlson et al 2004: 390) who found difficulties in sequencing tasks amongst non-fluent aphasics.
The presence of syntax errors in Broca's aphasia does, however, suggest that Broca's area is not only responsible for language production (Libben 1996:427) as does the identification of patients with lesions within Broca's area who have been found to have no speech or language problems (Caplan 1987: 49) These cases suggest that language may not be contained in the way that Broca believed it to be, or possibly support the notion of brain plasticity that Broca suggested was capable in adults, should the correct rehabilitation and encouragement be given, causing the right hemisphere to adopt the language functions of the damaged hemisphere (Caplan 1987: 47); however plasticity lessens as we grow into adulthood with the brain becoming more stable and the ability to learn language being lost (Obler, 1999: 4).
Those suffering from Broca's aphasia have also been suggested to lose control of non- speech oral movements in some cases (Goodglass, 2001: 62) due to the areas adjacency to the motor strip that controls facial muscle movement (Libben 1996: 426); however damage to Broca's area has been found only to produce mild weakening of facial muscles contra-laterally on a temporary basis, thus it seeming reasonable to revert back to the suggestion that Broca's area has a specific responsibility for language functions (Libben 1996: 426).
In contrast to Broca's aphasia, Wernicke's aphasia is a fluent aphasia, and the most common of the fluent aphasias (Goodglass, 2001: 69). Fluent aphasia retains normal pace and intonation (Obler, 1999: 41) with language appearing fluent at first glance, yet on closer inspection it is found to have no meaning (Obler, 1999: 9). The lesions related to this type of aphasic syndrome are typically in the posterior temporal lobe (Goodglass, 2001: 69), which is responsible for "hearing and time relation" (Garman 1990: 75) and is commonly known as Wernicke's area. Patients with Wernicke's aphasia produce very nonsensical language (Caplan 1987: 50), being found to use phonemic paraphasia (Obler, 1999: 43) in which the patients wrongly select their speech sounds; Wernicke emphasises that patients do not mispronounce phonemes (Caplan 1987: 50) and that aphasia is not a production disorder. The errors in sound selection lead to the use of non-words and neologisms (Libben 1996: 429), however phonemic deficits are not the only characteristic of Wernicke's speech with various grammatical and semantic deficits also being apparent. Word finding difficulties within Wernicke's aphasia are incredibly severe and a constant feature of this type of aphasic syndromes speech (Goodglass, 2001: 69) with content words, particularly open class words, being sparse and the content words that are used seeming not to make sense (Carlson et al 2004: 390), for various reasons of paraphasia or the context in which they are used. Semantics are described as unusual (Obler, 1999: 41) with lexical semantic deficits being a common occurrence (Obler, 1999: 58), unlike Broca's aphasics who typically have good lexical semantics. However, the main deficits of Wernicke's aphasia seem to be comprehensive with the patients seeming to understand very little of others speech and their own self monitoring seeming to echo this. Lack of comprehension means that sentence structure often seems bizarre (Obler, 1999: 41) with Wernicke's aphasics use of function words, complex verb tenses and subordinates (Carlson et al 2004 : 390) seeming to be in vain due to the lack of relevant content. When attempts are made to employ content words circumlocutions are often used in the place of the single word, as word retrieval proves difficult (Goodglass, 2001: 69), resulting in elaborate descriptions being used. Similarly, when asked to repeat structures "paraphasic distortions" occur with the patient, once again, elaborating and using more difficult structures than the examination requires (Goodglass, 2001: 69). Carlson et al (2004: 390) suggests that comprehension begins at the auditory level with the idea that in order to understand we must first hear and process information, seeming to suggest that the temporal lobes role in hearing may influence the syndromes lack of comprehension, this would seem to be supported by the fact that, unlike Broca's aphasics, Wernicke's aphasics are unaware of any of their errors (Goodglass, 2001: 68) and the notion that sufferers have difficulties converting thoughts into words (Carlson et al 2004: 391) as the difficulties with comprehension and recognition of words would also be internalised, by which I mean self- monitoring and planning through thought (Libben 1996: 429). Severe damage to Wernicke's area can produce pure word deafness, whereby patients cannot understand oral language despite having normal hearing (Obler, 1999: 45). Those with this type of damage have been found to recognise non-speech sounds, such as a door-bell or dog bark and emotion expressed through intonation (Carlson et al 2004: 391) suggesting that aspects of association related to comprehension can still remain in extreme cases of left hemisphere damage.
Jackson (1878 in Obler, 1999 : 33) stated that "to locate the damage which destroys speech and to locate speech are two different things" and in order to locate language features and processing in the brain psycholinguists think that it is important to look at the normal brain, that is one without trauma (Obler, 1999: 2), as developing an awareness of the language-brain relationship could prove helpful (Caplan 1987:32) In recent year technology has become available that can aid knowledge of language localisation within the brain, some of which will briefly be discussed.
Computerised Axial Tomography (CAT scanning) has been used to identify lesions and tumours within the brain (Lebbin: 422). Whilst these identification aids are useful, CAT scans only produce static pictures or X-rays of the brain at rest and therefore do not aid knowledge about language localisation specifically.
The WADA test, however, is used to discriminate which hemisphere is responsible for language functions by injecting anaesthetic into the brain and observing whether language is paralysed (Obler, 1999: 28). If the injection does result in temporary paralysis it can be concluded that the side injected is dominant in language functions, with normal language functions being found to resume shortly after (Obler, 1999: 29). This is an invasive way of identifying language functions and is generally done prior to brain surgery so as to avoid damaging critical language areas of the brain.
The more recent models have proven less invasive than the WADA test, with Event Related Potentials, or ERP's, using electrode attached to the scalp to record any brain activity (Obler, 1999: 35). The patient carries out various language tasks that act as the stimulus (Obler, 1999: 35) whilst the results are quickly measured (Caplan 1987: 29). The results gained will include conscious and unconscious language functions, however irrelevant actions, such as blinking and jaw movement, can also be recorded and therefore must be controlled (Caplan 1987: 29).
Positron Emission Tomography (PET) is also another non-invasive way tracking language, this time via blood flow. The patient inhales a small, harmless amount of radioactive gas which then attaches itself to red blood cells in the blood (Libben 1996: 423). When a particular task is being done blood will rush to the area responsible for that language function, thus indicating localisation of particular language functions. The blood flow is shown via different lights on a computer screen with different colours representing different levels of involvement (Obler, 1999: 10). PET's have shown that when a patient speaks there is increased blood flow in Broca's area (Libben 1996: 423); however the distribution of language functions illustrated is often not seen to be as localised, as originally suggested, to Broca and Wernicke's areas respectively.
The use of these metabolic scanning measures allows more precise observations and conclusions to be formed (Oblen: 31) with elements such as cerebral blood flow in PET scans aiding knowledge of language functions.
Studies into aphasia have suggested that particular areas of the brain are responsible for particular language functions by correlating localisations of lesions and deficits a patient exhibit (Goodglass, 2001: 57). Broca's area, in the lower frontal lobe, was suggested primarily to relate to speech production due to this being the main deficit in early case studies, whilst Wernicke's area was primarily involved in comprehension issues which were thought to be controlled by the temporal lobe. These studies have focused mainly on observations of a living patient and their autopsy results as to where their particular lesion lay, until the introduction of metabolic scanning. The early research and theories in the area, as proposed by Broca and Wernicke, have proved essential in the development of the field and many of the symptoms presented to be synonymous to their aphasics can still be discovered today, as demonstrated by the identification of Broca's area in speech production found in PET scans (Libben 1996: 423) and also Broca's identification of the left hemisphere as dominant in the majority of people (Obler, 1999: 28); however it is important to remember that locating damage and locating speech are vastly different things (Jackson,1878 in Obler, 1999 : 33)
Aphasic study has, typically, focused on language as a uni-lateral function when via many modalities the non-dominant hemisphere, in most the right hemisphere, plays a vital role, for example in reading. Non-verbal linguistic features, such as visual information from facial expression and gesture, have been suggested to be typically right hemisphere functions, as are features of prosody, seen to be so important in Broca's aphasia; and aspects of comprehension relating to jokes and metaphors (Libben 1996: 419). Language disorders have also been identified in patients' non-dominant hemisphere and therefore outside the stated language areas (Obler, 1999: 5), with the majority of aphasics demonstrating word retrieval difficulties regardless of the position of their lesions (Libben 1996: 434). These findings suggest that the whole brain contributes to language functions (Obler, 1999:12) and that language may not be as localised as originally thought with.
However, aphasic studies have informed our knowledge as to the localisation of language functions in the brain. Had the original theories not have been suggested by the likes of Broca and Wernicke further research would not have been done and technology would not have developed to aid our understanding of neurolinguistics via mapping of brain activity. Although Broca and Wernicke's suggestion that language is specifically localised is now being challenged by new information about language distribution in the brain, it has not been totally disproven, as mentioned previously; however it seems vital to remember that different tasks require different functions and that "localisation of symptoms is a product of brain maturation and years of language use" (Goodglass, 2001: 57) thus proposing that not all brains necessarily follow the same paths in relation to their deficits, which in turn reinforces individual differences and therefore the possibility that language pathways can also differ.