The term 'levels of language' refers to semantic, phonological, lexical and pragmatic development across language acquisition and use. Typical child language acquisition maps stages at which each of these 'levels' develop and become gradually more sophisticated, however, in atypical language development these 'levels' often appear impaired. Kaiser et al (2001:145) state that children with developmental disabilities exhibit cognitive, perceptual and social characteristics that result in modest to severe disruptions of the normal language learning process. These disruptions are mainly manifested through language delays which, although detrimental, offer an insight into language development of atypical individuals in a more detailed way due to each stage developing at a slower rate (Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 311).
This assignment aims to look at deficits in spoken language associated with Autism and Down's syndrome. Each of the disorders will be presented separately, with a brief description of what they are before the relative strengths and weaknesses of language acquisition and use is discussed and a conclusion formed.
Baird et al (2003: 488) describe Autism as a "behaviourally defined disorder characterised by qualitative impairments in social communication, social interaction and social imagination". The disorder is, generally, diagnosed on behavioural deficits as a biological cause has not been identified as of yet (Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 328) with the majority of diagnosis taking place after the age of 3;0 (Baird et al, 2003: 490). Due to the relatively late diagnosis there is little evidence from the pre-linguistic period or early vocal development (Tager- Flusberg, 1999: 328), however social deficits have been noted as early as 18months with Baron-Cohen et al (1996, as in Kaiser et al, 2001: 145) reporting that eye contact was only used for requests or regulation.
Downs Syndrome is the most common neurodevelopmental disorder (Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 312) which is typically diagnosed at birth (Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 313). The disorder has been found to be due to an individual developing an extra chromosome before birth (Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 312) with the disorder varying greatly from relatively few deficits and a near normal IQ to severe impairments (Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 313). Abbeduto and Hesketh (1997: 327) suggest that those with Downs Syndrome "see language as a vehicle for performing the same interpersonal functions as do typically developing children, albeit at a considerably later age" with Downs Syndrome children focusing on interpersonal relationships more than their environment.
Whilst both disorders did demonstrate deficits in language acquisition and use across the different levels of language the deficits experienced in both differed dramatically.
Impairments in the language development of Autistic children have been identified with an unusual use of language and poor non-verbal and comprehension abilities being reported (Baird et al, 2003: 490). Lower verbal, than non-verbal scores have been found in preschool children with Autism (Tager-Flusberg and Lord, 2002 as in Rice et al, 2005: 15), with Allen and Rapin (1980 as in Rice et al, 2005: 16) reporting that 67% of autistic children have expressive and receptive language delay.
It is thought that language and concepts that engage what are referred to as "theories of mind" are impaired, whilst lexical semantics remain less impaired (Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 334) within autistic individuals, with Tager-Flusberg (1999: 328) seeming to suggest that language deficits lead to the social deficits autistic people experience.
The association between Autism and lack of interpersonal communication seems to provide reasoning for the emergence of linguistic terms that refer to and request objects and actions in the environment. It also supports the additions of irrelevant information and common initiation of subject change (Tager-Flusberg, 1999:330) as the child appears to have a relatively egocentric cognitive and linguistic capacity.
Phonologically, few deficits appear in Autism with the phonological system appearing to develop typically. Similarly lexis is relatively strong with little evidence being proposed of any significant delays, and neologisms seeming to be the main cause for concern. Syntactically there is little evidence; however there does appear to be a large range of ability across the Autistic populations studied.
On the contrary, those with Downs Syndrome experience poor phonology, lexis and syntactic development; whilst pragmatics appears to be a relative strength. Phonologically delays are rife, possibly due to anatomical deficits such as abnormally formed vocal tract or hearing loss. However, there is evidence of a significant delay which is not remedied over time despite a typical developmental pattern occurring. Lexically and syntactically language is acquired at a very basic level with progression being slow. The syntactic delay is most probably a result of the lexical deficits experienced with multiple word utterances appearing late.
Pragmatically those with Downs Syndrome are relatively strong, although their other deficits can often cause confusion with identifying the intent of a speech act. Eye contact and maintaining conversation is done well, however initiating conversations is rare.
Therefore, when language develops atypically patterns of deficit differ across different congental disorder. Autism is mainly found to be deficit in pragmatics and social features of language acquisition, whilst pragmatics is a relative strength in Downs Syndrome. However, those with Downs Syndrome experience greater difficulties with lexis, syntax and particularly phonology. Despite these dffernces those with Autism and Downs Syndrome have been found to acquire language via a normal pattern, although at a slower pace.